Guidelines for Return to Presential Classes: Consensus Proposal in Accordance with the
National and International Health Regulatory Agencies
Toufic Anbar Neto, Denise Daher Anbar, Isabela Daher Anbar, João Pedro Daher
Anbar, Idiberto José Zotarelli Filho
FACERES, Medical School of Sao Jose do Rio Preto, Jardim Francisco Fernandes, São José do
Rio Preto, Brazil.
Abstract
Introduction: The coronavirus disease pandemic (COVID-19) caused an unprecedented crisis
in the area of education, causing the massive closure of classroom activities by educational
institutions in more than 190 countries. By mid-May 2020, more than 1.2 billion students at all
levels of education world- wide have stopped taking face-to-face classes. Therefore, the
reopening of schools, colleges, and universities during the COVID-19 pandemic represents a
special challenge worldwide in order to ensure the safety of students and staff. The guidelines
need to outline the creation of a task force at each university, risk screening based on school,
travel history, occupation, contacts, groups, and self-management. Objective: In this way, the
present work had as objective to propose a guideline of return to the face-to-face classes
based on the main regulatory criteria of government agencies in Brazil and
the world. Methods: The present study followed a review model of the main national and
international public health legislation as UNESCO, WHO and ANVISA. Development and
Strategies: According to the process of economic reopening in Brazil and the world, the return
to educational activities begins with the effective need to develop an action plan inherent to this
resumption, gradually and safely. The resumption requires several strategic mea- sures adopted
by the executive powers of all spheres of power (federal, state and municipal), allowing at that
moment the safe, but gradual, resumption of economic activity, reducing the harmful and
collateral effects in terms of social inequality. Conclusion: Multiple intervention strategies at the
school and reductions in transmission in the community, in addition to the extent achieved so
far, will be necessary to avoid the excessive undue risk associated with the reopening of the
school.
Keywords
Education, Face to Face Classes, Legislation, Monitoring, COVID-19
1. Introduction
The coronavirus disease pandemic (COVID-19) caused an unprecedented crisis in the area of
education, causing the massive closure of classroom activities by educational institutions in more
than 190 countries, to prevent the spread of the virus and mitigate its impact. According to data
from the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), by mid-
May 2020, more than 1.2 billion students at all levels of education worldwide have stopped
taking face-to-face classes. Of these, more than 160 million were students in Latin America and
the Caribbean (UNESCO, 2020).
When entering the recovery phase of COVID-19, it will be essential to reflect on the role of
educational systems and, particularly vocational education, in promoting resilient
societies (WHO & UNICEF, 2020). The global health crisis and the ensuing blockade brought
an unprecedented challenge to the professions, renewing awareness of its value to society. It also
helped to restore a sense of esteem for those workers who struggled tirelessly during this time to
maintain savings (WHO, 2020).
In this scenario, the pandemic exposed global vulnerability to crises and revealed how precarious
and interdependent economies can be. It also resulted in natural diseases, political, economic and
environmental disorder. Our ability to respond effectively and efficiently in the future will
depend on government forecasting, readiness and preparedness (WHO, 2020).
Through their role in developing the competencies and skills needed for tomorrow‟s society,
education systems will need to be at the center of this planning (ANVISA, 2020). This includes
rethinking how the economy should evolve to protect itself against adversity, and defining the
skills, education and training needed. This also means working closely with other sectors of the
government and the private sector to increase the attractiveness and prospects of the labor
market for certain professions, including those considered essential for the common
good (ANVISA, 2020).
The real change usually occurs in deep crises, and at this moment it keeps the possibility of not
going back to the status quo when things are back to “normal”. Although this crisis has
profoundly disruptive implications, including for education, it has no predetermined results. It
will be the nature of the collective and systemic responses to these disruptions that will
determine how we are affected by them (Brasil (SAPS), 2020).
In this sense, the pandemic is also a call to renew the commitment to sustainable development
goals, ensuring that all young people have the opportunity to succeed in school and develop their
knowledge, skills, attitudes and values. The current crisis has tested man‟s ability to deal with
large-scale disruptions. As a corollary, it is imperative to build a more resilient society (Brasil,
2020).
Therefore, the reopening of schools, colleges and universities during the COVID-19 pandemic
represents a special challenge worldwide to ensure the safety of students and staff. The
guidelines need to outline the creation of a task force at each university, risk screening based on
the school, travel history, occupation, contacts and groups. Also, health self-management and
quarantine measures, general hygiene measures (including the use of masks in indoor
environments), principles of ventilation and sanitation, regulations on school assemblies,
notification of suspicious cases and policies on closing schools and school classes replacement.
Also, a class should be suspended if 1 student or employee tests positive and the school should
be closed for 14 days if it has 2 or more confirmed cases (Cheng, Wang, Shen, & Chang, 2020).
In this way, the present work had as objective to propose a guideline of return to the face-to-face
classes based on the main regulatory criteria of government agencies in Brazil and the world.
2. Methods
2.1. Study Design
The present study followed a review model of the main national and international public health
legislation. After literary search criteria using the MeSH Terms that were cited in the item below
on “Search strategies”, a total of 35 official documents from Brazi (ANVISA), WHO (World
Health Organization) and scientific articles were submitted to the eligibility analysis and, after
that, 16 documents were selected.
2.2. Search Strategy and Information Sources
The search strategy was carried out in the databases PubMed, Embase, Ovid and Cochrane
Library, Web Of Science, ScienceDirect Journals, Scopus, UNESCO, WHO and ANVISA
website. MeSH Terms: Education. Face to face classes. Legislation. Monitoring. COVID -19,
and use of “and” Booleans between MeSH terms and “or” among historical findings.
3. Development and Strategies
3.1. Guidelines for Gradual Return to Activities
• Controlled transmission of the virus.
• National health system with the capacity to detect, test, isolate, treat, and monitor the
contagion network.
• Risk of outbreak minimized.
• Preventive measures are implemented in workplaces, schools, and places where the movement
of people is essential.
• Risk of “importing” the virus under control.
• Society fully educated, engaged, and empowered to join new norms of social interaction.
• The decision of the appropriate time to reopen, in each location, is up to public authorities.
3.2. How to Return?
world, establishing several axes of decision making that are regulated by the Public Health
Emergency Operations Center Network (EOC-NET) (WHO & UNICEF, 2020; WHO,
2020; ANVISA, 2020).
According to the process of economic reopening in Brazil and the world, the return to
educational activities begins with the effective need to develop an action plan inherent to this
resumption, gradually and safely, without prejudice to preventive and preventive measures.
combating the COVID-19 pandemic. The resumption requires several strategic measures
adopted by the executive powers of all spheres of power (federal, state and municipal), allowing
at that moment the safe, but gradual, resumption of economic activity, reducing the harmful and
collateral effects in terms of social inequality (Johns Hopkins University, 2020).
Also, the compatibility of these measures with the guidelines of the World Health Organization
(WHO), the Ministry of Health (Brazil), and the regional and local health authorities about the
response plan to COVID-19 and the biosafety guidelines and rules to be imposed for the gradual
resumption of economic and educational activities (WHO, 2020; Brasil, 2010).
Besides, because Brazilian private institutions serve around 15 million students, being structured
and built with investments from families, regulated and evaluated by governmental structures, it
is essential to partner families not only in the formal education of their children, but as a
structure of support so that fathers and mothers can develop their professional activities,
promote their livelihood, especially when the more than 9 million students served in basic
education are highlighted, with 2.5 million in early childhood education (Brasil, 2020).
In this scenario, it is essential to balance the variables involved, including seeking to ensure the
safety of children in the school environment, following health and care protocols to avoid
contagion with other children and adults. Thus, based on several government and private plans
to resume face-to-face activities of schools and universities in Brazil and the world, a strategic
plan for gradual and safe resumption is proposed. As an antecedent phase, it is necessary to
4. Proposal for a General Protocol
2020; Brasil, 2020; Brasil (n˚ 5), 2020).
Operations Centre Network (EOC-NET).
authorship.
5. Specific Protocols
HEALTH
health (WHO & UNICEF, 2020; ANVISA, 2020; Brasil, 2020).
PEDAGOGICAL
pedagogical proposal (WHO & UNICEF, 2020; WHO, 2020; Brasil, 2020).
LEGAL
proposal (WHO & UNICEF, 2020; Brasil (n˚ 1565), 2020; Brasil, 1988).
COMMUNICATION
communication proposal (Brasil, 1990).
MONITORING
monitoring proposal (Van Lancker & Parolin, 2020; Mangiarotti, Peyre, Zhang, Huc, Roger, &
Kerr, 2020).
Results of international studies that support the guidelines of the present study
Large-scale school closures have been implemented worldwide to stem the spread of COVID-
19. However, the impact of the closing and reopening of schools on the dynamics of the
epidemic remains with great challenges. Therefore, as scientific support, a study simulated the
transmission dynamics of COVID-19 using a stochastic model based on individuals,
incorporating social contact data of school-age children. Thus, assuming that children < 10 were
half more susceptible to infection than older children and adults, it was estimated that closing
schools prevented a similar number of infections (13,842 cases; 95% CI: 6290, 23,040) as
closures workplaces (15,813; 95% CI: 9963, 22,617) and social distance measures (7030; 95% CI:
3118, 11,676). Under assumptions of moderate transmission in the community, it was estimated
that the reopening of schools would increase symptomatic disease among high school teachers
(an additional 40.7% should have an asymptomatic infection, 95% CI: 1.9, 61.1), high school
teachers (37.2%, 95% CI: 4.6, 58.1) and elementary school teachers (4.1%, 95% CI: −1.7, 12.0).
A hybrid learning approach with classes reduced to half 10 students may be required in high
schools, while maintaining small groups of 20 students may be required for elementary
schools (Head, Andrejko, Cheng, Collender, Phillips, Boser, Heaney, Hoover, Wu, Northrup,
Click, Harrison, Lewnard, & Remais, 2020).
Another study analyzed the evidence that constitutes well-established scientific data and that can
guide intervention policies and practices in the post-pandemic context. The outlets considered
more obvious for the post-pandemic period, such as remote education, the use of technologies,
and the increase in the workload, although they are being incorporated into the school‟s daily
routine with greater intensity, hardly contain the elements to help in the recovery most affected
students. Thus, the most solidly based outlets in the literature include a diagnosis of students as a
basis for the resumption of teaching programs. And, after that, robust and promising
interventions must be carried out that include structured teaching, the use of appropriate literacy
methods, the strategic use of homework, and reading programs. The best use of time is to reduce
absences and intensive tutoring programs in small groups (Oliveira, Gomes, Matheus, Barcellos,
& Thais, 2020).
Also, investments in Education must be increased, according to UNESCO, the natural drop-in
learning may last for more than a decade if public policies are not created that invest in
improvements in infrastructure, technologies, training, methodologies, and salaries, in addition to
the reinforcement of school lunches, better use of time, tutoring outside the usual class hours
and additional material (UNESCO, 2020). There is a need for an appropriate articulation
between distance and face-to-face teaching, given that many in Brazil do not have access to
quality computers, cell phones, or the Internet, and a considerable number of teachers needed
the training to use digital platforms, insert online activities, evaluating students at a distance and
producing and inserting material on the platforms that help the student to understand the
contents (Dias & Pinto, 2020).
Besides, in the psychological field, it is notorious to encourage solidarity, resilience and the
continuity of social relations between educators and students in this period is fundamental, as it
helps to lessen the negative psychological impact of the pandemic on students. Now, it is
important to prevent and reduce the high levels of anxiety, depression, and stress that
confinement causes in quarantined students (Dias & Pinto, 2020).
6. Conclusion
Therefore, multiple intervention strategies at the school and reductions in transmission in the
community, in addition to the extent achieved so far, will be necessary to avoid the excessive
undue risk associated with the reopening of the school.
Funding
The work was supported by Faceres-Medical School, São José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of this paper.