Important Note: This pre-print has been peer-reviewed and published at Social Science &
Medicine. We advise readers to consult and cite the latest version of this work, available at
What drives beliefs in COVID-19 conspiracy theories? The role of psychotic-like
experiences and confinement-related factors
1 123 1 4
Simão Ferreira , Carlos Campos , Beatriz Marinho , Susana Rocha , Eduardo Fonseca-
5 1*
Pedrero , Nuno Barbosa Rocha
Center for Rehabilitation Research, School of Health, Polytechnic Institute of Porto, Porto,
Portugal
Laboratory of Neuropsychophysiology, Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences,
University of Porto, Portugal
Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
Polytechnic Institute of Porto, Porto, Portugal
University of La Rioja, Spain
*Corresponding Author:
Prof. Nuno Barbosa Rocha
nrocha@ess.ipp.pt
Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic is a worldwide threat to public health and the global economy. The
climate of fear and uncertainty associated with the pandemic has fostered the emergence of a
wide-range of COVID-19 conspiracy theories that has the potential do shape public opinion
and hinder the effective dissemination of valid information. Beliefs in conspiracy theories has
been associated with maladaptive personality traits such as schizotypy and paranoia, as well
as other non-psychotic psychological characteristics (e.g., social isolation, stress). The current
study aimed to examine the association between beliefs in COVID-19 conspiracy theories
and psychotic-like experiences within the community, while also addressing the role of
sociodemographic information, psychological outcomes (e.g., stress, affective states) and
other pandemic-related factors (e.g., confinement conditions/behaviors). Our results suggest
that psychotic-like experiences are associated with beliefs in COVID-19 conspiracy theories,
particularly perceptual abnormalities and persecutory ideation. Moreover, increased health-
related concerns and reduced education levels also seem to be liability factors for these
conspiracy beliefs. These results add important insights into how the adherence to illogical
and erroneous disease-related arguments may be contingent to proneness to psychotic-like
experiences. COVID-19 conspiracy theories are yet another major challenge that
governments and policy makers must contemplate when defining strategic directions to
manage the current and future pandemics.
Keywords: COVID-19; pandemic; confinement; conspiracy theories; psychosis
Introduction
COVID-19 is a potentially serious acute respiratory disease caused by the new SARS-
COV-2 coronavirus, which first appeared in Wuhan (China) at the beginning of December
th
2019. On the 11 of March 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared this
disease as a pandemic, due to the alarming transmission rates and the lack of action, with no
vaccines or biologic therapies available at that time proven to be efficient to fight the
virus[1,2]. With the exponential increase in the number of affected individuals, COVID-19
became a significant threat to public health and the global economy, which lead to the
introduction of diverse contention measures, as a strategy to fight the virus propagation [3,4].
According to WHO, government-mandated lockdown and its impact on people’s
habits and routines may lead to an increase in the prevalence of depressive disorders, anxiety,
and post-traumatic stress [5-10]. Generally, these disorders last for a long time and can be
exacerbated or first experienced due to the uncertainties caused by the lack of knowledge
regarding the disease, as well as due to the lack of transparency by the government and health
professionals [11-16].
In the case of the COVID-19 pandemic, and unlike other pandemics in the past, there
was a constant dissemination of sensationalist reports regarding the new coronavirus, mostly
because of social media, thus intensifying public doubts and raising fear, panic, and distrust
[17-22]. This climate of uncertainty leaves an open door for alternative explanations of
pandemic-related events, ultimately leading to the emergence of conspiracy theories. These
result from the actions of a wide, insidious, and efficient international conspiratorial network,
conceived to perpetrate acts which nature is harmful, intentionally deceiving and
manipulating the public opinion for its self-benefit [23].
Beliefs in conspiracy theories are related to maladaptive personality traits, schizotypy,
and paranoia [24,25]. Previous evidence suggests that psychotic experiences are positively
related with the receptivity to conspiracy theories and ontological fantastic stories, as these
experiences potentiate the development of bizarre or abnormal thoughts and non-
conventional logic, which might be associated with impaired perceptive decision-making as
well as causal, probabilistic, and logical thinking [26-30]. Psychotic-like experiences are
reduced forms of hallucinatory perceptions and illusory beliefs that are similar to the
symptoms of psychotic disorders, yet not reaching the limit of clinical significance,
considering its lower intensity and persistency, not being associated with clear incapacity and
significant psychological suffering [31-35]. Recent studies emphasize that these experiences
are present on a substantial proportion of the general population, with a prevalence of
approximately 7%, from which 80% are transitory psychotic experiences and 20% represent
persistent experiences [36,37]. It is important to highlight that from the individuals who
experience persistent psychotic experiences, 7% develop a psychotic disorder, with a
transition annual rate below 1% [37]. Thus, understanding the interaction between psychotic-
like experiences in community-samples and beliefs in conspiracy theories may be critical to
tackle the ongoing growth of conspiracy theory believers, which truly may hinder societal
efforts to manage the pandemic (including the generalization of treatment and vaccines once
they are ready).
Other non-psychotic psychological characteristics have also been linked to beliefs in
conspiracy theories, namely the lack of self-esteem, social isolation, sleep privation, and a
higher susceptibility to stress and anxiety, jointly with the feelings of uncertainty, uneasiness,
and helplessness [38-44]. The confinement experience during the pandemic was also largely
dependent on additional factors such as housing conditions, caregiver role, health-related
concerns, among others. The pandemic produced significant changes in work-related
variables, as several people had changes in their monthly income or started teleworking
during this period. Thus, it is important to understand how confinement-related experiences
and behaviours may have also played a role in COVID-19 conspiracy theories beliefs.”)
Furthermore, measures related to confinement can also contribute to the appearance of
psychotic experiences [45-47]. This interference is corroborated by social networks and the
reduced frequency of visual contact presented by individuals who suffer from psychotic
disorders, before the appearance of the disease [48,49].
Additionally, several researchers demonstrated that psychotic experiences are also a
risk indicator for the appearance of mental disorders, such as depressive disorders, anxiety,
post-traumatic stress, and personality [50,51] being associated with risk behaviors, such as
attempted suicides [52,53], psychological suffering [54], functional involvement [55],
chronic physical conditions [56], as well as a higher need for psychiatric intervention and
higher mortality risk [57]. One of the main goals of this study consists in verifying the
association between the belief in conspiracy theories and psychotic-like experiences. It is
expected that individuals who present psychotic-like experiences are more prone to believe in
conspiracy theories.
Hence, besides looking at the link between psychotic-like experiences and beliefs in
conspiracy theories, we should also explore how other moderating variables may increase the
likelihood to develop these beliefs.
The current study aims to examine the association between beliefs in COVID-19
conspiracy theories and psychotic-like experiences within the community, while also
addressing the role of other contributing variables such as sociodemographic information
(sex, age, education), psychological outcomes (e.g., stress, affective states) as well as other
pandemic-related factors (e.g., isolation conditions, health concerns).
Results
Sociodemographic Variables and COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories
differences on COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs, t (436) = 0.031, p = 0.969, MD 99%
CI [-2.886, 3.321], as both males and females displayed quite similar scores (M = 21.51, SD
= 9.77 vs. M = 21.54, SD = 10.38, respectively). COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs
were negatively and moderately associated with education years, r (436) = -0.203, p < 0.001,
99% CI [-0.328, -0.069]. There was no significant correlation between COVID-19
Conspiracy Theories Beliefs and age, r (436) = 0.076, p = 0.114, 99% CI [-0.061, 0.218].
Confinement Behaviors/Beliefs and COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories
Although participants that reported not being in confinement (n = 109) were not
included in the full analysis, it was still relevant to compare them with participants in
confinement (n = 438) regarding COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs. There were no
significant differences between both groups, t (545) = 1.593, p = 0.108, MD 99% CI [-1.258,
5.351], although descriptive statistics suggest that participants in confinement displayed
lower scores in the COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs Questionnaire in comparison to
non-confiners (M = 21.53, SD = 10.24 vs. M = 23.50, SD = 11.37, respectively).
Results regarding the role of confinement-related behaviors/beliefs in COVID-19
positive and small correlation between COVID-Related Health Concerns and COVID-19
Conspiracy Theories Beliefs, r (436) = 0.158, p = 0.003, 99% CI [0.012, 0.292]. Moreover,
there was a marginally significant difference in COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs
regarding leaving the house during the confinement, t (436) = -2.218, p = 0.025, MD 99% CI
[-6.982, 0.638]. More specifically, participants that left their house during the confinement
displayed higher scores in the COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs Questionnaire in
comparison to participants that reported not leaving (M = 21.75, SD = 10.37 vs. M = 18.48,
SD = 7.56, respectively). Finally, there was also a statistical trend for a small positive
association between COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs and smoking frequency during
confinement, r (436) = 0.129, p = 0.024, 99% CI [-0.014, 0.273].
Confinement Conditions and COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories
Results regarding the association between confinement conditions and COVID-19
in any of the collected variables.
Work and Finance-Related Variables and COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories
Findings addressing the role of work/finance related variables in COVID-19
small and positive association between pandemic-related financial concerns and COVID-19
Conspiracy Theories Beliefs, r (436) = 0.189, p < 0.001, 99% CI [0.057, 0.328]. Furthermore,
there was a marginally significant difference in COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs
regarding pandemic-related budget reductions, t (436) = -2.174, p = 0.036, MD 99% CI [-
4.552, 0.462]. More specifically, participants that experienced budget reductions displayed
higher scores in the COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs Questionnaire in comparison to
participants that did not (M = 22.68, SD = 10.32 vs. M = 20.57, SD = 10.09, respectively).
Finally, there were also marginal differences in COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories
Beliefs between participants that transitioned to telework and those who did not, t (240) =
2.120, p = 0.036, MD 99% CI [-0.507, 7.123]. Teleworkers displayed less beliefs in COVID-
19 Conspiracy Theories in comparison to participants that did not work from home (M =
20.67, SD = 8.67 vs. M = 23.74, SD = 11.20, respectively).
Psychotic-Like Experiences, Psychological Distress and COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories
Results addressing how clinical measures and psychological distress is related to
significant moderate and positive association between CAPES Total score and COVID-19
Conspiracy Theories Beliefs, r (436) = 0.271, p < 0.001, 99% CI [0.132, 0.412]. Moreover,
each CAPE domain was also positively and moderately related to COVID-19 Conspiracy
Theories Beliefs, namely CAPE Bizarre Experiences, r (436) = 0.227, p < 0.001, 99% CI
[0.090, 0.360], CAPE Persecutory Ideation, r (436) = 0.223, p < 0.001, 99% CI [0.086,
0.365], and CAPE Perceptive Abnormalities, r (436) = 0.271, p < 0.001, 99% CI [0.071,
0.451].
Besides psychotic-like experiences, there were also a marginally significant positive
and small association between COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs and PANAS
Negative score, r (436) = 0.120, p = 0.024, 99% CI [- 0.010, 0.255], meaning that negative
affect may be linked to beliefs in COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories. Higher QRE Cognitive
Reappraisal was also marginally associated with COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs, r
(436) = 0.117, p = 0.017, 99% CI [-0.005, 0.244].
Control Analysis: Time of questionnaire completion and government-imposed
lockdown
As data collection lasted around 2 months, participants completed the questionnaire in
different stages of government-imposed restrictions to manage the pandemic: during the
emergency state (until the 2nd of May; n = 285) and post-emergency state (started on the 3rd
of May; n = 153). The emergency state in Portugal started on the 22nd of March. During this
state, the government imposed a lockdown where citizens saw some of their rights suspended
such as: the right to freely move in national and international territories, giving the
government control over individual circulation. Citizens still had the right to move for
professional purposes, healthcare, taking care of others and getting food supplies. This law
had other implications such as cult freedom, private economic initiative control and
resistance right, in this last one, citizens were not allowed to resist government policies. (e.g.,
the government was allowed to implement movement restrictions, such as prevented people
from travelling outside their local area, or leaving home without a “reasonable excuse”, being
work related or taking care of others). The emergency state was renovated 2 times, until the
2nd of May. The post-emergency state (calamity) started with a “deconfinement” plan
composed of three phases, 4th of May, 18th of May and 1st of June. During this time citizens
still had several restrictions in Portugal, but now they could already move freely as long as
preventive strategies to reduce disease spreading were fulfilled. Telework was applied to
everyone who gathered all the requirements to work from home. There were restrictions in
public transportation (2/3 of the occupation), stores could only take five persons per square
meter and there was a mandatory use of mask. Thus, it was important to test whether our
variables of interest were influenced by the timing when participants completed the
questionnaire (during vs. post-emergency state). The major finding in this analysis was a
trend for statistically significant differences between timepoints regarding COVID-19
Conspiracy Theories Beliefs questionnaire, t (436) = 2.718, p = 0.013, MD 99% CI [-0.18,
5.163]. During the emergency state, participants displayed higher scores in the COVID-19
Conspiracy Theories Beliefs questionnaire in comparison to the post-emergency state period
(M = 22.46, SD = 10.51 vs. M = 19.80, SD = 9.51, respectively). Similarly, COVID-19
related financial concerns were significantly different between both stages, t (436) = 2.800, p
= 0.004, MD 99% CI [0.040, 0.856], as participants displayed higher financial concerns
during the emergency state then post-emergency state (M = 4.36, SD = 1.73 vs. M = 3.90, SD
= 1.64, respectively). Thus, the timing for completion (during vs. post-emergency state) was
also added to the subsequently tested regression model.
Regression Model for Predictors of COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs
A regression model was prepared including as predictors all the variables
significantly associated with COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs in the previous analysis
(education years, COVID-related health concerns, pandemic-related financial concerns,
CAPE subscales), as well as variables that were only marginally significant (leaving the
house, smoking frequency during confinement, pandemic-related budget reductions, QRE
Cognitive Reappraisal , PANAS Negative, timing for questionnaire completion).
Before proceeding with the final model, several assumptions were tested.
Regarding the normally distributed residuals assumption, standardized residuals displayed an
approximately normal distribution (skewness = 1.126; kurtosis = 1.867). Although Cook’s
distance did not suggest any influential cases (max. value = 0.099), 2 participants presented
standardized residuals greater than |4.0|, suggesting that the regression equation did not
accurately predict the dependent variable for these cases. Thus, these subjects were excluded
from the analysis. The independence of errors assumption was not violated (Durbin-Watson
statistic = 2.029). Furthermore, there was no evidence of collinearity (highest correlation
between predictors was 0.577) or multicollinearity (lowest tolerance value was 0.535).
Finally, the scatter plot with absolute standardized residuals by standardized predicted values
suggested some degree of heteroscedasticity, which was further validated by the Koenker
test, χ2 (12) = 38.105, p < 0.001. Thus, the regression model was ran using the wild
bootstrap, which does not assume homoscedasticity [58,59].
regression equation was found, F (12,423) = 8.931, p < 0.001, with an R2 of 0.202. Education
years was a significant predictor of COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs, B = -0.510, p =
0.001, 99% CI [-0.854, -0.204], meaning that for each less year of education, the COVID-19
Conspiracy Theories Beliefs score was 0.510 points higher. CAPE Perceptual Abnormalities
was also a significant predictor of COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs, B = 3.041, p =
0.007, 99% CI [0.062, 5.857], while CAPE Persecutory Ideation was only a marginally
significant predictor, B = 0.607, p = 0.034, 99% CI [-0.158, 1.348]. Other marginally
significant predictors included COVID-related health concerns, B = 0.709, p = 0.041, 99% CI
[-0.067, 1.617], and smoking frequency during confinement, B = 1.073, p = 0.039, 99% CI [-
0.229, 2.359], as well as timing for questionnaire completion, B = 1.992, p = 0.025, 99% CI
[-0.202, 4.227], as completers during the emergency state scored 1.992 points higher in the
COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs questionnaire in comparison to participants that
participated in the study post-emergency state.
Discussion
Conspiracy theories related to the COVID-19 pandemic have become a worldwide issue
that hinders the effectiveness of governments and health authorities in managing the spread
of this virus. Thus, understanding which factors may predispose individuals to believe and act
on these theories may be extremely useful for policymakers, health professionals and even
media outlets, allowing to develop more precise communication strategies and identifying
high-risk individuals for non-compliance with disease-preventing measures. The current
study aimed to assess how proneness to psychotic-like experiences is related to beliefs
regarding conspiracy theories, whilst simultaneously accounting for other psychological
outcomes (e.g., mood) as well as other pandemic-related factors (e.g., isolation conditions,
health concerns, etc). This is a novel hypothesis for dealing with the current and future
pandemics that adds important insights into how the adherence to illogical and erroneous
disease-related arguments may be contingent to proneness to psychotic-like experiences.
Most conspiracy theories are not based on credible evidence but rather on inaccurate
thoughts and frequently illogical ones. Psychotic experiences enhance the development of
these types of thoughts [27,29,60]. For instance, Barron et al. [61] suggested that there are
positive and direct correlations between the belief in conspiracy theories and schizotypy
domains, namely strange beliefs, magical thinking, and reference ideas [28,41,62,63]. The
current results are in line with this previous evidence as we found positive associations
between psychotic-like experiences and beliefs in conspiracy theories related to COVID-19.
More specifically, the most highly associated domains were psychotic perpetual
abnormalities, followed by persecutory ideation experiences.
According to previous evidence, a stronger relation with persecutory ideation would
be expected, since this psychotic domain is widely linked to conspiracy beliefs type of
thinking [64]. A recent systematic-review actually identified two major groups of predictors
for conspiracy beliefs, those being pathological (e.g., paranoia) or socio-political focus [39].
Paranoid tendencies are associated with cognitive bias that negatively influences causal and
probabilistic thinking, as well as the flexibility of beliefs [61,65]. Similarly, conspiracy
theories have also been associated with highly rigid belief system that are not very permeable
to change. Wood, Douglas & Sutton [66] relate conspiracy beliefs to a broad ideologic
system, which justifies any belief associated with it, constituting a base ground to understand
and assimilate new social conditions. It seems that beliefs in conspiracy theories follow a
single-logic approach, through which beliefs on any given theory constitute a way of
sustaining other theories [67,68]. Thus, persecutory ideation and belief in conspiracy theories
may share an underlying vulnerability for biased thinking styles, which ultimately leads to an
increased likelihood of producing inaccurate working models of real-word events, especially
when there is information (even if false) supporting these misrepresentations.
Perceptual abnormalities were the psychotic domain more clearly associated with
COVID-19 conspiracy theories. Dagnall, Drinkwater, Parker, Denovan. & Parton. [69]
merged perceptual abnormalities into a mixed domain called cognitive-perceptual measures,
which were reported through three questionnaires (Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire,
Delusions Inventory and The Launay–Slade Hallucination Scale). The authors found that
beliefs in conspiracies, within the sub-clinical population, were mostly associated with
delusional thinking style, although the pooled cognitive-perceptual factor still explained 32%.
Thus, one can argue that the role of perceptual abnormalities on conspiracy theories may also
be mechanistically related to other psychotic-like experiences.
Langdon and Coltheart proposed that there must be some damage to sensory and/or
attentional-orienting mechanisms which causes aberrant perception, arguing that this same
process underlies not only perceptual abnormalities but also persecutory ideation, bizarre
experiences or other types of delusional thinking [70]. Ben-Zeev, Ellington, Swendsen &
Granholm. [71] examined a cognitive model of persecutory ideation that suggested that
negative emotions, perceptual anomalies, and recent life events are important predictors of
experiencing persecutory ideation. Hence, our results regarding perceptual abnormalities may
not be interpreted separately from the complete psychotic architecture, as this domain is
intrinsically connected to delusional experiences.
Also, confinement due to the COVID-19 pandemic may have also played a role on the
clear association between perceptual abnormalities and beliefs in conspiracy theories. The
confinement-related social isolation lead to feelings of loneliness that could increase human
agency detection, therefore making people more prone to hear voices or perceive human
agency in nonhuman stimuli [72]. As participants were requested to report on psychotic-like
experiences during confinement, it is feasible to postulate that these abnormal perceptual
experiences were enhanced throughout this period, ultimately leading to a more critical role
in the association with beliefs in conspiracy theories.
Besides the clear association between psychotic-like experiences, our work also
unveiled additional factors that seem to play a critical role in COVID-19 conspiracy theories.
For instance, concern with one’s own health was associated with beliefs in conspiracy
theories. The lack of effective responses to tackle the pandemic as well as the difficulty in
transmitting clear and consistent information regarding a widely unknown disease enhanced
feelings of uncertainty and concern in the general population. Consequently, this may
potentiate the lack of trust in governmental authorities and the health system, which may
eventually foster the vulnerabilities that make people believe in conspiracy theories [23].
Evidence suggests that reduced knowledge about any given topic increases the probability for
beliefs in conspiracy theories [73-75]. When exposed to highly complex and ambiguous
situations, individuals who do not have sufficient knowledge regarding a topic have a
tendency to use a heuristic processing to formulate their opinions, which raises the likelihood
for conspiracy-related beliefs [76-78]. Consistently, when faced with different perspectives
and arguments, individuals tend to use a directional bias to strengthen their pre-existing
visions [79,80]. The COVID-19 pandemic was an ideal setting to nurture these reasoning
processes, especially as several unknown sources of misinformation further added to the
uncertainty already inherent to a new wide spreading virus.
Another important although expected finding was the negative association between
education levels and beliefs in COVID-19 conspiracy theories. Previous evidence clearly
suggests that beliefs in conspiracy theories are positively related to lower analytic thinking,
open-mindedness, and consequently, intuitive thinking. Individuals who are less educated
tend to attribute agency and intentionality where it does not exist [81-83]. Despite the role of
education on beliefs in conspiracy theories being expected, this is particularly relevant during
a pandemic outbreak. Decision makers and other critical societal agents should be aware of
this issue and implement communication strategies that can be easily understood across all
education levels. This approach would be extremely valuable not only to increase knowledge
about the virus, the treatment and the required preventive measures, but also to demystify
misinformation whenever necessary.
Interestingly, we also found that the timing of response played a role on beliefs in
COVID-19 conspiracy theories, as levels were higher during the government mandated
emergency state. There are two major factors that may explain these findings. First, in the
initial stage of the pandemic information was far more inconsistent, which left more room for
the proliferation of conspiracy theories. Secondly, the emergency state in Portugal introduced
a wide set of restrictions that led to a lack of structured routine and loss of (in-person) social
interaction, which may have consequently played a role on psychological well-being (e.g.,
loss of motivation, meaning and self-worth) [28,84,85]. Taking together, it is easy to
understand how these factors, which were most likely at their peak during the emergency
state, contributed to feelings of threat and insecurity, increasing the likelihood for beliefs in
conspiracy theories [86].
Finally, we also found a positive association between tobacco consumption and
beliefs in COVID-19 conspiracy theories. Although the current work is cross-sectional and
we cannot infer any sort of causality between constructs, we postulate that it is more likely
that the intrinsic vulnerability to believe in conspiracy theories may drive the increase in
tobacco consumption and not the other way around. Some authors suggest that nicotine may
reduce anxiety and depressive-like behavior [87,88], although this is much more a common
sense idea that most people have (i.e., “nicotine reduces the anxiety and stress”) [89]. Thus,
as suggested by the “self-medication” hypothesis of drug abuse [90-92], accentuated
depressive/anxiety symptomatology inherently leads to an increase in tobacco consumption.
Moreover, it also fairly well known that tobacco consumption is very high in patients with
psychotic disorders [93]. Thus, it is possible to postulate that individuals more likely to
believe in conspiracy theories may also display an increased vulnerability for tobacco
consumption, especially in high stress situations were tobacco is seen by its users as an tool
to reduce negative affective states.
There are several limitations regarding the present study. Data collection was
conducted using an online survey which ultimately does not allow to represent the whole
population, as there are potential participants that do not have access to the Internet and
hence could not be recruited. Furthermore, the questionnaire was fairly extensive which
might have predisposed participants to be less engaged at times and produce less reliable
answer. Most importantly, this cross-sectional study does not allow to establish any sort of
causal relationships between the measured constructs. Ideally it would be necessary to assess
how psychotic-like experiences evolved across time. Additional longitudinal studies would
be valuable to understand how different stages of the pandemic control and government
management influence psychotic-like experiences as well as measures related to
psychological well-being. Furthermore, it would also be relevant to understand these
phenomena in clinical populations, including people diagnosed with psychotic-like disorders.
Finally, our initial correlation analysis also indicated a trend for a positive association
between beliefs in conspiracy theories and COVID-related budget changes and financial
concerns, although these associations were not significant in multiple regression analysis.
The working-age population is particularly facing uncertainties and constant concerns due to
pandemic-related economic changes, which potentiates negative future perspectives that
affect their mental health and well-being [94]. Thus, future studies should further assess how
work-related factors may moderate the vulnerability to beliefs in COVID-19 conspiracy
theories, psychotic-like experiences and other psychological distress factors, as this likely
produces indirect costs that can be lessened through effective social protection systems.
Conclusion
COVID-19 conspiracy theories are yet another major challenge that governments and policy
makers must contemplate when defining strategic directions to manage the current pandemic.
The current study suggest that psychotic-like experiences are clearly associated with beliefs
in conspiracy theories, particularly perceptual abnormalities and persecutory ideation.
Moreover, increased health-related concerns and reduced education levels also seem to be
liability factors for valuing these theories. Future studies should further refine the role of
psychotic-like experiences on these beliefs and explore additional factors (e.g., financial and
work-related factors) that can help us to understand how COVID-19 conspiracy theories have
become a major worldwide misinformation source, hindering the transmission of factful and
meaningful information to the community.
Methods
Participants Participants, aged 18 or older, were recruited using a “snowball” approach [95].
Recruitment was only performed after the consent and approval of the Ethics Committee of
ESS-P.PORTO. All participants agreed with the electronic consent form, prepared according
to the Declaration of Helsinki [96]. The survey was anonymous and the participants did not
receive any sort of compensation. A total of 547 participants completed the questionnaire.
However, only 438 participants were included for the full analysis as we decided to exclude
participants who were not in confinement (e.g., due to their profession or any other factor).
Non-confined subjects did not fully experience the restrictions related to lockdown which
would constitute a major confounding factor in our results. The dataset for the current study
can be found at osf.io/c82gs.
Instruments The online survey had an estimated length of 15-20 minutes and included the
following: sociodemographic questionnaire (age, sex, education levels, employment status);
questions addressing behaviours and events related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including
confinement experience; COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Questionnaire, developed by the
research team; control question regarding general conspiracy theories[97]; standardized
questionnaires to assess psychotic-like experiences as well as others constructs of interest
(e.g., perceived stress, satisfaction with activities, etc). Participants were instructed to provide
answers regarding their confinement period (i.e., “since you started your confinement did you
experience …”). Reliability coefficients for the included questionnaires were assessed using
Cronbach’s alpha and the cut-off criteria defined by Kline [98]: < 0.5 unacceptable; ≥ 0.5 and
< 0.6 poor; ≥ 0.6 and < 0.7 questionable; ≥ 0.7 and < 0.8 adequate/acceptable; ≥ 0.8 and < 0.9
good; ≥ 0.9 excellent. Bellow we provide a more detailed description of each component of
the online survey.
Questionnaire for behaviors and events related to the COVID-19 pandemic: a survey
developed by the research team to understand confinement-related behaviors (outings during
confinement, telework, online social contacts, tobacco and alcohol consumption), beliefs
(information about the pandemic, health-related concerns, satisfaction with confinement
experience, financial concerns), and conditions (having/not having an infected relative,
confined alone or not, caregiver for children and/or elderly, available outdoor spaces,
employment status and budget changes). This questionnaire can be found at osf.io/c82gs.
COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs Questionnaire: 11-item survey conceived by the
research team to assess the degree of belief in conspiracy theories related to COVID-19. Each
item refers to a conspiracy theory about the pandemic. An online search was conducted by
the research team to identify the most common conspiracy theories that were being debated
after the start of the pandemic (e.g., COVID-19 is a biologic weapon created in a laboratory
setting, big pharmaceutical companies created COVID-19 to achieve huge profits from
vaccines). Each statement was rated on a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from “completely
false” (1) to “completely true” (7). A total score was computed by adding the rating for each
individual item, with higher scores representing stronger beliefs in COVID-19 conspiracy
theories. Cronbach’s alpha for this questionnaire indicated good internal consistency (α =
0.886). Furthermore, the COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs Questionnaire was highly
correlated with ratings of overall belief in conspiracy theories, r (436) = 0.582, p < 0.001,
99% CI [0.493, 0.658].
Community Assessment of Psychotic Experience (CAPE): self-report questionnaire that
assesses the frequency of psychotic-like experiences in the general population [99]. It is
composed of 15 items, framed within three domains: persecutory ideation (5 items), bizarre
experiences (7 items), and perceptive abnormalities (3 items). Each item is rated on a 4-point
Likert scale, with 0 representing “never” and 3 meaning “almost always”. Items were
summed to compute a total score that can range from 0 to 45, with higher scores representing
larger frequency of psychotic experiences. In the current sample, CAPES Total Score
displayed good internal consistency (α = 0.867). Moreover, the Cronbach’s alpha for the
CAPE Bizarre Experience also indicated good internal consistency (α = 0.824), although
internal consistency was only acceptable for CAPE Persecutory Ideation and CAPE
Perceptive Abnormalities (α = 0.773 and α = 0.766, respectively).
Perceived Stress Scale (PSS): 13-item questionnaire to assess self-perceived global stress,
that is, how frequently certain life events might induce stress [100,101]. Each item is rated
on a 5-point Likert scale, ranging from “never” to “many times”. In the current sample,
Cronbach’s alpha for the PSS indicated good internal consistency (α = 0.870);
Emotional Regulation Survey (ERS): 10-tem questionnaire to assess the degree to each any
given individual uses certain strategies to regulate his/her emotions, namely cognitive
reappraisal and expressive suppression strategies which are scored separately [102,103]. Each
item is rated on a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from “I totally disagree” to “I totally agree”.
In the current sample, Cronbach’s alpha was poor for the Cognitive Reappraisal domain (α =
0.532) and unacceptable for the Expressive Suppression (α = 0.426). Thus, results regarding
this questionnaire should be interpreted with caution.
Personal Well-Being Index (PWBI): 8-item self-report survey to measure subjective well-
being, which is achieved by assessing individuals’ satisfaction regarding several life domains
(e.g., health, life goals, safety, future, spiritual connection, etc) [104]. Each question is rated
from 0 to 10, with 0 corresponding to “Totally unsatisfied” and 10 representing “Totally
satisfied”. In the current sample, Cronbach’s alpha for the PWBI indicated good internal
consistency (α = 0.858);
Activities Questionnaire: 4-items developed by the research team to assess participation and
satisfaction regarding productive, leisure, and self-care activities during confinement. Each
item was rated using a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from “totally disagrees” to “totally
agrees”. In the current sample, internal consistency for this questionnaire was acceptable (α =
0.730).
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS): 10-item self-report measure assessing
positive and negative affective states (5 items for each domain) [105]. Each item is rated on
a 5-point Likert scale and a total score is computed for each domain. In the current sample,
internal consistency was acceptable for the PANAS Positive domain (α = 0.769) and good for
the PANAS Negative domain (α = 0.840).
Three-Item Loneliness Scale: a scale constituted by 3 items, which goal is to quantitatively
assess the isolation/loneliness, encompassing the following dimensions: relational
connection, social connection, and self-perception of isolation. This is scored using a Liker
scale with three answer categories, namely: almost never/never (1 point), sometimes (2
points), and frequently/always (3 points). The final score results from the addition of the
score attributed to each answer. The highest the score, the highest the degree of
isolation/loneliness [106,107]. In the current sample, internal consistency for this
questionnaire was acceptable (α = 0.739).
Satisfaction, Alertness, Timing, Efficiency and Duration Questionnaire (SATED): self-report
measure assessing sleep-related health by considering sleep satisfaction, alert state during
waking hours, as well as sleep length and efficiency [108,109]. This scale includes 6 items,
assessed using a 5-point Likert scale. In the current sample, Cronbach’s alpha was
questionable for this scale (α = 0.695).
Statistical analysis Regarding descriptive statistics, absolute and relative frequencies were
computed for categorical variables, while mean and standard deviation are reported for
continuous variables. For inferential analysis, independent samples t-tests were used to
compare several groups (e.g., males vs. females, caregivers vs. non-caregivers during
confinement) regarding COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs. For this test, the
homogeneity of variance assumption was also examined using the Levene’s F test. When this
assumption was not met, the Welch’s t-test was used instead. Pearson correlations were also
used to test the association between scores on the COVID-19 Conspiracy Theories Beliefs
and other continuous variables (e.g. COVID-19 information levels, confinement experience
ratings, scores on other scales). According to the guidelines of Gignac & Szodorai [110], the
magnitude of Pearson correlations were classified as small (>=0.10), moderate (>=0.20), and
large (>= 0.30). Finally, as the normality assumption was not met for several analysis,
bootstrapping (bias corrected accelerated, 1000 samples) was used to estimate test statistics
and confidence intervals for the independent samples t-tests and Pearson correlations.
Contingent on the results found in the previous inferential tests, a regression model
was prepared including all variables significantly and marginally associated with COVID-19
Conspiracy Theories Beliefs. Before implementing the regression model, the following
assumptions were tested: normally distributed residuals (examination of the distribution of
standardized residual and identification of influential cases); homoscedasticity (Koenker test
and visual inspection of the scatter plot of absolute standardized residuals by standardized
predicted values); collinearity (correlation matrix between independent variables);
multicollinearity (tolerance and variance inflation factor). The regression model was adjusted
after assumption testing, if required. All analysis were implemented using IBM SPSS
(version 26). To control for multiple analysis, significance levels were set at 0.01, although p-
values between 0.01 and 0.05 were considered as marginally significant.