Implicit Conditioning and ERP 1
Lane Beckes
James A. Coan
James P. Morris
University of Virginia
Implicit Conditioning of Faces via the Social Regulation of Emotion: ERP Evidence of Early
Attentional Biases for Security Conditioned Faces
Running Head: Implicit Conditioning and ERP
Corresponding Author: Lane Beckes
Address: Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, 102 Gilmer Hall, Charlottesville,
VA 22904
Email: lab5nq@virginia.edu
Phone: 434-243-2323
Word Count: 7,554
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 2
Abstract
Not much is known about the neural and psychological processes that promote the initial
conditions necessary for positive social bonding. This study explores one method of conditioned
bonding utilizing dynamics related to the social regulation of emotion and attachment theory.
This form of conditioning involves repeated presentations of negative stimuli followed by
images of warm, smiling faces. Beckes and colleagues (2010) found that this conditioning
procedure results in positive associations with the faces measured via a lexical decision task,
suggesting they are perceived as comforting. This study found that the P1 ERP was similarly
modified by this conditioning procedure and the P1 amplitude predicted lexical decision times to
insecure words primed by the faces. The findings have implications for understanding how the
brain detects supportive people, the flexibility and modifiability of early ERP components, and
social bonding more broadly.
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 3
Implicit Conditioning of Faces via the Social Regulation of Emotion: ERP Evidence of Early
Attentional Biases for Security Conditioned Faces
Social connectedness is now recognized as crucial to human health and well-being (e.g.,
Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Uchino, Cacioppo, & Kiecolt-Glaser, 1996; House, Landis, &
Umberson, 1988; Holt-Lunstad, Smith, & Layton, 2010). One pathway through which social
relationships are thought to benefit health is through the regulation of emotional responses to
stressful events (e.g., Beckes & Coan, 2011; Bowlby, 1969/1982; Coan, 2008, 2010; Hofer,
1995, 2006; Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003; Cohen & Wills, 1985). Bowlby’s (1969/1982) seminal
attachment theory was the first to propose that a vital role of “secure” attachment relationships
was to regulate negative emotion. Secure attachments emerge out of relationships that provide a
sense of “felt security” (Sroufe & Waters, 1977), which grows when the relationship partner is
available and responsive to the distress of the other (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003); relieving
distress and regulating negative emotion. According to social baseline theory (SBT; Coan, 2010;
Beckes & Coan, 2011) social relationships are perceived as resources that offset the risks and
efforts associated with daily life. But the effectiveness of a social resource is contingent upon its
reliability, raising the question of how that reliability is assessed. The answer rests on social
experience.
According to SBT, people reflexively use any available information to predict the
likelihood that another person will be a reliable resource. In general, reliable, familiar, and
predictable social resources are the most valuable in times of need. If an individual has been
both needed and responsive in the past—even the very recent past—then it is wise to affiliate
more with that individual. This experiment examines the role of non-verbal signals of
responsiveness in the presence of potential threats. Specifically it extends previous research by
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 4
Beckes, Simpson, and Erickson (2010) by exploring the neural timing of conditioned learning
related to the social regulation of emotion, and the degree to which these processes promote
approach relevant attentional biases in early social perception.
Social Regulatory Conditioning
Beckes and colleagues (2010) hypothesized that the experimental combination of threat
and responsiveness would foster felt security in their participants. Specifically they tested
whether people would be more likely to develop positive, attachment-related associations with
the faces of people who display genuine smiles if those faces have been implicitly paired with
distressing stimuli (e.g., snake or mutilation photos). Results from these studies indicated that
smiling faces paired with negative stimuli did indeed decrease lexical decision response times for
security related words (e.g., “belong”) while increasing lexical decision response times to
insecurity related words (e.g., “betray”). Importantly, the learning process did not have this effect
when neutral, unresponsive faces were used. Thus, responsive (smiling) faces preceded by
potential threats promote implicit associations between those responsive faces and security
constructs.
The hypothesis that this sequence of events could lead to secure associations emerged out
of an integration of neurobiological models of attachment and contemporary adult attachment
theory. According to Mikulincer and Shaver (2003) attachment security should emerge through
repeated iterations of a sequence of threat, followed by support seeking, followed by
responsiveness from a supportive other. This theoretical sequence has much in common with
basic animal models of attachment behavior. For example, Nelson and Panksepp (1998) argue
that social bonding is supported by two basic affective/motivational neural subsystems that form
a larger integrated social emotion system. The first subsystem, governing separation distress, is
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 5
involved in support seeking motivation. Evidence for the neural mechanisms involved in
separation distress come from animal studies using electrical stimulation of the brain.
Stimulation of a circuit including regions of the dorsomedial thalamus, ventral septal area,
preoptic area, basal nucleus of the stria terminalis, anterior cingulate cortex, amygdala and
hypothalamus increases distress calls in mammals (see Nelson & Panksepp, 1998). Further these
regions appear to be down regulated by endogenous opioids and oxytocin (see Panksepp, Siviy,
& Normansell, 1985), which separately are critical components of what Panksepp and Nelson
term a social reward subsystem.
Importantly, neuro-chemicals involved in the stress response such as corticotrphin
releasing hormone (see Panksepp et al., 1985) increase activity in the separation distress circuit
and promote distress vocalizations in most social species. Alternatively, opioids and oxytocin are
not only associated with down-regulation of separation distress, but they tend to be released via
social stimuli such as soft touch (e.g., Blass & Fitzgerald, 1988). Taken together, these literatures
and theoretical traditions both seem to argue that stressors can produce a motivation to seek
support, and if that support is given in appropriate ways (e.g., soft physical touch,
responsiveness) it diminishes the stress response, and conditions an association between the
supporter and feelings of security and comfort.
This begs the question, what is meant by responsiveness? Why does a smiling face signal
responsiveness? Responsiveness is an admittedly vague and broad concept, which makes it
difficult to operationalize in a specific and grounded manner. Despite this Reis, Clark, and
Holmes (2004) note that perceived responsiveness is an important organizing construct in the
relationship domain and therefore may be thought of a part and parcel of myriad
operationalizations of interaction quality within dyads. For example, they suggest that measures
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 6
of verbal and nonverbal behaviors in interactions, behavioral mimicry, perceived validation, and
several other measures frequently capture aspects of responsiveness. We take a more explicitly
behavioral approach in this research using concrete non-verbal cues such as direct eye-gaze and
Duchenne smiles as an alternate construct for responsiveness. The degree to which this can be
termed responsiveness per se is debatable, however, such non-verbal behavior is likely
foundational to the perception that another is being responsive. Moreover, there is now
considerable evidence that facial expressions, eye contact, physical touch, and similar behaviors
have powerful effects on emotional and physiological systems of social mammals (e.g., Harlow,
1958; Hofer, 2006; Whalen, Rauch, Etcoff, McInerney, Lee, & Jenike, 1998), a phenomenon
which Hofer termed “hidden regulators”. More specifically, Whalen and colleagues (1998) note
that even at an implicit level, masked happy faces appear to signal safety. Thus, although warm,
smiling faces may not embody responsiveness, they are an excellent behavioral
operationalization of the social signal of safety, the primary signal of interest, in that they are
acutely observable, controllable, and easily replicable.
In practice this conditioning method is most similar to that employed by Olson and Fazio
(e.g., 2001), which they have dubbed evaluative conditioning. This approach usually takes
conditioned stimuli such as faces and repeatedly pairs them with negative, neutral, or positive
unconditioned stimuli in order to transfer the valence of the unconditioned stimuli onto the
conditioned stimuli. This procedure follows the traditional classical conditioning sequence in
which the conditioned stimuli are presented prior to (or alternatively simultaneously with) the
unconditioned stimuli. This sequence leads the learner to associate the conditioned stimuli with
the subsequent presentation of the unconditioned stimuli, as if it were a signal of the positive or
negative stimulus that is about to be presented. Our method flips the event sequence such that the
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 7
conditioned stimuli (faces) always follow the unconditioned stimuli (negative or neutral images).
In this sense, the faces become cues that the unconditioned stimulus is being removed. In this
way the faces become negatively reinforced (in a novel classical manner) if presented after the
negative stimulus, and signal a return to baseline safety. As found by Beckes and colleagues
(2010), however, the face appears to require signals of safety to function as a negative reinforcer.
It is possible that the unconditioned properties of warm, smiling faces are necessary for this type
of negative reinforcement to take hold and truly neutral objects cannot be conditioned in this
manner.
Early Stage Social Perception and the Social Regulation of Emotion
Social baseline theory argues that early stage or “bottom-up” perceptual processes make
important contributions to the social regulation of emotion (Beckes & Coan, 2011). If true, it is
likely that cues indicating the reliability, familiarity, and predictability of individuals are encoded
in early perceptual circuits, and that the social regulatory conditioning identified by Beckes et al.
should be evident in early perception. Indeed, signs from others of warmth and safety have their
greatest signal value when one is in dire straits. If another person reliably and predictable shows
up for a poker game or night out for fun this type of information bears far less predictive value
than if they respond appropriately during times of duress or when asked for help. Thus, helping
when the chips are down defines what it means to be reliable and predictable social resource for
the purposes of affect regulation. This is intimately related to what Simpson (2007) terms trust
diagnostic situations. According to Simpson, people often look to “strain-tests” to determine the
trustworthiness of a given relationship partner. Strain-tests refer to situations in which the other
person has power to benefit the individual, but could choose to not help. Thus, one critical factor
in learning a sense of security with another person is having them be reliably helpful or calming
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 8
in challenging situations. But why should this manifest in early perception? This hypothesis
emerges out of continued findings that typical top-down regulatory mechanisms (e.g., the ventro-
medial prefrtonal cortex) do not appear to be acting to down regulate threat response during
social contact (e.g., Coan, Scharfer, & Davidson, 2006; Coan, Beckes, & Allen, in press), despite
repeated findings that social contact does diminish threat responding. Thus, social baseline
theory has argued that the diminished threat experienced under social contact may be due to
bottom up perceptual processes changing the perception of the motivational landscape (Beckes &
Coan, 2011). In effect the perceptual characteristics get automatically linked to a sense of safety
and security in memory, increasing motivated approach, and diminishing vigilance and anxiety
over potential environmental threats.
Event related potentials (ERPs) provide an ideal method for determining the timing of
such processes. ERP captures electrical potentials on the scalp. In face perception, these
potentials usually include an early positive going potential over posterior electrodes that peaks
shortly after 100ms, commonly referred to as the P1 component (Cunningham, VanBavel,
Arbuckle, Packer, & Waggoner, 2012), and an early negative going potential over posterior
regions usually peaking around 170 ms, called the N170 component (Ito & Bartholow, 2009).
A growing body of research suggests that social categorization processes are visible in
these early components (Ito & Bartholow, 2009). For example, the N170 component has been
shown to be larger in amplitude to other race faces (Walker, Silvert, Hewstone, & Nobre, 2008;
Hermann, Schreppel, Jager, Koehler, Ehlis, & Fallgatter, 2007; Stahl, Wiese, & Schweinberger,
2008; Ito & Urland, 2005) and to novel rather than familiar faces (Jaques & Rossion, 2006).
More recently, Cunningham and colleagues (2012) found evidence for smaller P1 and larger
N170 amplitudes to other race faces. Intriguingly, the N170 components in this study appeared to
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 9
be a function of the P1 difference—with N170 effects disappearing after statistically adjusting
for the P1. Further, these differences were attenuated when participants were in an approach
motivational frame, suggesting that the P1 component is sensitive to motivational states. This
implies that the P1 component is tapping attentional biases toward approach relevant social
stimuli and could be used to gauge the degree to which faces are perceived as approach relevant,
ingroup stimuli relative to other faces.
The Current Experiment
This experiment was designed to test whether social regulatory conditioning (Beckes et
al., 2010) would result in larger P1 amplitudes to smiling faces that had been previously paired
with threatening-negative stimuli (i.e., striking snakes) relative to faces previously paired with
neutral stimuli (i.e., rolling pins). We focused on the P1 effect because it appears to tap into
motivational components of ingroup perception, whereas the N170 appears to be more sensitive
to task features that modify structural encoding (Senholzi & Ito, 2012). The procedure involved a
learning phase in which a set of two faces displaying genuine Duchenne smiles (Freitas-
Magalhaes & Castro, 2009) was repeatedly preceded by a negative stimulus and another set of
faces was preceded by a neutral stimulus. The “test” phase of the experiment involved measuring
ERP components to the face stimuli and response times (RTs) to words primed by the face
stimuli. We predicted (1) that when primed by snake-paired faces (relative to rolling pin-paired
faces), RTs to secure words would decrease while RTs to insecure words would increase; (2) that
snake-paired faces would result in larger P1 amplitudes relative to rolling pin-paired faces; and
(3) that condition differences in lexical decision times would be correlated with condition
differences in P1 amplitude. We used a 2 x 2 within-subjects design for the lexical decision task,
including conditioning of face prime (snake- vs. rolling pin-paired) and attachment valence
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 10
(secure vs. insecure). For ERP measurements, we used a 2 x 2 within-subjects design, including
conditioning of face stimulus (snake- vs. rolling pin-paired) and electrode site hemisphere (left
vs. right) .
Method
Participants
Forty-six undergraduate students (16 men, 30 women) participated in exchange for
course credit. They ranged in age from 16 to 23 (M =19.1). Self-identified racial background
indicated the sample consisted of 3 African American, 5 Asian, 1 Hispanic, 32 white, 4 “other
race” and 1 mixed race participants. One subject was dropped due to technical problems during
data collection.
Stimulus Materials
Face photos were originally selected from the NIMSTIM database (Tottenham,
Borscheid, Ellertsen, Marcus, & Nelson, 2002) and included face shots of individuals with
forward facing eyes and Duchenne smiles. Images were displayed in color with a resolution of
253 x 325 dpi. The images were separated into two sets counterbalanced on likability, warmth,
and attractiveness (see Beckes et al., 2010). Each set included one image of a woman and one
image of a man (01F, 07F, 28M, and 34M).
Images used as unconditioned stimuli included a negative US (a striking snake, IAPS
slide 1050) and a neutral US (a rolling pin IAPS slide 7000), and were originally selected from
the International Affective Picture System (IAPS, Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 2005). A
scrambled image of nature scenes was used as a mask stimulus. Each image was 512 x 384 dpi.
Stimulus words were presented in white font on a black background in order to minimize
blink artifacts, and were composed of 5 different categories of words. The categories included
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 11
secure words, insecure words, sexual desire words (e.g., desire, lust), disgust words (e.g., decay,
disease), and neutral words (e.g., tissue, foot). Each category included ten words equated on
word length, and frequency in written language (Kucera & Francis, 1967), taken from the
Affective Norms for English Words list (Bradley & Lang, 1999). In addition, 50 non-words were
used as distracters, and were similar in length to the real words. Secure words included the
following: tender, warmth, secure, calm, sensitive, affection, belong, comfort, trust, nurture.
Insecure words included the following: insecure, neglect, fear, hurt, distress, avoid, betray,
rejection, lonely, anxiety.
Procedure
Participants completed informed consent and self-report measures including demographic
measures of race, age, and gender. Upon completion of consent, and prior to filling out self-
reports, 32-electrodes were affixed to their face and scalp. Upon finishing self-reports and testing
the electroencephalographic (EEG) signal, the participants were given instructions on the
learning phase.
The learning phase (see Fig. 1) involved watching a series of images flash upon the
screen and at the end of each trial indicating whether they saw a star (by pressing the “n” key) or
a box (by pressing the “b) key. The monitor refresh rate was set at 75 Hz. Each trial lasted a total
of 11 seconds and contained a fixation point displayed for 2 seconds, a brief 14ms implicit
presentation of a snake or rolling pin (unconditioned stimuli; US), a mask image presented for
186ms to prevent explicit identification of the US, a blank screen for 800ms, a smiling face for 3
seconds, followed by a 14ms presentation of a white box or triangle, in that order. A blank screen
filled in the inter-trial interval for the remainder of the 11 seconds. We used a black background
for each image in both the learning and test phases to prevent blink artifacts. The sequence of
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 12
US-face presentation was such that the snake always preceded one set of face photos and the
rolling pin always preceded the other set of face photos. This combination was switched via
random assignment across participants so that some participants always had the snake paired
with set 1 and the rolling pin paired with set 2 and vice versa for participants assigned to the
other group. Each US-face pairing occurred 20 times in the learning phase for 80 total trials.
Upon finishing the learning phase participants were given instructions on the test phase.
The test phase (see Fig. 1) required participants to make a lexical decision (word vs. non-
word) by pressing the appropriate key (“b” and “n” respectively) as quickly as they could while
still being accurate. Each word was primed by each of the faces in random order. In addition, 20
trials for each face (80 trials total) were collected without a lexical decision in order to get clean
ERP measurement of the face stimuli both with and without words being presented immediately
afterward. This phase included several trials with a fixation point presented for 250ms, a face
presented for 250ms, a word/non-word presented until response, and a 1 second inter-trial
interval. This led to 20 lexical decisions for each face condition/word category combination and
240 individual ERP epochs for each face condition or a total of 480 per subject.
Upon finishing the test phase participants were screened using a funneled debrief in
which they are asked a) to recall all stimulus they saw, b) to guess any stimuli that may have
been presented but that they did not consciously recognize or see, and c) to choose from set of
forced choice options what stimuli they might have seen. Five participants either recalled or
guessed without the forced-choice options that they saw the snake. Given that the implicit nature
of the learning procedure is important, these subjects were removed from further analysis in
order to make sure all learning was implicit in nature and to avoid potential confounds associated
with explicit inference and participants guessing study hypotheses.
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 13
Physiological Data Collection and Reduction
ERP recordings were collected from 32 scalp electrodes using a Biosemi ActiveTwo
EEG system. The 32 electrode headcap conformed to international 10/20 standards, and we
measured activity from all electrode sites (Fp1, Fp2, AF3, AF4, F7, F3, Fz, F4, F8, FC5, FC1,
FC2, FC6, T7, C3, CZ, C4, T8, CP5, CP1, CP2, CP6, P7, P3, Pz, P4, P8, PO3, PO4, O1, Oz, and
O2). ActiveTwo is a battery powered system that uses two electrodes called “Common Mode
Sense” and “Driven Right Leg” electrodes as a ground. The electrodes form a feedback loop
which functions to place the subject’s average potential as close to amplifier zero as possible.
The EEG system sampled the signal at 1024 Hz which were decimated to 256 HZ using
Biosemi’s Decimater and processed in EEGlab (Delorme & Makeig, 2004) and ERPlab (Marley,
Luck, & Lopez-Calderon, 2011). Data were filtered offline with a high-pass filter of .2 Hz and a
low-pass filter of 19.8 Hz. An average reference was derived off-line by subtracting from each
electrode site the average activity of all electrode sites. Electrodes placed at approximately 20%
of the nasion–inion distance directly below FP1 and FP2, were used to monitor eye movements
and blink artifacts. Epoch’s were defined as the window from 200ms pre- to 800ms post-
stimulus presentation. Artifact detection was carried out using ERPlab’s moving window peak-
to-peak artifact detection function using a voltage threshold of 80v. Visual inspection was used
to verify the effectiveness of this detection method. Data were corrected to the mean voltage of
the pre-stimulus interval. Three participants failed to have at least 30 accepted trials for each face
stimulus, and were thus removed from analysis.
Results
Response Time Results
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 14
Accuracy rates during the lexical decision task were excellent with mean hit rates over
96%. Incorrect trials were dropped from analysis, and trials with RTs more than 1500 ms (~ 3
standard deviations from the mean) were also dropped. It should also be noted that a log
transformation on the RT data resulted in the same results (only small changes in summary
statistics with no impact on interpretation), so all effects reported are on untransformed data. To
test the effects of conditioning on response time, we conducted a repeated measures ANOVA
with conditioning (snake-paired vs. rolling pin-paired faces), valence (secure vs. insecure), and
word type (attachment vs. non-attachment) as the primary independent variables and gender as a
between subjects effect. Results indicated a significant effect of conditioning F(1, 38) = 7.3, p =
.03, partial η = .16, indicating slower response times to words primed by snake-paired faces.
There was an additional main effect of valence, F(1, 38) = 7.8, p = .008, partial η = .17,
indicating slower responses to negative words relative to positive words. No other significant
effects emerged, all other p’s > .2.
To further interrogate these effects we conducted additional ANOVAs for attachment
words and non-attachment words to determine if one of these groups was driving the effects of
conditioning and valence. First we conducted a repeated measures 2 x 2 ANOVA with
conditioning (snake-paired vs. rolling pin-paired faces) and valence (secure vs. insecure) as the
primary independent variables and response time to words after a face prime as the primary
dependent variable of interest. We predicted a significant interaction between conditioning and
security such that RTs to secure words would be faster if primed by snake-paired faces and RTs
to insecure words would be slower if primed by snake-paired faces relative to responses to words
primed by rolling pin-paired faces. A significant main effect of conditioning emerged, F(1, 39) =
4.1, p = .05, partial η = .09, indicating slower response times to words primed by snake-paired
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 15
faces (see Fig. 2). All other effects were non-significant, all p’s > .1. The effect found in Beckes
and colleagues (2010) was not fully replicated as there was only a non-significant trend in the
interaction in the expected direction, F(1, 39) = 1.8, p = .19, partial η = .04. Additional paired t-
tests revealed that there was a significant effect of conditioning on RTs to insecure words as
predicted, t(39) = 2.8, p = .007, such that insecure words primed by snake-paired faces were
There was no significant effect for the secure words, t(39) = .6, p = .58. This provides partial
support for hypothesis 1 and partially replicates the Beckes and colleagues (2010) findings. The
lack of full support is likely a function of statistical power and repeated word presentations, most
likely the latter. It is possible that repetition priming (Tulving & Schacter, 1990) effectively
washed out any effects of conditioning on the secure word priming. These design limitations
were introduced to offset other demands and costs associated with ERP studies. Importantly,
when the current data were concatenated with those of Beckes and colleagues (2010) and re-
analyzed meta-analytically, we found that the interaction between condition (snake vs. rolling
pin-paired faces) and valence (secure vs. insecure) remained significant despite using data from
this sample, p = .003.
Analyses of RTs to non-attachment related words were conducted in the same manner
with a 2 x 2 ANOVA using conditioning and valence as within-subjects factors. This analysis
resulted in a significant main effect of valence, F(1, 39) = 8.3, p = .007, partial η = .18,
indicating that sexual desire words were responded to significantly faster than disgust words. No
other effects were detected, all p’s > .25. Paired t-tests on all categories of words including
neutral words revealed that conditioning of the prime faces only significantly changed RTs to
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 16
Overall these analyses indicate that the snake conditioning significantly inhibited
response times to insecure words, but had no significant effect on other word categories. These
results also indicate generally faster response times to positive words, driven in part by baseline
differences in the non-attachment words, and partially by the inhibition of insecure attachment
words by the snake-paired faces.
P1 Component Results
We focused on the P1 component peaking between 110-140ms post-stimulus
electrode sites, specifically O1, O2, PO3, and PO4, where expected. Data was analyzed for these
four electrodes only, and data from all other electrodes was ignored. We conducted a 2 x 2
repeated-measures ANOVA with conditioning (snake-paired vs. rolling pin-paired faces) and
hemisphere (PO3/O1 (left) vs. PO4/O2 (right)) as the primary independent variables and mean
amplitude between 110-140ms post-stimulus presentation as the primary dependent variable. We
also included gender as a between-subjects factor in all analyses. We predicted greater P1
amplitudes to snake-paired faces relative to rolling pin-paired faces. No effects emerged from
this analysis, all p’s > .1, except a significant conditioning by hemisphere interaction F(1, 35) =
6.9, p = .01, partial η = .17. Further interrogation of this effect identified a significant main
effect of conditioning in the left hemisphere (PO3/O1) F(1, 35) = 5.6, p = .02, partial η = .14,
significantly larger P1 amplitudes to snake-paired faces (M = 6.2, SE = .26) relative to rolling
pin-paired faces (M = 5.8, SE = .26). This result supports hypothesis 2.
A potential confound with race could emerge in these results if the race of the faces and
participants was somehow unbalanced during randomization. Previous research has found
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 17
significant differences in the P1 to same vs. different race faces. Given that all the faces used in
this study were of white individuals, we tested whether our effects obtained in only our white
participants. The same test in this subsample revealed the same significant interaction between
conditioning and hemisphere, F(1, 24) = 7.2, p = .01, partial η = .23, all other p’s > .10. This
eliminates the possibility that the conditioning effects were a function of race.
No peak N170 effects were detected, however, there was a trending effect in the left
hemisphere electrodes (PO3/O1), F(1, 35) = 3.3, p = .08, partial η = .09, indicating greater
negativity to rolling pin-paired faces relative to snake-paired faces—an effect that is similar to
the N170 ingroup/outgroup effects reported in Cunningham et al (2012).
P1 Correlation with Response Times
One potential problem with the interpretation that P1 components are due to social
regulatory conditioning is that faces paired with snakes may get more early attention due to the
arousing nature of the snake stimulus. If this is the case, however, P1 amplitude differences
should be uncorrelated with lexical decision times or systematically correlated with arousing
words regardless of word type if this is the case. To test this we took the difference in amplitude
for each face condition (snake-paired minus rolling pin-paired faces) in the left hemisphere
electrodes (PO3/O1) and the difference in response time for each face condition (snake-paired
minus rolling pin-paired face primes) to each category of words and conducted a Pearson’s
product moment correlation test to see if these differences were significantly related. As
hypothesized, for the insecure words these variables correlated positively, r(37) = .36, p = .03,
meaning that the greater the P1 amplitude was to snake-paired faces relative to rolling pin-paired
faces, the slower the RT to insecure words primed by snake-paired faces relative to rolling pin-
paired faces (see Fig. 4). Moreover, these effects did not emerge in the correlations between P1
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 18
amplitude and RTs to other word categories, all p’s > .10. Moreover, the correlations with sexual
desire (r(37) = -.25, p = .14) and disgust words (r(37) = -.19, p = .26), both of which are high
arousal word categories, are not only non-significant, but also of opposite sign to that of the
correlation with the insecure words. This finding makes it unlikely that the inhibition of insecure
words associated with the conditioning procedure is simply a function of arousal. This finding
strengthens the other results and the conditioning interpretation by providing evidence that the
RT and P1 measures are functionally linked in a manner more specific than would be predicted
from a simple arousal effect.
Discussion
Results reported here provide additional support for the original hypotheses of Beckes et
al. (2010), who suggested—and observed—that the social regulatory conditioning procedure
inhibits supportive faces from being associated with insecurity concepts. More importantly, the
conditioning procedure also seems to amplify P1 responses to supportive faces paired with
snakes relative to rolling pins. This supports hypothesis 2 that early attentional biases toward
securely conditioned faces would mirror P1 biases toward putative ingroup faces. Such evidence
implies that social regulatory conditioning increases early categorization of individuals as
potential resources, and may lead to the encoding of familiarity and possibly ingroup
membership. If true, it is likely via an increase in the approach relevance of the target individual.
Together, these processes point to psychological pathways for building, maintaining, and
strengthening secure social bonds by virtue of the combination of threat and responsiveness.
The ERP evidence suggests further that P1 generators are sensitive to implicit learning.
This supports the general conclusions of Cunningham and colleagues (2012) that early
attentional biases are flexible and modifiable by various factors. Specifically this experiment
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 19
suggests that one can increase approach relevant attentional biases toward novel individuals by
using the principles laid out by the social regulatory conditioning approach. Such insights could
lead to new ways to change implicit biases to promote less biased perceptual processes toward
marginalized members of a community, or outgroup members more generally. Indeed,
Mikulincer and Shaver (2007) note that boosting attachment security increases pro-social values
and intergroup tolerance. It may be that the social regulatory conditioning method is tapping into
similar psychological dynamics as security priming by enhancing approach motivation with
respect to target individuals.
The significant correlation between P1 and insecure RT measures provides convergent
evidence for the conclusion that social regulatory conditioning functions to facilitate the
perception of target individuals as safe and supportive. Specifically, it indicates that early
perceptual biases are functionally linked to implicit associations. Because the conditioning
procedure both increases approach related attentional biases toward target individuals and
decreases implicit associations between the target individual and insecurity—and because those
changes correlate—these data provide persuasive evidence for our conceptual interpretation.
Despite this plausible alternative hypotheses may exist. Arousal has been associated with
greater attraction to target individuals in investigations of links between arousal and affiliation
(e.g., Allen, Kenrick, Linder, & McCall, 1989; Brehm, Gatz, Goethals, McCrimmon, & Ward,
1978; Dutton & Aron, 1974; Jacobs, Berscheid, & Walster, 1971; Kenrick & Johnson, 1979;
Riordan & Tedeschi, 1983). These effects have alternatively been explained as misattribution of
arousal, response facilitation effects, and negative reinforcement effects. Although, to our
knowledge, none of these studies have looked at downstream learning as a function of pairing
arousal with a social target, it is possible some associative learning does occur in these situations
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 20
even if the underlying mechanism is more closely related to misattribution or response
facilitation explanations. Here we have interpreted our findings with a negative reinforcement
explanation, which easily explains the downstream learning found in our data, but similar
learning cannot be ruled out for the other possible mechanisms. These results, regardless of the
underlying psychological mechanism, should still be of keen interest to those curious about how
human bonding occurs and how it affects perceptual processes related to social targets. Debates
over the foundational mechanisms that link fear and arousal with social affiliation have
continued since Schacter’s (1959) experiment, with only temporary gaps in which no new data
was brought to bear. More recently with the burgeoning development of neurobiological models,
Shelley Taylor (2006) has suggested a link between stress responses and affiliation mediated by
oxytocin mechanisms, a process she pits against fight or flight with “tending and befriending”.
Here we do not make any grand claims related to resolving these debates, but rather offer novel
evidence for how this process may unfold and how that process relates to perceptual learning.
This experiment suggests a readiness of the human mind to implicitly interpret the
sequence of threat followed by responsiveness with safety and security in such a way as to bias
very early social perception processes. Further it highlights links between broader social
ingroup-outgroup perception and interpersonal bonding and attachment. Much more needs to be
explored regarding this unique conditioning phenomenon and its underlying mechanisms.
Despite the need for more investigation, however, this research is beginning to shed light on
important ways in which trust and comfort in others is developed and may lead to important
therapeutic and applied insights to help solve a number of social and relational problems faced
by people in day to day life.
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 21
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Belel Ait-Ouzemine, Casey Brown, Rolf Garcia, Laura Long, Matt
Lerner, and Julian Wills for their help with this project.
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 22
Footnotes
1 – The decision to split the analysis by hemisphere was based on recommendations by Luck
(2005) and following the methods used by Cunningham et al. (2012). An additional, more
conservative analysis was done including electrode site as a factor (PO3 vs. O1 vs. PO4 vs. O2)
in the analysis in order to verify reported findings. This analysis resulted in the same
interpretation as the hemispheric analysis, indicating a significant conditioning by electrode
interaction (p = .04 multivariate test and p = .007 within-subjects effect with Greenhouse-Geisser
correction).
2 – Subsequent analysis indicated that in the meta-analysis a paired-t-test of the hypothesis that
snake paired face primes lead to faster reaction times to secure words than rolling-pin paired face
primes was significant, p = .05. Further, a paired-t-test of the hypothesis that snake paired face
primes lead to slower reaction times to insecure words than rolling-pin paired face primes was
significant, p = .005.
Implicit Conditioning and ERP 23