Commentary on the Beyond WEIRD special issue:
The importance of open research practices to empirical research
in the evolutionary social sciences
∗†
Adam R. Kenny
2021-04-16
The importance of open research practices to the evolutionary social sciences has been un-
derscored of late (e.g. Beheim 2016; Kavanagh and Kapit´any 2021). The “Beyond WEIRD”
special issue has exemplary demonstrations of several practices, including, but not limited to,
data archiving, code sharing, and open materials. Here, I focus on these three open research
practices. I reiterate their benefits for comparative cross-cultural research in the evolutionary
social sciences. I also highlight some of the challenges researchers might face in their implemen-
tation, and provide pointers to possible solutions. Finally, I list elements of open research that
merit greater discussion in this area of research. For brevity, the focus here is on experimental
work, although open research practices apply to other empirically based cross-cultural research
more broadly.
First, how common is the implementation of open research practices in the evolutionary
social sciences? An indication is provided by a recent survey of the social learning literature,
including cultural evolution and evolutionary psychology, conducted by Minocher et al. (2020).
The authors were able to reproduce one in four results from 1955 to 2018, i.e. to re-derive
the results using the same data and methods as in the original research. Low reproducibility
was primarily due to unavailable, incomplete, or ambiguous data, as well as unclear analytic
pipelines, an issue compounded by a lack of scripting in a statistical language such as R. However,
estimated reproducibility was around 70% for 2018. It appears that open research practices
are increasingly being adopted — a shift attributable to changes in academic norms, journal
requirements, and technological capabilities.
There are several advantages to open data, code, and materials (Towse et al. 2020). Inno-
vation is promoted through the re-use of data and code. Open practices provide opportunities
for collaboration; minimally, they allow researchers not part of large research programmes to
integrate work. Generally, openness ensures the transparency and credibility of the scientific
record. As such, these practices should be adopted, unless opting out can be justified.
Open data can facilitate cross-cultural comparisons and meta-analyses, and can help situate
a primary study within the broader literature. With researchers encouraged to expand samples
beyond students from “WEIRD” contexts, MTurkers, and individuals from “small-scale soci-
eties”, public data will allow comparison across populations (Apicella and Barrett 2016; Milfont
and Klein 2018). Townsend et al. (2020) is an illustration of the type of cross-cultural research
that could draw upon open data. The authors demonstrated that sharing in a dictator game
Calleva Research Centre for Evolution and Human Sciences, Magdalen College, Oxford, UK & Institute of
Cognitive and Evolutionary Anthropology, University of Oxford, UK; email: adam.kenny@anthro.ox.ac.uk
Commentary on the “Beyond WEIRD” special issue in Evolution and Human Behavior. This is the author
accepted manuscript version of Kenny (2021) doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2021.02.008. This work is available
under a CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 licence.
among the Ik of Uganda was similar to behaviour in 18 other societies, the latter derived from
a meta-analysis.
Open materials allow for both direct replications and checks on generalisability. A direct
replication, an attempt to estimate the same effect using the same methods and population
as a previous study, might be a necessary first step when a finding is novel or unexpected.
Generalisability tests, possible through conceptual replications that modify methods and multi-
site studies, are important in building general models of human nature. A discussion of cross-
cultural generalisability is in Tiokhin et al. (2019), where adapted protocols for measuring social
discounting were implemented with rural Bangladeshis, rural Indonesians, and undergraduates
in the USA.
Direct replications might be challenging where data are collected using small and/or non-
probability samples from populations experiencing substantial social, cultural, and environmen-
tal change. For instance, the Hadza hunter-gatherers of Tanzania are considered a population
in transition (Smith and Apicella 2020), with increasing exposure to outsiders and non-Hadza
institutions. Yet this should not prevent studies from being replicated in theory. Furthermore,
open materials can facilitate longitudinal studies and replication attempts in the (distant) fu-
ture, both of which will be crucial to assess the effects of both long-term processes, like market
integration and climate change, and sudden shocks, such as the COVID-19 pandemic.
Privacy and anonymity are legitimate concerns when disclosing data, particularly when in-
formation relates to either small or at-risk communities in which participants are potentially
identifiable. In such cases, solutions include providing redacted data, where sensitive informa-
tion has been removed, and managing access through licences that stipulate conditions of use.
Alternatively, synthetic datasets can be generated: these preserve statistical properties and the
original relationships between variables but there is no “real” participant. For example, Gettler
et al. (2020) generated synthetic data to protect the identities of Congolese BaYaka and Bon-
dongo men included in their study, using the R package synthpop (Quintana 2020). In doing
so, results can be reproduced and effect sizes can be used in future research. If disclosing data
still involves a potential risk to participants, then researchers should clearly state why. Pro-
cessed data, used to complete the final analysis, should be shared, where processing is minimal.
Generally, the data should be as open as possible and as closed as necessary.
Another risk to participants is that data are re-purposed for research they did not or would
not consent to. Perhaps a participant would object to a secondary analyst making comparisons
across groups. Relatedly, there are ethical considerations with previously collected information
where consent was silent on data sharing. Neither issue prevents making data available: access
and usage conditions can regulate re-use (e.g. McElreath 2020), while sharing is easier where
original consent procedures did not include a promise not to share. The degree of openness
should be determined on a case-by-case basis, balancing potential participant concerns with the
need for a reproducible knowledge base. For a discussion and practical tips, see Meyer (2018).
Cross-cultural research can anticipate data sharing issues by engaging with communities
before data collection and dissemination. How to discuss and present research practices will
vary across societies and studies. Generally, discussions should be as explicit as possible with
respect to usage and access, raising what to share (e.g. individual or aggregated data) and
who might have access to datasets, whether other researchers, media, and/or governments. To
derive a contextually appropriate consent procedure, community leaders and local collaborators
should be included, and community members could be interviewed during pilot investigations.
All the while, researchers should be attentive to data sovereignty (an issue raised in biological
anthropology that applies more broadly, see Tsosie et al. 2020).
The open practices discussed here are perhaps easiest to implement with experimental re-
search. Observational and ethnographic studies generate data that are seemingly harder to
share. However, digitisation and archiving improves reproducibility and the long-term utility of
such data, as highlighted by Kraft et al. (2020) in relation to decades-long research with Batek
hunter-gatherers in Malaysia. Code that clearly documents the data wrangling process helps
reproduce cross-cultural research that uses secondary sources.
Finally, to foster an inclusive, collaborative, and more credible evolutionary social science,
the following aspects of open research practices merit further consideration:
Community involvement Researchers should discuss data sharing with study communities
early in the research programme (Broesch et al. 2020). Ownership, data format, and level
of anonymisation will differ depending on community needs and demands. The principle
“share data” applies to both academic networks and the communities researchers work
with. With shared access to data, asking and addressing questions is more collaborative.
Software licences A licence details permitted uses of the code and how others might redis-
tribute it (Fortunato and Galassi 2021). Without an appropriate licence, it might be that
researchers cannot technically use the code. A licence should be included with distributed
code or software.
Training Several standards, tools, and resources facilitate open research practices (some are
listed in Towse et al. 2020; Turner et al. 2020). Training should be central to educational
programmes in the evolutionary social sciences, in order to develop general skills, such as
writing clear metadata (e.g. description of variables), documenting code, and specifying the
computational environment in which analyses were conducted, and specific computational
skills for maintaining data provenance and minimising copy-paste errors, like using version
control and dynamic documents.
Credit Many evolutionary social scientists undertake substantial effort to document behaviour
during fieldwork. Using available data is relatively cost-free. Thus, researchers should
be rewarded for sharing data (Pierce et al. 2019), through appropriate credit (e.g. the
data curation role as part of the Contributor Roles Taxonomy) and citation of persistent
identifiers (e.g. a digital object identifier). Data management roles should be valued and
remunerated.
To paraphrase a characterisation of food sharing (Jaeggi and Gurven 2013), data sharing
can be defined as the unresisted transfer of data from one data-motivated individual to another.
Empirical researchers are motivated by data and rarely should there be a need to request data,
code, and materials. Open research practices should be a staple of evolutionary studies of the
human experience.
Acknowledgements
I thank Rhea Arini, Malika Ihle, Laura Fortunato, Chris Osborne, Ilse Pit, Sarah de Vries, and
the Editors for helpful comments, and ReproducibiliTea Oxford for discussions over the years.