Hate crime increases with minoritized group rank
† ‡ §
Mina Cikara Vasiliki Fouka Marco Tabellini
February 2022
Abstract
People are on the move in unprecedented numbers within and between countries. How does
demographic change affect local intergroup dynamics? In complement to accounts that em-
phasize stereotypical features of groups as determinants of their treatment, we propose the
group reference dependence hypothesis: violence and negative attitudes toward each minori-
tized group will depend on the number and size of other minoritized groups in a community.
Specifically, as groups increase or decrease in rank in terms of their size (e.g., to largest minor-
ity within a community), discriminatory behavior and attitudes toward them should change
accordingly. We test this hypothesis for hate crimes in U.S. counties between 1990 and 2010
and attitudes in the U.S. and U.K. over the last two decades. Consistent with this prediction,
we find that, as Black, Hispanic/Latinx, Asian, and Arab populations increase in rank relative
to one another, they become more likely to be targeted with hate crimes and more negative
attitudes. The rank effect holds above and beyond group size/proportion, growth rate, and
many other alternative explanations. This framework makes novel predictions about how
demographic shifts may affect coalitional structures in the coming years and helps explain
previous findings in the literature. Our results also indicate that attitudes and behaviors
toward social categories are not intransigent or driven only by features associated with those
groups, such as stereotypes.
Keywords: hate crimes, prejudice, minority, reference dependence
We are grateful to Lauren Davenport, Elias Dinas, Benjamin Enke, Jens Hainmueller, Alain
Schl¨apfer, Yiqing Xu and seminar participants at the InterGroup Relations Workshop, the Harvard
Behavioral Insights Group Webinar, the Minority Politics Seminar Series (MPOSS), and the Harvard
Behavioral Political Economy Workshop for helpful comments and suggestions. This research was
supported in part by a National Science Foundation CAREER award (BCS-1653188 awarded to MC).
Silvia Farina, Ludovica Mosillo, Gabriele Romano, Gisela Salim Peyer, and Nathan Hunt provided
excellent research assistance. All remaining errors are ours.
Associate Professor, Department of Psychology, Harvard University. Email:
mcikara@fas.harvard.edu
Assistant Professor, Department of Political Science, Stanford University, NBER and CEPR.
Email: vfouka@stanford.edu
Assistant Professor, Harvard Business School, CEPR, and IZA. Email: mtabellini@hbs.edu
The confluence of global political and economic upheaval with humanitarian and cli-
mate crises has triggered unprecedented flows of immigrants, refugees, and resident
minoritized groups around the world [1]. The bulk of research on the effects of demo-
graphic change has examined how increased mobility impacts majority group members’
(i) feelings about newcomers in particular [2] and (ii) racial attitudes and policy pref-
erences more generally [3–5]. One prevailing framework argues that there are specific
characteristics of migrant, refugee, and resident minoritized groups that guide majority
groups’ attitudes towards them – e.g., their presumed skills [6, 7], perceived foreignness
[8], competitiveness, and status [9, 10]. A complementary alternative is that majority
groups are sensitive to a more generalized group feature that signals threat, invariant
to the groups in question.
One such threat feature that has garnered a great deal of attention, particularly with
increases in shifting demographics, is group size. The larger groups become, the less
they are tolerated by majority group members (see “Group Threat Theory”; [11–20];
see however, [21, 22], for null findings). However, this relationship is not so straight-
forward. One important, but underappreciated, complication is that size judgments of
all kinds – of individual objects, or collectives – are reference dependent [23]. That is,
one’s estimate of the size of a target is determined relative to other accessible targets
(e.g., in a choice set or sampled from memory; see the Ebbinghaus illusion as a striking
of relative group position over 80 years ago: it is not necessarily the case that increases
in groups’ size will trigger threat among majority groups; (new) groups may have to
surpass a particular threshold in size to register as such. Related, because immigrants,
refugees, and resident minority groups are not distributed evenly across a given geogra-
phy, different communities might exhibit distinct hierarchies of prejudice across several
minoritized groups. Binary models of intergroup relations – e.g., White vs. Non-white
communities – will not be able to account for these dynamics [24–26]. Relying instead
on the concept of reference dependence as a driver of intergroup attitudes and behavior
can help us get better traction on how group relational hierarchies change: both over
time and across communities.
In this paper, we introduce the “group reference dependence hypothesis”: majority
group members reactions to any one group will depend on the demographic distribution
of other groups that are also present in the social ecology. Specifically, we test a
corollary of the general reference dependence hypothesis: rather than being sensitive
only to the absolute size of any one minoritized group per se or its size relative to the
majority group, majority groups are also sensitive to minoritized groups’ relative rank
in size. While people are demonstrably inaccurate in judgments of the absolute size
and proportions of collectives (e.g. [27, 28]), they are quite accurate in their judgments
of collectives’ relative size (what is sometimes referred to as mapping as opposed to
metric knowledge, [29]; see [30] as an instance of this phenomenon in the domain of
demographics). Given humans’ general sensitivity to rank, we predict that majority
groups will discriminate the most against whichever group is the largest local minority
(i.e., first-ranked), followed by the second-largest, and so on, above and beyond the
absolute size of the groups in question. Recent related work on relative status has
focused on the phenomenon of countries becoming “majority-minority” nations (e.g.,
how White Americans respond to the U.S. becoming less white; e.g., [31, 32]). While
our inquiry is also about relative position-based threat and multi-group dynamics, it
departs from previous work in that we examine not the perceived relative status of
White people, but rather the relative status of several other groups within the U.S.
As demographics shift and groups increase in size rank, discriminatory behavior and
attitudes toward them should increase accordingly.
Data and methods
We test the group reference dependence hypothesis in two countries. Our main analysis
focuses on the U.S., where we examine majority group (i.e., White people’s) discrimi-
nation – specifically, hate crimes – toward four minoritized racial/ethnic groups: Black,
Hispanic/Latinx, Asian, and Arab people. We use data from the U.S. Census of Pop-
ulation between 1990 and 2010 to measure the size of those groups as a share of total
population and their rank – in terms of size – at the county level. To measure discrim-
inatory behavior against each of these minoritized groups, we use data on hate crimes
compiled by the FBI as part of the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) program. This
dataset records the bias motivation of each crime (e.g., “anti-Black”), as well as the
race of the perpetrator. Our main dependent variable is the number of hate crimes
committed by White offenders against a group in a given county and decade, expressed
as fraction of the county’s total population (hate crimes per 100,000 inhabitants). We
combine these two data sources to create a novel county-group-decade dataset, and
study the relationship between hate crimes against a specific racial/ethnic group and
that group’s size-based rank in a county in a given decade.
To test the generalizability of these findings across outcome measures and contexts, we
Race- or ethnicity-based collectives are better characterized as categories rather than purposive
social groups [33], but for readability we will refer to them as groups throughout this paper.
also examine attitudes towards minoritized groups in the U.S. and the United Kingdom
(U.K.). For this analysis, we combine White respondents’ feeling thermometer ratings
of Black, Asian, and Arab people from Project Implicit [34] with census data. Our
analysis in the U.S. is conducted at the county level and spans the period 2000-2018.
In the U.K., we combine attitudes data with demographic data on minoritized groups’
sizes and ranks from the 2001 and 2011 census at the level of the Lower Layer Super
Output Area (LSOA): a smaller unit of aggregation than U.S. counties, with an average
population of about 1,500 residents.
Further dataset construction and analysis details as well as supplementary results ap-
pear in the Supplementary Materials.
Results
a racial/ethnic group vary with that group’s size and with whether the group is the
largest (circles) or second largest (diamonds) minoritized group in their county. The
size. Larger groups are more likely to experience hate crimes, but this relationship
weakens as group size increases.
However, crucial for our hypothesis is the relationship between hate crime victimization
and group rank conditional on size. A racial/ethnic group present in equal relative
numbers in two counties is more likely to be victimized in the county where it is the
largest group, relative to the one where it is in second place. This relationship is
present for all three racial/ethnic groups. It is apparent for Hispanic/Latinx groups of
any relative size, and becomes increasingly clear for Black and Asian people as their
relative size increases.
To help illustrate the separate influences of relative group size and size-based rank,
and the group’s rank in a county and decade, for a narrow range of differences in
group size around the threshold where the group switches its rank. The x-axis plots
the difference in the size of a group from the size of the group that is largest among
where the group is first or second in the rank distribution, so that positive differences
mean the group is largest, and negative differences mean the group is second largest in
the county. To mitigate the possible influence of outliers, we plot the data both in its
Crimes against Arab people are not depicted, as this group is never in the first or second position
in any county.
000,001
rep
semirc
etaH
Black victims
0 .2 .4 .6 .8
Group’s share of total pop.
1st 2nd
Marginal effect of rank= −0.965, t−stat= −3.79
000,001
rep
semirc
etaH
Hispanic victims
0 .2 .4 .6 .8
Group’s share of total pop.
1st 2nd
Marginal effect of rank= −0.660, t−stat= −9.10
000,001
rep
semirc
etaH
Asian victims
0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
Group’s share of total pop.
1st 2nd
Marginal effect of rank= −0.304, t−stat= −3.04
committed by White offenders against each group (per 100,000 inhabitants) and group size (as share
of total county population). Blue and red dots denote bins of county-year cells where the group is,
respectively, the first and second largest minority.
raw form (upper subplot) and after winsorizing the top and bottom 5% of observations
(lower subplot).
(where the group is the largest minority) register more hate crimes against the group
compared to counties just to the left of the threshold. Removing outliers strengthens the
rank-related uptick in hate crimes. If rank had no explanatory power for victimization
rates over and above a group’s size, the relationship between hate crimes per capita
and the difference from the largest other group should be continuous around the zero
threshold. The discontinuity in the slope suggests an independent effect of rank, which
is observable for all three racial/ethnic groups. Notably, we see no discontinuity in levels
directly at the zero threshold. This suggests that it is not actual, but rather perceived
rank that matters for group targeting. Tiny differences in size that place a group in the
first rather than the second rank should not be noticed by majority group members and
therefore not predict changes in prejudice and hate crimes. As size differences become
large enough for rank to be noticed, majority behavior should adjust accordingly.
The relationship between size-based rank and victimization rates plotted in Figures 1
and 2 may be spurious. For instance, Black people are the largest minoritized group
in Southern counties, and have been so since before the U.S. was founded. Therefore,
White people in the U.S. South may be most biased against Black people due to the
long history of racial animus, and not because of the latter’s present rank in the size
distribution of minority groups. Along the same lines, Hispanic/Latinx people are the
largest minority in most Southwestern states and counties. Persistent negative views
of that group in that region, or proximity to the border with Mexico, may be driving
White people’s propensity to target that group with hate crimes. If these factors were
the only ones contributing to anti-Hispanic behavior, the Hispanic/Latinx group’s rank
(a) Raw data
000,001
rep
semirc
etaH
Black victims
−.1 −.05 0 .05 .1
Difference from largest other group
000,001
rep
semirc
etaH
Hispanic victims
−.1 −.05 0 .05 .1
Difference from largest other group
000,001
rep
semirc
etaH
Asian victims
−.1 −.05 0 .05
Difference from largest other group
(b) Winsorized top and bottom 5%
000,001
rep
semirc
etaH
5.3
5.2
Black victims
−.1 −.05 0 .05 .1
Difference from largest other group
000,001
rep
semirc
etaH
2.1
8.
6.
4.
2.
Hispanic victims
−.1 −.05 0 .05 .1
Difference from largest other group
000,001
rep
semirc
etaH
5.1
5.
Asian victims
−.1 −.05 0 .05
Difference from largest other group
committed by White offenders against each group (per 100,000 inhabitants) and the difference in
size of each group from the largest among the remaining three groups. Data restricted to county-
decades where the group is first or second in rank. Linear regression lines are fitted on each side of
the rank change threshold. Subplot (a) displays raw data and subplot (b) displays data after a 90%
winsorization.
in the minority size distribution within a given county should have no effect.
To address these and similar potential confounders, we use a fixed effects analysis. This
analysis accounts for any county-specific factor – observable and unobservable – that
can affect the frequency of hate crimes and that does not vary over time. This includes
a county’s persistent levels of out-group (in)tolerance or other characteristics that may
correlate with it, such as geographic location or economic conditions. We also account
for time-invariant factors specific to each minoritized group that are common across
all counties (e.g., higher average levels of prejudice against Hispanic/Latinx and Black
people compared to Asians in the country as a whole). Finally, we net out decade-
specific shocks that might change community members’ behavior towards minoritized
groups in general (e.g. economic shocks that might increase scapegoating against all
minoritized groups or increasing influence of right-wing populism in national politics).
Crucially, we always control for a non-linear function of the size of each minoritized
group, thereby isolating the rank effect from a more general “size” effect, identified
in the previous literature [11, 13]. Controlling for group size ensures that the effect
we identify is not driven by different base rates of victimization across groups and
counties. Even if attacks against groups occurred at random, the probability of hate
crime perpetrators randomly encountering a member of a racial/ethnic group would be
captured by the group’s size (i.e., share of the total population).
group’s size, its rank is highly predictive of its victimization rate. A group experiences
approximately one more hate crime per 100,000 county residents when it moves from
the fourth to the first place in the size rank distribution of that county. This effect
corresponds to 107% of the average county-level victimization rate of a group across
the three decades we analyze (0.9 hate crimes per 100,000 inhabitants). The second
largest minority is in higher danger of victimization than the fourth and the third largest
one, though the difference between second and third is not statistically significant at
conventional levels.
knar
fo
tceffe
lanigraM
3.
2.
1.
1st 2nd 3rd
Rank
Baseline Rank changes
size rank on hate crimes per 100,000 county residents committed by White offenders. Baseline refers
to estimates from Equation 1 and Rank changes refers to estimates from Equation 8 in Section C of
the Supplementary Materials. Standardized beta coefficients reported.
Robustness analyses
We probe the robustness of this result in a number of ways, beginning first with fea-
tures of the groups themselves. The rank effect does not merely capture rising preju-
dice against groups that are growing over time throughout the entire country (Column
2010. Second, we account for the fact that rank is a non-linear function of a group’s
size and the size of other groups in the county. Our findings are not an artifact of the
of the non-linear effects of other groups’ sizes. Rank remains predictive of a group’s vic-
timization rates independent of whether we measure relative size as a share of the total
1-2) and its effect is robust to controlling for the relative group sizes of all other minori-
tized groups and for the difference in relative size between a minoritized group and the
group immediately below it in rank (i.e., it’s nearest competitor; Supplementary Ta-
ble D.2, Columns 3-4). Third, rank does not simply capture faster growing minoritized
groups in some counties [35]; in fact, our effects remain robust to controlling for the
Column 5). Finally, the rank effect is not driven by any one of the four groups we’ve
included in the overall analysis. We see the predicted pattern of results when we exam-
ine a three-group subset including any combination of the groups; though, as expected,
our effects weaken in magnitude when large groups are iteratively omitted from the
What about the influence of regional features? Rank does not capture changing char-
acteristics of counties over time (e.g., varying economic conditions that could increase
3). Neither does rank capture the effect of a group’s size in neighboring counties or in
driven by rural or low population density counties; in fact, results are stronger when
regressions are weighted by county population to increase the influence of more urban-
consistent effect across different geographic subsamples. Specifically, our results do not
vary by macro-region (defined following the U.S. Census classification): the largest mi-
nority is more likely to be victimized across all Census Divisions, though the effect is
not precisely estimated in the Northeast due to smaller sample size (Supplementary
At the county level, the effect of rank does not strongly depend on the distribution of
minoritized groups. We explore heterogeneity of the effects of rank by different mea-
sures of diversity: a commonly used measure of fractionalization [36–38], a measure of
polarization capturing whether minority populations are (un)evenly distributed across
two groups [39–41], and an entropy measure capturing even representation of groups
within a geographic unit [42]. Across measures of heterogeneity, the largest minority in
a county is equally likely to be victimized in counties with high and low racial/ethnic
display larger differences in the likelihood of victimization when diversity is higher.
This result is not surprising: regardless of proxy, higher diversity implies higher repre-
sentation and visibility of smaller groups, compared to situations with one dominant
minoritized group. Said another way, rank effects are more pronounced for smaller
groups when their presence in the county can be noticed. We also explore the role of
spatial segregation, though we are only able to compute a county-level index of segre-
gation for groups other than Arab people. Effects of rank are stronger for all groups in
counties with above median segregation, suggesting that separation in physical space
may accentuate comparisons across minoritized groups, but the difference from counties
below the median falls below conventional levels of statistical significance (Supplemen-
We also find no indication that the effect of rank is driven by reporting bias in the
UCR data (Section H of Supplementary Material). Crucially, we continue to observe a
statistically significant effect of rank when excluding non-violent hate crimes (e.g., bias-
motivated property damage) and restricting analyses only to violent hate crimes, for
which reliability of reporting should be higher than non-violent crimes (Supplementary
the possibility that different groups receive systematically different kinds of (i.e., more
or less violent) hate crimes on average.
What can these data tell us about how rank related information might be encoded?
To address this question, we replicate our analysis at different levels of aggregation.
The hate crimes data do not allow us to examine the effect of rank at regional units
of analysis smaller than the county because counties are the smallest unit recorded
in the UCR. Existing work, however, points to more accurate perceptions of group
size at units more closely approximating a neighborhood [43–45]. This would imply
worse estimates of relative group sizes and weaker effects of rank as the regional unit
of analysis grows larger. We analyzed our hate crimes data for this pattern and find
no statistically significant difference in estimated effects of rank between counties and
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). By contrast, the effect of rank disappears at
experience of more local-level demographics. However, we would be remiss if we did not
note that the state analyses may also be limited in their informativeness due to reduced
statistical power and more noise in the measurement of relevant groups, as compared
In our data and across all census periods, the average county has a population of approximately
30,000, the average MSA has a population of 760,000 and the average state a population of 5.5 million.
to the county-level analysis.
Exploiting rank switches
A remaining potential concern is that even the estimates from our fixed effects model
might be influenced by the fact that both hate crimes toward a particular racial/ethnic
group and that group’s rank in a county’s minority size distribution are simultaneously
related to a third factor. For instance, even accounting for a county’s location in the
U.S. South, counties with a stronger legacy of slavery (relative to those with lower past
dependence on slave labor) within the region are more biased against Black people to-
day [46]. In those same counties, Black people have consistently remained the largest
minoritized group. It is also possible that large minority populations have specific char-
acteristics that trigger more discriminatory behavior from White people. For example,
even conditional on their size, Hispanic or Asian people may be less likely to speak En-
glish, or more likely to be geographically concentrated in counties where they are the
largest group, thereby activating greater threat responses among local White people.
To address these and similar possibilities, we exploit the fact that groups experience
lustrates that, between 1990 and 2010, Hispanic/Latinx groups rose in rank on average,
while other minoritized groups’ relative ranks fell. However, this average pattern masks
wide variation, both in terms of the direction of rank switches (Supplementary Fig-
In some counties, the Hispanic/Latinx group dropped from second to third place, while
the Black group moved up in rank (e.g. from third to second, or from second to first
rank).
Exploiting variation in rank switches across groups, we estimate the effect of rank by
only comparing victimization rates within group-county cells. Intuitively, this strategy
compares the change in victimization suffered by two minoritized groups whose relative
size, in a given decade, grows by the same amount, but who experience a different
change in rank (e.g., from second to first in a county versus no change in a county).
the frequency of group-specific hate crimes. Holding the change in relative size across
two decades constant, moving from last to first rank predicts that a minoritized group
The Arab group is always ranked fourth at the MSA and state level, so our estimations have to
rely on the other three groups only. Even among the remaining groups, variation in rank at higher
levels of aggregation is more limited. For example the Asian group, commonly in position three of the
size distribution, is ranked second in 28.7% of cases at the county level, but only 20.3% of cases at the
state level.
will experience an increase in the frequency of hate crimes that target it equal to
approximately 61.5% of the average victimization rate across counties and decades.
In Sections F, G and H of the Supplementary Material, we subject this result to the
same set of sensitivity checks as our baseline analysis of rank effects. The effect of rank
switches is robust to accounting for time trends in groups’ and counties’ characteristics,
minoritized groups’ growth patterns, as well as a number of ways of conditioning on
the effect of relative group sizes. County-group specific factors that could vary over
time and that relate to groups’ economic status (e.g., household income) and political
representation (e.g., electoral outcomes) do not account for the effects of rank on hate
against county-group specific changes in minoritized group member behavior that could
be correlated with (or driven by) rank and provoke more aggressive behavior among
White people. The FBI database provides no indication that racial/ethnic group mem-
bers commit more hate crimes, either in general, or against Whites, as their rank in a
Finally, the analysis of rank switches allows us to examine if the effects on hate crime
incidence differ by whether a group moves up or down the ranks. Supplementary Fig-
ure F.6 shows that rank effects are roughly symmetric. The increase in victimization
a group experiences when moving from second to first place in a county is equal in
magnitude to the decrease it experiences when moving from first to second place. This
suggests substitution in prejudice across groups, and is consistent with majority mem-
bers “distributing” a roughly fixed amount of discrimination across minority targets.
Evidence from attitudes
Hate crimes are an extreme manifestation of prejudice against minoritized groups [47].
One widely studied intermediate link between group size rank and a behavioral out-
come like bias-motivated crimes is majority group members’ attitudes toward minori-
tized groups. To substantiate the existence of this link, we turn to data from Project
Implicit [34], which collects implicit and explicit attitudes of millions of users who take
a computerized test online through the project’s webpage. The majority of users are
located in the U.S., but thousands of users have also taken the test in the U.K., which
allows us to conduct the same analysis in two country contexts.
We replicate our analysis of the effect of group size rank, focusing on White non-
Hispanic, non-Muslim respondents’ explicit attitudes towards the three minoritized
groups for which Project Implicit has designed Implicit Association Tests: Black, Asian,
and Arab people. We do not analyze implicit association scores due to methodological
variations across the relevant Implicit Association Tests (both across group-related
stimuli: e.g., Black vs. White faces, Arab/Muslim vs. Anglicized names; and across
evaluation dimensions: e.g,. good vs. bad, Americanness vs. foreignness) because
methodologies are confounded with groups. Instead, we focus on feeling thermometer
ratings as a measure of explicit prejudice, which have been collected consistently across
groups.
The analysis of attitudes has two important shortcomings relative to the analysis of
hate crimes. First, the data consist of opt-in responses that are not representative
of country populations (see Supplementary Section I). Second, Project Implicit does
not collect attitudes on Hispanic/Latinx people, one of the largest and fastest growing
groups in the U.S. during the period that we study. Omitting a relevant group from
the analysis biases any effects of rank towards zero.
At the same time, the use of attitudinal data from Project Implicit allows us to demon-
strate generalizability of our findings to a different country context and one in which
the rank ordering of minoritized groups is different from that of the U.S., with Asian
populations (of both South and East-Asian origin) occupying first place in the size
rank distribution in the U.K. Additionally, while our data in the U.S. are available at
the county level, in the U.K. we are able to geolocate respondents at a much smaller
regional unit of analysis (i.e., LSOA) and more clearly demonstrate how rank effects
change as we move from lower to higher levels of aggregation.
We find statistically significant effects of rank on feeling thermometer ratings in both
or first place of the size rank distribution elicit cooler feelings from White respondents
relative to the third group, with a relative decrease that amounts to 10% of a standard
deviation in thermometer ratings across groups, counties, and periods. In the U.K.,
where precision is higher both in the measurement of relevant groups – because we
do not miss large relevant groups such as the Hispanic group in the U.S. case – and
in the regional unit of analysis – which is much smaller than a U.S. county – rank
effects are even more pronounced. When a group moves from third to first place in
the size rank distribution, its ratings decrease by 21.5% of a standard deviation or 8%
relative to the long-run mean across groups and output areas. This effect is about half
and remains statistically significant for the second largest group. The magnitudes we
estimate remain unchanged (in the U.K.) or increase (in the U.S.) when we exploit rank
We verify this intuition in the hate crimes dataset. When excluding the Hispanic group from the
analysis and re-computing size rank among remaining groups, we estimate substantially attenuated
switches to estimate the effects of rank.
The high level of granularity in the U.K. data also allows for a closer examination of how
rank effects are moderated by the size of the regional unit of analysis. Again, higher
levels of aggregation over populations dampen the effects of rank both in magnitude
When moving the analysis to the level of Local Authority Districts (LADs) – with
population ranging from 10 thousand to 1.5 million – we recover effects similar to
effects estimated for U.S. counties, with a smaller magnitude and muted differences
across first and second rank. This strongly suggests that minority group comparisons
matter most at very local levels.
In sum, this analysis suggests that group size rank shifts White people’s attitudes
toward minoritized group members, above and beyond changes driven by minoritized
group size. This pattern is consistent across contexts and is invariant to the identity
and rank ordering of minoritized groups. Perceptions and attitudes plausibly serve as
an intermediate step for discriminatory behavior such as bias-motivated violence.
Discussion
Consistent with the group reference dependence hypothesis, an increase in groups’ size-
based rank relative to other minoritized groups is associated with a higher likelihood of
being targeted with discrimination and prejudice. Independent of minoritized group’s
absolute and relative proportions, majority group members appear to be sensitive also
to these groups’ relative rank in size. This sensitivity is reflected both in prejudiced
attitudes and in extreme manifestations of intergroup hostility, specifically hate crimes.
Our descriptive results suggest that it is perceived rather than actual rank that matters
for increases in group victimization. Finally, the effect of rank is stronger at smaller
regional units of analysis relative to larger regional units suggesting rank is most likely
encoded via local experience.
Why might individuals be sensitive to group size rank above and beyond group size?
These “rank transformations” of distribution information represent a form of efficient
coding present across many domains of decision-making [48] and are part of a very gen-
eral pattern of reasoning about proportions – independent of the domain or topic under
consideration [49]. Human estimates of proportions, in general, reflect representations
that have been transformed into log-odds; this transformation distorts raw proportions
– inflating estimates of low proportions and underestimating larger proportions – but
leaves ordinal judgments intact [50]. How does this rank ordering translate into dis-
crimination? We conjecture that people begin from the premise that they have finite
resources with which to defend their groups, and that they take as input a rank ordering
of threat from greatest to least urgency. In principle, people could maintain staunchly
negative attitudes and behavior towards current out-groups as new out-groups arrive
or grow, but they would end up, in practice, entirely surrounded by competitors. Thus,
one strategy is to become relatively more inclusive toward less threatening out-groups
[51]. In line with this interpretation, we find that minoritized groups that drop in
rank are substantially less likely to be targeted with hate crimes relative to when their
rank remains the same or increases. An important next step in this line of research
is to identify the specific cues on which people rely to encode rank (or to inform their
perceptions of rank): e.g., face-to-face interactions, media attention to demographic
change, (dis)appearance of cultural institutions marking the ebb and flow of respective
minoritized groups within a community, etc.
Our framework makes novel predictions about how demographic shifts may affect coali-
tional structures in the years to come. For instance, Asian Americans continue to be
the country’s fastest growing racial category in the US, with immigration being a major
driver of this growth [52]. As Hispanic and Asian populations continue to grow and their
rank changes, we may observe a change over the features that matter for prejudice: e.g.,
shifting away from skin tone to language as a primary coalitional boundary. Related,
Asian Americans’ tenuous status as model minorities [53] may wane as their popula-
tions increase, specifically in places where they begin to outnumber other minoritized
groups.
We believe that this framework is a first step in addressing some existing gaps in the
literature, including inconsistent effects of group size (e.g., [22]). Higher emphasis on lo-
cal and relative group rank amongst perceivers may help explain why past “corrective”
informational interventions regarding shifting demographics exhibit mixed results–for
example when they provide information at the country-level [54–56]–and why other
explanations, such as emotions or bias, fail to account for inaccurate group size esti-
mates [49, 57]. In intervention studies, researchers might tell respondents that they are
overestimating the proportion of immigrants in their nation, but these figures will not
mean much unless researchers also provide information about respondents’ local com-
munities (which may reflect a very different distribution than say country-level figures)
and include other minoritized groups’ sizes.
A broader theoretical contribution of this framework and the current findings is that
they further dispel the notion that attitudes and behaviors toward social categories are
intransigent or somehow derived only from categories’ essentialized properties [58]. This
matters because majority group members beliefs about the malleability of race-based
bias and discrimination influence their approaches to and strategies within interracial
interactions [59, 60]. The more people understand when and why prejudice and dis-
crimination are flexibly deployed, the more empowered they may feel to combat it.
Data and Code Availability
Datasets and code can be downloaded at the Harvard Dataverse.