[WORKING PAPER. Last update: 11.05.2021]
Different target modalities improve the single-probe protocol of the response
time-based Concealed Information Test
1,2* 3,4 2
Dave Koller , Franziska Hofer , Bruno Verschuere
Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Department of Clinical Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Zurich State Police, Airport Division, Research and Development
brainability, Developing Human & Organizational Potentials, Zurich, Switzerland
* Corresponding author
Binzmühlestrasse 14 / Box 22
8050 Zurich
Switzerland
E-mail: d.koller@psychologie.uzh.ch
Conflict of interest statement
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Data availability statement
The material, data, and scripts that support the findings of this study are openly available on
Abstract
To detect if someone hides specific knowledge (called ‘probes’), the reaction time-based
Concealed Information Test (RT-CIT) asks the examinee to classify items into two categories
(targets/non-targets). Within the non-targets, slower RTs to the probes reveals recognition of
concealed information. The preferred protocol examines one piece of information per test
block (single probe protocol), but its validity is suboptimal. The aim of this study was to
improve the validity of the single probe protocol by presenting the information in multiple
modalities. In a preregistered online study (n = 388) participants were instructed to try to hide
their nationality. The items referring to the nationality were presented as words, flags, and
maps. Increasing the number of modalities of the targets (BF = 37), but not of the probes
(BF = 6), increased the CIT-effect. This broadens the range of the RT-CIT’s applicability,
which is an important step towards application in practice.
Keywords: memory detection, Concealed Information Test, CIT, deception, single
probe protocol, lie detection
General audience summary
Law enforcement agencies, intelligence service, or even companies can encounter
situations in which they would like to find out if a person knows something about an incident
even though he or she claims not to. In situations like these, the reaction time-based
Concealed Information Test (RT-CIT) could be applied. In this automated test, examinees
first learn a few so-called target items (words and/or pictures). Then they will see different
items one by one. These items are either the learned targets, items related to the incident (so-
called probes) or unrelated items (so-called irrelevant items). The examinees’ task is to
indicate with two keys on the keyboard if he or she recognizes this item or not (i.e., YES-
button for the targets and NO-button for the other items). Slower responding to items related
to the incident than to irrelevant items is an indication of concealed recognition. The RT-CIT
works best if multiple pieces of information about the incident (e.g., location, stolen jewelry,
tool used for the break-in) are tested. In reality, however, an examiner might have only one
information that can be tested. We explored two possibilities to improve the performance of
the RT-CIT in such a scenario. In an online study with 388 participants, they were asked to
hide their true nationality and claim to be from another country which was used as the target
information. We investigated if the performance of the RT-CIT could be increased if we
present the items not only as words (e.g., “United Kingdom”) but also as flags and maps of
countries. Presenting the target information in different ways increased the difference between
probes and irrelevant items which implies more correct detections. This makes the RT-CIT
applicable in a wider range of situations.
Introduction
The concealed information test (CIT; Lykken, 1959), can be used to reveal if a person
has specific knowledge he/she claims not to possess and is frequently used by Japan’s police
(Osugi, 2018). The rational of the CIT is that a person shows a different reaction to an item
whose recognition he/she tries to conceal, compared to similar yet irrelevant items. When for
example crime related items (e.g., the location where the victim was found: the woods) are
presented among other plausible items (e.g., the river, the sewer, the shed), only a person with
crime knowledge is expected to show a distinct reaction to the crime related items (so-called
probes) compared to the other items (so-called irrelevants). The typically observed reactions
for concealed recognition in the CIT include increased response times, increased skin
conductance response, and increased P300 amplitude (see Verschuere & Meijer, 2014 for a
review). With its potential to easily test large groups of people remotely (Verschuere &
Kleinberg, 2016), there has been renewed interest in response times as CIT index.
The response time-based CIT (RT-CIT) includes a third item type, the so-called
targets (Farwell & Donchin, 1991; Rosenfeld et al., 1988; Seymour et al., 2000). Examinees
are instructed to press the YES button only for targets, and the NO button for all other items
(including the probes). Meijer et al. (2016) found a weighted average of the area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of .82 based on 981 participants across the nine
analysed experiment, which is well above chance. The classification performance is known to
vary with several factors, one of which is the testing protocol (Lukács et al., 2017; Verschuere
et al., 2015).
There are two main RT-CIT testing protocols: the single probe protocol and the
multiple probe protocol. In the single probe protocol, each block contains items of one item
category (Lykken, 1959). For instance, a first block could test the examinee for stolen goods,
the next block for crime locations, etc. In the multiple probe protocol, the items of the
different item categories are all presented intermixed in each block (e.g., Seymour et al.,
2000). Research showed superior classification performance for the multiple probe protocol
compared to the single probe protocol in the RT-CIT (Lukács et al., 2017; Verschuere et al.,
2015). Experiment 2 of Verschuere et al. (2015), for example, showed larger effect sizes for
the multiple probe protocol compared to the single probe protocol (d = 1.52; d =
within,MP within,SP
0.59) as well better classification (AUC = .86; AUC = .69). The application of the
MP SP
multiple probe protocol is limited to situations in which more than one critical piece of
information is known. Furthermore, when the RT-CIT is used as an investigative tool in form
of a searching RT-CIT (Koller et al., 2020), the single probe protocol may be the only option.
For example, to reveal the exact location of a planned terror attack, the examiner would first
need to test for the city, then for a specific location within that city. Without this serial testing,
the number of items that would need to be included in the CIT would quickly explode (pun
intended).
Given the need for a more accurate single probe protocol, Lukács et al. (2017)
introduced the addition of familiarity related filler items that needed to be classified as
familiar (e.g., “RECOGNIZED”) or unfamiliar (e.g., “UNKNOWN”). This modification led
to larger CIT-effects as it assures semantic processing of the stimuli and/or may enhance
response conflict for the probes. As a limitation, the authors noted that the addition of fillers
may come at the cost of higher dropout or exclusion rates (Lukács et al., 2017). Although this
was a concern in the initial online study, a new laboratory study did not show high exclusion
rates (Olson et al., 2020). While familiarity related fillers seem to be a good way to improve
the single probe protocol, exploring alternative solutions still has its merits (e.g., to find
combinations of effective techniques or to overcome potential shortcomings of one solution).
In the present study, we examined whether presenting items in different modalities
(e.g., a country as name, flag, or map) is sufficient to increase the validity of the single probe
protocol. Further, we explored whether it is the probe or the target modalities that contribute
to the effect. The ultimate goal of this study was to make the RT-CIT applicable to a wider
range of scenarios.
Method
The experiment was approved by the ethical committee of the Faculty of Social and
Behavioural Sciences of the University of Amsterdam (approval number: 2014-CP-3389).
Deviations from preregistration
We had 3 exclusion criteria, one stated: “Participants with mean RT of irrelevant items
deviating more than ± 3 SE of their respective group means of irrelevant items (only correctly
answered trials are considered in this analysis) will be excluded”. However, this is an
unfortunate typing error and was meant to state “± 3 SD”.
Participants
Participants were eligible to enrol if they were between 18 and 45 years old and of one
of the following nationalities: British, Portuguese, Spanish, German, Italian, Austrian, or
Swedish (see Procedure). Completion of this study took participants about 14 minutes and
was reimbursed with 1.4 GBP (≈ 1.8 USD).
Following the preregistered recruitment procedure, four hundred participants were
recruited using the online platform Prolific (M age = 27.88, SD = 7.36, 51% female). Twelve
participants (3%) were excluded based on the three preregistered criteria. Eight indicated that
they provided wrong information about their nationality in the pre-CIT questionnaire, three
due to poor performance in the task (more than 50% errors in at least one item type), and one
due to slow RTs to irrelevant items (M RT > group mean + 3*SD), resulting in a final
irrel
1 We infer increased validity from larger within-participant CIT-effects. Lukács and Specker (2020) showed that
this inference might not be valid if the standard deviations of the within-participant CIT-effect increases
sample of N = 388 (M age= 27.74, SD = 7.35, 51% female). Per inclusion criteria, participants
were British (42%), Portuguese (33%), Spanish (11%), German (2%), Italian (10%), Austrian
(0%), and Swedish (2%).
Procedure
At the beginning of the experiment, participants were asked to indicate their
nationality from a list of the seven nationalities that were eligible for the study and “other”.
Participants that chose “another country” were directed to the end of the study explaining that
they are not eligible to participate in this study. The chosen country was the critical probe
item in the CIT. We used Prolific’s built-in nationality filter to invite eligible participants
only. To further improve data quality, we asked participants at the end of the study whether
they indicated their true nationality in the beginning. It was made clear that this does not have
any influence on their payment or on in-/exclusions for future studies. These measures give us
confidence in the truthfulness of the reported nationalities.
If participants chose one of the seven countries as their nationality, they were
subsequently asked to indicate up to one other country from the remaining six that is of
significance to them. This country was removed from the item pool of irrelevant items in the
CIT to assure that only the country of origin stands out amongst the other countries in the
CIT. Not removing other significant countries would lead to a lower sensitivity. If no other
country was indicated as significant, one was removed at random.
2 Due to a programming mistake, participants did not see the informed consent form and therefore did not give
us explicit consent before the study. However, in agreement with the ethics review board of the University of
Amsterdam, we are convinced that it is ethical to use the collected data for the following reasons. 1) Data
collection was done on Prolific, an online platform for running scientific studies to which participants signed up.
2) Participants were informed about the nature of the study before they chose to participate. More specifically
they were informed that they need overcome an information verification test, that the test is based on reaction
times, that the test cannot be paused, that they need to install a plugin but instructions to uninstall the plugin will
be provided, that only participants of certain nationalities are eligible to participate (UK, Germany, Spain,
Portugal, Italy, Sweden, Austria), and they were informed about the time the study will take and reimbursement
they will receive. 3) Participants had the possibility to revoke their consent at any point by “returning” their
submission, as Prolific calls it. 4) Participants could revoke their consent by contacting the first author using
Prolific’s built-in messaging system.
Next, participants were asked to imagine a scenario in which an online service they
need to use is not available for people of certain nationalities and theirs is one of them (e.g.,
Sweden). Therefore, they had to pretend to be from another country (randomly assigned from
the remaining five countries, e.g., Spain). As they were suspected of cheating (the online
service provider was said to have detected a mismatch between the location of the computers
IP-address and the claimed nationality) they were asked for additional verification: the RT-
CIT. Participants were told that this verification tries to detect their true nationality and that
their goal is to hide that information and to convince the service provider to be from their
indicated country (Spain). Then, the RT-CIT started. After the RT-CIT, participants were
asked if they indicated their true nationality in the beginning of the study, thanked and
redirected to the Prolific website. Payment was processed through Prolific within a few days.
RT-CIT
The RT-CIT was programmed with Inquisit 5 (2016) and ran on the participants’
computer using the Inquisit Web plugin, which they downloaded just before starting the test.
Participants were instructed to answer the question “Is this your nationality?” as fast
and accurately as possible by responding YES (A-key) only for items that belong to their fake
nationality and NO (L-key) to all other items and therefore denying their true nationality. So,
a person from Sweden pretending to be from Spain would answer YES only to Spain, and NO
to Austria, Sweden, Portugal, and Germany. Three modalities (word, flag, map), with six
items (1 probe, 1 target, 4 irrelevant) per modality were used as items in the RT-CIT. The
three target modalities (i.e., word, flag, map corresponding to their fake identity) were
presented on the screen for 10 seconds together with a reminder that participants should
respond to these items with YES, followed by a repeatable practice block in which each of the
18 items was presented once. Then followed three test blocks, each consisting of 6 burn-in
trials at the beginning of the block that were discarded to avoid possible artefacts (e.g., due to
finger placement, accustoming to the pace) and 126 test trials (totalling 378 test trials).
Every trial started with the stimulus presentation in the centre of the screen which
stayed until a response was given or the response deadline of 1.5s was reached. The question
“Is this your nationality?” was displayed on top of the screen as well as the answer labels
Feedback (red “WRONG” displayed below the stimulus for 250ms for incorrect responses;
red “TOO SLOW” above the stimulus 800ms after stimulus onset) was given only in the
practice trials. The practice block was repeated up to three times or until the accuracy of each
item type (probe, target, irrelevant) was above 50% and the mean RT of irrelevant items was
below 800ms. Reminder instructions were given before each repetition. The response-
stimulus-interval varied randomly from 400-800ms. Until the end of the practice phase, the
task was identical for all participants.
For the test phase, we manipulated the number of modalities of targets (one vs. three)
and the number of modalities of probes and irrelevant items (one vs. three) that participants
saw in any given block. Participants had been randomly divided into four groups (1Probe-
1Target with n = 89, 3Probe-1Target with n = 103, 1Probe-3Target with n = 96, 3Probe-
3Target with n = 100) based on the automatically generated participant number. The 1Probe-
modality in each block (e.g., flags in the first, words in the second, and maps in the third
block). This condition mimics the traditional single probe protocol. The 3Probe-1Target
modality of the target per block. This means that in one block, the target information was only
presented as a flag, for example, while the probes and irrelevants were presented in all three
modality for the probes and irrelevants, but three modalities for targets per block. The 3Probe-
as an example. Each participant saw every item 21 times over the course of the 3 blocks. The
blocks were presented in random order.
Exemplary Segments of the Four Conditions
Note. This illustration shows exemplary segments from two of the three blocks for each
condition.
Experimental Conditions Illustrated for the Word-Block
Item type
Probe Target Irrelevant
Germany, Portugal, Austria,
1P1T Sweden Spain
Italy
3P1T Sweden, , Spain Germany, ,
Germany, Portugal, Austria,
1P3T Sweden Spain, ,
Italy
3P3T Sweden, , Spain, , Germany, ,
Note. Cells that only contain words would be changed to flags or maps for the flag-block and map-
block, respectively. The mixed cells remain unchanged.
Results
We only included correctly answered non-target test trials with RTs between 200ms and
1500ms in the analysis. A total of 1209 non-target trials (0.99%) were excluded. We obtained
the typical CIT effect in response times (i.e., larger RTs for probes than for irrelevant items) in
participant CIT-effect (dCIT = (M RT – M ) / SD RT ; Kleinberg & Verschuere, 2015),
Probe Irrel Irrel
was credibly greater than zero for all groups (i.e., the lower bound of the 95% CI greater than
Response Times, Within-Participant CIT-Effect, and Probe-Irrelevant Effect Size
Condition RT dCIT δ
Probe Irrelevant Target
1P1T .15 (.30)
418 (64) 405 (52) 491 (51) .61 [.38, .85]
(n = 89) [.10, .23]
3P1T .17 (.24)
458 (58) 441 (51) 520 (51) .82 [.59, 1.04]
(n = 103) [.13, .22]
1P3T .24 (.28)
458 (57) 436 (51) 545 (54) 1.08 [.75, 1.39]
(n = 96) [.19,.30]
3P3T .28 (.32)
509 (59) 482 (55) 575 (53) 1.03 [.75, 1.27]
(n = 100) [.23,.35]
Note. Mean response times (in ms; SD in parentheses), mean within-participant CIT-effect
(SD in parentheses; 95% credible interval in brackets), and probe-irrelevant effect size δ (95%
credible interval in brackets) estimated with a Bayesian Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
The dCIT reported is the standardized within-participant probe-irrelevant difference and is not
to be confused with Cohen’s d. The effect size δ and 95% credible intervals were estimated
with the Bayesian Wilcoxon signed-rank test of JASP (JASP Team, 2020) using a Cauchy
prior (scale = .707) because the normality assumption needed to calculate Cohen’s d was
violated.
3 Due to the low error rate and following the preregistration, errors rates were not analysed. Error rates per
We used the BayesFactor package (Morey & Rouder, 2018) extension for R (R Core
Team, 2020) to conduct a Bayesian fixed effects ANOVA with a JZS prior (Cauchy prior
with scale = .5) to test for effects of number of probe modalities and number of target
modalities on the within-participant CIT-effect (dCIT). The data was most likely under M ,
Tar
very strong evidence for this model compared to the null-model M (BF = 37.1),
0 Tar,0
supporting the hypothesis that there is an effect of number of target modalities on the within
participant CIT-effect (dCIT). Both model comparison that can be used to assess the effect of
number of probe modalities showed moderate evidence against such an effect (BF = .17;
Pro,0
BF = 5.3). Those comparisons show that the data is about 5 times more likely under the
Tar,Main
model without an effect of number of probe modalities. We also found evidence against an
interaction effect (BF = 6.3; BF = 33.5). Therefore, our results showed a benefit
Main,Full Tar,Full
of using multiple target modalities but no effect of multiple probe modalities.
Bayesian Model Comparison
Compared to the Intercept
Compared to the Best model
Models only model
(i.e., BF )
Tar, Model
(i.e., BF )
Model,0
M dCIT ~ nProbes .17 (±0%) 213.38 (±0%)
Pro
M dCIT ~ nTargets 37.12 (±0%) 1.0 (±0%)
Tar
M dCIT ~ nProbes + nTargets 7.06 (±.97%) 5.26 (±.97%)
Main
dCIT ~ nProbes + nTargets
M 1.11 (±1.06%) 33.46 (±1.06%)
Full
+ nProbes x nTargets
Note. In the first column, the models are compared to the null-model. Bayes factors > 1 indicate that
the data is more likely under this model than the null-model. In the second column, the best model
4 A reviewer proposed an alternative model comparison (using Baws factors), which essentially lead to the same
(M ) is compared to the other models. Bayes factors indicate how much more likely the data is under
Tar
M compared to the other models.
Tar
The magnitude of the effect of target modality was assessed by the parameter’s (β )
Tar
posterior distribution of M (M β = .10; 95% HDI = [.04, .15]). Because the 95% HDI
Tar Tar
does not include 0, it can be concluded that presenting the targets in three different modalities
instead of one lead to a credible increase of the within participant CIT-effect (dCIT) of .1, on
average. This effect is independent of the number of probe modalities, since the model
comparison showed evidence against an interaction effect.
Discussion
Some situations in practice require the single probe protocol of the RT-CIT that tests
for one item per block, but it has lower validity than the multiple probe protocol that tests
several items per block. The present study aimed at investigating how the validity of the
single probe protocol could be improved to make it applicable in a wider range of situations.
We tested for one piece of information (nationality) and presented it either in one or in three
different modalities (word, flag, map). We independently manipulated the number of target
modalities and probe modalities. We found moderate evidence against an effect of number of
probe modalities on the within-participant CIT-effect (dCIT), but strong evidence for an effect
of number of target modalities. This study suggests that the validity of the single probe
protocol can be increased not by presenting the probes in different modalities, but by
presenting the targets in different modalities.
The impact of the number of target modalities is especially interesting, as researchers
initially thought targets would not matter at all and could even be discarded (e.g., Matsuda et
al., 2009). Nevertheless, it has become clear that the target items influence the CIT-effect.
Gamer et al. (2007) argued that perceptual similarity between target items and test items
(probes and irrelevants) influences the encoding of test items. Dissimilar target items can be
identified easily without deep encoding, leading to smaller probe-irrelevant differences.
However, not only perceptual similarity seems to impact the CIT-effect. Suchotzki et al.
(2018) manipulated the familiarity of the target items. They argued that this increased the
feature overlap (in the familiarity feature) between targets and probes, and therefore the
response conflict for probes, which lead to larger probe-irrelevant differences. Suchotzki et al.
(2018) also observed a small increase in the probe-irrelevant difference when four targets
were used as compared to two targets. A crucial difference to our study is that they added
targets (e.g., ‘Spain’ and ‘Greece’) whereas we presented the same target in different
modalities (e.g., flag and name of Spain). This increased the number of semantic objects
participants had to keep in mind.
The reason why we found larger CIT-effects in the three target modality conditions
could have been because it might have altered the way examinees approached the task. With a
single target modality, examinees can perform the task by focussing on a unique perceptual
feature of the target (while attempting to ignore other features). Such perceptual processing
reduces the influence of other features needed for the CIT effect (i.e., familiarity, saliency).
Targets share those features with the probes but not the irrelevants, which leads to slower RTs
for probes than for irrelevants (Gamer et al., 2007; Suchotzki et al., 2018). With multiple
target modalities, there is not a single perceptual feature that allows to do the task and
therefore requires semantic encoding. This leads to the incorporation of a wider array of
features in the decision-making process, including features that lead to response conflict for
probes. We call this explanation target focus hypothesis. A large body of research on the
Stroop effect (Stroop, 1935) and the Garner interference (Garner, 1974) showed that it is
possible to primarily focus the attention on the feature of interest but other, irrelevant, features
are often not ignored completely and thus influence the decision also (for reviews, see Algom
& Fitousi, 2016; MacLeod, 1991). Therefore, two crucial processes for the target focus
hypothesis, focused attention on specific features and integration of information from multiple
feature dimensions into a binary decision, have been shown in other paradigms. Note that a
connection between Stroop-like interference and the CIT-effect has been suggested before
(e.g., Seymour & Schumacher, 2009). The addition of other ways to increase the reliance on
these conflict inducing features, as it was done by using familiar targets (Suchotzki et al.,
2018) or self-related filler items (Lukács et al., 2017) could improve our multiple modality
single probe protocol even further.
It is fortunate, especially for applied purposes, that it seems to be sufficient to
increase the target modalities rather than the probe modalities. It would be an additional
restriction if only probes could be used for which different presentations not only exist, but
for which the examinee also has a strong internal representation – an important factor to
obtain strong CIT-effects (Geven et al., 2019). For example, if the police want to test
someone only on the pseudonym of a cybercriminal, it would be very challenging to find
different visual modalities for that pseudonym.
Limitations & Future Studies
This study exclusively looked at nationality information and limited the number of
countries that were included in the RT-CIT. Of those seven countries, 75% of participants
were British or Portuguese. While we expect that our results generalize to other countries, a
replication study with a more diverse population and a balanced design should be conducted.
Due to the randomization and the nature of an online study, we cannot rule out some
degree of selective attrition. However, it seems unlikely that it is a major issue. Only 4
participants were excluded due to poor performance, and the group sizes were very similar.
Furthermore, we cannot exclude that our results are unique to the modalities (word,
flag, map) used in this study. While words are commonly used when testing for participants’
nationality, flags and maps have not been studied often with the RT-CIT. Exploring the
possibilities of switching between visual and auditory presentation within a block or other
means that prevent participants to focus on a perceptual feature (e.g., using synonyms or very
closely related stimuli as targets [e.g., gun, pistol, firearm]) seems highly relevant for applied
purposes.
An obvious but important limitation to consider from an applied perspective is that
the increased validity for multiple target modalities might not generalize from the RT-CIT to
the physiological CIT, the only version currently applied in the field (Osugi, 2018). It is likely
that different mechanisms are involved in the RT-CIT and the physiological CIT (see e.g.,
klein Selle et al., 2018; Seymour & Schumacher, 2009).
With the introduction of familiarity related fillers (Lukács et al., 2017) and our
multiple modality approach, we now know of two ways to increase the validity of the single
probe protocol. We want to encourage future research to explore the combination of both
approaches.
Conclusion
Our findings show that in situations in which only one piece of information is
available for testing, the validity of the RT-CIT can be increased by using multiple modalities
for the target item. Presenting the target in several modalities may prevent a purely perceptual
way of processing and assure semantic processing of the stimuli in the RT-CIT. This brings
about the processing of feature dimensions that induce response conflict and therefore the
CIT-effect.
Author Contributions
Dave Koller proposed the initial study design which was refined in collaboration
with Bruno Verschuere. Programming, data collection, and analysis was done by Dave Koller.
The manuscript was mainly written by Dave Koller but in close collaboration with Bruno
Verschuere and in consultation of Franziska Hofer. Franziska Hofer and Bruno Verschuere
supervised the project.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Swiss Federal Office of Civil Aviation (project number: 2016-106) and
the Zurich State Police, Airport Division for their financial support.