Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
Disruption to Embodiment in Autism, and Its Repair
ACCEPTED AUTHOR MANUSCRIPT
To be published in N. Papaneophytou & U. Das (Eds.), Emerging Programs for Autism
Spectrum Disorder. Academic Press.
The full copy-edited manuscript will be available at:
disorder/papaneophytou/978-0-323-85031-5
Please cite as:
Delafield-Butt, J., Dunbar, P., & Trevarthen, C. (2021). Disruption to Embodiment in
Autism, and Its Repair. In N. Papaneophytou & U. Das (Eds.), Emerging Programs for
Autism Spectrum Disorder. Academic Press.
Jonathan Delafield-Butt
Professor of Child Neurodevelopment and Autism
Director, Laboratory for Innovation in Autism,
University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland.
E-mail: jonathan.delafield-butt@strath.ac.uk
Penelope Dunbar
Independent Artist and Creative Researcher, Glasgow.
Colwyn Trevarthen
Professor (Emeritus) of Child Psychology and Psychobiology,
School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences,
The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland.
E-mail: c.trevarthen@ed.ac.uk
- 1 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
Disruption to Embodiment in Autism, and Its Repair
Abstract
This paper offers a neuroscientific explanation of life with autism which recognises that
human behaviour and experience is by nature both personal and interpersonal. With a focus
on insights of Penelope Dunbar (Pum) who has lived with autism for decades, we explore an
affective neuroscience understanding of autistic experience and how to work creatively with
its impulses for health and personal development. Pum describes her autistic disruptions to
the intra-personal coherence of her basic states of being, moving-with-feeling in self-
awareness, and how this disturbance to her internal subjective coherence of mind challenges
her capacity to self-regulate arousal, and communicate with others. By examination of the
source of her problems in childhood and ways of working with them, Pum has clarified
fundamental elements in the development of her capacity to regulate self-care in creative
efforts that facilitate both affective embodiment and sensory-motor coherence in growth of
understanding in her mind and body. With her advice we explore how current
neurobiological insights in autism as a disruption to the regulation of affective embodiment
and sensory-motor integration leads to new recommendations for therapeutic care to relieve
autistic distress and restricted modes of being. Although particular to her circumstances and
cultivated habits of autistic expression, this analysis offers insight into the fundamental
nature of autism, and ways of positive working with one’s autistic nature for creative gains.
Keywords: autism, affective neuroscience, embodiment, self-regulation, art, movement
- 2 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
Introduction
In the human mind, consciousness of ‘the self as agent’ (Macmurray, 1957) is not a singular,
homogenous phenomenon, but is a layered set of systems integrated by a hierarchy of
phylogenetic principles of brain growth and animated activity that give rise to sympathetic
actions and reactions that connect ‘persons in relation’ (Macmurray, 1961). Comparative
neuroscientist of emotions, Jaak Panksepp (Panksepp, 1998a; Panksepp & Biven, 2012).
identified three levels of neural processing in mammals, each generating an awareness of the
Self made in relation to internal and external environments, and mediating between the two.
His view advanced by detailed comparative neuroanatomy with penetrating observation of
affective expressions and responses common to rodents and primates gave psychology
improved description and richer evolutionary understanding of the basic notion of a ‘triune’
brain of Paul MacLean (1990) – the idea that evolution of vertebrate ecology in social groups
toward the human cultural intelligence incorporated three distinct, but inter-connected levels
of processing. First of the reptilian brain stem, then the palaeo-mammalian midbrain limbic
system, and finally the complex neo-mammalian powers for acquiring adaptive experience
recorded in what is known as the neocortex of the forebrain.
What a human person experiences in healthy activity of the body and brain with awareness
as a singular coherent conscious Self (Sherrington, 1906) is the result of efficient composition
of action in the layers of neurobiological processing working in synchrony (Buzsáki, 2006).
Regulations of energy in internal embodied well-being of an integrated person is maintained
by an affective system linked to the autonomic visceral organs (Panksepp, 1991; Panksepp,
1992), and this is coupled with all voluntary and imaginative neuromotor control of the
skeleto-muscular system of the body in purposeful movement (Bernstein, 1967). This ‘inner
life’ from which all arts, mathematics and philosophies grow (Langer, 1942; Lashley, 1951) is
both graceful or aesthetic in its efficiency (Turner, 1991), and gracious or moral in inter-
subjective social cooperation (Trevarthen, 2015).
Efficient communication between all the elements of the intentional and self-conscious
nervous system in one rhythm of time (Buzsaki, 2006) is critical. The animal brain evolved as
an integrative organ to bring the experiences and activities of all parts of the body into one
composite awareness. In human beings the fingers, hands, elbows and feet move the body in
ambient and focal awareness to exploit what the outside world affords for use (Gibson, 1977).
Inner vitality coordinates functions of the stomach, liver and heart, and the information-
seeking assertions of neck, head, mouth and eyes that become powerful media of
communication of individual impulses and their effects in social partnerships (Reed, 1006).
Every movement acts as a coherent and coordinated whole with its own, singular purpose in
transformations of the body made in movement with prospective imagination of the effects
(Bernstein, 1967). The innate coherent rhythmic ‘musical’ composition of all wilful agency of
the individual is elaborated within each body as the common code for shared cultural
awareness and understanding (Malloch & Trevarthen, 2009b; Trevarthen, Gratier, & Osborne,
2014).
At the anatomical centre of this integrative system of neurons in all vertebrates is the
brainstem. At the anterior end of the spinal column it brings together information from the
visceral organs on maintenance of inner life, and information from the moving muscles of the
skeleton together which sense information about the surrounding world from the distance
- 3 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
receptors, the eyes, ears, and nose for sight, sound, and smell. This brainstem ‘head ganglion’
(Coghill, 1929), has access to all of the information from outside and inside the body required
for prospective conscious awareness along the intended course of locomotion. It’s basic
anatomy and neural function is shared across ‘vertebrates’ – all animals with a spine; reptiles,
amphibians, birds and mammals. As the most ancient phylogenetic layer of this neural system
it is the site of rapid integration and evaluation of information across the body and brain, in
what Panksepp calls the ‘Core Self’, the first ‘centre of conscious awareness’ (Northoff &
Panksepp, 2008; Panksepp, 1998b).
Interestingly, and importantly, this Core Self can operate on its own in humans, cats, and rats,
without the addition of information from the phylogenetically more recent neocortex – the
large, voluminous convoluted brain mass that fills the skull and that most educated people
(including cognitive neuroscientists) think of as ‘the brain’ (Bjorn Merker, 2007; Penfield &
Jasper, 1954). In fact, we can be conscious without a cortex, as surgical decortication
experiments have shown, and as is proven by children born with rare congenital total loss of
neocortex (Shewmon, Holmse, & Byrne, 1999). This simple fact is lost in most contemporary
neuropsychology sources, but it is critical to our understanding of autism. The brainstem is
the site of coherent integration of information about the world outside in consciousness, and
also of the state of the world inside, rich with vital needs of the body, which are afforded
opportunity for satisfaction in active appreciation of benefits, and apprehension of dangers,
in contacts with the world outside.
Second, above the brainstem sits a complex of pathways and larger nuclei that hold special
abilities to store memories and appraise these as benefits or risks of harm. These store and
organise past experience so it can be recalled and deployed to help organise action in the
present moment, and in service of future goals. The accumulated memories of the past serve
understanding of the consequences of actions in the present, and set goals for a desired and
imagined future of purposeful life.
In the third level of organisation experiences grow with our expanded cognitive or ‘knowing’
capacities, and with tools of symbolic abstraction that enable defined experiences to be held
‘off-line’ in memories and manipulated in our imagination. This third level of processing
occurs across the vast array of brain space we recognise as the cortex. It’s unique format
presents layers of neurons stacked as vast, broad sheets of integration that can process the
rich variety of experiences near-simultaneously. This new element of the brain provides
capacities of enhanced perceptual discrimination, memory, abstract reflection, conceptual
organisation, planning, and evaluation. These ‘cognitive tools’ become the structures that
build our human intelligence, knowledge, and technical mastery (Gigliotta, Pezzulo, & Nolfi,
2011; Pezzulo & Castelfranchi, 2009). It is the seat of our post-industrial rational human mind
and reflective pragmatic intelligence recorded symbolically in manufactured media.
Our conscious experience in each moment varies and shifts, contingent on changing needs
and circumstances. It is a single point in what William James called ‘the specious present’
(James, 1890), a unique moment in time that slips ever forward, its experience structured by
the remembered past and anticipated future. We now understand its structure is the product
of deep evolutionary layering, adapted for an adventurous animal life that expands our ability
to anticipate and prepare for the organic needs of growth, sustenance and learning especially
highly developed in humans. It enables an exceptional capacity to project the imagination
into the future, to make plans in the present moment based on a remembered past, for a
- 4 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
Jaak Panksepp’s three levels of conscious processing demonstrate that what we have
traditionally considered ‘unconscious’ is in fact the core of our conscious experience – it is a
primary, pre-reflective consciousness that is evident in, and that structures, everyday actions
of the animal. As Solms and Panksepp (2012) put it in their title, “The “Id” knows more than
the “Ego” admits.” We accept this as the hierarchy of human motor intelligence , and how it
grows between the intuitive invention of activity in awareness of the body, and the articulate
record and interpretation of thinking with semantic codification of foci of interest in gestural
and linguistic syntax with affective prosody (Delafield-Butt & Gangopadhyay, 2013; Delafield-
Butt & Trevarthen, 2015; Malloch & Trevarthen, 2009a; Trevarthen & Delafield-Butt, 2017).
(reproduced from Solms and Panksepp, 2012) and (B) their integration and contribution to
experience over time. The primary, core self is the most phylogenetically ancient and
therefore ontogenetically primary self – a site of integration of integrative, evaluative
experience and agency. This is brainstem mediated. The secondary self stores with greater
precision the memories with greater powers of discrimination for evaluation, but finally the
tertiary self is empowered with the cognitive tools built on abstraction from primary
experience through its secondary process and considered ‘offline’. Cortically mediated.
These layers of processing are reflected in the artwork, “Profile of a collaged mind, finding
sense through fragment and movement – autism as sensory motor disruption to core self”,
Autistic Experience as a Disruption of the Primary Affective Self, and its Coherent
Integration with Secondary and Tertiary Processing
In this paper we examine lived autistic experience to reveal its nature in light of the vertical
organisation of mental processing. We build on self-reflection, scholarship, and dialogue
between Penelope Dunbar (Pum) and Jonathan Delafield-Butt, made in recorded interviews
about Pum’s life with autism over a period of five years, and placed into context of a
- 5 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
developing understanding of autism from an embodied, ecological perspective developed
earlier between Jonathan Delafield-Butt and Colwyn Trevarthen (Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen,
2017; Trevarthen & Delafield-Butt, 2013a). We have worked to understand the structure of
her experience as a person diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder from a
phenomenological, lived perspective and have set this within new theoretical understanding
of autism as a disorder or distortion of a particular kind of embodiment of human agency,
distinguishing the regulation of purposes by levels of feeling in body movement, affective
appraisals and arousal, and their communication (Trevarthen, 2014). Therefore, the
experiences and conclusions drawn from these are relevant for this one particular autistic
individual, and we can guarantee their accuracy as reported.
However, autism is not a simple variation of normal motivation and intelligence. It is
recognized as a very varied state of personality and in each case manifests its spectrum of
conditions idiosyncratically (Hobson, 1993; Gillberg, 1992; Hobson & Hobson, 2011).
Therefore, although not all of our findings from Pum’s account will generalise or fit as one
correct description of the condition, we do emphasise the manifestations in it of general
truths applicable to all human beings concerning feeling, arousal, the nested organisation of
conscious experience, and the effects of these manifest in the embodiment and learning of
intentional action. The basic facts of motivation for human life are common to individuals
with their different characters and experiences, and a typical disruption of these within
autism may be identified.
A Brainstem Sensorimotor Disruption in Autism
Our account of autism emphasises a disruption to efficient primary processing of sensory-
motor information, and the self-related affective processing that mediates arousal regulation
Trevarthen, 2017; Delafield-Butt, Trevarthen, Rowe, & Gillberg, 2019; Trevarthen & Delafield-
Butt, 2013a). In this paper, we extend this account of a disturbance of self-regulating vitality
to include a specific disruption in the coherence of consciousness vertically, between its three
levels of processing. This weakening of coherence appears to start within the primary,
brainstem processing that integrates the Core Self, affecting first its internal coherence, and
subsequently its elaboration through participation in processes of the higher levels. In this
regard, it is from a weak central coherence of primary consciousness, not one limited to
particular higher-order cognitive and perceptual domains of the traditional theory that
emphasises focal perceptual attention to integration of parts (Happé, 1999, 2003; Happé &
Frith, 2006; Happé, 1997; Happé & Booth, 2008), rather than a whole single system rich with
affectivity and the spirit of vitality and awareness. We draw out aspects of conscious
experience below tertiary cognitive processing that the weak central coherence theory
(Happé & Frith, 2006) attends to, to show a more fundamental global ‘weakening’ of
conscious coherence that involves affects, arousal, and the centre of gravity of one’s
conscious awareness.
Our account recognises and appreciates the fundamental contribution to conscious thought,
feelings, and awareness the brainstem complex provides, not only in terms of organising
information, but in terms of organising one’s subjective awareness. And although the
1 As the autistic community points out, “if you’ve met one person with autism, you’ve met one person with
autism”.
- 6 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
brainstem may be anatomical subcortical, its function is ontogenetically supra-cortical, giving
patterns and structure to cortical development and processing in organization of bodily
activity (Merker, 2005, 2013), and the generation of subcortical rhythms that patterns cortical
cohesion (Buzsáki, 2006).
An intra-personal coherence between levels of processing appears disrupted, which prevents
the development of the innate function of the core self in regulating affective states, and that
disrupts efficient agency and inter-personal communication recognised in formal clinical
autistic symptomology.
Autistic Challenges of a Disconnected and Incoherent Core Self
In Pum’s experience, she felt a distressing disjunction between her rational, reflective self and
her inability to manage her affective states of arousal. Her core affective and integrative
corporal self was disconnected and muted. Her reflective tertiary self became obsessively
aware of her social expectations, and its demands for her to perform in a socially conformed
manner. This logic produced a ‘false’ rationale because it excluded personal feeling and
motive, but it dominated her thinking and reflection and came to control her conscious
experience and behaviour. It was an inflexible, literal appropriation that accepted what she
was taught and led to a rational rule-governed understanding of social requirements and
engagement in them. Yet, this rational self-control of her behaviour neglected her more
fundamental needs for self-knowledge and self-satisfaction as an individual animal with
impulses and feelings, which were denied to her. Instead, compliance to learnt social scripts
were supported at the cost of her emotional wellbeing. Later, her ability to regulate states of
arousal and anxiety were paralysed by a disconnection and in many respects were completely
unaware of what we have come to identify as the feelings and needs of her Core Self. Further,
this habitual disassociation into a performed script damaged her ability to manage her basic
functioning, and manifested in, for example, eating and sleeping disorders and entrenched
mental health problems in her early adult life.
The language of the core self is non-verbal, affective and aneotic (Vandekerckhove &
Panksepp, 2009). In childhood learning Pum was instructed how to understand and use social
verbal language. And she worked hard to learn speech, reading and writing through copying
particular demonstrations of these, and with obsessive attention to detail of politeness and
needs of others. This led to an unintegrated sense of self, which was eventually expressed in
mental health symptoms of chronic anorexia and depression. It was only many years later in
adult life, after ongoing therapy and some decades of self-reflection and analysis that she
came to understand that she had developed a disjunction between what we now know as her
Core Self – her core affective, perceptual, and embodied Self – and her more artificial,
rational, and reflective Tertiary Self. The logical language of words were not expressive of her
true intuitive self-as-agent with its idiosyncratic autism profile, accepting it, and therefore did
not communicate what she really wished to do and share.
Meaning, Coherence, and the Challenge of Incoherence
We are a social species that demands meaningful social interaction, even in autism (Jaswal &
Akhtar, 2018). Social isolation is a painful experience and can be associated with feelings of
shame on both sides (Trevarthen, 2005), it disconnects the inter-personal world from a
- 7 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
system evolved to share in it (Gallagher, 2014). Similarly, disconnection within oneself can
be painful. In Pum’s autism, centres of conscious experience evolved to work integratively as
a whole were disconnected from each other, and intra-personal disconnection. Failure of a
coherent, integrated experience of behaviours and interactions left each less meaningful, and
created distress and challenging behaviours as a consequence. Left unattended to in
childhood, this lack of depth of meaning created despair and anxiety that became the
standard in her adolescence and early adulthood.
On the surface, she had adjusted her social relationships to appear acceptably ‘normal’, but
she struggled in private with an array of distressing and challenging behaviours hidden from
view. Internal incoherence and neglect of more primitive, subsurface feelings and desires led
to significant mental health issues, especially apparent at peak life events, such as the
transitions of puberty and to adulthood, and in the event of life’s challenges affecting love,
loss, desire, and change of ‘home’. Her Core Self that worked to integrate somatic physiology,
including satiation in feeding, digesting, sexual awareness, affectionate engagement, and
satisfaction, and sleep/wake regulation, was disengaged from her public behaviour.
In childhood, Pum learned language rationally, ‘outside’ of her body. She became more and
more disconnected from the life of the body and its needs for self-regulation as the years
went by. And, by copying sounds, which then became learnt codes for behaviour that were
socially appropriate, she could present herself as appropriate, but these were personally
meaningless to her.
Johnson and Lakoff teach us how ‘being in the body’ grows into language (Lakoff & Johnson,
1980, 1999), a feature missed or reduced in Pum’s development. In typical ontogenesis, one
develops movement first, and feelings expressed in movement generate the inspiration for
expressive language (Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen, 2013; Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen, 2015;
Iverson, 2010). It is only once this affective experience of being has found its primary,
intuitive, and embodied language can it be developed into an expression of reaching out and
sharing what is internal with those who are physically external. Only once this is achieved can
the meaningful shared communicative verbal language of words be placed on top, and the
possibility of authentic communication established.
Lessons in language development offer a particularly useful illustration of how a supportive
parent, therapist, or teacher can encourage healthy curiosity and enjoyment of animated
learning. The expressive language of the emotions and body come first in development, on
which the language of words bears depth of meaning, and purpose. “It is by natural signs
chiefly that we give force and energy to language; and the less language has of them, it is the
less expressive and persuasive.” (Reid, 1764) (pp. 106-107).
Implications for Self-Improvement and Therapeutic Support of Autistic Disturbance to the
Core Self
If our account of the disruption to the coherence of core experience of self and its
communication with higher level processing is correct, then focussing therapeutic
intervention on overt behaviours and conventional speech production may miss the mark,
- 8 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
over-shooting a coherent integration of feelings and impulses of the affective Core Self.
Ontogenetically one must work to develop and substantiate the primary levels of processing
first, before extending to more advanced forms such as social regulation, speech production
and verbal communication. One must first build an intimate an affective ‘languaging’ of the
self (Halliday, 1975, 1978).
The core self is principally embodied, enactive, and non-verbal, so stories of language-like
understanding can be first formed on a non-verbal sensory and motor level, as artful visual
imagery or musical auditory patterns (Malloch, 1999; Malloch & Trevarthen, 2009a, b), and
within the level of the physiological regulation of the communicator’s body and its inner life,
as in ‘polyvagal theory’ of the emotional nervous system and expressive forms of movement
for communication (Porges, 2001). For therapy, deploying creativity and playful movement
in an asocial, structured environment paying particular attention to detail and consistency of
the routine to support the patient’s growth within the condition of autism, rather than setting
a priority on teaching technical performance and social rules where one may unwittingly be
led to prioritise performance rather than intuitive knowing what is intended and felt, may be
more effective in engaging, or facilitating, the whole, integrated self of the individual with
autism.
We have found strong physical activity can also be therapeutic, such as in sports, dance or
equine therapy (Ford, 2013; Koch, 2016; Koch et al., 2015; May et al., 2019; Rinehart, Jeste,
& Wilson, 2018), or in shared movement-regulating programmes, such as that based on the
agency-guiding education theory of Geoffrey Waldon (Solomon, Holland, & Middleton, 2012;
Posner, 2016). In the activity of ‘doing’, the sensory and motor system embeds, supports and
physically yolks experience to the active sensory-affective self. Further, creative process and
movements can become tools when they are built into established daily and weekly
structured routines that are organised and predictable.
We caution that the individual with autism needs special support to access and maintain
these routines adequately. A low arousal, structured and predictable lifestyle can support
overall wellbeing and regulation. Without support for routines, feelings and self-agency may
be inaccessible, blocked by executive function difficulties in planning, preparation, and
organisation.
First, for growth and learning, one must be confidently centred within oneself. The human
organism must come to terms with the innate complexity of its own movements, expressions,
and desires, and able to experience these as self-expression of ‘Me’, before one can
differentiate him or herself from the actions of another.
“In the course of emotional development of the individual a stage is reached at
which the individual can be said to have become a unit…. At this stage the child can
say ‘here I am’. What is inside me is me and what is outside me is not me. The words
inside and outside here refer simultaneously to the psyche and to the soma… A
satisfactory psychosomatic partnership.” (Winnicott, 1971/2001, pp 130-131)
The centre is first and foremost our embodied Core Self, the brainstem-mediated
ontogenetically primary agent who perceives, feels, anoetically evaluates without conscious
definition, acting without the ‘superior’ reflective consciousness mediated by our cortical
cognitive systems (Vandekerckhove & Panksepp, 2011). One must first ‘get into the body’
with the felt life of wilful movements (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980, 1999).
- 9 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
Getting into a Routine
However, we must appreciate that activities of integrated movement may not be physically
or psychologically available or accessible to a person with ASD. There is an anxiety specific to
autism provoked by the beginning of any new act (Robledo, Donnellan, and Strandt-Conroy,
2012), and it takes time for the individual to feel safe and allow arousal levels to settle.
Accessing movement for personal or social aims can over-excite uncertainty, “Am I going to
be able to move my body?” This can be debilitating, and prevent wilful transition into the
activity. However, with external support for practice of a daily and weekly routine, the
impulse to act can recover with feelings of safety, and the body can begin to associate the
beginning of that structured routine with a sense of confidence in knowledge of the future
activity.
How Emotional Arousal can be Understood, and Managed.
activity, their personal expression and interpersonal sharing in movement. The green area
indicates the optimum, ideal levels of arousal for practicing structured and creative routines
in kinetic expression, and to facilitate ‘self-to-self’ communication across levels (c.f. Fig. 1).
The left-hand side of the chart shows negative balance states, feelings that are detrimental
to individual functioning and wellbeing and that incur further stress. The right-hand side of
the chart shows more positively valanced feelings. The higher regions of arousal on this side
- 10 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
can still result in an unpleasant and detrimental response. States of happiness and surprise
are especially triggering, and stressfully disorientating. Being over-excited makes Pum
dissociate and become over-stimulated, which often results in an inevitable shift to
meltdowns and anxiety, leading to disorientation, confusion and a grief-stricken state.
When a child’s or an adult’s autism’s needs are not met, their levels of arousal increase, and
they may appreciate even a sensitive invitation as disorientating. The individual requires an
adapted calm responsive treatment, which offers containment and a neutrality that accepts
and attempts to moderate their reactions of distress (Douglas, 2007).
At first, the companion, supporter or therapist may work alongside the individual. This may
help to foster oblique communication by removing face-to-face interaction which can be
experienced as overwhelming and confrontational for the individual with autism. Imitating
and helping to organise the routine of their actions, acting as a coach or guide to help
regulation of their movement and to confirm a sense of coherent agency. A therapist who is
patient, committed, and observant of patterns of action may act with aesthetic and
compassionate feelings that recognise the unique autistic needs of the individual in the
present moment.
The practitioner’s actions need to be predictable and consistent for the person with autism
to feel accepted, safe and their needs appreciated. Then they can begin to become aware of
what those needs are, safe in the knowledge that the other is able to foster trust and lower
arousal. From this foundation in mutual regulation of self-awareness and trust, the more
creative organic platform of communication for the self through structured, repetitive activity
can be developed. This way autonomy can be promoted, and eventually secured.
Communication from within the Primary Self leads to a growing potential to meaningfully
communicate with another person as a more authentic, confident, and true Self.
Co-opting Compulsions for Repetitive Behaviours, and Transforming Them into Productive,
Creative, Self-sustaining Action for Personal Growth
Self-expression is built and shared in efforts of sport and art, but their aesthetic and moral
power in shared vitality can be devalued and often overlooked in Psychology, even as music
has been by Stephen Pinker, follower of Noam Chomsky’s theory of the rational formality of
language (Chomsky, 1957), on ‘the language instinct’ (Pinker, 1994).
With the information obtained by detailed analysis of the talents of infants for sharing stories
of life in movement (Trevarthen, 2003; Trevarthen & Delafield-Butt, 2013b; Trevarthen &
Delafield-Butt, 2015), we see these activities and the routines that lead into them as
fundamentally important for personal well-being, growth, and mental health of every human
being. From before birth, as a foetus alive and responding to feelings with the mother’s
person, each individual adapts the vital compulsion for rhythms of repetitive action (D. N.
Stern, 2000; Daniel N. Stern, 2010), and co-opts this to serve useful purpose in special ways
of living in the objective and social worlds. Their co-option affords gains in self-control, self-
satisfaction, and learning with a shift in mental processing that is felt, from the start, as a
- 11 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
cohesive and integrative embodied experience, a story of human life to be shared (Bruner,
2003).
In infants with autism, their co-option into habits of shared social value is disrupted (St Claire,
Danon-Boileau & Trevarthen, 2007; Trevarthen & Daniel, 2005). Repetitive movement
without a plan or narrative that gives a clear beginning, middle, and end to the project
(Trevarthen, Aitken, Nagy, Delafield-Butt, & Vandekerckhove, 2006) can produce compulsive
repetition of behaviours. Some stereotypies of gesture, such as hand flapping, can be self-
confirming, allowing one to hold a presence of mind for useful benefit in self-regulation
(Caldwell, 1999, pp. 16). Others can be detrimental, such as excessive consumption of water
or food, or teeth grinding. When over-done, their beneficial effect is lost to a detrimental,
sometimes damaging form of loss of control, such as in compulsive eating, biting, or extensive
habits that cause damage to the body. In Pum’s experience, the self-affirming quality of
repetitive action contains within it a valuable resource to be harnessed.
With care to bring into life a structured routine that has a clear narrative purpose, with a
meaningful beginning, middle, and end, security in predictable rhythms of action can be
recovered. However, without this structure and routine the autistic individual may lose that
coherence of purpose, not know what one is doing or what to do, and it can be very difficult
to step over into the activity or the movement, particularly the transition from a mental,
imagined into physical, active state. This particular emotional autistic sensitivity needs to be
supported. Movement and the creative process within a regular routine can support the
individual.
Pum has shown that the power of two routines she has developed over many years can co-
opt her autistic needs for repetition and regularity, but also her needs for body movement to
feel alive in the body and in her mind. These two activities are swimming and collage,
different in the degree of physical exertion, but similar in their adoption of repetition and
routine for beneficial gains, and a unique and particular transformation of state of mind that
is of special interest to our developing thesis on the Primary Self.
Pum’s swimming routine was developed over ten years of practice and serves as a self-
generated intervention to manage her autism and its associated depressive mood disorder.
Exercise benefits regulation of appetite, sleep, hygiene, and also creative imagination.
Second, she has always deployed art for cathartic expression, particularly painting. From her
creative, artistic research grew collage praxis. Collage satisfied a need for an expansive, yet
concrete visual language. It further helped her to explore her autism, her sensory
sensitivities, disruption to her embodied being, and difficulties managing her lived
experiences.
We explore the details of each, in turn. Each is predicated on sensorimotor repetition,
sensory-motor loops (cf. Daniel, 2019; Trevarthen, Daniel, & Trevarthen, 2017). Each practice
is a routine that involves ritualised regularity of the tasks before, during, and after it, for
example in the days of the week, time of day, and pattern of preparation, practice, and
conclusion. Each is itself a regular, repetitive routine, but it’s sensory-motor nature does
something peculiar for Pum’s state of mind, improving her clarity, reducing her autistic
anxiety, and enabling a cohesion in her sense of Self that bridges between her rational tertiary
self and her core self. Both give integration through movement.
- 12 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
of water which offers routines of sensorimotor integration and progress in
movement. Below: An original collage artwork by Pum that explores and
expresses visually a growing understanding of the neurobiological basis of autism
spectrum disorder. The foetus represents the core self, and the collage spatially
positions images in correspondence to the brain locations of various structures to
represent those functions. See Appendix 1 for a full key to the component parts.
- 13 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
1. Swimming as Creative Therapy
The cycles of body movement in swimming are repetitive and predictable over a series of
time-scales. They are carried out in a specially constructed swimming pool environment
which stays constant, improving the regularity of the experience. Each length of the pool is
the same as the next or the last, and each lap repeats a loop of the same action architecture.
Thus, the repetitive nesting of voluntary neuromotor actions creates and sustains a regularity
of acting, one that is generated and controlled by the individual’s own wish, and will, to swim.
Swimming creates a sensation of a moving and floating Self made by making sinuous
movements of the whole body pushing against the water by cyclic strokes of legs and arms,
coordinated to follow a particular course with more or less vigour. It requires exercise of
repetitive sensorimotor loops guided by bilateral actions with unique kinetic and
proprioceptive properties. The body is suspended with a feeling of weightlessness and
sufficient buoyancy to hold it at the surface in any posture, but able to dive by pushing
downwards. With any movement the water provides a tactile feedback over the body’s
surfaces, and muscular-skeletal feedback is felt internally by proprioceptive stimulation from
actions slowed by the resistive forces of the water.
Regular, repetitive sensory-motor loops of arm, leg, head, and body posture in synchrony are
paced and forced with direction in space and time to produce fluid movement of the whole
body through the water. Separate actions are serially organised and coordinated to work in
step with their kinetics slowed by the fluid mass in which they float. A front-crawl cycle of
arm moves to push the body forward is made with adjustments of posture and head to afford
breathing in time with the successive strokes of left and right arms in alternation, and the two
legs kick in contrapuntal, anti-phase synchrony. Thus, simple actions of the limbs are serially
organised and coordinated in time with breathing. Each cycle of limb actions conforms with
the cycle of a whole-body pattern marked by breathing, which resets the cycle. A fixed project
of these repeated actions moves the body to the other end of the pool where a different set
of coordinated movements turns the person around to face the opposite direction, and the
exercise repeats.
Using buoyancy of the body held with the liquid mass of water, swimming is regulated by
kinetic proprioception of the body surface by a unique tactile feedback of counter-balancing
muscular forces sensed simultaneously. With strong patterns of simultaneous feedback from
trunk and all four limbs it can be particularly somatically integrative. It sets swimming aside
as a unique exercise of all-body monitoring by sensory feedback. This appreciation of
intentional action, coupling all modalities of sensory feedback, may have especially positive
benefits for individuals with autism, helping them sense in fully-coherent self-control. It
generates a physiological and psychological experience of unification: “I am, I be-come, I act
embodied. My body is felt as mine.” This relates back to Winnicott’s understanding that,
from the beginning of individual life, knowing your body as yours is primary, and essential for
learning an understanding that your body is separate and distinct from any other person’s
body. Swimming builds up individual and relational awareness and creates a safe exploration
in rhythms of movement for the experience of Self, to appreciate it is intact and truly
inhabited with an ambitious will to live.
What Are the Special Beneficial Effects of Swimming for a Person with Autism?
- 14 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
As with all repetitive, patterned activity, the exercise of swimming frees the conscious mind
to reanimate a deeper, more primary physical awareness. The conscious attention required
to perform a skilled routine is significantly reduced, which allows the sensuous part of the
mind to become affectively engaged with the body, finding somatic satisfaction in the
expression of movement. This can be felt as cathartic.
Generated and integrated within the brainstem at the level of Panksepp’s ‘Core Self’, the
underlying sensory-motor activity generates a rhythmic regularity and integration of
experience at this primary level of integrative processing. The contrapuntal, bilateral
repetitive movements together with haptic sensation of the whole-body to resistive forces of
liquid flowing across it confirm a strong sensory-motor integration in active experience of
beneficial for peaceful and pleasurable integration of mind.
Signals from rhythmic brainstem sensory-motor integration, in concert with the rhythms of
action generation and sensory responses, are repeated through all their nested cycles in
synchrony. The foundational rhythms of body movements, generated and integrated in the
brainstem, pattern and structure the more speculative rhythms of neural activity in the
cerebral cortices (Buzsáki, 2006). There, our abstract, ‘off-line’ intuitive, anoetic processes
and reflections are aroused and coordinated by patterning of inter-neuronal activity excited
from below (Pezzulo & Castelfranchi, 2009; Vandekerckhove & Panksepp, 2011). From this
knowledge we advance the hypothesis that increased strength of the brainstem integrative
signal excited for swimming generates a coherence of conscious experience by its regular
repetition with the improved vigour of simultaneous, all-body sensory and motor signals.
The physical exertion of swimming certainly brings deep physiological benefits. The heart
pumps faster, circulating more blood, oxygen, and energy not only to the muscles, but also to
the brain, enhancing mental function. There is increased awareness of this link between
exercise and thought, with particular attention in the literature to walking. It is a common
understanding that walking or swimming or other forms of exercise enable thoughts and
especially creative or ‘divergent’ thinking (Keinänen, 2016). Walking has long been associated
with facilitating creativity in intellectual pursuits (ibid), from the Socratic peripatetic school
(Peripatetic = walking about) advanced by Aristotle and others (Athamatten, 2012), to
Nietzsche who claimed in typical over-zealous fashion, “Only those thoughts that come by
walking have any value” (Nietzsche, 2007, p. 9). Indeed, Henry David Thoreau commented,
“Methinks that the moment my legs begin to move, my thoughts begin to flow.” (Thoreau &
Blaisdell, 2011). Exercise of repetitive body movement can liberate thought.
In the case of Pum’s lived experience, the act of mixed purposeful programs of action and
their repetitions affords an intense feeling of integration in coherence of mind and body that
is not otherwise felt, and that produces within it a sense of calm and affective equilibrium.
Swimming and walking, and indeed any complex well-conceived pattern of behaviour,
depends on regular cycles of action in an involuntary autonomic system, which assures the
supply of oxygen and energy required for the rhythms of exercise. Done well, the body’s
physiological homeostasis can be maintained for many tens of minutes with the benefit of a
constant, regular repetition of action and its felt sensory effects. Pum has developed her
swimming practice of bi-weekly swims of fifty lengths, with regular periods of rest between
2 Interestingly, this stands in contrast to the lateral thinking released for enhancement of the creative
imagination in people without autism, and suggests that while some common mechanism is at work, its effects
differ in their quality between autistic and non-autistic experience.
- 15 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
sustained swimming to stretch the body. Stretches generate further skeletal muscular
feedback and give her a growing sense of her body as hers in that moment. The movements
and stretches performed together confirm ownership and self-control of her actions.
2. Collage as Creative Therapy
Pum is a practiced collage artist. Her practice developed from a need to explore, express and,
inter-relate ideas and concepts from her own personal research and scholarly work. She has
found collage-making exceptionally beneficial, cathartic and calming. Collage as a medium
allows her mind to shift into a fluid multi-metaphorical state similar in dynamic complexity to
her use of the water in swimming exercise, but with differences of composition and
significance.
Like swimming, collage is a repetitive activity that allows discovery of new forms of experience
and thought, and that flows with the activity to allow opportunity for the accessibility of
affective and reflective self-awareness. It involves intention for regular cycles of repetitive
sensorimotor activity – sorting of the paper, selection of images, cutting of fragments – all
actions that demand integrated action across the body, stabilising posture and maintaining
coherence of attention and coordinated action. Done easily with rehearsed skill, these simple
activities can allow the mind to freely associate, playing off the images and their associations
in the safety of a known environment that remains peacefully constant and unobtrusive.
Small, elementary micro-movements make large shifts of symbolic content with very little
effort and only subtle movements of the muscles. A shift of the paper can juxtapose
foreground and background in a new way to give rise to a significantly larger cognitive and
perceptual shift in the created world. This aesthetic incidental control of the pictorial world
can be very strengthening, reassuring, and rewarding. Again, a sense of agency is confirmed.
Moreover, while each repetitive micro-movement is focussed on detail, controlled shifts of
attention strive to piece together the detailed parts into a new whole. This strategy of
creation exploits her autistic preference for applying detailed focal attention while at the
same time allowing a return placement of the selected part into the whole again. Perspectival
shifts from part to whole, back to part again, and so on to give the aesthetic feel of the
growing picture, and this can enhance a sense of integration and coherence for the autistic
artist in their practice. The aesthetic affective resonance of the work of art allows for and
reinforces the maker’s experience of affective, embodied self-awareness.
As with her swimming, Pum has found collage-making to be a calming activity that allows an
integration of the whole self from across the vertical levels of mental processing, allowing
thought of the experience to flow from its perceptual elements to recollections of their
embodied resonances on combination.
The simple logical efforts, of sticking together a complex picture composition and swimming
down a pool are constituted in the pursuit of repetitive sensorimotor action. In collage, this
is the selection of print material, the cutting out, and the handling of discreet components.
The amount of physical exertion for picture-making is significantly less than for any athletic
task, and correspondingly the degree of perceptual and cognitive reflection can be
considerably greater, feeding off the images and patterns that transform the elements of the
collage in their creative exploration to make their meaning coherent.
- 16 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
This requires a regular to-and-fro shift from internal-to-external percept, a movement from
creative interior intuition to concrete external symbols. It enables a stitching together of
conscious processing with thoughts and feelings that lie below conscious awareness. This
process of composing an integrated picture can be cathartic, easing her internal tension which
arises out of an autistic confusion of fragmented parts and contexts.
Collage affords Pum the discovery of a new synthesis of mind, allowing her autistic brain to
get into the detail and to feel how each part shape the others, allowing comprehension and
a new, literal appreciation of the attractiveness of the message as a coherent whole. By
shifting focus across the details in collage-making, the whole visual composition is held and
articulated, complete with thoughts and feelings communicated through the silent and still
language of imagery. Pum feels this benefit, a satisfaction in the work of interpretation.
Collage is hugely strengthening for Pum, because she has to capture its sense not in words,
but in images of tangible static imagery made in scraps of concrete detail. It lets her autistic
mind to do what it likes to do, focus on the detail, and lets the autistic brain do what it likes
to do, get stuck in and focussed in on the activity or project. Then, when one is locked into
that activity of repetitive sensorimotor process, the creative process kicks in. Something new
happens: a new, integrative state of consciousness. And that new something enables growth
of her creative self, enables Self-relating, and an integration of her sensory-affective
experience made coherent and meaningful in her exploratory, expressive body movement. It
opens new, higher states of reflective self-consciousness. This is incalculably beneficial, its
insights translated for healthier everyday living.
The other important feature of collage is that it captures one’s interest in the little fiddly
movements some individuals with ASD are compelled to repeat, normally with little product
or enjoyment to be shared. However, by embedding this repetitive behaviour in a structured
routine, a creative opportunity is encouraged. Thus, if a supportive and sensitive practitioner
can foster one’s engagement with concrete materials, one can help the individual with autism
access an evolving creative dimension. When acting in an asocial setting, and left alone, the
individual collage-maker necessarily communicates with him- or herself, through the
aesthetic, signs and symbols of their work. Thus, when Pum is making a collage, she is
engaged in Self-related processing. She is ‘dialoguing’ with different aspects of her Self free
from social responsibility or performative requirements. She is solely engaged in
communicating to and with her Self. She likens this process to a private form of waking
dream, in which she can slowly discover herself.
In Pum’s experience, good collage comes from three to four hours of continuous practice. It
is in such sustained activity that she begins to synthesise thoughts, feelings, and ideas working
below the level of conscious reflection to solve problems, and that is when she begins to feel
an intuitive, integrated and coherent sense of self. It gives her new, inner strength that
enables her to survive and cope with the relentless performative demands of her autism
disorder and the everyday, practical activities that support her physical, mental and
emotional wellbeing. This deeply restorative creative behaviour has allowed her to
understand her need to withdraw from the conventional social world, whilst supporting her
growth within her private creative work and research.
Collage is embodied self-reflexivity in changing sensorimotor movements. Movements of the
pieces of collage generate feed-back that is satisfying, or not. And through appraisals and
self-reflection, something new and rewarding can be established. As the repetition of these
- 17 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
movements proceed, Pum discovers a transition in her consciousness from its usual state of
tense, fragmented, unfocussed attention, to one of more relaxed coherence of perception,
action, and reflection. This transitioned state allows an appreciation of experiences
immediately at hand to include both internal and external awareness. New to this experience
is a feeling of integrated coherence, with mind and body working synchronously together in
balanced harmony, not felt passively during the flux of daily experience or under the demands
of rules and routines in a spontaneously changing external or internal environment. Autism
presents disorder in the normal experience of self-conscious purposeful and valued habits of
a life alone and in relationships. It can be helped by giving it clarity and strength by changing
personal and social demands for action, and social interaction.
Sensitive Care for the Primary Self of a Companion with Autism: Supportive Structures for
Routines of Practice
From consideration of the principles of brain control of purposeful muscular activity of the
human body in awareness of its environments, objective and social, with appreciation of the
efforts and emotions involved, we have outlined a theory of autism, its development and how
its problems may be alleviated by relational and sympathetic therapy that adapts the urge for
repetitive behaviour into constructive routines (Trevarthen & Delafield-Butt, 2013b). The
foundation of our approach is in the phylogenetic record of vertebrate brain systems that
direct and evaluate movements with many senses for feedback of biomechanical effects
between the body and the environment, as well as within the body between its inner vital
organs, media for sustaining nutritive well-being, and harmonisation of activity in its skeleto-
muscular system to maintain health and growth of the integrated whole Self (Bosco et al.,
2018; Dadalko & Travers, 2018; J. Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen, 2017).
A focus for therapeutic intervention can be to improve intra-personal coherence and self-
awareness of the different levels of processing, especially the difference between the
the rational thoughts from ‘above’ with the feelings and desires of the present moment, made
real in active bodily expression. Strengthening this self-regulation can lead to gains in
cooperative awareness if the emotional processes of inner, intra-personal sympathetic
relating are enriched (Delafield-Butt et al., 2019; Delafield-Butt et al., 2020).
It is for this reason that we caution against behavioural therapies such as those based on
Adaptive Behavioural Analysis that focus on the performative aspects of communication and
action, but that do not work to help the individual to find the particular form of expression
that carries their inner feeling. Performative methods train the intellect to control and rule
the body in service of socially acceptable norms of shape or form. And while this may yield
some benefit for the family and community by creating an apparently adapted individual with
socially normalised behaviours, that individual may very likely remain internally stressed
deeper in the body, because performative communication can remain disconnected from
personal motives, and remain meaningless or empty.
In such a case, the autistic individual can be left stranded, disconnected, and unable to relate
to oneself let alone to another. This aloneness can be disorientating and the meaninglessness
- 18 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
stressful. It can be explained as a dissonance between the primary self and the social
expectations learned by the secondary and tertiary levels of processing, incurring an internal,
chronic distress and further cutting off and entrenching dissociation with primary affective
experience.
The organisation of autism and its phenomena described in this paper give information for
individuals with autism, and for parents and professionals who offer care and support for
them. We offer simple, practical advice on securing coherent, productive and pleasurable
Self-awareness with motive impulses to enrich experience and give value to habits and
knowledge. This is not about appropriate behaviour or reciprocal communication of facts in
shared meaning for social use of conventional tools or media, which is an enterprise that can
arouse self-judging anxiety or shame. It is about finding internal coherence in one’s sense of
self, and making the best of one’s autistic impulses and particular needs.
Establishing a routine for safe practice
Pum’s account of her active use of swimming and collage for building strength in her ability
to self-relate confirms that such creative activity can be helpful not only as therapeutic for
autistic anxiety, but for opening new possibilities for thoughtful reflection, personal
development, and creative expression that can allow for an integration of the Self, and only
later for one’s personal experience to be communicated, and shared in safe and sustaining
relations. Both activities were conducted alone, in quiet isolation, exploiting familiar
environments and set within routines of daily and weekly patterns. A supportive context can
be generated by caring others with practical prompts, such as “in 10 minutes we will be
stopping”, or by showing an object that signals “coming to the end” of an activity. These
simple steps encourage security in knowing what is to come. By learning what a movement
of the body is and how its activity draws to completion clarifies how the feeling is embodied,
and lived.
Change and transitions between states of being can cause the individual with autism
significant discomfort. Performing simple rituals of preparation and travel to the swimming
pool, or setting out the items to start a college, can itself be anxiety-provoking. Without
support, the individual may find this anxiety too difficult to overcome alone. By
understanding the individual’s autism’s needs for clear, transparent expectations with explicit
prompts, a caring supporter can facilitate management of the individual’s growing anxieties
about the change-to-come. This can be done simply through rehearsal and help with planning
the details and preparing for the routine.
Each step is important: preparing the swimming costume and towel, packing the bag, wearing
the right clothes for the outside, leaving the house, and travelling to the pool. Familiarity with
this routine is paramount to reducing anxiety, and maintaining consistency in the patterns is
extremely helpful. Keeping to a regular time of day and day of the week is very helpful. Once
at the pool, regular use of the same changing room, shower, and swimming lane all help to
present a degree of constant, regular familiarity in the routine. This will lead to a building up
of an affirmative experience where anxiety levels become reduced over the weeks, months,
and years. This will promote a growing sense of self-control, self-confidence, and self-
empowerment.
- 19 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
It is worth noting that no matter how simple or complex the task to hand, the carer who is
observant and responsive to expectations and past experiences, and respectful of reassuring
routines, will assist the individual to become more confident and secure. It may be important
to help an individual with autism to identify their needs so they may learn how to
communicate them, and find how to manage them for themselves, and become better
resourced in self-regulation of vitality. The autistic child needs this support to feel the story
of each simple routine, so they can practice it again by themselves. From Pum’s experience,
the ideal help for the child with autism to surpass developmental hurdles is at their own pace,
encouraging known routines and actions that already work, however simple they may be.
Supporting an Integration of the Self, for Self-Awareness and Self-Empowerment
The experience of feelings and motives for action and interaction of the Core Self can be very
different from that of the higher-order, Conceptually-Oriented Self. This higher-order Self is
developed socially with others, and is therefore structured and organised by conventional
social expectations, including instructions. It is shaped by outside social environments.
Altogether these external influences on the priorities and values of the Tertiary Self may
dissociate it from the feelings, desires, and wishes of the Core Self, which may become
trapped and unexpressed.
This can lead to “difficult”, “disruptive”, or “challenging” behaviours. But it can be damaging
for an individual to be defined as such, and it neglects the role and responsibility of social
expectation and caregiver support when these behaviours result from a mismatch between
these social expectations and tolerances, and lack of ‘connection’ an individual’s needs and
modes of feeling, thinking, and being. This is why we advise support for them to become
more happily self-aware, ready and able to ask for help and therefore to manage their autism
better, in friendship.
The Core Self is non-verbal, expressive in the language of body movement, gesture, and
intonation of the voice. It may be that to emphasise verbal language acquisition in some
children – ‘to get them to talk’ – may miss the fact that they don’t speak because they are not
ready for that level of abstract, verbal narrative and sense-making, and must rely on intuitive
non-verbal elements of self-expression. As in typical development, there needs to develop
first a “languaging” of the self in actions of the body (Halliday, 1975). In the sensory-motor
realm of psychological functioning, the motor life embeds and supports the awareness of the
senses, physically yolking them to the sensory, giving structure to and learning of self-
consciousness from sensory perceptions.
All Behaviour is Communication
Parents as custodians of mental and emotional life can often be overly concerned with what
their child ‘can’t do’, overlooking what their child ‘can do’. We say it is fundamentally
important for the child and adult with autism to find their own language on their own bodily
level, in extraverted and introverted activity. Throwing a ball and catching, jumping on a
trampoline, or moving to music gives that child an experience of their body. And at the same
time it’s activity in action is creating life experiences at a cognitive and sensory level, creating
new neural pathways. Just by doing something in a structure or project, with or without a
- 20 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen
caregiver. Thus, the best caregiver support is attentive and observant to the opening, to
where the child is going to be able to channel communication with their self and body.
Key Conclusions, How Individual Vitality, With Emotional Appreciation of Experience from
Acting, Grows in Brain and Body of a Person With ASD, and How It May Benefit from Special
Care
This paper has examined the evidence for a nested hierarchy of human conscious experience
that exists at all stages of development of body and brain, and the special nature of autism
disorder which disrupts the efficient integration in neural centres of the primary Core Self,
and the development of coherence in communication of neural and motor effects reaching
between levels to enrich the consciousness of the top level. We identified the need in each
person, child or adult, for intra-personal communication to be supported and strengthened
as the Self-in-Relations of an intimate and structured social life. This is fundamental learning
for self-care and self-development.
By analysis of Pum’s personal experience and collaboration with her perspective and insights
of her experience of autism, we consider the benefits from two energetic and demanding
sensorimotor activities, swimming and collage, which she knows to be beneficial for the
integrative access between higher and core levels of her Self, and that she believes can be
made beneficial for individuals with autism.
We confirm that genuine inter-personal communication in parental care or professional
therapy can bring benefit only once the autistic individual is in touch with his or her Core Self,
and can source meaningful engagement with others from this place of assertion to move with
emotional appraisal. We identify means that caring persons can deploy to help the person
with autism become more complete, embodied and coherent, and to help them express their
individuality ready to share an integral meaning in life’s movements and what they discover.
Acknowledgement
- 21 -
Papaneophytou & Das (Eds.) Delafield-Butt, Dunbar, & Trevarthen