EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 1
Emotional Reactivity and Parenting in Families Experiencing Homelessness
Alyssa R. Palmer1, Rachel A. Foster1, Rebecca Distefano2, and Ann S. Masten1
1University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
2Teachers College, Columbia University
Author Note
Author for correspondence is Alyssa R Palmer, Institute of Child Development, University of
Minnesota, 51 East River Parkway, Minneapolis, MN 55455; E-mail: palme719@umn.edu
We thank the children and families who participated in the research as well as Dr. Daniel Berry
for his contribution to data collection and cleaning. This research was supported by a predoctoral
fellowship from the National Institute of Health (T32 MH015755 to ARP), the University of
Minnesota Interdisciplinary Fellowship (ARP), the Irving B. Harris Professorship in Child
Development (ASM), and the Institute of Child Development Graduate Student Small Grants
Program. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. None of the authors have any
conflicts of interest to declare.
EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 2
Abstract
Parents are key protective systems in the lives of children experiencing homelessness.
Evidence suggests that parent emotional reactivity, expression, and regulation play a critical role
in promoting adaptive parenting behaviors. Studies of emotional reactivity in parents utilize
different methods, including self-report, observations, and physiological measures. However,
these methods are rarely evaluated together, particularly among disadvantaged families. The
present study examined how subjective (i.e., self-report), observed, and physiological measures
of parent emotional reactivity relate to each other and to observed parenting behaviors in parent-
child interaction tasks comprised of problem-solving and teaching tasks. Participants included
fifty 4- to 7-year-old children and their caregivers staying in an emergency homeless shelter.
Observed and subjective emotional reactivity were largely uncorrelated, except in the case of
positive emotions during problem-solving tasks. Adaptive parenting behavior was related to
lower scores on measures of subjective and observed negative emotions and higher observed
scores for positive emotions during problem-solving tasks, as well as higher observed scores of
positive emotions during teaching tasks. Physiological reactivity was not related to parenting
behaviors. Results suggest that associations of emotional reactivity with parenting behavior
depend on the context of the parent-child interaction and how emotional reactivity is measured.
Keywords: Parenting; Emotion; RSA; Homelessness
EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 3
Emotional Reactivity and Parenting in Families Experiencing Homelessness
Families experiencing homelessness often encounter multiple adversities, including food
insecurity, residential instability, community violence, and stressful shelter conditions (Haskett
& Armstrong, 2019). Children experiencing homelessness are more likely to have problems in
academic achievement, mental health, and physical health (Bassuk et al., 2015; Masten et al.,
2015). However, adaptive parenting behaviors consistently predict child adjustment in the
context of homelessness (Cutuli & Herbers, 2014). In social information learning theory (e.g.,
Forgatch & Degarmo, 2005), the core components of adaptive parenting behaviors include skill
encouragement, positive involvement, and problem-solving skills, as well as less coercive
discipline. Skill encouragement is an ability to promote children’s skills through contingent
encouragement and scaffolding, and positive involvement includes behaviors like warmth,
empathy, and affection. Problem-solving refers to generating feasible solutions to interpersonal
conflicts, while coercive discipline highlights parental harsh/aversive behaviors. Among families
experiencing homelessness, adaptive parenting behaviors are linked to fewer externalizing and
internalizing symptoms in children (Labella et al., 2019; Palmer et al., 2020), as well as more
peer acceptance and better cognitive functioning (Labella et al., 2019; Narayan et al., 2014).
Unfortunately, the extensive adversity associated with homelessness is likely to influence
the functioning of parents as well as children (David et al., 2012; Perlman et al., 2012).
According to family stress theory, economic pressure places parents at increased risk for
emotional distress, which may undermine adaptive parenting behaviors (Conger & Donnellan,
2007). This stress may be particularly salient when families have recently sought out emergency
shelter. To foster positive development in children experiencing homelessness, it is important to
understand factors underlying adaptive parenting in this acutely stressful context.
EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 4
One factor that may be related to parenting in the context of homelessness is parent
emotional reactivity. Despite being in a highly strenuous housing situation, parents must manage
their emotional expressions and maintain effective child rearing practices (Gewirtz et al., 2009).
Labella et al. (2016) demonstrated that parents’ expressed negativity (e.g., hostility) during an
interview about their child was inversely related to child prosocial behavior. Despite endorsing
high levels of internal distress, parents still demonstrated adaptive parenting behaviors. These
results suggest that within the context of homelessness, children may benefit from parents’
ability to modulate the outward expression of their emotional reactions and provide sensitive
parenting. This also suggests that there may be differences in physiological and internal
experience of emotions compared to external emotional expression.
Adaptive parenting is not only related to lower expressed negative emotions (Niehaus et
al., 2019; Turpyn & Chaplin, 2016), but also the maintenance and enhancement of positive
emotions (Hajal et al., 2019; Julian et al., 2018). Unfortunately, negative and positive emotions
rarely are studied in tandem, nor always with parenting context in mind. The role of positive
emotional reactivity may be very different in a challenging parent-child interaction versus a play-
based teaching interaction (Stifter & Augustine, 2019). Interestingly, one study found that
incongruent positive affect (i.e., positive emotions during a negatively-valenced interaction) was
related to less sensitive parenting (Borelli et al., 2012). In the current study we evaluate the role
of positive and negative emotions across multiple parenting contexts.
Parents’ subjective emotional experiences may also differ from their physiological
reactivity. The polyvagal theory (Porges, 2007) posits that parasympathetic nervous system
functioning underlies emotional reactivity and regulation. Respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) is
used as a measure of parasympathetic nervous system activity. Higher resting RSA is related to
EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 5
adaptive emotional responses to environmental stimuli (Balzarotti et al., 2017) and adaptive
parenting behaviors (e.g. Zhang et al., 2017). Larger RSA withdrawal (i.e., RSA decreases from
baseline to task) during challenge tasks has been consistently related to better emotion regulation
and fewer displays of negative emotions (Balzarotti et al., 2017). For positively-valenced social
tasks, some evidence suggests that RSA augmentation (i.e., RSA increases from baseline to task)
may be more indicative of adaptive social behaviors (Kok & Fredrickson, 2010). Evaluating
what unique information is gained from different measurements of emotional reactivity across
contexts, is important to understanding the role of emotions in parenting.
We investigated the relations among three indicators of emotional reactivity across a
baseline task and two types of parent-child interaction tasks typically used to rate adaptive
parenting behaviors (e.g. Forgatch & Degarmo, 1999). This included two problem-solving tasks
where dyads addressed a family conflict and three game-like and play-based teaching tasks. We
first evaluated whether the different tasks yielded different levels of subjective and observed
positive and negative emotion as well as RSA reactivity. We hypothesized that problem-solving
tasks would be more negatively valenced than teaching tasks (due to the play-based nature of the
teaching tasks). Both tasks were expected to elicit more positive and negative emotional
reactivity than the baseline task. Additionally, we hypothesized that, parents would engage in
RSA withdrawal to the problem-solving tasks (representing a need for physiological regulation)
and RSA augmentation during the teaching task (representing positive social engagement).
Our second aim was to evaluate whether positive and negative emotion scores across
problem-solving and teaching tasks would differentially predict observed parenting behaviors.
We hypothesized that lower observed and subjective negative emotions scores across all tasks
would be related to more adaptive parenting behaviors. We also predicted that lower observed
EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 6
and subjective negative emotion scores as well as RSA withdrawal during the problem-solving
tasks would be more strongly associated with a higher score on adaptive parenting behaviors
compared to negative emotion scores and RSA augmentation during the teaching tasks. We
expected that problem-solving tasks would be more likely to elicit negative emotions compared
to teaching tasks and larger displays of negative emotions would be more likely to interfere with
the goal of collectively solving a problem. Positive emotion scores were expected to have a
larger positive effect on parenting behaviors during teaching tasks than during problem-solving
tasks. Positive emotion was expected to be more common in the teaching task context and
congruent with the goals of the teaching task compared to incongruent displays of positive affect
in the problem-solving tasks. A third exploratory aim was to test whether the three distinct
indicators of emotional reactivity (subjective, observed, and physiological) related to each other
and uniquely predicted parenting behaviors in the context of homelessness.
Method
Families with a 4- to 7-year-old child were recruited from an urban emergency homeless
shelter in a Midwestern U.S. city in 2017. Family eligibility criteria included (1) at least a three
day stay in the shelter, (2) a sufficient understanding of English, and (3) no known
developmental delay that would impede participation. This pilot study was a part of a larger
study of families with data collected across two study sessions approximately one week apart
that included 50 families who completed both visits. Of the 114 eligible families residing in the
shelter during the recruitment period, 58 families participated in the study. The other 56 eligible
families never learned of the study, were unavailable, or were not interested. All study
procedures were approved by the (BLINDED) Institutional Review Board. Parents completed
consent and children gave verbal assent. Study sessions took place in private research rooms
EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 7
located inside the emergency shelter. Trained examiners administered the parent measures in a
separate room and read aloud all questions and instructions to alleviate concerns about literacy.
During the first session, parents completed a family information questionnaire, which
included questions about family demographics and background. Caregivers were primarily
biological mothers (84%), identified as Black (60%), and were 21–62 years old (M = 32.50; SD
= 9.29). 15 parents did not finish high school, 16 had a high school diploma or equivalent, and
19 had post-secondary education or training. Children were 5.4 years old on average (SD = 0.7),
and 42% female. All other measures were administered during the families’ second visit.
During the second visit, parents wore a heart rate monitor (FirstBeat BodyGuard2) to
capture RSA across two baseline tasks and parent-child interaction tasks. To capture resting
RSA, parents spent five minutes quietly watching a video of nature photos. While in separate
rooms, both the parent and child identified a challenging family conflict. Dyads then reunited
and completed the interaction tasks. First, they participated in a five-minute active talking
baseline task where the parent and child took turns describing pictures in a storybook. Parents
were asked to turn the pages and point to pictures in the book to account for the effects of seated
movement on RSA. Next, the dyad completed a 25-minute set of standardized Family Interaction
Tasks (FITs) including two problem-solving discussions based on the distressing conflict they
chose (attempting to solve one family problem picked by the caregiver and one picked by the
child) and three teaching-oriented games (a guessing game, a marble labyrinth game, and
tangram puzzles; see DeGarmo et al., 2004 and Gewirtz et al., 2009).
Parents rated their own emotions (happy, excited, frustrated, angry, and sad) after the
talking baseline, the two problem-solving discussions and the three teaching games. The
examiner presented the parent with a card representing the target emotion and a 5-point scale
EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 8
from 1 (not at all) to (very). Prior to the interaction tasks, the parent examiner had shown the
cards to the parent and instructed them to only point to the number so that the child would not
know how the parent was feeling during the dyadic tasks. Across the assessment points, ratings
for happy and excited were averaged for one subjective positive emotion score (α = 0.76 to 0.82)
and ratings for frustrated, angry, and sad were averaged for one subjective negative emotion
score (α = 0.64 to 0.82).
Inter-beat interval (IBI) data were sampled at 1000 Hz with the FirstBeat BodyGuard 2
device. Research assistants who are reliable with Porges’ gold standard (Brain Body Center,
University of Illinois at Chicago) used CardioEdit to hand-edited aberrant IBI values. Cleaners
adjusted IBI values that indicated a missed R-peak, a miss-labeled R-peak, or movement
artifacts. Those values were replaced by an imputed IBI value based on IBI values surrounding
the mis-identified beat. No more than fifteen percent of any file was corrected, with the majority
of files requiring no editing. Fifteen percent of the IBI files were double-edited for reliability.
RSA values were estimated using 0.14–0.40 Hz frequency band, representative of normative
adult respiration using CardioBatch software (Brain Body Center, University of Illinois at
Chicago). RSA means per parent per task were averaged across the two problem-solving
discussions (r = 0.95, p < .001) and three teaching tasks, respectively (r = 0.92 – 0.97, p < .001).
Physiological reactivity was calculated as the difference between the talking baseline average
RSA and the average RSA from each set of interaction tasks. A positive value indicates RSA
augmentation and a negative value indicates RSA withdrawal to the task. The larger the negative
number, the more withdrawal or physiological regulation that is occurring during that task.
Two coders rated the parents’ observed emotions and parenting behaviors. Twenty
percent of videos were coded by both coders to determine reliability (ICC: .87–.94). Parents’
EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 9
emotions were rated on a 6-point scale from 0 (never) to 5 (always) on displays of negative and
positive emotions after each problem-solving task and at the end of the teaching tasks. Three
indicators (e.g., “seemed sad, blue, depressed”) were averaged for one observed negative
emotion score (α = 0.60 to 0.66) and the single indicator of positive emotion (“seemed
cheerful/pleasant”) was used as the observed positive emotion score for each set of tasks.
Our observed measure of adaptive parenting behaviors was based on the Parent
Management Training Oregon FITs coding scheme (DeGarmo et al., 2004) and adjusted for
families experiencing homelessness to be more contextually and culturally sensitive (Forgatch et
al., 2010). Parents were rated on a series of behaviors that indicated their positive involvement,
problem-solving, inept coercive discipline (reverse-coded), and skill encouragement across all of
the interaction tasks. These subscales were standardized and composited for one observed
adaptive parenting score (Palmer, 2018).
Missingness ranged from 12% (subjective emotion ratings) to 26% (RSA during
problem-solving tasks). Under the assumption that data are missing at random (MAR; Little et
al., 2016), we used multiple imputation with the R program MICE to generate unbiased
parameter estimates across 20 data sets using fully conditional specifications (R Core Team,
2020; van Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011). Missing RSA reactivity scores were
addressed using passive imputation, which retains the relation between baseline RSA and
interaction task RSA in the imputation model. The 20 imputed datasets were pooled using
Rubin's rules which incorporate both within and between imputation variability (Rubin, 2004;
Schafer & Graham, 2002). In the subsequent analyses we used the imputed data, although the
pattern of the results was similar using listwise deletion.
Results
EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 10
First, we conducted a series of t-tests between the baseline, problem-solving, and
task, parents reported higher subjective negative emotion scores during problem-solving tasks
and higher subjective positive emotion scores during teaching tasks. Parents also had higher
scores on observed positive emotion during teaching tasks compared to problem-solving tasks.
Descriptive analyses suggest that observed and subjective emotional reactivity scores
were largely uncorrelated with each other within task, except for measures of positive emotions
is important to note that there was less variability in negative emotion reactivity scores compared
To further address the second and third aims, multiple linear regression was used to
evaluate how different indicators of emotional reactivity during the problem-solving tasks and
subjective and observed negative emotion scores during the problem-solving tasks were related
to a higher adaptive parenting score. Higher observed positive emotion scores during the
problem-solving task were related to higher adaptive parenting score. Only higher observed
positive emotions during the teaching tasks were positively related to adaptive parenting.
Overall, results indicate that observed emotions were associated with observed ratings of
adaptive parenting, even after controlling for subjective emotions. Physiological reactivity was
unrelated to adaptive parenting scores.
Discussion
The current study adds to research on the antecedents of adaptive parenting in the context
of homelessness. Results generally support the hypothesis that emotional reactivity is associated
EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 11
with adaptive parenting behaviors among parents experiencing homelessness. Given the pivotal
role that parenting plays in supporting child adaptation in this context (e.g. Cutuli & Herbers,
2014), these findings suggest that increasing parents’ expressed positive emotions and decreasing
negative emotional reactivity may bolster a critical resilience factor for young children.
The first aim of this study was to identify differences in emotional reactivity across tasks.
Parent interaction tasks elicited more negative and positive emotions compared to a structured
baseline interaction. Further, the teaching tasks tended to have higher positive emotion scores
than the problem-solving tasks, suggesting that the teaching context may elicit more positive
emotions. Future studies may benefit from including more exclusively positive tasks such as
planning a fun activity or free play. Additionally, the problem-solving task had higher ratings of
subjective negative emotions compared to baseline, but there were no differences in negative
emotion between the problem-solving and teaching tasks. However, it is important to note that
subjective and observed negative emotions were not frequently endorsed across tasks. It is
possible that these tasks were not as negatively eliciting given the children’s developmental stage
and ability to engaged in a problem-solving discussion. Finally, there were no differences in
physiological reactivity across the tasks.
The second aim of this study was to evaluate how various indicators of emotional
reactivity across different parent-child interactions independently predicted parenting behaviors.
Observed but not subjective positive emotions across tasks predicted higher adaptive parenting
scores. There was a larger effect of positive emotion during the teaching tasks compared to
positive emotion during the problem-solving tasks. Expressed positive emotions may facilitate
the engagement of more adaptive parenting behaviors in positively valenced parenting contexts
as well as more negatively valenced problem-solving discussions at this age. Positive emotional
EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 12
experiences can facilitate sensitive and responsive parenting behaviors in the moment and build a
stronger relationship between parents and children via increased parent interest, attention, and
intrinsic motivation to interact. Alternatively, the associations in this study could be conflated by
shared method variance because observed emotions and parenting behaviors were rated by the
same coders. Positive affect may influence how coders rate parenting behaviors, even if they are
not explicitly a part of the parenting rating scale. As a sensitivity test, we evaluated the
correlation from one coder’s emotion rating to the other’s parenting ratings on reliability videos
Within this small interrater reliability subsample, the association of positive emotion with
adaptive parenting appeared to not solely be attributable to bias or halo effects. Future studies
should critically evaluate the existence of such biases in observational rating systems.
Higher subjective and observed negative emotional reactivity scores during the problem-
solving tasks were related to lower adaptive parenting scores. However, negative emotional
reactivity scores during the teaching tasks were not related to adaptive parenting. These results
underscore the importance of considering which emotions are most salient for any given
interaction context. Future studies may benefit from studying these phenomena in more
emotionally-arousing contexts such as clean-up tasks or disciplinary interactions in comparison
to free play.
Although observed and subjective emotion scores showed similar relational patterns to
parenting behaviors, they had unique predictive variances, suggesting that they provide different
information about emotional processes in parenting. Subjective and observed emotions may be
separable constructs, representing differences in how a parent feels and their expression of those
feelings. However, contrary to expectations, once the effects of observed and subjective
EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 13
emotions were controlled, physiological reactivity (indexed by RSA, an internal physiological
indicator of emotional reactivity) was not related to parenting behaviors. Effects of RSA on
parenting behaviors could be small and may be mediated by the ultimate interpretation of
physiological responses based on a parent’s subjective emotional experience. Further, research
on dynamic patterns of physiological responding across task and parent-child RSA synchrony
suggests that ideal patterns of regulation may fluctuate moment-to-moment across a task. Parent-
child physiological synchrony may be a more salient biological predictor of adaptive parenting
behaviors than individual parent reactivity (e.g., Giuliano et al., 2015; Lunkenheimer et al.,
2017). Future work could analyze second-by-second RSA and emotion expression to inform how
dynamic emotional reactivity and physiological reactivity are related across parenting tasks.
A key strength of this study was including multiple indicators of emotional reactivity
within a set of standardized parenting tasks. It was particularly novel to include physiological
measures with families experiencing homelessness. Given that this pilot study yielded promising
results, future studies with more participants are warranted. This study was only powered to find
medium to large effects, and not powered to test for mediation. For example, it will be
particularly important to understand moderators, such as current levels of life stress and distress,
as well as the impact of system-level financial supports and psycho-social interventions on
parent emotional wellbeing. Additional research is needed to further examine the role of positive
and negative emotions in risk and resilience processes for parenting in the context of
homelessness and identify ways that emotional reactivity might be leveraged as an intervention
target to promote parenting behaviors and thereby child wellbeing.
EMOTIONAL REACTIVTY AND PARENTING 14