RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
Daily Stress Reactivity: The Unique Roles of Personality and Social Support
Aleksandra Kaurin, Aidan G.C. Wright, & Thomas W. Kamarck
University of Pittsburgh, Department of Psychology
We wish to thank Dr. Sheldon Cohen for critical comments on a prior draft of this
manuscript. Additional online material, the preregistration plan, and the analysis scripts
funded by the National Institute of Aging (R01 AG041778) The authors declare no conflicts of
interest.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Aleksandra Kaurin,
Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, 3rd Floor Sennott Square, 210 S. Bouquet
St., Pittsburgh, PA, 15260. E-Mail: kaurinaleksandra@gmail.com
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
Abstract
Background: The processes through which social support exerts its influence in daily
life are not well understood. Arguably, its salutary effects as an environmental variable might be
construed as shared effects of personality. Method: To test this possibility, we investigated the
unique and shared effects of personality and social support on daily stressor exposure (social
conflict, task strain) and on the within-person association of stressor exposure with perceived
stress. A community-sample of N=391 adults completed an ambulatory assessment protocol for
two 2-day periods with fixed hourly intervals spread across 16 hours. Results: Consistent with
our preregistered hypotheses, multilevel structural equation models returned that both,
personality and perceived social support, predicted daily stressor exposure and moderated
within-person effects of daily stressors on perceived stress. Contrary to our hypotheses, received
social support had no effect on daily stress processes. When extraversion, neuroticism, and social
support were added as joint predictors, neuroticism and extraversion were related to stressor
exposure, and further moderated the within-person link between stressor exposure and stress
experience, while perceived social support had an incremental beneficial effect on social conflict
exposure and stress appraisal. Conclusion: Social support does not increment the well-
established relationships between neuroticism or extraversion and stress reactivity.
Keywords: social support, ambulatory assessment, multilevel structural modeling, daily
stress reactivity
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
The idea that social support shapes individual behavior is rooted in Émile Durkheim’s
(1897) foundational work on suicides, which, he argued, are more prevalent among individuals
with fewer social ties. Interest in the relationship between social support and psychological
variables was revived by epidemiological studies in the 1970’s and 80’s, for instance by Cassel
(1976) and Cobb (1976), which proposed that social support serves as a buffer for stress
experiences. Ever since, the positive link between social support – generally denoting the
presence of caring others – and wellbeing has been demonstrated across a broad range of healthy
and ill populations (Cohen, Gottlieb, & Underwood, 2000; Cohen, Mermelstein, Kamarck, &
Hoberman, 1985; Rueger, Malecki, Pyun, Aycock, & Coyle, 2016) with studies showing larger
effect sizes for several aspects of social relationships than other established risk factors across
health outcomes (Holt-Lunstad, Smith, & Layton, 2010). The specific mechanisms or processes
through which social support exerts its influences in daily life, however, are not well understood.
In particular, the unique role of social support effects on health outcomes is clouded by
evidence that one’s social network likely entails complex associations among individual and
contextual variables (e.g., Feeney & Collins, 2015). Therefore, this study addresses the relative
contributions of individual differences in relevant personality traits and social support on daily
stress processes using an ecological momentary assessment (EMA) design.
Generally, social support refers to acts of resource provision, that are intended to help an
individual (Cohen, 2004). More specifically, it has been defined as interactions that lead
someone to “believe that he [SIC] is cared for and loved, esteemed, and a member of a network
of mutual obligations” (Cobb, 1976, p. 300). Social support represents a heterogeneous construct
(Cohen & Wills, 1985; Cohen, 2004; Gottlieb & Bergen, 2010) which can take a variety of forms
including belongingness, emotional, esteem, informational, and tangible support (Cohen &
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
Wills, 1985; Wills & Shinar, 2000). Conceptually, there is a crucial difference between the
perceived availability of social support and received support (e.g., Barrera, 1986). Perceived
social support describes a relatively stable belief that help will be accessible if needed (e.g.,
Lakey et al., 2010). Received social support, in contrast, refers to retrospective reports of
supportive acts that have actually been received. Although it is generally known that the
presence of caring relationships provides coping assistance, particularly at times when the
confluence of stressors outweighs individual regulatory abilities (e.g., Cohen, Gottlieb, &
Underwood, 2001), examining both types of support is important. Perceived and received social
support are interrelated. However, they represent distinct constructs, which demonstrate
differential relationships with mental health or related outcomes and are – at best – only
moderately associated with each other (Haber, Cohen, Lucas, & Baltes, 2007).
Stress is considered to be an important risk factor for a number of health problems (Adler
& Matthews, 1994). The relationship between social support and stress processes has been
concisely formalized in Cohen and Wills’ (1985) seminal work discussing the stress-buffering
effects of social support. The authors proposed two potential mechanisms via which social
support may protect individuals against the deleterious effects of stress and maintain or enhance
health and well-being in turn. First, social support may affect the way in which individuals
appraise stressors that they encounter in daily life (Cassel, 1976; Cobb, 1976; Cohen, 2004).
Second, the perceived availability of social support has been hypothesized to moderate the
impact of stress on an outcome (Cohen & Wills, 1985; Kawachi & Berkman, 2001). Both of
these mechanisms are proposed to be important pathways by which social support may be
associated with health (Cobb, 1976).
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
Empirically, perceptions of supportive relationships (i.e., perceived social support) have
been consistently linked to attenuated negative reactions to daily stressors (Eisenberger, Taylor,
Gable, Hilmert, & Lieberman, 2007; Ditzen & Heinrichs, 2014), have been shown to facilitate
emotional recovery from stressors (e.g., Bolger, Zuckerman, Kessler, 2000; Hawkley, Preacher,
Cacioppo, 2007), and have been shown to change stress appraisals (e.g., Pietromonaco &
Collins, 2017). Meaningful social connections have also been shown to serve a protective role in
reducing neural and physiological responses to pain and stress including heart rate, blood
pressure, and neuroendocrine responses (Montoya et al., 2004; Ozbay et al., 2007).
In contrast to perceived social support, received support has not been consistently
positively linked to mental health (e.g., Finch, Okun, Pool, & Ruehlman, 1999). In some cases,
received support has even been linked to poorer, instead of better mental health outcomes
(Bolger & Amarel, 2007; Bolger, Zuckerman, & Kessler, 2000; Gleason, Iida, Shrout, & Bolger,
2008). Related work suggests that support receipt may create feelings of obligation, threaten self-
esteem and the sense of self-efficacy, or evoke guilt, accounting for its deleterious impact
(Bolger & Amarel, 2007; Gleason, Iida, Bolger, & Shrout, 2003).
Lakey & Orehek (2011; see also Cohen & Wills, 1985) suggest that the association
between received social support and stress could be accounted for by the fact that individuals
who experience generally higher levels of stress also tend to generally receive higher amounts of
support, while also reporting worse mental health. More specifically, the authors put forward that
previous work has not sufficiently ruled out the possibility that main effects of social support
reflect recipient personality. Thus, interpretations of whether research findings reflect personality
or social processes primarily reflect the fact that social support may be viewed as a construct that
is either influenced by or shares substantial overlap with personality (Lakey & Drew, 1997;
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
Lakey, McCabe, Fisicaro, & Drew, 1996; Lutz & Lakey, 2001; Swickert, Rosentreter, Hittner, &
Mushrush, 2002; Swickert & Owens, 2010; see also Bergeman, Plomin, Pedersen, McClearn, &
Nesselroade (1990) for potential genetic influences on social support). Seeming benefits of
social support could, therefore, actually reflect individuals’ levels of basic traits, like
extraversion or neuroticism and consequences of reactive, evocative, or proactive processes
between individual differences and one’s supportive social environment (e.g., Pierce, Lakey,
Sarason, Sarason, & Joseph, 1997).
Individual differences may affect both exposure to as well as the response to stress (Liu
& Alloy, 2010). For instance, neuroticism, often denoted as emotional instability, has been
linked to the probability of experiencing distress, the evaluation of an event as taxing, the
likelihood of enacting certain coping strategies, and the success of these coping strategies (Grant
& Langan-Fox, 2007; Penley & Tomaka, 2002; Suls & Martin, 2005). Moreover, neuroticism
might adversely affect the quality of social relationships and increase the probability of exposure
to interpersonal stress (Branje, van Lieshout, van Aken, 2004; David & Suls, 1999; Hooker,
Frazier, & Monahan, 1994; Lara, Leader, & Klein, 1997; Suls & Martin 2005). Neuroticism has
also been linked to lower levels of perceived social support (Ayub, 2015; Branje et al.,
2004; Swickert et al., 2010). Findings from daily diary studies provide further evidence for the
link between neuroticism and the experience of more (interpersonal) stress, elevated levels of
stress intensity and reactivity (Bolger & Schilling, 1991; Howland, Armeli, Feinn, & Tennen,
2017; Mroczek & Almeida, 2004; Suls et al., 1998), as well as the habitual use of poorer coping
strategies in response to everyday stress. Neuroticism may facilitate the maintenance of current
stressors or the generation of future ones (Gunthert, Cohen & Armeli, 1999). Thus, individuals
who score high on neuroticism may report more daily stressors and – in turn – higher levels of
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
perceived stress, because of less perceived social support, or because they are quicker to appraise
a situation as stressful (Bolger & Zuckerman, 1995).
Extraversion, in contrast, relates to perceiving events as challenges rather than threats and
to positive appraisals of coping resources (Longua, DeHart, Tennen, & Armeli, 2009; Penley &
Tomaka, 2002; Vollrath, 2001). Also, as individuals high in extraversion are characterized by
sociability, it is likely that they will enjoy wider social networks and seek out more social
support than those lower in extraversion (e.g., Ashton, Lee, & Paunonen, 2002; Feiler &
Kleinbaum, 2015; Morelli, Leong, Carlson, Kullar, & Zaki, 2017; Morelli, Ong, Makati,
Jackson, & Zaki, 2017; Williams, Morelli, Ong, Zaki, 2018; see Baranczuk (2019) for a meta-
analysis). In daily diary studies, high levels of extraversion have been linked to fewer instances
of stress exposure, lower stress-reactivity, and positive appraisals of available coping resources
(Gunthert, Cohen, & Armeli, 1999; Suls & Martin, 2005). A study based on a community sample
of men found that those with relatively high levels of extraversion tended to engage more
frequently in emotion-focused coping strategies (e.g., venting of affect in response to daily
stressors; David & Suls, 1999). This overall pattern was mirrored by the additional observation
that more extraverted participants exhibited a tendency to engage their social networks in
response to daily stressors. A similar ambulatory assessment study in a sample of individuals
with Rheumatoid Arthritis – a condition associated with a multitude of daily stressors –
complements this set of findings by showing that individuals high in extraversion were more
likely to use adaptive coping strategies such as cognitive reframing in response to a daily stressor
and they were more likely to benefit from engaging in those strategies as well (Newth &
DeLongis, 2004).
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
Potentially, the daily stress-buffering effects of drawing support from one’s broader
social network can be accounted for by perceived and received social support, over and above
personality. Research on social support univocally suggests that those who perceive themselves
as having social support find negative events to be less aversive than those who perceive that
they have little or no support. For instance, in daily diary and longitudinal exploratory studies,
the within-person link between daily stressors and affect was stronger for people who perceived
themselves as having less social support (Caspi, Bolger, and Eckenrode, 1987; DeLongis,
Folkman, Lazarus, 1988; Nezlek & Allen, 2006). More specifically, Affleck, Tennen, Urrows,
and Higgins (1994) found that social support moderated one-day lagged relationships between
negative events and negative mood but not same-day relationships. The lagged relationship was
greater for people with less social support than for those with more support. This finding
resembles work by DeLongis, Folkman, and Lazarus (1988) suggesting that within-person same-
day relationships between mood and daily hassles are stronger for people who had less social
support than for those who had more support.
Global perceptions of support availability, as well as perceptions of support attempts
from close others, may be associated with the frequency of specific coping strategies, the
effectiveness of strategies employed (e.g., DeLongis & Holtzman, 2005; Heller, Swindle, &
Dusenbury, 1986), as well as health-related outcomes more generally (Bisconti, Bergeman, &
Boker, 2006; Cook, McElwain, & Bradley-Springer, 2016; Gerteis & Schwerdtfeger, 2016).
The Present Study. What is not entirely clear from existing research is whether
individual differences in personality relevant to social support, such as neuroticism and
extraversion, confer shared or unique effects in moderating within-person relationships between
daily events and stress appraisals. Because of the links between both perceived and received
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
social support with coping processes, the putative salutary effects of support as an environmental
variable might be construed as effects of individual differences in contextualized personality
processes. This study seeks to disentangle the effects of recipient traits from perceived and
received social support, thus clarifying the unique and shared salutary effects of personality and
social support on daily stress processes. Our study uses an ecological momentary assessment
(EMA) study design, with intensive and repeated assessments of stress appraisals in an
individual’s natural environment (Moskowitz et al., 2009; Trull & Ebner-Priemer, 2013; Wright
et al., 2019). There are three major methodological advantages specific to EMA designs. First,
collecting data in natural settings permits the examination of socio-affective processes as they
unfold in real-world contexts. This maximizes ecological validity and generalizability that are
limited in laboratory settings. Second, momentary measures have been shown to reduce bias and
systematic error associated with traditional retrospective self-reports (Trull & Ebner-Priemer,
2013). Third, the use of repeated assessments throughout the day allows us to capture within-
person variability with a temporal resolution that is not possible with alternative approaches.
Repeated assessments provide representative samples of everyday stressor exposure along with
episodic psychological responses that may accompany those events. In that regard, EMA
represents a unique approach toward harmonizing assessments of stress exposure and
susceptibility because it allows us to capture both constructs in a way that closely aligns with our
daily life experience. In sum, EMA permits to reliably model the dynamic interplay of
environmental triggers on stress processes as they unfold in real-world contexts.
Stress processes are ideal for studying the joint and distinctive impact of perceived and
received social support and personality on the contextualized processes that may underlie
individual differences in health and wellbeing (e.g., Wright, Aslinger, Bellamy, Edershile, &
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
Woods, 2019). Especially interpersonal conflicts have been found to have strong negative effects
on psychological well-being (Bolger, DeLongis, Kessler, & Schilling, 1989; Rook, 1992), and to
activate stress physiology (Kiecolt-Glaser & Newton, 2001).
Conventionally, stress is defined as a transactional process arising from existing or
perceived environmental demands that can be appraised as threatening or benevolent, depending
on the availability of coping resources to an individual (e.g., Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). As
outlined above, personality traits and social support both can influence any point of a coping
sequence such as exposure or response to stressors, as well as their within-person links across
time. Thus, stressful experiences during daily life that may evoke different responses as a
function of individual differences and/or social support are likely to be an important process
operating in health and wellbeing.
For this study, two types of events — social conflict and task strain — were selected as
key determinants of daily stress reactivity on the basis of their hypothesized associations stress-
induced sympathetic nervous-system responding (Manuck et al., 1991; Schnall et al., 1992).
The main objective of this study was to determine whether and how basic personality
traits (i.e., extraversion, neuroticism) and perceived or received forms of social support uniquely
relate to processes of perceived stress exposure and reactivity in daily life. As preregistered, we
hypothesized that social support and personality will have unique effects on (i) stressor exposure,
effect annotations).
Hypotheses
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
Perceived Stress Exposure. The first set of hypotheses examined the between-person
portion of our model, concerning effects of personality and social support on individual
differences in perceived stress.
Hypothesis 1a: Individual differences in perceived and received social support will be negatively
associated with ratings of daily life stressor occurrence and intensity (task demand
and social conflict) during daily life.
Hypothesis 1b: Levels of extraversion will be negatively, while levels of neuroticism will be
positively, associated with ratings of daily life stressor occurrence and intensity
Hypothesis 1c: When entering social support and personality variables simultaneously in one
model, all variables will uniquely contribute to daily life ratings of stressor
occurrence and intensity.
Amplified Stress Response. The second set of our preregistered hypotheses focused on the
moderating effects of personality and social support on the within-person association between
momentary stressors and perceived stress in daily life.
Hypothesis 2a: Low levels of perceived and received social support will amplify the within-
person association between reports of daily stressor and perceived stress.
Hypothesis 2b: Both high levels of extraversion and neuroticism will amplify the within-
person association between reported daily stressors and perceived stress.
Hypothesis 2c: When entering all variables in one model, each of these four predictors will
uniquely amplify the within-person association between reported daily stressors and perceived
stress.
To further control for the possibility of suppression effects, extraversion and neuroticism
will be first entered as predictors in separate models, before merging them into one
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
comprehensive model. The concept of a suppressor variable describes cases in which the
inclusion of a second predictor increases the predictive power of the first predictor by controlling
for criterion-irrelevant variance (Lynam, Hoyle, & Newman, 2006; Paulhus et al., 2004),
potentially revealing patterns of stress-specific and nonspecific components that likely operate in
tension with one another.
In a parallel set of analyses, we also operationalized momentary perceived stress as
momentary negative affect. This led to very similar patterns of results.
The output of all supplementary analyses can be found on the OSF (Tables S1-S7).
Method
Open Practices
consent form did not request permission for open sharing of the data, and therefore we are unable
to post the data online.
Procedures
All study procedures were approved by the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Review
Board (PRO13010074), and all participants were administered informed consent before
enrollment.
Potential subjects for SHINE (Study of Health and Interactions in the Natural
Environment) were recruited by the University Center for Social and Urban Research (UCSUR)
at the University of Pittsburgh, using targeted telephone recruitment methods. A telephone
interviewer contacted all respondents for purposes of study description and initial screening for
eligibility. If interested and eligible, the potential participant was scheduled for a study visit.
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
Eligible participants were middle aged (age 40-64) and in generally good health. Exclusion
criteria were based upon an effort to reduce major confounding medical and health-related
variables that might influence the measures of affect, health behavior, and cardiovascular,
metabolic, and inflammatory processes that were the focus of the study. Thus, individuals who
reported chronic illness, diabetes requiring medication, or recent cancer requiring treatment were
excluded, as were those with untreated high blood pressure (SBP > 180 or DBP > 110), or
neurological deficit. Furthermore, those taking psychotropic medications, or medications with
autonomic, HPA axis, inflammatory, or metabolic effects were excluded. Moreover, participants
were excluded if they reported health habit or life situations that may adversely affect
participation. These include excessive alcohol consumption (> 5 drinks >3 times per week),
recent recreational drug use, current shift work, current pregnancy, or less than an 8th grade
education. Subjects attended 4 laboratory visits: an informed consent and screening visit, a social
network assessment visit, an ambulatory monitoring training visit, and a debriefing visit. Primary
data collection occurred over the course of a 4-day period, between visits 3 and 4. Throughout
this period, electronic diary (ED) monitoring assessments were carried out, along with hourly
ambulatory blood pressure assessments and measures of salivary cortisol, collected six times
daily (data not relevant to this current report). During Visit 1, informed consent was
administered, followed by demographic and social network assessment. Visit 31, usually on
Monday, was devoted to training in ambulatory monitoring. Each subject was required to meet
demonstrated competence on use of equipment before being sent into the field for a
1 Training sessions began with a self-paced tutorial developed as part of our previous research. Each subject was
required to meet demonstrated competence on use of equipment the “shakedown” trial.
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
“shakedown” trial. Following brief telephone contact to troubleshoot any technical or operational
difficulties, ambulatory data collection began the next day (typically Tuesday)2.
For the duration of their ambulatory monitoring session – two two-day periods over the
course of one week –, participants were given a mobile phone (Nexus S) equipped with
programmed software previously designed to facilitate EMA assessment. Subjects were
instructed to use the ED throughout each monitoring day (approximately 16 hrs3) and they
completed questions administered by the ED at fixed hourly intervals4. Right before bedtime,
participants were prompted to complete an evening interview, to turn off the device, and to set a
set a wake-up alarm on the ED for the time of their choosing for the following morning. Upon
awakening, participants were asked to activate the device and to complete a morning interview.
Hourly interviews were prompted by the inflation of the ambulatory blood pressure device,
donned within 45 minutes of awakening. Additional physiological assessments were collected
during the monitoring period (cortisol and urinary catecholamines), but these were not relevant
to the analyses reported here. Participants were encouraged to respond immediately following
each prompt, but they were allowed to ‘delay’ responding, if necessary, if circumstances were
prohibitive (e.g., meeting or phone call). Responses that were completed 22 minutes or greater
following each cuff inflation were deemed invalid and were deleted.
2 To minimize any annoyance and/or frustration that may result from interacting with the electronic diary devices, all subjects
were appropriately trained on how to use the devices prior to being sent out into the field. Furthermore, during the entire
monitoring period while subjects were in the field, a research specialist was ready and available (by cell phone) to answer any
questions.
3 After an initial morning interview, participants were given an hour to shower and to don their equipment, resulting in a
maximum of 15 possible interviews per day (or 60 possible prompts over the course of the 4-day study, respectively).
4The present study drew data from a larger parent project, designed, in part, to explore the link between psychosocial factors and
acute cardiovascular responsiveness in daily life. In the context of the overarching goal of the parent study, ambulatory diary
measures of stressor exposure and adaptive reactivity were set to be synchronized with hourly cuff inflations of ambulatory blood
pressure. More specifically, blood pressure was assessed every 60 minutes throughout the day (which corresponded to
approximately 16 waking hours per participant). Immediately following each blood pressure measurement, participants were
prompted to complete a 2-minute electronic diary. This protocol has been applied in a number of previous studies (Kamarck et
al., 2018), and has been proven useful for the examination of episodic adjustments in hemodynamic activity that may accompany
ongoing stressor events.
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
At the end of the data collection period, subjects attended a morning lab visit (Visit 4),
for data download, to return their equipment, to complete a blood draw, to complete additional
questionnaires, to facilitate subject payment ($350 for completion) and to discuss the study5.
Sample
391 participants completed ambulatory assessment procedures. Due to errors in the
software used to administer questionnaires, 11 of these were missing social support data and 21
were missing personality data. Other than noted in our preregistration, this yielded a sample size
of 370 with complete data available for hypotheses involving the cross-level interaction between
momentary and trait measures. 61.4% of the sample was female (N=240), and 22.5% was
nonwhite, with a mean age of 52 years. The sample was generally well educated (~64% with
bachelor's or graduate degree). At the within-person level, this returned N=11275 momentary
observations of social stressors, and N=19165 momentary observations of task-related stressors,
with an average compliance rate of 71%.
Fewer observation numbers for social conflict compared to task demand result from our
effort for the social conflict variable to extract only responses pertaining to interactions reported
to be occurring at the time of or within the 10-minute period preceding the ED assessment. An
average of N=30 ambulatory monitoring observations (i.e., diary entries) per person were
available for analyses based on social stressors, and N=52 for analyses based on task-related
stressors.
Assessment of Personality and Social Support
measured with the NEO Five-Factor Inventory (Costa & McCrae, 2008).
5 Based upon their adherence to study procedures, 25 subjects agreed to undertake 1-3 days of additional data collection in order
to remain eligible to complete the study.
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
Perceived Social Support was assessed with the short form of the Interpersonal Support
Evaluation List (ISEL-12; Cohen, Mermelstein, Kamarck, & Hoberman, 1985). 12 items assess
the perceived availability of social support on a four-point scale ranging from “definitely false”
to “definitely true.” All items are summed to yield a total score (scores range 0-36) or four items
per subscale. The tangible subscale measures the perceived availability of material aid, the
appraisal subscale the perceived availability of someone to talk to about one's problems and the
belonging subscale the perceived availability of people one can seek companionship with.
Received Social Support was assessed using the Positive Social Exchanges subscale of
the Positive and Negative Social Exchanges (PANSE; Newsom et al., 2003) scale. Twelve items
assess the frequency with which positive social exchanges have occurred within the past month
within the following domains (three items per domain): emotional support, companionship,
instrumental support, and informational support.
Assessment of Momentary Stress Processes
Variables measured in EMA surveys were derived from a self-reported multi-item
electronic diary assessment tool, used for repeated real-time assessments. Participants completed
the diary on an hourly basis. The diary includes scales assessing current affect and stressor
exposures, including measures of task demand and social conflict. For each of the items,
participants respond using a 10-point scale (with the anchors NO! No no yes Yes YES!). As
preregistered, due to an error in our assessment software (inability to reliably detect the full
range of the scale), response options for each item were transformed to range from 1 to 9.
To assess task/work-related stressors, participants were asked to “Think about mental
and physical activity in the past 10 minutes.” The three-item task-demand scale (i.e., “Required
working hard?” “Required working fast?” and “Juggling several tasks at once?”) followed. These
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
items were derived from the Job Content Questionnaire (Karasek et al., 1985), a standard
instrument used for the assessment of job strain. Retest reliability and criterion validity for this
EMA-based scale has been previously described (Kamarck, Muldoon, Shiffman, Sutton-Tyrrell,
Gwaltney, 2004). During each hourly assessment, participants were also administered several
items inquiring about their most recent social interaction. Social conflict scores for these recent
interactions were assessed using a three-item scale (i.e., “Someone was insensitive to you?”
“Someone made you tense?” “Someone interfered with your efforts?”; e.g. Kamarck et al.,
2018). For both types of stressors, scores were averaged across items for each scale. Between-
and within-person reliabilities were calculated for these scales using McDonald’s omega (𝜔;
Zinbarg, Revelle, Yovel, & Li, 2005).
Momentary perceived stress was assessed with one item: “How feeling? Nervous /
Focal Preregistered Analyses
We used Mplus Version 8.3 (2019) to estimate multi-level structural equation models
observed variables of stressors and stress response was broken down into within- and between-
person latent variables using latent decomposition. This is analogous to the partitioning of
variance that occurs with the outcome variable in standard multilevel modeling, however in
MSEM it is conducted for both outcomes and predictors that are observed at Level 1 (i.e.,
variables that have both within and between-person variance). The between-person variables
(i.e., Level 2) are an estimate of an individual’s average (i.e., random intercepts), and the within-
person variables (i.e., Level 1) reflect deviations from their average during a given repeated
assessment. Because all the modeled associations are among concurrently assessed variables and
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
not lagged, this means that the within-person associations reflect situation-to-situation dynamic
processes, but they do not directly establish temporal precedence.
We used the Bayes estimator. No prior information about parameter values was specified
(i.e., we used non-informative/diffuse priors that are the default in Mplus). Inferences were based
on point estimates drawn from their posterior distribution and associated 95% credibility
intervals. We considered coefficients in which the credibility interval did not include zero to be
significantly different from the null hypothesis.
To test our first set of hypotheses, we examined whether dispositional measures of
personality and perceived or received social support predicted individual differences in random
intercepts of task-related and social stressors. For analyses based on the second set of our
hypotheses, we examined whether individual differences in personality and social support
moderated the within-person association between reported daily stressors and perceived stress
(i.e., cross-level interaction). For tests of hypotheses 1a/b and 2a/b, extraversion, neuroticism and
social support were entered as separate predictors to the model, whereas for tests of hypotheses\
1c and 2c, all three sets of predictors were joined into one model.
In accordance with previous analyses based on this or similar datasets (Kamarck et al.,
2004; Kamarck et al., 2018), we used age, gender, race, and education as covariates at the
between-person level in all analyses. Race was coded using a dichotomous scale
(white/nonwhite) and education was designated with a 4-point scale (high school, some college
or associates, BA/BS, post-BA degree). Covariates were modeled only at the between-person
level. To control for the effects of each, random slopes and intercepts were regressed on
covariates. Preregistered syntaxes of our analyses can be found on the OSF.
Supplementary Analyses
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
To harness the full potential of the dataset, we further carried out a series of
models, perceived and received social support were conceptualized as broad overarching
constructs. However, because social support is a heterogeneous construct (Cohen & Wills, 1985;
Gottlieb & Bergen, 2010) its distinct elements may be obscured by the use of an overall score.
Therefore, we also pre-registered exploratory analyses examining the moderating role of social
support on stress reactivity based on each of the available subscales of perceived and received
social support (see below for a detailed overview of subscales). The results of those analyses can
discussion of this article.
Finally, for both sets of hypotheses, further exploratory analyses were carried out,
examining the contribution of agreeableness, conscientiousness, and openness to the probability
of individuals reporting a stressor in daily life and the efficacy of self-regulatory success after
experiencing stress in daily life (OSF: Tables S11-S12).
Results
Preliminary Analysis
To validate our momentary models of stress reactivity, we regressed ratings of
momentary perceived stress on each of the stressor perception domains separately at Level 1 (see
analyses were described in our preregistration and outputs for all reported models can be found
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
Our analysis returned a significant effect of task demand at the within-person level
(b =.23, CI= .18; .26) and at the between-person level (b = .39, CI= .28, .48). The results for
models including social conflict as predictor variable were b = .31 (CI= .29; .34) at the within-
and b = .65, (CI= .59; .71) at the between-person level, respectively. This pattern of associations
and variability supports the validity of our measures’ ability to reflect momentary stress
elevation in response to work- and interpersonally related stressors.
An overview of zero-order correlation coefficients can be found at the OSF
Perceived Stress Exposure
All analyses were carried out in the context of the four demographic covariates specified
above and the detailed output is available at the OSF.
social support (H1a) and personality traits (H1b) on the probability of experiencing a stressor in
daily life, we ran separate simple prediction models. These models returned significant positive
effects of extraversion on the amount of reported work-related stressors (b=.09, CI: .01; .16), and
significant positive effects of neuroticism (b=.23, CI: .16; .31) and negative effects of perceived
social support (b=-.16, CI: -.23; -.08) on social conflict exposure. Received social support, in
contrast to our prediction (H1a), had no effect on the perceived exposure to stressors.
unique predictive validity of each variable in a combined prediction model elucidated that
neuroticism (b=.12, CI: .05; .20) and extraversion (b=.11, CI: .03; .18) incrementally added to
the explanation of variance in task demand, while neuroticism (b=.20, CI: .12; .26) and
perceived social support (b=-.10, CI: -.18; -.02) incrementally added to the explanation of
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
variance of social conflicts to emerge in daily life. Except for extraversion, each of these
variables was associated in the preregistered direction across stressor domains.
Amplified stress reactivity
In the context of hypotheses 2a and b, we tested the moderating value of dispositional
measures on within-person associations between reported daily stressors and perceived stress
(i.e., cross-level interaction). Coefficients emerging from the “® Reactivity” path of our models
respectively).
In line with hypothesis 2a, we found that perceived social support dampened the link
between daily social conflicts or task demand and perceived stress (b=-.13, CI: -.20; -.04).
Received social support, however, had no effect on stress reactivity. In line with hypothesis 2b,
neuroticism enhanced the link between both types of daily stressors and perceived stress (b=.19,
CI: .09; .27; b=.12, CI: .02; .20), while the predicted effect for extraversion did not emerge.
Hypothesis 2c predicted that personality and social support would uniquely amplify the
within-person association between reported daily stressors and perceived stress. In contrast to
our hypothesis, when entering all predictors concurrently into one model, only neuroticism
emerged as significant moderator of stress reactivity, and only so in the context of daily work-
Discussion
A seldom-tested explanation for the effectiveness of perceived social support in
ameliorating the detrimental effects of stress is that it may be attributable to relevant personality
characteristics. In this preregistered study, we tested the extent to which daily stress-buffering
effects of drawing support from one’s broader social network can be accounted for by perceived
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
and received social support, over and above neuroticism and extraversion, two traits that share
substantial overlap with processes of social support. Our study illustrates that perceived social
support has a protective effect on the probability of experiencing a stressor in daily life
(Hypothesis 1a), even after controlling for traits that are closely related to social support
(Hypothesis 1c). Neuroticism (Hypothesis 1b) was related to an increased level of overall
stressor exposure, and extraversion to more frequent reports of work-related stressors. As
expected, perceived social support (Hypothesis 2a) and personality (Hypothesis 2a) moderated
relationships between stressor exposure and experienced stress. In contrast to our hypotheses, the
ability of perceived social support to buffer reactivity to stressful experiences, however,
disappeared after controlling for personality (Hypothesis 2c). Received social support neither had
an effect on stressor exposure (Hypothesis 1a), nor stress reactivity (Hypothesis 2a).
Overall, our results are in line with previous work suggesting that personality, and
neuroticism in particular, reflects greater reactivity of negative affect to unpleasant events and
stressors (Bolger & Schilling, 1991; Longua, DeHart, Tennen, & Armeli, 2009; Maples, Miller,
Hoffman, & Johnson, 2014). To some degree, this overall picture contrasts with previous work
by Cohen et al. (2015), reporting that perceptions of social support and the frequency of being
hugged or experiencing interpersonal tension were not influenced by relevant personality
characteristics (i.e., extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism), although all traits that have
been associated with social interaction styles. It is possible that our findings deviate from those
reported in Cohen et al. (2015) because the outcomes were differentially indicative of social
support and personality across both studies. As Cohen et al. (2015) put forward, hugging may
represent a behavioral indicator of social support, whereas the main outcome in our study (i.e.,
the within-person link between stressor and stress response) could be viewed to reflect the
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
momentary regulation of trait indicative behavior (Fleeson, 2012; Wright, 2011, 2014), thus
diminishing the predictive validity of perceived social support after controlling for neuroticism
or extraversion.
Alternatively, it is also possible that, even though social support may be mobilized
instantaneously, the positive effects of such support are likely experienced with some temporal
distance. Thus, although supportive relationships may not guard against the immediate adverse
effects of stressful daily events, they may guard against negative long-term health effects of daily
stress experiences (Caspi et al., 1987).
Partially aligning with this explanation are findings regarding our first set of hypotheses.
Although the pattern of our results replicates previous evidence illustrating that neuroticism
increases the probability of exposure to stressors – and levels of perceived stress in turn – more
generally (e.g., Suls & Martin, 2005), it also adds to this well-established relationship. The
incremental effect of perceived social support on the likelihood of reporting an interpersonal
stressor in daily life may potentially mirror the notion that the occurrence of stressful events
likely propel individuals with highly supportive social networks into positive social encounters,
and thus decrease the probability of detrimental health effects in the long run (e.g., Caspi et al.,
1987; Cutrona, 1986; Nezlek & Allen, 2006).
The findings presented here are based on a design with a notable ability to approximate
real-world daily stress processes: We assessed stress reactivity of individuals hourly in their
daily lives across two two-day periods over the course of a week (i.e., 4 days total) in a
community sample, combining the twin benefits of increased ecological validity and minimized
retrospective biases. Although the general picture emerging from this set of analyses is that the
seeming benefits of social support on daily stress reactivity could be viewed as reflections of
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
individuals’ basic trait levels and consequences thereof (e.g., Pierce et al., 1997), some aspects
deserve further discussion.
It is important to note that our sample was relatively well-educated and predominantly
white which may limit the generalizability of our results to other groups.
Moreover, because EMA encompasses a methodological approach that is characterized
by complex sampling procedures and data analytic choices, each individual study’s specifics
may introduce a new source of variance or capture different aspects of the hypothesized
processes. Thus, this circumstance may complicate the comparability of results across seemingly
very similar studies. To illustrate, a recently published study found no evidence for neuroticism
moderating the within-person link between negative affect and daily stressors (Mey et al., 2020).
This contradicts the the findings reported in our study, as well as the majority of studies
revealing an impact of neuroticism on stress reactivity following daily hassles (e.g., Bolger &
Schilling, 1991; Marco & Suls, 1993; Mroczek & Almeida, 2004; Suls et al., 1998). However,
Mey et al. (2020) used a small sample (N=70), employed a brief measure of affect valence with
two uncommonly used items (i.e., discontent, unwell), and had relatively long temporal periods
covered by each prompt. Thus, it is possible that any number of these choices could have
impacted their findings. Future studies should, therefore, systematically evaluate alternative
methodological decisions including selection of affect items and timing of assessments.
Because it can be argued that self-reported measures of social support and personality
reflect a blend of social and intraindividual differences (e.g., Lakey & Orehek, 2011), we ran a
supplementary set of analyses to control for the possibility of plausible suppression effects. A
those models, extraversion and neuroticism were first entered as predictors in separate models
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
social conflicts per se, a moderating effect of social conflict reactivity arose when we controlled
for perceived and received social support. This suggests that adjusting for social support
variables may reveal the predictive power of extraversion, by bringing into clearer focus
elements that are inherent — but largely hidden —in the overall score of extraversion (e.g.,
Watson, Clark, Chmielewski, & Kotov, 2013).
The idea of overlapping variance in constructs of interest is also relevant for study design
considerations that aim at the disentanglement of effects emerging from the support recipients’
traits vs. effects that stem from interpersonal influences. The fact that all measures in our study
were assessed via self-report may hamper the ability of our design to sufficiently distinguish
between these effects in daily life, because a correlation between a self-reported measure of
perceived support and stress processes likely reflects large amounts of the traits themselves. If
respondents make judgments of their social ties, by guessing average supportiveness across
different providers, then, according to reliability theory (Cronbach et al., 1972), general
measures of perceived support compound recipient trait variance by averaging out effects due to
providers (Lakey & Orehek, 2011). As Lakey & Orehek (2011) suggest, future studies should,
therefore, ask respondents to rate a single, most important support provider. That way the
magnitude of recipient influences is not overestimated by averaging across multiple providers
and the magnitude of the confound is reasonably low. Alternatively, future work may also
employ informant reports of social support and test the effects reported in our study
systematically across a variety of different, yet related outcomes (e.g., health behaviors,
physiological processes).
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
To more specifically tackle the question of determinants of perceived benefits of social
support, future studies may also consider assessing interactive effects of personality and social
support on momentary stress processes. Because interaction effects require large sample sizes
(e.g., Rohrer & Arslan, 2020) and thoughtful consideration of the strength and form of the
effects, we suggest basing related analyses on carefully planned and (ideally) preregistered study
protocols, thus reducing potential threats to reliability and preventing the introduction of false-
positives into the literature.
Moreover, future work may also employ high-resolution studies with more in-depth
measurements of social support. This notion is built on more recent evidence, suggesting that the
conceptualization of social support as a static construct may conceal relevant features of social
support (Coppersmith et al., 2019). Capturing social support with a single assessment does not
take into account the volatile nature of perceived social support, which is known to fluctuate
even over short periods of time and relatively restricted scales.
Although aspects of method variance are key for future studies to carefully parse out
redundant variance between social support measures and those of closely related personality
variables, it may also be that an incremental effect of social support on daily stress processes
may be very small. Thus, it would require very large samples to detect it. Indeed, the effect of
neuroticism was large, making the detection of additional, likely smaller effects, more difficult to
emerge.
Our research points towards the crucial role of one’s supportive social environment to
increment effects of personality on daily stress processes. However, follow-up studies using a
more extensive longitudinal design across different methods, and a broader range of outcomes
are needed to corroborate our findings. Possibly, to the extent that an unhappy or sunny
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY
disposition itself affects a person’s location in the social structure, correlations between social
support and daily stress processes could reflect the effects, not the causes of stress regulation.
Therefore, not the provision of social support per se, but understanding personality profiles
associated with successful social relationships may aid in increasing social connectedness and
lower stress experience in the long run. This process needs careful study, combining daily
indicators of social interaction with measures of daily events and well-being. Our findings
provide limited evidence of incremental effects of social support and personality, yet a
mechanistic account that accommodates these nuanced results beckons further study.
RUNNING HEAD: PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL SUPPORT IN STRESS REACTIVITY