The Use of Audio-Visual Materials as Strategies to Enhance Speaking Skills among ESL
Young Learners
Keetha Kathirvel, Harwati Hashim
Faculty of Education, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Bangi, Malaysia.
Abstract
There are four main skills in English language namely listening, speaking, reading and writing
respectively. Speaking skills is considered the most essential skills as it helps the learners to
communicate with others effectively. Some of the factors that contributing to the low level of
speaking skills are lack of exposure, low confidence level, and high level of anxiety towards
English Language. Thus, these issues should be addressed in order to enhance ESL learners‟
st
speaking skills. In this 21 -century learning and teaching, various strategies involving ICT have
been invented by teachers to improve speaking skills among ESL learners. One of the strategies
is the use of audio-visual materials to enhance speaking skills. An audio-visual material is a
technology-based strategy that has gotten many positive results from the ESL learners.
Therefore, it is believed that this strategy would develop speaking skills among ESL learners.
Hence, this paper explains how audio-visual materials assist in improving speaking skills and the
benefits of using audio-visual materials.
Keywords
Learning Strategies, Audio-Visual Materials, ESL Learners, Speaking Skills
1. Introduction
Technology is ruling our world and doing many wonders in human life. Aligning with the
invasion of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, technologies are rapidly advancing in various
industries, and the educational field is not exempted from embedding technology in its
sector (Mudin, Eng, Rahman, Ibrahim, & Jopony, 2018: p. 3). Larsen-Freeman & Anderson
(2011) supported the idea that technology affords teaching materials and creates exciting learning
experience to the world of learners. Through the use of technology, learners can be motivated to
master all the four language skills (Yunus et al., 2010; Hashim, 2018; Mohamad et al., 2018; Rafiq
& Hashim, 2018; Hashim et al., 2018). According to Zaremba (2006), speaking appears to be the
most essential skill required for communication among four macro English skills. Therefore, it
needs to be given more important as it serves many purposes in everyone‟s life.
Supiyati (2011) stated that practically the use of audio-visual materials is one of the suitable
techniques in developing speaking skills of students. It has given many positive outcomes in
students‟ speaking skills. Harmer (2007) also states that if speakers want master to speak
effortlessly in English, they need to be able to correctly pronounce phonemes, use proper stress
and intonation patterns and speak in connected speech. For that, they need to see and hear
someone pronounce the phonemes correctly so that they can imitate it easily. In this case, audio-
visual materials have been a great facilitator in helping the learners.
In Malaysian Education System, a new curriculum which is Common European Framework of
Reference (CEFR) has been used since the year 2017. More attention has been given to speaking
skill whereas it is evaluated by teachers in daily teaching and learning session unlike in the
previous curriculum. Therefore, audio-visual materials are believed to support learners in
speaking. The following sections discuss the speaking skills among ELS learners, various related
research done using audio-visual materials and the potential affordances and the constraints of
the use of audio-visual materials among ESL learners.
2. Speaking Skills among ESL Learners
Speaking is a fundamental skill that needed to be acquired by language learners. It is very crucial
for communicating. Without it, it is very tough to survive in the world that full of evolving
technologies in which English is considered as the primary language to communicate. According
to Chaney & Burk (1998), speaking is “the process of building and sharing meaning in a variety
of contexts using verbal and nonverbal signs”. Whereas, Burns & Joyce (1997) have said that
speaking is an interactive process of building meaning that includes constructing and receiving
and processing information. O‟Malley & Chamot (1990: pp. 66-67) define speaking as an
example of a dynamic cognitive capacity that can be distinguished into many hierarchal sub-
skills, some of which might need controlled processing while others just automated processing.
According to Ur (1996), speaking is the most vital skill among four skills which are listening,
speaking, reading, and writing as a person who recognizes a language is called to as “speaker of
that language”. All in all, speaking skills is essential in expressing our thoughts, opinions, feelings
and messages to each other.
Looking into the Malaysian context, most ESL learners are not good in speaking due to little
exposure to the language, especially outside the classroom (Musa, Koo, & Azman, 2012).
Speaking skills has always been a skill that unnoticed by teachers because of the difficulty in
teaching it. It is supported by Hassan & Selamat (2002), who stated that teaching communicative
competences such as speaking and listening are often overlooked by Malaysian teachers. In fact,
according to Samad, Hussin, & Sulaiman (2015), they agreed that Malaysian public standardized
assessments only concentrate on reading and writing rather than listening and speaking. The
standardized examinations show that evaluation is very examination-oriented in the Malaysian
context, resulting in pupils becoming passive recipients in the classroom (Chan & Sidhu, 2010).
People tend to forget that we are living at a time when the capability to speak English effortlessly
has become an essential, particularly those who want to advance in certain areas of human
endeavor (Al-Sibai, 2004). However, equal importance has started to give to speaking skills same
as other skills after the implementation of a new curriculum, which is Common European
Framework of Reference (CEFR) since the year 2017. Therefore, a suitable approach and
teaching technique must be applied to improve the skill as Shaimaa (2006) stressed that speaking
ability remains a far-fetched target or an undefined subject believed to be impossible to achieve
by pupils like other skills.
3. Various Related Research Done Using Audio-Visual Materials and the Potential
Affordances
Audio-visual materials are one of the teaching and learning tools which have been used by
teachers to create a technology-based classroom. It helps both teacher and students in their
everyday teaching and learning process. There are many definitions have been provided by
scholars and writers about audio-visual materials as cited in Guterres & Quintas (2018). Kinder
S. James (2002) stated that audio-visual materials are any device which can turn the learning
experience more concrete, more realistic and more dynamic. According to Riri (2011), audio-
visual materials are recording tools for improving speaking skills that are used multiple times and
more than others. On the other hand, Francis (2011) defines the term audio-visual materials are
generally used to refer to those instructional materials which can be used to express meaning
without relying on verbal symbols or language. In short, audio-visual materials are an interactive
tool with the combination of text, image, sound and video.
Various related researches have been conducted using audio-visual materials among learners to
improve language learning. Many studies showed that they improve teaching capacity, free the
overworked classrooms and provide teachers with a practical approach to speaking skills
training (Umar, 2014). Similarly, an interesting study was conducted to get to know the
Pakistani‟s University students insightful on the use of audio-visual materials by Ghazala Kausar
(2013). The result of the study showed that they could learn effortlessly with the support of
audio-visual materials. They indicated that, by recalling the situation from when they had heard
or seen it, they would quickly remember new words. It receives support from Natoli (2011) who
emphasized that audio-visual materials are essential in teaching and learning processes because
“having seen something, most people recognize, for whatever it was, it creates an image with the
mere mention and can be freely spoken about.” Another research was conducted specifically on
improving speaking skills among second-grade students of Ensino Secundariu Cristal in the
school year 2017 using audio-visual materials by Charles Fatima Guterres (2018). The result of
the research revealed that audio-visual tool was the successful way, and it improves students‟
speaking skills. The researcher added that this method helped in encouraging the students to
develop their speaking ability as well.
A study by Albahiri & Alhaj (2020) was conducted to explore the elements in the stimulation of
speaking skills among second language learners. The focus of the study is mainly on the theories
related to technology-aided language lessons and media elements that encourage learners to
interact and communicate effectively. The researchers focused on YouTube as a source to
provide videos that will function as aids. A quasi-experimental research was conducted where 48
students from a higher learning institute in Saudi Arabia had been used as participants. The
research showed that the visual elements in videos played a very significant role in encouraging
second language learners to be more interested in interacting using the language. Specifically,
YouTube was found to be a very valuable source that provided a multitude of visual and audio
materials that aided meaningful interactions.
Besides, Yunus et al. (2018) conducted a study to investigate the use of authentic English video
clips among EFL students in Aceh, Indonesia. The study, which was a quasi-experimental study
used non-randomised groups to conduct the experiments. 68 students from a high school in
Banda Aceh took part in the study. For the experimental group, authentic video clips were used
in their lessons and for the controlled group, they used audio compact discs. The core idea of the
research was to further analyse the effectiveness of audio-only materials and audio-visual
materials. The researcher noted that, there were positive effects in both the groups as both
groups showed improvements. However, higher t-test result of the experimental group only
further affirmed that the use of videos was more effective compared to audio. This is crucial in
understanding how audio and visual both work hand in hand to create a more effective learning
environment in the language classroom.
Apart from that, Cakir (2006) said that everyone knew very well that audio-visual materials are a
great helper in stimulating and facilitating the foreign language learning process. According to
him, students show more interest in language class with the use of audio-visual materials as it
encourages them to stay focus, and they can relate their learning with their real life. He also
added that, recently, the use of video in English classes had overgrown because of the increasing
stress on communicative techniques. Moreover, Hariyanto (1995) in Ramendra & Ratminingsih
(2007) stated audio-visual materials are enticing tools for learners‟ eyes and ear that can be used
to help teachers to educate the students. Subartha (2012) shared the same view which she said
that films have a dominant influence on pupils as they appeal not only to the eyes and ears but
also to the emotions, which is the correct platform in building the right attitudes and habits.
Additionally, another researcher Madhuri (2013), emphasized that audio-visual materials are the
only methods which can help students in improving their speaking skills among other
techniques. He said audio-visual materials support the sound and sight in teaching by enabling
more than one sensory channel to promote student learning. Kausar (2013) in Thaseem &
Kareema (2017) presented that it is very important to use audio-visual materials for learning
English. It is because the students encounter many problems in mastering the English language
and feel it is hard to learn the English language without the help of any audio or visual materials.
It increases the amount of emotional input, the level and the productivity of verbal skills of a
person (Tarcan, 2004). Supporting the point of view of the uncountable advantages of audio-
visual materials, Umar (2014) claimed that the use of high-tech new technology as audio-visual
materials encourages the unwilling English learners to practice speaking regularly.
4. The Constraints of Using Audio-Visual Materials among ESL Learners
It has become ubiquitous nowadays to see technology-based classroom everywhere as it involves
a variety of language learning activities. It is a well-known truth that technology and interaction
of teaching and learning are inseparable, where teachers should choose suitable technologies for
their teaching-learning situations to aid their learners to learn well (Ismail, 2006). However, there
are few constraints of using it in the classroom by teachers. First and foremost, most teachers
find it time-consuming as they need to search for appropriate audio-visual materials that aligning
with the textbook content they are teaching. A research was carried out to investigate factors
affecting English as a Foreign Language teachers use of technological aids in the classroom in
Korea by Park & Son (2009). This study reports that it takes up teachers‟ time to find suitable
on-line EFL resources and integrate with textbooks in order to meet the levels and needs of
students.
Furthermore, in another study which was conducted by Maniruzzaman & Rahman (2008) had
suggested few things on the use of audio aids in the EFL class at the tertiary level in Bangladesh.
They said that insufficient of teacher training, inefficiency of audio tools and material, and the
administrative indifference hinder the use of audio aids in the EFL class. They further added that
foreign language learners show passiveness or disappointment with EFL course materials when
they find it unfamiliar, hard, tricky, mechanical and unappealing. Besides, Jadal (2011) conducted
a study at primary Level in Z.P Primary Schools of Solapur District, India on the effectiveness of
the audio-visual aids in teaching and learning of English. Findings of the study recommend that
many English teachers were found incompetent to use audio-visual and materials. These teachers
were not entirely conscious of the countless projected aids to be used in the classroom.
Adding to that, Dias (1999) argue that to make technology essential to their teaching, language
teachers and their administrators must aware common obstacles to technology integration and
be ready for the changes caused by the integration of technology. According to Dias, the ultimate
task for EFL teachers is using technology to bring innovative learning opportunities for students.
Thus, looking into all the constraints above, teachers have to be prepared and ready to overcome
all the challenges that they might encounter with the use of audio-visual materials to provide
effective teaching to the students.
5. Pedagogical Implications
The affordances of audio-visual materials in enhancing speaking skills has overtaken the
constraints as discussed above. It can be seen clearly that the use of audio-visual materials helps
students in improving their speaking skills. They can see and hear the words which could help
them to remember better when speaking. They can pronounce it correctly as they already hear
the correct pronunciation from the audio before they talk. It indirectly would boost their
confidence level in speaking, and they can overcome their shyness as well. Apart from that, it
st
helps in creating 21 -century learning where more emphasis is given on the use of ICT. Learners
will feel motivated to learn as most of the learners are technology savvy nowadays.
However, teachers should take into consideration the listed constraints above to aid the students
in speaking. In this case, the help of other parties, such as school administration is very crucial.
School administration should make sure the classrooms are well equipped with internet
connection and technologies for the teachers to use audio-visual materials without any troubles,
especially in rural areas. Pupils from rural areas should not be neglected as they have equal rights
in experiencing the learning process the same as other students. Thus, the school administration
must take necessary steps to overcome these problems such as by providing downloaded audio-
visual materials which are not required internet connection during the teaching and learning
process. The teachers can use it anytime without the need of internet connection which would
lessen the burden of teachers in finding audio-visual materials.
Besides, the teachers should be given enough training on the use of technology in teaching and
learning to make it exciting and interactive. It is crucial to create awareness among teachers on
the use of audio-visual materials. It is also would help to break the traditional method of teaching
by some of the teachers who do not bother in integrating technologies in their daily teaching and
learning. Courses and training would be an eye-opener for them to change the way they are
st
teaching based on 21 -century learning environment. Apart from that, choosing the right audio-
visual materials are essential as well to suit the students‟ level and the content that they are going
to teach. For that, teachers can collaborate with their colleagues to choose the best materials for
the students.
Moreover, most ESL teachers tend to ignore the significance of using audio in their classroom,
where more attention is given to the video. They did not focus on the pronunciation and the
words used by the speaker in the audio to improve the students‟ speaking skills. The teachers
choose a video with eye-catching visuals for learners to attract them rather than focusing on the
pronunciation as well as the vocabularies used in the video. It is established in recent studies on
technology integration into teacher education curricula that the video has received growing
attention (Ozkan, 2002: p. 1). More researches have done as well on the use of video compared
to audio in language teaching.
In a nutshell, the audio-visual materials have the power to turn a dull classroom into a fun and
interactive atmosphere. Ranasinghe & Leisher (2009) point out that technology can never
substitute the human mind, but it can help to develop it. Thus, the effective use of audio-visual
materials can produce a right user of the second language without a doubt.
6. Conclusion
st
As we all aware, our education system is emphasizing to create 21 -century learning aligning with
the aim of our National Philosophy of Malaysian Education (NPME) which is to produce a
holistic individual through the implementation of 21st-century learning (Ministry of Education,
2015: pp. 1-10). In line with that, audio-visual materials have been contributing a lot to both
teachers and students in language learning, especially in improving speaking skills as stated
above. It creates an interactive, fun and most importantly, effective education to students.
Moreover, with this COVID-19 outbreak which has been declared as pandemic many countries
have opted to online learning. Malaysia too has started this online learning after the
implementation of Movement Control Order (MCO) which required the closing of all
educational institutions. Thus, audio-visual materials have become a great helper for teachers to
teach students from home and for students to understand the lesson better. For further research,
it is recommended to do more research on the use of audio-visual materials in enhancing
speaking skills to give more insight to teachers since most ESL learners have problems in
speaking skills. For example, teaching and learning activities that can be done through this
method, the criteria to be considered when selecting audio-visual materials could be given more
focus for the upcoming research.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia under the Research Grant
number (i) KRA-2018-044 and (ii) GGPM-2019-037 for supporting this project.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of this paper.