Smart Distance Lab’s art fair, experimental data on
social distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic
1,* 1 1 1
Charlotte C. Tanis , Nina M. Leach , Sandra J. Geiger , Floor H. Nauta , Fabian
1 1,2 1 3 3
Dablander , Frenk van Harreveld , Sanne de Wit , Gerard Kanters , Jop Knoppers ,
3 4 4 5
Diederik A. W. Markus , Rick R. M. Bouten , Quinten H. Oostvogel , Meier J. Boersma ,
5 1 1,*
Maya V. van der Steenhoven , Denny Borsboom , and Tessa F. Blanken
University of Amsterdam, Department of Psychology, Amsterdam, 1018 WS, the Netherlands
National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, 3721 MA, the Netherlands
Centillien B.V., Mierlo, 5731 SG, the Netherlands
Focus Technologies B.V., Eindhoven, 5657 EW, the Netherlands
Smart Distance Lab, Leiderdorp, 2353 NM, the Netherlands
corresponding authors: Charlotte C. Tanis (c.c.tanis@uva.nl) and Tessa F. Blanken (t.f.blanken@uva.nl)
ABSTRACT
In the absence of a vaccine, social distancing behaviour is pivotal to mitigate COVID-19 virus spread. In this large-scale
behavioural experiment, we gathered data during Smart Distance Lab: The Art Fair (n = 839) between August 28 and 30, 2020 in
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. We varied walking directions (bidirectional, unidirectional, and no directions) and supplementary
interventions (face mask and buzzer to alert visitors of 1.5 metres distance). We captured visitors’ movements using cameras,
registered their contacts (defined as within 1.5 metres) using wearable sensors, and assessed their attitudes toward COVID-19
as well as their experience during the event using questionnaires. We also registered environmental measures (e.g., humidity).
In this paper, we describe this unprecedented, multi-modal experimental data set on social distancing, including psychological,
behavioural, and environmental measures. The data set is available on figshare and in a MySQL database. It can be used to
gain insight into (attitudes toward) behavioural interventions promoting social distancing, to calibrate pedestrian models, and to
inform new studies on behavioural interventions.
Background & Summary
The COVID-19 pandemic severely affected cultural life around the globe, including theatres, exhibitions, museums, and music
events . Many countries, including the Netherlands, shut down cultural venues and generally recommended individuals to
maintain a distance of 1.5 metres from one another to reduce virus spread . As the pandemic persisted, a key question became
whether behavioural interventions could promote social distancing without bringing society to a standstill. Together with
Smart Distance Lab, we conducted a field experiment during an art fair in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, to investigate how
social distancing can be promoted effectively during large-scale events. Specifically, we implemented several behavioural
interventions and assessed their effectiveness in promoting social distancing behaviour. In doing so, we aim to provide insight
into how events can be organised safely during a pandemic.
The art fair was organised between August 28 - 30, 2020 and visited by 839 individuals. The study took place between the
first and second COVID-19 wave, when about 500 new COVID-19 cases were registered in the Netherlands each day . We
implemented a combination of several interventions, including walking directions (bidirectional, unidirectional, no directions)
and supplementary interventions (face mask, buzzer via wearable social distancing sensors, none). Before visiting the art fair,
visitors completed a questionnaire, which included questions on factors related to adopting social distancing (e.g., perceived
Social Distancing Sensors (SDSs), movement data via cameras, and indoor environment data such as humidity and temperature.
After the visit, we administered an exit questionnaire focusing on experiences with keeping distance during the art fair (e.g.,
perceived difficulty, adherence, and automaticity). These different data collection modes resulted in a unique data set combining
psychological, behavioural, and environmental measures of a large-scale event organised during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The reported data set can, for example, be valuable to provide insight into attitudes and behaviours during the COVID-19
pandemic, to help calibrate pedestrian models, to validate social distancing measurements, and to design subsequent studies
investigating behavioural interventions. We initially used these data to investigate how behavioural interventions influence social
distancing behaviour, employing Behavioural Contact Networks (BECONs) that encode which individuals came within 1.5
metres of each other. We subsequently compared the networks across conditions to assess the effectiveness of the interventions
5,6
in terms of social distancing .
Methods
Design
At the art fair, a selection of top graduates of Dutch art academies who finalised their studies in 2019 and 2020 displayed their
unidirectional, no directions) and supplementary interventions (face mask, buzzer, none). However, we had to adapt this set-up
due to unforeseen circumstances. As a result, we could only implement experimental conditions during eight of the 11 available
time slots. We also needed to repeat the buzzer condition on day 3 because the buzzer settings differed across conditions (see
In the unidirectional and bidirectional conditions, walking directions were indicated through arrows displayed on the floor.
On day 1, arrows were pasted in two directions forming two lanes that guided visitors to walk either clock- or anticlockwise
(bidirectional walking condition). On day 2, arrows pointed only in one direction (unidirectional walking condition), while there
were no directions on day 3. Within each of these conditions (i.e., during different time slots within each day), we implemented
a set of supplementary interventions. For the face mask condition, we handed out face masks to visitors. At the beginning of
the buzzer conditions, we operated the SDS such that the sensor would buzz when visitors came within 1.5 metres from one
another.
Sample
In total, 997 tickets were sold for the art fair. During three days, 839 people entered the fair, of which 639 (76.2%) wore an
already entered the art fair. Some of these visitors had already left before the SDSs were handed out. Thus, the percentage of
visitors who wore an SDS during the experimental conditions was higher than the reported 76.2%. We gathered demographic
information (n = 857) when people obtained a ticket. The average age of this group was 45.2 (SD = 16.0, Min = 12, Max = 82),
different visitor streams.
Materials
Questionnaires
Participants completed two questionnaires: a pre-questionnaire before entering the art fair and a post-questionnaire after
attending the event. The pre-questionnaire recorded participants’ demographics (i.e., age, gender, and educational level), email
addresses, and whether they had previously been infected with the coronavirus. It included seven items about a potential
coronavirus infection: the likelihood of getting infected (0 very unlikely to 100 very likely), the severity (1 not serious at all to 7
very serious), the perceived health risk for family and friends, and (separately) for themselves (1 extremely small to 7 extremely
large), as well as worries about getting infected, infecting others, and an overloaded healthcare system (1 no worries at all to 7
a lot of worries). The pre-questionnaire also contained 16 items about their attitudes and self-reported behaviours regarding
the behavioural guidelines, the perceived social norm, and automaticity of keeping distance (four items of the Self-Reported
Behavioral Automaticity Index ; 1 completely disagree to 7 completely agree), as well as how participants experience the social
distancing rule (1 to 7, not sensible–sensible, useless–useful, not enjoyable–enjoyable, unfair–fair, unacceptable–acceptable,
difficult–easy). Finally, participants were asked about their general health (1 very bad to 7 very good), how they feel about face
masks as protection against the coronavirus, and whether it is less important to keep distance when wearing a face mask (1
and response options of the pre-questionnaire.
The post-questionnaire recorded participants’ email addresses to link the two questionnaires. It included 13 items about
participants’ social distancing behaviour during the event: whether they tried to maintain distance during the event (1 completely
disagree to 7 completely agree), the experienced difficulty of maintaining distance and determining when someone is within
1.5 metres distance (1 difficult to 7 easy), their adherence to the 1.5 metre guideline (1 not at all to 7 constantly), as well as
automaticity of distancing, and whether they felt they were constantly reminded of maintaining distance (1 completely disagree
to 7 completely agree). Next, participants were asked to what extent they felt protected against the coronavirus, their stress level
during the event, the extent to which they experienced freedom to behave as they wished, to what extent they felt obligated
to behave in a certain way (two items), trust in their ability to maintain distance, and pleasure during the event (1 completely
disagree to 7 completely agree). Lastly, they were asked how many units of alcohol they consumed during the art fair and
2/12
questions and response options of the post-questionnaire.
Social Distancing Sensor
SDSs are wearable electronic devices that use ultra-wideband (UWB) technology to detect the presence of other sensors, and
measure distance with an accuracy up to ten centimetres. The SDSs in this study were designed by Focus Technologies B.V.
the SDSs, an access point, a laptop connected to the access point running a control application, and multiple base stations. Each
sensor had a unique tag ID and locally stored counts of how often other sensors had been within a pre-specified range, i.e., 1.5
metres. The access point located near the entrance of the gallery area collected these counts when an SDS was within 30 metres
(line of sight) and sent the data to a central database. A time stamp was only recorded when the data moved from locally stored
on the SDS to the central database and, therefore, does not refer to the time of contact itself. Contacts that occurred near the
entrance may have been sent to the database immediately, whereas the majority of SDSs were only close enough to the access
point when a data sweep was performed. In addition, the access point updated the settings of the SDSs in case they had been
changed via the application. An SDS was (de)activated by placing a sensor on a base station. In our set-up, up to four SDSs
could be linked by simultaneously placing them on different base stations to avoid registering contacts between members of the
same household. As soon as an SDS was deactivated, any other SDSs that were linked to it were disconnected.
The SDSs were set to register a contact when another SDS was within 1.5 metres. When two SDSs were in contact, they
gave at least one of three types of feedback: a flashing light, a buzzing sensation, or a beeping sound. This feedback could
either occur immediately or after two seconds of contact. Except in the buzzer conditions, we set the feedback to a flashing
light and placed the SDS in a small black bag to avoid visitors being able to see whether they were within 1.5 metres of others.
This way, data could be gathered without the flashing light influencing the behaviour of visitors. Visitors wore the SDS on a
key cord (lanyard) around their neck. In addition to the SDSs worn by visitors, we positioned nine “location” SDSs at a fixed
prevent inappropriate feedback to visitors when standing close to a location SDS.
Cameras
We mounted six optical cameras on trusses at a height of 12 metres. The cameras were configured to record with a resolution of
640 × 480 pixels to ensure that visitors of the art fair could not be recognised from the recorded images. Each camera lens
◦ ◦
had a field of view of 98 × 55 resulting in a maximum ground coverage of 27.6 × 12.5 metres per camera. Three cameras
were mounted above the entrance and covered the entire entrance area. The other three cameras were located above the gallery,
covering stands 1 to 17. One of these cameras, covering stands 15 to 17 and the entrance to the toilet, was mounted at an angle
◦ ◦
of 10 ± 2 to prevent walls from blocking the camera view. The cameras were configured to record at 10 frames per second
(FPS) to enable real-time data processing.
Indoor Environment Measures
During the event, the temperature, humidity, and light intensity were continuously monitored using the internal sensors of an
8 ◦ ◦ ◦
Ubibot WS1 . The internal temperature sensor had a precision of ±0.3 C and a range of −20 C to 60 C. The internal humidity
sensor had a precision of ±3 RH within the range of 10% to 90% relative humidity. The light sensor had a precision of ±2% in
the range of 0.01 to 83K lux. The indoor environment conditions were sampled every 5 minutes at an approximate height of 2.5
Procedures
Participants were recruited by promoting the art fair on social media. Before buying a ticket, participants were asked to provide
access to a free ticket and the other to a ticket that cost 5 euros. The content of both online pre-questionnaires was identical and
we merged their responses. Each ticket was associated with a time slot during which visitors could enter the fair. At the fair,
tickets were scanned, visitors walked by the cloakroom, and arrived at the research desk. At the research desk, we checked
if visitors had filled in the pre-questionnaire using their email address. If not, e.g., because someone else bought their ticket,
we only asked visitors to provide informed consent to participate in the study. To avoid congestion near the entrance, we did
not ask these visitors to complete the pre-questionnaire on site. Next, an SDS attached to a key cord was handed out, and the
visitor’s email address was registered to link the SDS and questionnaire data. If visitors came in groups, the linked tag IDs were
registered. After registration, visitors activated their SDS at the activation desk, where they also received a small black bag to
cover their sensor. We asked participants to activate their SDS themselves to avoid touching the disinfected materials. In the
face mask condition, visitors were provided with a face mask and were asked to wear it until the end of the condition.
Once inside the fair, visitors could stay as long as desired. The maximum capacity inside was 150 visitors, which was never
exceeded. Before exiting, visitors handed back the SDS, key cord, and bag at the back of the research desk, where their tag ID
3/12
was once again registered. Finally, visitors were asked to scan a QR-code and complete the post-questionnaire. All materials
were then disinfected, and the SDS charged before handed out again.
Between conditions, we performed two “data sweeps” by walking through the hall with the laptop and access point. The
first collected all data from the sensors in the previous condition. The second activated the settings of the SDSs for the following
condition. In addition, after the face mask condition, we informed visitors that they could take off their face mask; and when
switching to or from a buzzer condition, we took in or handed out the black bags around the sensors. The camera and indoor
environment measurements were performed during the entire art fair and did not require any interaction with visitors.
Ethical Issues
The University of Amsterdam collected the questionnaire and sensor data. The ethics review board of the University of
Amsterdam (2020-CP-12488) approved data collection, and all participants provided informed consent before participating.
The camera and indoor environment data were collected and processed by Centillien B.V., a Dutch company specialised in
they obtained a ticket. All personal identifiable information used to link the questionnaire and sensor data has been destroyed.
The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy (Ministerie van Economische Zaken en Klimaat, EZK) and Mondriaan
fund invested in the production costs of the Art Fair and Smart Distance Lab organization.
Data Records
The data set is available in comma-separated value (CSV) files on figshare , and a relational (MySQL) database hosted by SURF
SARA . On figshare, the data are grouped based on the data source (i.e., questionnaire, sensor, camera, and environment). The
database can be accessed via mysqlonubuntud.smartdist-uva.src.surf-hosted.nl/phpmyadmin, using the read-only account with
username “sdl_guest” and password “dmebozY07tRfigfm”, or via any compatible analysis software or app. An example script
Technical Validation
When processing the data, both data checks and cleaning were conducted. The two pre-questionnaires were merged by
email address. If participants completed a questionnaire multiple times, only the first completed questionnaire with a unique
combination of email address, age, and gender was kept. A questionnaire ID (QID) was automatically assigned to participants
who completed a questionnaire. Email addresses were replaced by their corresponding QID in both the questionnaire and
sensor data to anonymise the data. We generated unique QIDs for participants in the sensor data who had not completed a
questionnaire. We used QIDs instead of tag IDs to link the data sets since the SDSs were handed out multiple times a day to
Contacts are stored twice in the sensor data, because a contact involves two SDSs. Both kept a record with their ID as
reporting tag ID and the other as opposing tag ID. However, the sensor data also contained exact duplicates in the database, i.e.,
the same number of contacts with the same reporting and same opposing tag ID at the same time. In these cases, we only kept
one of the records. We also removed a record if an SDS tag ID could not be linked to a QID of a person that was present at that
time. These records could occur when an SDS was activated but not handed out, e.g., when removed from the charger and the
SDS automatically activated. We added records to the sensor data when an SDS made zero contacts since the data should also
include people without any contacts. These visitors were identified using the registration of tag IDs at the beginning and end of
a visit. Finally, for each condition, we only kept the sensor data between the start and end data sweep of that condition.
such that each layer serves as an input to the next layer and increases the abstraction of the data . Layer 1 contains the raw
video footage captured during the art fair and is available upon request. Layer 2 provides the first level of abstraction from the
raw video footage. Computer vision was used to obtain pixel coordinates of visitors. This abstraction was realised by using a
sophisticated implementation of a blob detector, which included a K-nearest neighbour (KNN) background subtractor, morph
dilation to reduce noise, and chain approximation. In this layer, the data of multiple cameras were merged into one single data
set, and we removed data points where the camera views overlap. Each pixel has a width and height of 5.5 centimetres. The
pixel coordinates obtained in both layer 2 and 3 can be converted to physical coordinates. The left upper corner of the map
corresponds to the point where x = 0 and y = 0. Layer 3 adds a second level of abstraction by including time information to
allow tracking of visitors over time. A centroid tracking algorithm in combination with filtering was used to provide data points
where time gaps were reconstructed, and noise in the spatial-time domain was removed.
The indoor environment measures were taken at a height of 2.5 metres to prevent visitors from accessing the device.
4/12
Usage Notes
the MySQL database, you might need the following information:
phpMyAdmin = mysqlonubuntud.smartdist-uva.src.surf-hosted.nl/phpmyadmin
user = sdl_guest
host = mysqlonubuntud.smartdist-uva.src.surf-hosted.nl
password = dmebozY07tRfigfm
db = sdl_202008_artfair
Code Availability
All code related to this data set can be found in the Smart Distance Lab OSF project .