POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 1
© 2021, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may
not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. The final article will be
available, upon publication, via its DOI: 10.1037/pas0001052
Informing the Classification and Assessment of Positive Emotional Experiences:
A Multisample Examination of Hierarchical Positive Emotionality Models
Kasey Stanton, Phd
a b
Virginia Tech , Western University
Matthew F. D. Brown, MSc
Western University
Riley McDanal, BA
Stony Brook University
Corinne N. Carlton, MS
Virginia Tech
Noah N. Emery, PhD
Colorado State University
Correspondence concerning this paper should be addressed to Kasey Stanton, Virginia Tech,
Psychology Department, 121 Williams Hall, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061. Email:
kaseyjstanton@gmail.com. Please note that the ideas appearing in this manuscript have not been
disseminated previously. Research ethics committee approval was obtained for this research,
and all individual research participants provided informed consent for their participation. Ethics
approval was not explicitly sought to post data presented in this manuscript to open access,
online repositories, and thus, these data are not provided on such a forum. However, please
contact Kasey Stanton should you have any questions or wish to access these data. There is no
funding to report for this research.
Information regarding preregistered analyses for this study and manuscript preprints can be
Departmental affiliations for universities listed above:
= Department of Psychology
= Department of Psychology
= Department of Psychology
= Department of Psychology
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 2
Abstract
Despite being multifaceted in nature, positive emotional (PE) experiences often are studied using
only global PE ratings, and measures assessing more specific PE facets do not converge in their
assessment approaches. To address these issues, we examined hierarchical factor structures of
ratings of positive emotionality, which reflect propensities toward experiencing PE, in both
online community adult (N = 375) and undergraduate (N = 447) samples. Preregistered analyses
indicated (a) a broad distinction between tendencies to experience social affection and other PE
types, and that (b) PE ratings can be differentiated by as many as four replicable factors of
Joviality, Social Affection, Serenity, and Attentiveness. These PE dimensions were associated
with distinct personality and psychopathology profiles. Examples of these distinctive
associations included Joviality displaying robust positive associations with grandiosity and
exhibitionism; conversely, although Social Affection and Joviality were strongly correlated,
Social Affection showed associations in the opposite direction with grandiosity and
exhibitionism. Other notable results include Serenity (e.g., feeling relaxed) showing negative
associations with negative emotionality at a magnitude indicating that Serenity may reflect low
levels of negative emotionality to a considerable degree. Collectively, these results highlight the
need to consider distinct PE facets in addition to global PE ratings when assessing PE, as
important nuance may be lost otherwise. Furthermore, our results indicate the need for
additional research clarifying PE structure at different levels of abstraction to inform future
measure development efforts and assessment approaches.
KEYWORDS: positive emotionality; positive emotion; hierarchical factor structures;
exploratory factor analysis; preregistration
PUBLIC SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Our results inform how tendencies toward having
different types of positive emotional experiences such as feeling energetic, compassionate, and
determined are interrelated. These results can be used to guide comprehensive assessment of
emotional experiences in future research studies, particularly in research focused on how
different emotional experiences are linked to personality and mental health symptoms.
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 3
Informing the Classification and Assessment of Positive Emotional Experiences:
A Multisample Examination of Hierarchical Positive Emotionality Models
Positive emotional (PE) experiences have been studied widely in connection to
psychopathology, well-being, and personality over the last several decades (Gruber, 2011;
Watson et al., 2015b). As the body of research on PE experiences has expanded, so have
definitions of the PE domain. Traditionally, PE research has focused on experiences such as joy
and excitement that are linked to individual differences in extraversion (Cowen et al., 2019;
Shiota et al., 2006; Watson et al., 2015a). However, conceptualizations of the PE domain now
also include a broader range of experiences that are associated most strongly with five-factor
model (FFM) traits other than extraversion. Examples of this include PE experiences of
compassion that are most strongly associated with agreeableness of any FFM trait, as well as
feelings of determination and attentiveness aligning with FFM conscientiousness (Fredrickson,
2013; Shiota et al., 2006; Watson & Clark, 1999). Upon careful consideration, some PE
dimensions may represent a blend of affective, cognitive, and behavioral components rather than
being purely emotional in nature. For example, a term such as “attentiveness” may bring to mind
aspects of thought or behavior rather than or in addition to affect (e.g., thinking that a
conversation is interesting and then displaying interest/attentiveness with specific behaviors).
However, attentiveness (e.g., being attentive, interested) is described as a PE facet dimension in
some models because such a term may reflect positively-valenced feeling states of curiosity or
motivation (Fredrickson, 2013; Watson & Clark, 1999). Supporting this, experiences of
attentiveness frequently co-occur with other PE experiences, and attentiveness ratings load
strongly onto a general latent factor with ratings of joy and excitement that have long been
deemed central to PE descriptions as reviewed.
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 4
Although PE can be assessed across different temporal timeframes, the current study
focuses on improving the classification and assessment of dispositional, trait tendencies toward
experiencing PE. Shorter term, state assessments of PE experiences often are described using
terminology such as “positive emotion” or “positive affect.” Dispositional tendencies often are
referred to as “positive emotionality” or “positive affectivity” (Shiota et al., 2006; Watson &
Clark, 1999), which we emphasize here given that many multidimensional measures have
from specific measures are organized rationally into clusters representing facets of the broader
(DPES; Shiota et al., 2006), the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule-Expanded Form
(PANAS-X; Watson & Clark, 1999), and the modified Differential Emotions Scale (mDES;
Fredrickson et al., 2003), among other commonly used measures (e.g., the Gratitude Adjective
Checklist [McCullough et al., 2002]; the Multiple Affect Adjective Check List-Revised
[MAACL-R; Lubin & Zuckerman, 1999]; the Multidimensional Mood-State Inventory [MMSI;
Boyle et al., 2015]; the Temperament and Affectivity Inventory [TAI; Watson et al., 2015a).
collectively assess a wide range of dimensions, including dimensions linked most strongly to
FFM traits other than extraversion (e.g., at least six existing scales include item content assessing
attentiveness, which may be more strongly linked to conscientiousness than extraversion).
Issues Resulting from Nonspecific and Inconsistent Assessment Approaches
aggregate PE ratings into composite scores when using brief measures such as the mDES and the
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS; Watson et al., 1988); unlike Watson and
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 5
Clark’s (1999) more recently developed PANAS-X, the PANAS does not provide assessment of
facet dimensions. Although these assessment approaches are efficient (e.g., the PANAS assesses
general PE with 10 items), they do not allow distinctive associations for different PE facet
dimensions to be identified.
Examples of distinctive PE facet associations that would be masked by focusing analyses
solely on global PE composite ratings include those for PE facets with different FFM traits. As
discussed, extraversion and high-arousal PE experiences are linked closely (Boyle et al., 2015;
Heuchert & McNair, 2012; Watson et al., 2015a). Indeed, factor analytic research indicates that
a specific PE factor representing individual differences in cheerfulness and energy is a core facet
of the extraversion domain (Watson et al., 2015b). Watson et al. (2015b) also identified an
extraversion facet labeled excitement seeking in their analyses of extraversion structure, which
Seeking). However, other PE facet scales assessing compassion correlate more strongly with
agreeableness than with extraversion (Shiota et al., 2006), which is not surprising because
agreeableness measures also assess tendencies toward being kind and sympathetic. These
specific PE experiences that are linked to agreeableness may serve a different function than other
types of PE by helping to maintain social bonds (Fredrickson et al., 2013; Robinson, 2007). As
another example of PE facet level distinctiveness, scales assessing serenity, which also are used
widely in PE research (e.g., Tsai et al., 2017), show strong negative associations with measures
of negative emotionality (NE; Watson & Clark, 1999; Payne & Schnapp, 2014). Thus, serenity
may be less distinct from NE than other PE facets and may represent a blend of low NE and high
levels of low-arousal PE.
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 6
In addition to distinctive PE facet associations being obscured by focusing analyses only on
specific PE dimensions they assess. Thus, even if researchers assess PE at the facet level, study
results could vary depending on the measure used. For example, use of the DPES (Shiota et al.,
2006) provides assessment of seven different facet dimensions, several of which are
1 do not assess these dimensions (e.g., the MAACL-R; PANAS-X), which may be important to
consider in research focused on social relationships for example. This lack of coherence
represents a longstanding issue leading to inconsistencies in measurement approaches, which
may hinder PE research across contexts (e.g., scores on some PE facet measures may change
more than others with treatment; Cowen et al., 2019; Stanton & Watson, 2015).
Current Study Goals: Informing Positive Emotionality Assessment
To inform how PE can be classified and assessed comprehensively and consistently across
studies, we aimed to identify a replicable factor analytic model of PE. Specifically, we examined
hierarchical factor structures of PE across two samples (i.e., 447 undergraduates; 375 community
adults). We examined these hierarchical structures using exploratory factor analysis (EFA) due
to a lack of clarity regarding how PE ratings should be organized at various levels of abstraction.
As noted, we focused here on assessing emotionality, or dispositions toward experiencing PE.
We recognize the importance of examining the consistency of PE factor structures across
different temporal frames (e.g., when also assessing state experiences), but examining factor
structures across multiple samples and administration instructions was beyond our study scope.
Existing PE research aimed at informing measure development and assessment often has
focused on a single level of specificity (e.g., identifying how many PE facets should be assessed
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 7
with a specific measure), and existing measures vary in their content and format. Some research
has directly examined the factor structure of PE experiences outside of the context of measure
development (e.g., Stanton & Watson, 2015), but included limited or no coverage of PE variants
such as compassion and awe. Thus, the current study extends prior work by informing our
understanding of the classification of a wide range of PE experiences at broad (i.e., a general PE
factor), intermediary (e.g., differentiating high- and low-arousal PE), and specific levels (e.g.,
distinguishing more specific, interpersonally-oriented PEs such as compassion and gratitude).
As a related secondary aim, we examined associations for both general and specific PE
dimensions identified in our EFAs to demonstrate that specific PE facets show distinctive
associations that are masked by focusing analyses solely on composite PE ratings.
Study Predictions
Timestamped predictions were made prior to conducting analyses, as described on the first-
Appendix 1. These predictions were made after data collection already had been completed
(timestamped date of April 22, 2020), such that these registered analyses represent a
able to identify as many as eight replicable factors representing different PE facets (also see
made for our preregistered analyses). Each predicted PE facet appeared to be reflected in the
content of several or more existing scales (e.g., the DPES, PANAS-X); in most cases, five or
more existing scales assess content relevant to each predicted facet (e.g., five scales include
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 8
Prior research indicates that some types of PE experiences may be challenging to
differentiate (e.g., feelings of joy and energy; Fredrickson, 2013), and our analyses involved
factor analyzing scores from many items across samples. Therefore, we realized that it may not
be possible to identify as many as eight well-defined, replicable factors. We generally had more
confidence in our predictions for factor solutions with relatively few factors and less confidence
in our predictions for factor solutions with larger numbers of factors representing nuanced PE
able to identify at least five factors of Joviality, Self-Assurance (e.g., feeling bold),
Attentiveness, Serenity, and Social Affection given that many of these distinctions are made in
existing multifaceted measures (e.g., the DPES, PANAS-X, and TAI).
Finally, predicted associations for these five PE factors with symptom and personality
would associate strongly with extraversion, Attentiveness with conscientiousness, and Social
Affection with agreeableness (all predicted rs = .50). We also hypothesized that Serenity would
associate strongly and negatively with NE based on prior research (Payne & Schnapp, 2014;
Stanton et al., 2016). These predictions for PE facet associations with FFM traits were made
based on the literature reviewed (e.g., Shiota et al., 2006; Watson et al., 2000) as well as
alignment between the content of specific PE facet measures and FFM traits (e.g., Social
Affection and agreeableness measures both reflect tendencies toward being compassionate).
Consequently, given these aspects of alignment across PE and FFM measures, demonstrating
these patterns of associations would not be surprising; however, examining them enabled us to
contextualize our factor analytic findings by showing that distinct PE facets represent
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 9
meaningfully different trait tendencies. Lastly, we predicted that most PE facets would associate
negatively with personality pathology and internalizing symptoms, but that PE ratings of
boldness subsumed within Self-Assurance would show positive associations with some aspects
of personality pathology (e.g., attention seeking) and some symptoms (e.g., euphoric mood).
Method
Description of Undergraduate and Online Community Samples
As discussed, we recruited both community adult and undergraduate participants (see
and missing data). Institutional research ethics board approval was granted for all data collection
and research procedures. Undergraduates (N = 447) were recruited through the psychology
department participant pool at a Canadian university. Average participant age was 18.6 years
(SD 1.6), and most participants identified as cisgender women (n = 303; 67.8%). Demographic
information was collected in a manner consistent with university ethics board guidelines, with
40.9% of participants identifying as being of White or European descent (e.g., Western European
descent); 28.2% as of East Asian descent (e.g., Chinese descent); 16.6% as of South Asian
descent (e.g., Indian descent); and 4.5% as of Middle Eastern or North African descent;
remaining participants (9.8%) specified other identities.
Community adults (N = 375) were recruited using Amazon Mechanical Turk. Average
participant age was 39.1 years (SD = 12.1), with a slight majority of participants identifying as
cisgender men (n = 201; 53.6%). Most participants identified as White or European American
(73.3%), 10.1% as Black or African American, and 8.0% as Asian American, with the remaining
percentage of the sample endorsing other identities. In regard to highest level of education
obtained, 41.6% of the sample reported having a bachelor’s degree; 32.3% reported having a
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 10
vocational degree, an associate’s degree, or some college; 15.2% reported having a high school
diploma or less education, and 10.9% reported having a master’s degree or higher.
Positive and Negative Emotionality Assessment
Positive Emotionality
To assess PE, participants were asked to indicate “to what extent you generally feel this
way” when rating different emotion adjectives using a 5-point rating scale ranging from 1 (very
slightly or not at all) to 5 (extremely). These instructions and rating scale follow the format of
the PANAS-X (Watson & Clark, 1999), which we used here because (a) many of the adjectives
used were drawn from the PANAS-X and (b) this format has been widely used in prior research.
Specifically, we administered all PE adjectives from the three PANAS-X PE scales: Joviality (8
items; e.g., cheerful), Self-Assurance (6 items; e.g., proud), and Attentiveness (4 items; e.g.,
determined). The PANAS-X also includes a Serenity scale that is described as assessing a blend
of low NE and low-arousal PE. Due to reflecting elements of both PE and NE, the Serenity scale
is not identified as a clear PE measure in the PANAS-X manual (Watson & Clark, 1999);
however, we also included adjectives from the Serenity scale (e.g., relaxed) in our analyses
because this item content is included in many other PE measures. Additionally, we included
other adjectives not included in the PANAS-X reflecting PE experiences such as love and
compassion, which are constructs assessed by other measures such as the Mood Adjective
Checklist (MACL; Nowlis, 1965). Like the PANAS-X, the MACL uses adjective-based
assessment, and MACL adjectives from the MACL Social Affection scale (e.g., affectionate,
warmhearted) also were included here. Furthermore, as reviewed, some measures (e.g., the
mDES, MACL, DPES) include assessment of PE experiences such as liveliness, gratitude, and
awe that we were unable to sufficiently assess using only the PANAS-X and MACL adjectives.
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 11
Consequently, we administered additional adjectives to assess each of these domains (e.g.,
adding adjectives such as feeling thankful to assess gratitude), which were generated by the first
included at least several adjective ratings anticipated to load on each potential factor.
We also considered alternative assessment approaches (e.g., administering both the DPES
and PANAS-X items). However, alternative approaches such as jointly factor analyzing
example, the PANAS-X uses adjectives whereas the DPES items are written in sentence form,
such that items may have loaded onto factors together based on having a shared administration
format rather than on content grounds (see Watson et al., 2015a).
Finally, participants from both samples also were administered the 10 adjectives from the
general Negative Affect (NA) scale of the PANAS-X. Participants again were asked to indicate
to “what extent you generally feel this way” when rating each adjective using a 5-point rating
scale ranging from 1 (very slightly or not at all) to 5 (extremely).
Other Measures Administered to Online Community Sample Participants
Community participants completed a more extensive battery of measures than did
undergraduates, enabling us to examine associations for our emergent PE factors with other
measures using data from this sample. Other measures included the second edition of the Big
Five Inventory (BFI-2; Soto & John, 2017). Participants rated themselves on all BFI-2 items
using a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (disagree strongly) to 5 (agree strongly).
Participants also completed the 18-item Narcissistic Admiration and Rivalry Questionnaire
(NARQ; Back et al., 2013), which includes narcissistic (a) Admiration (9 items; e.g., “am
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 12
special”) and (b) Rivalry scales (9 items; e.g., “want my rivals to fail”). Participants responded
to the NARQ items using a 6-point scale ranging from 1 (not agree at all) to 6 (agree
completely). Additionally, participants were administered the Grandiosity (7 items) and
Exhibitionism (6 items) scales from the Comprehensive Assessment of Traits Relevant to
Personality Disorder (CAT-PD; Simms et al., 2011). Participants responded to these items using
a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (very untrue of me) to 5 (very true of me). Finally, participants
completed select scales from the Expanded Version of the Inventory of Depression and Anxiety
Symptoms (IDAS-II; Watson et al., 2012). Symptom scales from the IDAS-II that were
administered included Dysphoria (10 items; e.g., “felt depressed”), Social Anxiety (6 items),
Euphoria (5 items; e.g., “had so much energy it was hard to sit still”), and Mania (5 items;
“thoughts raced”). Participants indicated the extent to which they experienced symptoms over
the past 2 weeks using a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 5 (extremely).
Results
Overview
All analyses were conducted using SAS Version 9.4. Descriptive statistics and coefficient
Coefficient alpha estimates for all study measures > .70, with most estimates > .80.
Next, our primary analyses involved conducting hierarchical EFAs of PE ratings as
described. All EFAs were conducted using principal factor analyses and were based on
polychoric correlation matrices because participants rated PE items using a 5-point response
scale. We used both Velicer’s minimum average partial (MAP) test and parallel analysis to help
determine the maximum number of factors to extract in our EFAs. Note that we report results
from principal factor analyses subsequently. However, we conducted parallel analyses and the
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 13
MAP test using principal components analyses (PCAs) because use of principal factor analysis
when conducting these procedures can suggest extracting an overly large number of factors
(O’Connor, 2000). Furthermore, although we took results from these parallel analyses and MAP
tests conducted with PCAs into account for informing our EFAs, we ultimately sought to identify
the largest number of well-defined (i.e., factors on which three or more items loaded strongly),
replicable PE dimensions. For conducting these EFAs, we began by extracting a general PE
factor in both samples and then extracted solutions with an increasingly larger number of factors
(Forbes et al., 2017). When extracting two or more factors, factors were rotated to oblique
simple structure using promax. We also examined the extent to which factors replicated across
samples using comparability coefficients (Everett, 1983), an approach allowing coefficients to be
computed using both the undergraduate and community datasets. Comparability coefficients ≥
|.90| indicate strong factor similarity (Everett, 1983).
Additionally, we report Pearson correlations for emergent dimensions from our EFAs with
other study variables in the community dataset. We report correlations for both (a) a general PE
factor from a single-factor solution and (b) the factor solution with the largest number of well-
defined PE factors. Factors identified in our EFAs were modeled using regression-based factor
scores. Lastly, we conducted a series of multiple regression analyses in which factor scores
reflecting PE facet dimensions were entered simultaneously as independent variables along with
PANAS-X NA ratings when examining their associations with other study variables. Unlike all
other analyses described, these regression analyses were not preregistered. They were added
after further consideration when revising this manuscript given that scores representing some PE
dimensions from our EFAs were strongly associated with PANAS-X NA ratings as described
subsequently. We considered the statistical significance of all associations at a p < .001 level.
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 14
Factor Analytic Results
Preliminary Analyses
Parallel analyses conducted in both the community and undergraduate samples indicated
that up to four factors could be extracted in our EFAs. However, results from the MAP test
indicated that seven- (mean squared partial correlation = .0147) and eight-factor solutions (mean
squared partial correlation = .0122) may be optimal in the community and undergraduate
datasets, respectively. This lack of convergence across these two procedures may provide
evidence for a hierarchical factor structure wherein multiple, meaningful factor solutions are
tenable (Forbes et al., 2017).
Factor Solutions with One to Three Factors
First, adjectives assessing high-arousal PE such as feeling enthusiastic, joyful, and cheerful
loaded most strongly (i.e., corresponding item factor loadings > .75) on a single general factor in
each dataset. Across samples, all 48 PE items loaded > .40 on this general factor. Comparability
coefficients scored in both datasets for this factor exceeded .99.
Next, factor loadings from two-factor solutions across samples are shown in Online
bold, and daring (factor loadings ≥ .65 across samples) loaded strongly onto the first factor
across samples. A range of other items assessing feeling excited, relaxed, and at ease also
marked this first factor. Adjectives such as sympathetic, loving, and compassionate loaded
strongly on the second factor (factor loadings > .75 across samples). Thus, emergent factors in
the two-factor solution represented a distinction between self- and interpersonally-oriented PE.
Accordingly, we labeled the first and second factors Self-Oriented Positive Emotionality and
Social Affection, respectively. The average level of communality for items was .58 and .47 in the
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 15
community and undergraduate datasets, respectively, indicating an acceptable level of
communality (i.e., values < .40 may be problematic; Costello & Osborne, 2005). This two-factor
solution replicated well across samples (comparability coefficients for each factor ≥ .98 in all
cases). Both factors correlated strongly in each dataset (interfactor r = .63 and .61 in the
community and undergraduate samples, respectively).
such as sympathetic and compassionate again loaded strongly onto a Social Affection factor (i.e.,
Factor II in both datasets). Additionally, adjective scores reflecting lower-arousal PE
experiences assessed by items such as calm and relaxed (loadings > .80 across samples) loaded
onto a factor labeled Serenity (Factor I and Factor III in the community and undergraduate
datasets, respectively). Finally, items assessing high-arousal PE (e.g., bold, excited) loaded > .65
onto Factor III in the community data and Factor I in the undergraduate data. We labeled this
factor Joviality, a term commonly used to label factors reflecting an array of high-arousal PE
experiences (e.g., Watson et al., 1999). All PE factors in each dataset again were moderately to
strongly positively intercorrelated, with all interfactor correlations ≥ .40. For these three-factor
solutions, the average level of communality was .63 and .51 in the community and undergraduate
datasets, respectively, again indicating acceptable commonality levels.
All three factors replicated across samples (all comparability coefficients for parallel
factors ≥ .93), but it is worth noting that the Serenity factor was broader in nature in the
community than undergraduate data. Specifically, only four items (i.e., calm, relaxed, at ease,
peaceful) loaded > .50 on the Serenity factor in the undergraduate data. These same items loaded
strongly on Serenity in the community data. However, adjectives such as determined and
attentive also loaded strongly onto Serenity in the community data (both loadings ≥ .50), but
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 16
instead loaded most strongly Joviality in the undergraduate data (loadings again ≥ .50).
Although some items showed differential loading patterns, overall factor comparability still may
have been strong due to the same core item sets loading most strongly on Serenity as well as
other items having similar loadings across samples (e.g., adjectives such as daring, excited, in
awe all loaded very weakly on Serenity across samples).
Factor Solutions with Four Factors
Next, four-factor solutions from the community and undergraduate datasets are shown in
energetic, daring) loaded strongly onto Factor I in the community data and Factor II in the
undergraduate data. We again labeled these factors Joviality. Adjectives assessing approach-
oriented PE experiences such as bold and daring tended to load more strongly on this Joviality
factor in the community than undergraduate dataset, whereas adjectives such as energetic,
enthusiastic, and lively showed comparatively stronger loadings on this factor in the
undergraduate dataset. Still, many of the same items loaded strongly on these factors, which our
comparability coefficient analyses indicated were similar (both coefficients ≥ .93). Next, a
Social Affection factor again emerged (Factor II in the community dataset; Factor I in the
undergraduate dataset), and comparability coefficients scored in either dataset indicated strong
factor similarity (both coefficients ≥ .98).
Adjectives such as relaxed and peaceful again loaded strongly onto a Serenity factor
(Factor III in the community dataset; Factor IV in the undergraduate dataset). A larger number
of adjectives loaded strongly onto Serenity in the community than undergraduate results (i.e.,
only four items with loadings > .50 in the undergraduate data), though this factor was
comparable across samples overall (both comparability coefficients ≥ .94). Lastly, adjectives
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 17
such as determined, alert, and attentive loaded strongly onto an Attentiveness factor that was not
identified in previous factor solutions (Factor IV in the community dataset; Factor III in the
undergraduate dataset). Both comparability coefficients for this fourth factor were ≥ .90. The
average level of communality was .67 and .54 for the four-factor solutions in the community and
undergraduate datasets, respectively, once again indicative of acceptable communality levels.
hierarchies closely parallel each other, with the exception of Attentiveness from the four-factor
solutions having its strongest path coefficient with different factors from the three-factor
solutions (i.e., .72 with Serenity in the community data; .87 with Joviality in the undergraduate
data). This difference likely emerged due to item content reflecting Attentiveness (e.g., attentive,
determined) loading most strongly on different factors across datasets in the three-factor
solutions as reviewed. Acknowledging this difference, all factors from the four-factor solutions
were well-defined, psychologically meaningful, and generally replicable as reviewed.
Solutions with Five or More Factors
Although we found evidence for four replicable factors, convergence in results was poorer
when extracting five factors in each dataset. The fourth factor in the community data, on which
items such as alert and determined loaded strongly, had no clear parallel in the undergraduate
data when extracting five factors; specifically, all comparability coefficients for this community
dataset factor were < .80 with all undergraduate dataset factors. Moreover, the fifth factor in the
community dataset on which adjectives such as grateful and thankful loaded strongly did not
have a strong parallel factor (i.e., highest comparability coefficient = .87 when using the
community dataset for scoring; no coefficients > .83 when scoring in the undergraduate data).
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 18
Similar issues regarding poor cross-sample factor comparability arose for six-factor
solutions. When extracting six factors, adjectives such as alert and attentive loaded strongly
onto the fifth factor in the community dataset, but this factor did not appear to replicate in the
undergraduate dataset (i.e., no comparability coefficient ≥ .75). We also identified a Heywood
case in the community dataset, as the adjective relaxed loaded 1.02 on the first factor in this
dataset. Heywood cases may emerge due to overfactoring and factors being narrowly defined,
among other reasons (de Winter & Dodou, 2012). Therefore, we did not consider these factor
solutions or solutions with greater numbers of factors further, as we focused on examining
associations subsequently for factor scores representing the four replicable factors described.
Online Community Sample Factor Associations
We first examined correlates for emergent PE dimensions with PANAS-X NA scores.
Correlations with PANAS-X NA for Joviality, Social Affection, Serenity, and Attentiveness
were -.06 (p = .22), -.14 (p = .006), -.57 (p < .001), and -.22 (p < .001), respectively; thus,
Serenity’s correlation was much stronger than the correlations for other PE dimensions.
As predicted, PANAS-X NA was associated robustly with BFI-2 Negative Emotionality and
internalizing symptoms. The general PE dimension displayed its strongest correlation with BFI-
2 Extraversion (r = .67), correlated at least moderately with all FFM domain ratings, and showed
some other robust associations (e.g., r = .50 with IDAS-II Euphoria).
At a general level, all four PE dimensions displayed robust correlates with BFI-2
Extraversion (all rs > .40). However, there was notable variation in the magnitude of these
correlates; for example, Joviality correlated .66 with extraversion, whereas Social Affection
correlated .41 with this same trait dimension (z estimate for correlation comparison = 6.60; p <
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 19
.001). Furthermore, Joviality correlated significantly more strongly with IDAS-II Euphoria,
NARQ Admiration, and CAT-PD Exhibitionism than other PE facets (all correlations
significantly stronger than correlates for all other facets at p < .001).
Social Affection’s most distinctive correlates were with BFI-2 Agreeableness (r = .64;
correlation significantly different from those for other PE facets at p < .001) and with NARQ
Rivalry scores (r = -.40). Next, Attentiveness showed the strongest correlation with BFI-2
Conscientiousness of any PE facet (r = .54; association was not significantly different than that
for Serenity, r = .48). Attentiveness also correlated strongly with BFI-2 Open-Mindedness (r =
.53; correlation significantly different than those for other PE facets at p < .001). Finally,
Serenity correlated very strongly and negatively with BFI-2 Negative Emotionality (r = -.77; p <
.001 for comparisons with correlations for other PE facets). Unlike other PE facets, Serenity
scores also were associated strongly and negatively with IDAS-II Dysphoria and Social Anxiety
scores (rs ≥ |.50|; p < .001 for all comparisons with other PE facet correlations).
Multiple Regression Analyses Controlling for Negative Emotionality
Follow-up multiple regression analyses were conducted to examine the extent to which PE
facet dimensions—and Serenity in particular—continued to show robust associations even when
accounting for the overlap (a) amongst PE scores and (b) for PE scores with PANAS-X NA.
Examination of the variance inflation factor (VIF) to detect issues related to multicollinearity
indicated that no independent variable had a VIF estimate ≥ 4.0, a benchmark often used for
identifying problematic multicollinearity levels (Fox, 1991).
several aspects of the correlational analyses, including Joviality being tied closely to extraversion
(β = .55; βs < .15 for other PE facets). For example, Social Affection again showed specificity in
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 20
its associations with BFI-2 Agreeableness (β = .69), and high-arousal PE reflected by Joviality
also associated strongly with specific externalizing measures (e.g., CAT-PD Exhibitionism).
Joviality also was very strongly associated with IDAS-II Euphoria (e.g., “had so much energy”;
β = .75), likely due to both measures assessing energy and excitement.
Perhaps most notably, Serenity showed few robust associations after controlling for its
overlap with other PE facets and PANAS-X NA scores, including showing only weak
associations with internalizing symptoms (e.g., IDAS-II Dysphoria). However, Serenity still
associated strongly with BFI-2 Negative Emotionality (β = -.61). This association was
noteworthy given that it was stronger in magnitude than PANAS-X NA’s association (β = .34)
with BFI-2 Negative Emotionality, despite both PANAS-X NA and BFI-2 Negative
Emotionality being directly used to assess tendencies toward experiencing negative mood states.
Discussion
Summary of Hierarchical Structures and Implications for Assessing Positive Emotionality
Overview and Implications of Factor Analytic Findings
Our primary goal was to articulate a hierarchical structure of dispositional PE ratings to
inform assessment approaches in future research. We predicted that as many as eight, and at
least five, replicable PE facets would emerge when examining hierarchical PE structures.
However, factor solutions with five or more factors were problematic, as they were challenging
to interpret and yielded one or more non-replicable dimensions. At the lowest level of our PE
factor hierarchy, we identified four factors of Joviality, Attentiveness, Serenity, and Social
Affection, consistent with our timestamped predictions for a four-factor structure (again, see
specific adjectives loaded most strongly onto different factors in some cases.
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 21
The four replicable factors we identified represented four of the five hypothesized factors
from the five-factor solution (i.e., Joviality, Self-Assurance, Attentiveness, Serenity, Social
Affection), with the exception of a distinct Self-Assurance factor failing to emerge when
examining five-factor structures. We also hypothesized that other distinct factors reflecting
dimensions such as gratitude would be identified in solutions with six or more factors, but factors
representing these dimensions also failed to emerge in more complex factor solutions.
The Importance of Assessing Distinct Positive Emotionality Facets
Although we were not able to identify as many meaningful PE facets as predicted, results
from the community data indicated that the replicable PE dimensions from the four-factor
solutions still showed distinctive associations that would be masked by focusing analyses solely
on composite PE ratings. For example, Joviality showed the clearest links with extraversion
(hypothesized r = .60, actual r = .66), consistent with prior research. In contrast, PE experiences
reflected by Social Affection (e.g., affectionate) associated robustly with agreeableness
(hypothesized r = .55, actual r = .64) but were unrelated to extraversion in our regression
analyses. This is notable given that extraversion facet scales assessing high-arousal PE (e.g.,
liveliness) from many omnibus personality inventories often are given general labels such as
“Positive Emotions” (see Watson et al., 2015b for review), which might suggest a neat
correspondence between PE and extraversion. However, both our results and broadened PE
conceptualizations indicate that other FFM traits should be considered in addition to extraversion
when evaluating alignment for PE dimensions with broader trait frameworks such as the FFM.
This was predicted given the content parallels for item adjectives used in our factor
analyses with measures of specific FFM traits (e.g., Social Affection items such as sympathetic
with agreeableness item content). Although these examples of PE overlap with FFM traits other
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 22
than extraversion are not surprising then, they illustrate exactly why researchers should be
interested in advancing understanding of hierarchical models and assessing PE at the facet level
when possible. For example, focusing analyses only on a general PE dimension when studying
how PE is associated with personality pathology may mask distinctive relations for Social
Further research is needed to build on our findings to reach consensus on how to optimally
assess PE at different levels of breadth. However, in the meantime, we encourage researchers to
use measures that were created explicitly to assess PE at the facet level when possible.
Examples of such measures reviewed include the TAI and DPES, which through their facet
scales assess many of the emotional experiences reflected by our emergent factors, albeit in
somewhat different ways (e.g., the TAI includes a separate scale assessing vigor/energy, which
the DPES does not). In making these recommendations, we are not advising that measure scores
reflecting general PE should not ever be included in study analyses, but rather, that consideration
of distinctive facet dimensions represents another important level of analysis.
It also is important to recognize that although the direction and magnitude of most
associations aligned with our predictions, some associations were stronger than anticipated. This
was the case for Serenity especially given its very strong associations with NE. Next, we review
the implications of these findings for PE classification by discussing the substantive nature of
each PE dimension, giving emphasis to discussing findings for Serenity in light of these results.
Serenity
Serenity was moderately to strongly intercorrelated with other PE facets (e.g., r = .62 with
Joviality in the community data), indicating that it overlaps strongly with other aspects of the
broader PE domain. We predicted that Serenity also would associate strongly with NE ratings.
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 23
However, the magnitude of the Serenity-NE associations were even stronger than predicted,
particularly the -.77 correlation between Serenity with BFI-2 Negative Emotionality; Serenity
also correlated -.57 with PANAS-X NA, though this correlation is more in line with prior
research (e.g., Payne & Schnapp, 2014). Placing this association for Serenity with BFI-2
Negative Emotionality in context, correlations of this magnitude often are observed between
different measures of the same construct (e.g., different measures of negative emotionality
correlate .75-.80; Watson et al., 2015a). Furthermore, Serenity continued to be strongly
associated with BFI-2 Negative Emotionality even in our regression analyses when controlling
for PANAS-X NA, which is noteworthy given that both BFI-2 Negative Emotionality and
PANAS-X were used to assess tendencies toward experiencing NE.
Why then were these associations so strong in magnitude? When considering post hoc
explanations, this Serenity association with BFI-2 Negative Emotionality may have resulted from
similar administration procedures for both our emotionality adjectives and the BFI-2.
Specifically, the BFI-2 items are written as short phrases or lists of adjectives (e.g., “is outgoing,
sociable”), with many of the BFI-2 Negative Emotionality items consisting of content that is
very similar in nature to the item content that loaded strongly on Serenity. For example, the BFI-
2 Negative Emotionality scale includes items such as “can be tense” as well as reverse-keyed
items assessing emotional stability (e.g., “handle stress well”) aligning closely with items that
loaded strongly onto Serenity (e.g., relaxed, calm). In contrast, all PANAS-X NA items directly
assess NE experiences and do not require reverse-keying for scoring, which may explain in part
why Serenity associated more strongly with BFI-2 Negative Emotionality than PANAS-X NA.
Going forward, it will be important to directly compare the extent to which Serenity associates
more strongly with NE assessed via the BFI-2 than other trait measures. For example, the
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 24
HEXACO Personality Inventory-Revised (HEXACO PI-R; Lee & Ashton, 2018) assesses NE
using longer sentence statements than those provided in the BFI-2, and many HEXACO PI-R
items focus on NE experienced in specific circumstances (e.g., “get anxious about making
important decisions”).
Acknowledging these differences across measures, different models provide similar
descriptions of emotional stability (or low NE) as reflecting tendencies toward being relaxed and
calm across situations (Lee & Ashton, 2018; Soto & John, 2017; Watson et al., 2015b). Item
content related to this definition loaded strongly onto Serenity here as reviewed, highlighting
possible “jingle-jangle” issues (i.e., content assessing tendencies toward feeling calm being given
different labels). Taken together, the strong associations for Serenity and NE likely are due to a
combination of construct overlap and methodological factors (i.e., similarities in item content
and wording). At a minimum, our results and consideration of these issues indicates that unlike
other PE variants that are more distinct from NE, Serenity may represent a blend of low NE and
high PE, as identified previously (Payne & Schnapp, 2014; Watson & Clark, 1999).
However, our results are not conclusive, and we hope that future research will investigate
the degree to which specific aspects of Serenity are distinct from NE to inform affective
assessment. Low-arousal affective experiences (e.g., feeling peaceful, relaxed) reflecting
Serenity are described as core to the broader PE domain across many models (e.g., Cowen et al.
2019; Fredrickson, 2013). Important cross-cultural differences in experiencing and valuing low-
arousal experiences of PE also have been consistently identified, and PE experiences may vary
according to other factors such as age (e.g., older adults may experience less high-arousal PE;
Tsai et al., 2017). Furthermore, other research indicates a meaningful distinction between
experiences of contentment (e.g., feeling content, satisfied) and tranquility (e.g., feeling calm,
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 25
serene; Berenbaum et al., 2019), but only five adjectives broadly related to these constructs were
included in our study to model a potential Serenity facet. Therefore, it will be important to
determine the degree to which different types of low-arousal PE identified in previous research
such as contentment and tranquility appear distinct from NE across contexts and when using
different assessment approaches (e.g., assessing PE experiences in specific situations).
Social Affection
Item content reflecting Social Affection emerged as distinguishable from other aspects of
PE even when extracting two factors across samples, highlighting its distinctiveness. Social
Affection’s robust associations with agreeableness were predicted as reviewed but
demonstrate—perhaps more than any other facet—the importance of considering distinct
dimensions when assessing PE. For example, in addition to Social Affection and Joviality
showing differential associations with extraversion as discussed, they had markedly different
associations with grandiosity and exhibitionism. These findings demonstrate clearly that specific
PE ratings are associated meaningfully with traits other than extraversion, with emotional
experiences represented by Social Affection being important for building social bonds and for
self-regulation in social contexts based on prior research (e.g., Robinson, 2007).
Joviality
Joviality (e.g., feeling excited) seems most differentiable from other PE facets identified in
that it reflects high-arousal PE, though some specific items that loaded strongly onto
Attentiveness (e.g., determined) also may capture high-arousal PE to an extent. In addition to
Joviality associating robustly with extraversion as predicted, other associations for Joviality with
grandiosity, exhibitionism, and IDAS-II Euphoria (e.g., “had so much energy”) support this
interpretation. These associations indicate distinctive connections for Joviality’s unique variance
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 26
with specific aspects of externalizing psychopathology and hypomania, consistent with other
recent research (e.g., Gruber, 2011; Stanton et al., 2019; Watson et al., 2015b).
Attentiveness
Lastly, consistent with our predictions and prior research, Attentiveness displayed
specificity in its associations with conscientiousness. Again, this is not surprising based on
content grounds (i.e., conscientiousness measures assess motivation and persistence), but it
provides another example of how specific PE facets are associated with different trait profiles.
One aspect of our findings that was not anticipated centers on Attentiveness’s positive
associations with open-mindedness, a trait typically weakly linked with emotionality ratings
(e.g., Watson et al., 2000). When considering post hoc explanations, these associations may
have been identified due to the Attentiveness factor being represented by item content such as
reflective that was not predicted to load strongly onto Attentiveness in our analyses. Some items
used to rate open-mindedness here assess tendencies toward being intellectually curious and
interested in ideas, which someone describing themselves as reflective may be likely to strongly
endorse. Given that these associations with open-mindedness are novel in some ways, it will be
interesting to explore connections for this FFM domain with specific PE facets going forward.
The emergence of the Attentiveness factor and these associations also reflect expanded
definitions of the PE domain as reviewed. For example, some of the items loading strongly onto
Attentiveness (e.g., concentrating, alert) appear to include cognitive or thought-based elements.
This may raise concerns about the relevance of content assessed by these items to the PE
domain; however, Attentiveness was moderately to strongly correlated with other emergent PE
factors when examining four-factor solutions. Furthermore, all Attentiveness items—and all PE
items included in our factor analyses more generally—loaded strongly onto a common factor
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 27
when examining single-factor solutions. Taken together, this provides some basic evidence that
all items included here reflect the same broad domain.
Future Directions and Limitations
Our results inform PE classification and assessment in the ways noted, but analyses of PE
state ratings could provide different results. Relatedly, we were unable to examine how different
functional and contextual factors may serve to differentiate various PE experiences (e.g.,
Attentiveness may facilitate goal pursuit more than some other PE types). It also would have
been interesting to examine PE facet associations with other psychopathology commonly studied
in relation to PE not assessed here (e.g., substance use). Thus, we hope future work will advance
research in this area using other study designs (e.g., using intensive longitudinal designs).
Additionally, we included many adjectives in our factor analyses, yet we still may have
failed to include a sufficient number of adjectives reflecting specific PE types that would have
enabled us to identify more than four replicable dimensions in our hierarchical EFAs. This
potentially could be important for making finer-grained distinctions amongst different types of
low-arousal PE for example (e.g., tranquility versus contentment; Berenbaum et al., 2019).
Related to this consideration, it will be important to evaluate low-arousal PE and NE overlap
going forward as discussed, including determining if Serenity item content aligns more closely
with some specific measures of NE than others (e.g., NE assessed via the BFI-2 versus
HEXACO PI-R). Finally, views of what constitutes PE have expanded over time (e.g., by
including attentiveness, compassion), but researchers continue to disagree about the boundaries
of the PE domain. Acknowledging these issues, we hope that future research will build on these
results in the ways described to sharpen understanding of hierarchical PE structures to promote
consistency in assessment approaches across studies.
POSITIVE EMOTIONALITY STRUCTURE AND CORRELATES 28