In press in Cognition.
Syntactic priming reveals an explicit syntactic representation
of multi-digit verbal numbers
Dror Dotan, Ilya Breslavskiy, Haneen Diab-Copty, and Vivian Yousefi
Mathematical Thinking Lab, School of Education and the Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University
When we say or understand verbal numbers, a major challenge to the cognitive system
is the need to process the number’s syntactic structure. Several studies showed that
number syntax is handled by dedicated processes, however, it is still unclear how
precisely these processes operate, whether the number’s syntactic structure is
represented explicitly, and if it is – what this representation looks like. Here, we used a
novel experimental paradigm, syntactic priming of numbers, which can examine in
detail the syntactic representation of multi-digit verbal numbers. In each trial, the
participants – Arabic-Hebrew bilinguals and Hebrew monolinguals – heard a multi-digit
number and responded orally with a random number. The syntactic structure of their
responses was similar to that of the targets, showing that they represented the verbal
number’s syntax. This priming effect was genuinely syntactic, and could not be
explained as lexical – repeating words from the target; as phonological – responding
with words phonologically-similar to the target; or as a numerical distance effect –
producing responses numerically close to the target. The syntactic priming effect was
stronger for earlier words in the verbal number and weaker for later words, suggesting
that the syntactic representation is capped by working-memory limits. We propose that
syntactic priming could become a useful method to examine various aspects of the
syntactic representation of numbers.
1. Introduction
1.1. The syntax of numbers
Most languages can denote any integer number up to a reasonable size as a sequence of words
using a small lexicon of words and a generative system of syntactic rules. In the cognitive system
too, there are lexical and syntactic processes to handle numbers: lexical processes handle basic
lexical elements, i.e., digits or number words, and syntactic processes merge lexical elements into
syntactically-structured multi-digit numbers (or decompose multi-digit numbers into lexical
elements). The lexical-syntactic distinction has been demonstrated by neuropsychological studies
that showed double dissociations between lexical and syntactic processing: lexical processing can
be selectively impaired while sparing syntactic processing (Cohen et al., 1997; Dotan &
Friedmann, 2015; McCloskey et al., 1985, 1986); and syntactic processing can be impaired while
sparing lexical processing (Cappelletti et al., 2005; Cipolotti, 1995; Cipolotti et al., 1994; Dotan
& Friedmann, 2018; Furumoto, 2006; Noël & Seron, 1993).
 We thank Daled Dotan and Ricardo Tarrasch for their help in the data analysis. This research was
supported by the Jacobs Foundation (grant no. 2019-1320-05, Dotan).
Of these two types of processes – lexical and syntactic – the bigger challenge to the cognitive
system seems to be posed by the processing of syntax. Multiple types of evidence indicate this
syntactic difficulty. First, learning the syntax of numbers during childhood is hard and takes years
to master (Cheung & Ansari, 2020; Dotan & Dehaene, 2016). Second, children make more
syntactic errors than lexical errors when reading or writing numbers (Moura et al., 2013; Power &
Dal Martello, 1990, 1997; Seron & Fayol, 1994). Even adults, who make fewer errors when they
read numbers, still make more syntactic than lexical errors (Dotan & Friedmann, 2018). Third,
cognitive deficits in syntactic processes seem to be more common than deficits in lexical processes.
We are not familiar with published statistics about the prevalence of specific types of number
reading/writing disorders, but when we examined the precise locus of deficit for 23 randomly-
selected adults with dysnumeria (number reading impairment), each single one of them had a
syntactic deficit, whereas only 5 had lexical deficits (Dotan, unpublished data). For children too,
children with mathematical disorders make more syntactic than lexical errors (Moura et al., 2013).
This idea, that syntactic processing of numbers is more demanding cognitively than their lexical
processing, accords with the view that the ability to process certain syntactic structures is an
advanced cognitive ability, which is unique to humans and is not shared by animals (Dehaene et
al., 2015; Hauser et al., 2002).
Clearly, number syntax is necessary for transcoding – reading aloud multi-digit strings or multi-
word numbers, or writing them to dictation. Nevertheless, the importance of number syntax may
go beyond transcoding tasks – it may affect mathematical achievements in general. Of the three
cognitive representations of numbers – symbolically as digits or number words, and non-
symbolically as approximate quantities (Dehaene, 1992) – recent studies indicate that the ability
to process number symbols predicts mathematical performance better than the ability to process
quantities (Göbel, 2020; Malone et al., 2021; Moeller et al., 2011; Xenidou-Dervou et al., 2017;
Yuan et al., 2019). A major aspect of this ability to process symbolic numbers is the processing of
their syntactic structure (Dotan & Dehaene, 2020b; Dotan et al., 2021; Dotan & Friedmann, 2018;
McCloskey, 1992). Indeed, children’s understanding of number syntax (place-value principle)
predicts later achievements in math (Miura & Okamoto, 1989).
1.2. The cognitive representation of number syntax
Several neuropsychological studies, including those cited above, show that number syntax can
be selectively impaired. These studies clearly indicate the existence of cognitive processes
dedicated to syntax. However, the precise nature of these cognitive processes is yet unclear.
One possibility is that number syntax is handled by several processes, each handling a specific
type of syntax-relevant information. For example, errors that occur specifically in the digit 0
(Furumoto, 2006; Granà et al., 2003), or specifically in non-0 digits (Cohen & Dehaene, 1991;
Dotan & Friedmann, 2018), may be attributed to a selective deficit in dedicated processes that
handle the digit 0, or to a selective sparing of such processes, either in the visual analysis of digit
strings (Dotan et al., 2021) or in the digit-writing mechanisms (Furumoto, 2006). Errors in the
number length (e.g., reading 12 as if it had 3 digits, “one hundred and two”, Dotan & Friedmann,
2018) may arise from a deficit in a specific process that handles the length information. For
example, in the visual analysis of digit strings, a number-length detector may help setting up the
visual analyzer to handling a particular number of digits (Dotan & Dehaene, 2020b; Dotan et al.,
2021). In the verbal system, the dissociation between digit substitutions (e.g., “twenty three”
“twenty seven”) and lexical class substitutions (e.g., “twenty three” “twenty thirty”) may be
explained as a syntactic-semantic organization of the number-word phonological lexicon, e.g., if
each number word is represented as two morphemes, a digit and a class (McCloskey et al., 1986).
All these syntactic processes may be considered as low-level, because they do not represent the
number’s full syntactic structure but only some aspects of it; and because they are peripheral, in
the sense that they operate in the context of a particular input or output process, in a particular
modality.
Another interesting possibility, which we examine here, is that on top of these low-level
syntactic processes, there is an explicit representation of the number’s full syntactic structure. This
was one of the central ideas in Michael McCloskey’s number processing model, which we now
explain.
1.2.1. McCloskey’s model of number processing
The processing of number syntax can be broadly defined as processing the relations between
lexical elements – digits and number words. As a more concrete definition of number syntax,
McCloskey and colleagues proposed in the mid-1980s an influential cognitive model (McCloskey,
1992; McCloskey et al., 1986), which we will examine in the present study. According to this
model, symbolic numbers (digits and number words) have a syntactic-semantic abstract core
representation. The representation is abstract in the sense that it is neither verbal nor visual. It is
semantic, as it contains the full information about the number (all digits). Finally, it is syntactic,
as it reflects the number’s base-10 structure – e.g., the representation of 37 is denoted in
McCloskey’s model as 3EXP2 & 7EXP1, similar to the number’s decimal structure (37 = 3 10 +
7 10 ). McCloskey also hypothesized that the syntactic representation is hierarchical: in the
syntactic representation of a number, the units and decades are merged first, then this pair is
merged with the hundreds (thereby forming a triplet), and then two triplets can be merged together.
For example, the number 234,567 would be merged as [2 & (3 & 4)] & [5 & (6 & 7)] – a
hierarchical tree-like structure. Dotan and Friedmann (Dotan & Friedmann, 2018) proposed a
detailed cognitive model of number reading which embraces and extends McCloskey’s assumption
of a hierarchical syntactic representation.
McCloskey’s model further assumes that this syntactic-semantic representation is not the whole
story of number syntax: additional syntactic processes exist as part of the mechanisms that translate
the central representation into a verbal number or a digit string, or create the central representation
from verbal numbers or digit strings.
The present study examined McCloskey’s assumption that the full syntax of multi-digit
numbers is represented explicitly. We examined this assumption specifically with respect to verbal
numbers.
1.2.2. Criticisms on McCloskey’s model and the survival of its assumptions about
number syntax
During the 1990s there was a lively theoretical debate that contrasted McCloskey’s model
versus other theoretical models of number processing, the main competition being from Dehaene’s
triple-code model (Dehaene, 1992; Dehaene & Cohen, 1995). Critical assumptions of
McCloskey’s model were refuted, in particular the assumption of an abstract semantic
representation that serves as an intermediate representation in almost any number processing task,
in particular calculation and transcoding. Crucially, however, these refutations did not challenge
McCloskey’s notion of a syntactic representation, but only the notion of a semantic representation;
and they refuted the idea of a mandatory abstract representation, i.e., one that must be used in any
task, but they did not refute the possibility that such representation is used in some tasks but not in
others.
The two main criticisms on McCloskey’s model were as follows. First, some researchers
criticized McCloskey’s assumption that calculation operates on a central abstract representation.
This assumption predicts that the performance in a calculation task depends on the abstract
representation but should be independent of the input and output format – i.e., on the number’s
presentation mode (verbally, as Arabic digits or digit strings, as Roman numerals, etc.) and on the
response model (oral, writing, etc.). Contrary to this prediction, several studies showed that the
input/output format did in fact affect the performance in calculation (Campbell & Clark, 1992;
González & Kolers, 1982; Noël & Seron, 1997). Nevertheless, while these studies speak against
the notion of a central representation that serves all calculation operations, they do not refute the
possibility of a representation that is used for operations other than calculation, for example, for
reading or writing numbers.
Other researchers criticized McCloskey’s assumption that the syntactic-semantic representation
must serve as a mediating representation in any transcoding task – reading aloud digit strings or
writing numbers to dictation. To refute this idea, two important studies (Cohen & Dehaene, 1991,
2000) examined the performance of patients with brain damage who made many errors when
reading numbers aloud. McCloskey’s model predicts that such errors must originate in a deficit at
the visual input stage (which would affect any comprehension task), at the verbal production stage
(which would affect any task in which numbers are produced verbally), or in the central abstract
representation (which would affect reading, writing, calculation, and additional tasks). Contrary to
this prediction, the patient described by Cohen and Dehaene (2000) had good comprehension
(refuting a visual-input deficit), good production of verbal numbers (refuting a verbal-production
deficit), and good performance in written calculation relative to oral calculation (refuting a central-
representation deficit); and the patient described by Cohen and Dehaene (1991) had good
comprehension (refuting a visual deficit) yet his errors were clearly affected by visual factors
(refuting a post-visual deficit). Thus, the performance of these two patients could not be explained
by McCloskey’s model. Nevertheless, both patients made only digit substitutions errors, with no
syntactic errors, so their performance does not inform about the processing of number syntax, but
only about semantic processing. Namely, these two cases refute the extreme assumption that a
central representation of the full number semantics mediates number reading, but they do not refute
a narrower assumption, according to which there is a central syntactic representation of the
number.
In short, none of the studies above has challenged McCloskey’s assumption of a syntactic
representation of the multi-digit number; and none has refuted the idea of an “optional” central
representation, i.e., one that is used in some tasks but not in others.
1.2.3. Existing evidence for syntactic processing
1.2.3.1. Syntactic processing of verbal numbers
Many studies have demonstrated the existence of cognitive processes dedicated to handling
number syntax. For example, several neuropsychological case studies showed that the processing
of number syntax can be selectively impaired (Cipolotti, 1995; Delazer & Bartha, 2001; Dotan &
Friedmann, 2018; Noël & Seron, 1993). However, as explained above, number syntax is a broad
concept, and most of the studies that examined syntactic processing did not identify the specific
syntactic process involved. Here, our goal was to focus on verbal numbers and to examine
McCloskey’s specific assumption of an explicit representation of the number syntax. As we shall
now review, only a few studies specifically addressed the syntactic representation of verbal
numbers, and none showed an explicit representation of the number’s syntactic structure.
One study, from our own lab (Dotan & Friedmann, 2018), examined several individuals with
developmental dysnumeria (number reading disorder). One of them (OZ) had a selective deficit in
creating the number word frame – the series of lexical classes (ones, tens, teens, etc.) in a verbal
number. OZ’s difficulty may be attributed to a deficit in an abstract syntactic representation as the
one hypothesized by McCloskey, but it may also be attributed to deficits in other processes – e.g.,
a verbal, language-specific syntactic process. Furthermore, OZ’s pattern showed a syntactic deficit
but did not show an explicit representation of the full number syntax. Thus, while OZ’s case
certainly demonstrates a syntactic sub-process in verbal number production, it does not show an
explicit representation of the number’s syntactic structure.
In another study (Hung et al., 2015), participants read aloud sequences of number words –
grammatical (e.g., Five hundred sixty seven), non-grammatical (seven sixty five and hundred), and
semi-grammatical (sixty seven five and hundred – i.e., the full sequence is not grammatical, but
some segments in it are). The participants’ reaction times and brain activity patterns were affected
by the syntactic complexity of the number word sequence: sequences with more/longer
grammatical segments yielded shorter reaction time and higher brain activity in the left IFG and
the left IPL. These findings suggest a mechanism that merges grammatical number word pairs (and
perhaps even longer segments). Still, Hung et al. did not examine the precise nature of this merge
operation. In particular, they did not examine whether this merge involves an explicit
representation of the full number syntax (or, for example, operates only on adjacent word pairs).
Other studies used number dictation task with multi-digit numbers and showed that the
processing depended on the verbal number’s syntactic structure. Lochy et al. (2002) showed that
the time gaps between the writing of consecutive digits reflected the syntactic structure of the
verbal number the participants heard. Specifically, if a 4-digit number was dictated as teens,
decades, and units (e.g., 1234 as “twelve hundred thirty-four”), there was a large gap between the
hundreds and tens digit; but if the number was dictated as thousands, hundreds, decades, and units
(one thousand, two hundred and thirty-four), there was a large gap between the thousands and
hundreds digits. Noël and Seron (1997) used a similar manipulation: they showed that comparing
a pair of 4-digit numbers was faster when the two numbers were presented in the same verbal
format (e.g., twelve hundred vs. fourteen hundred) rather than in different formats (twelve hundred
vs. one thousand and four hundred); and that in oral 4-digit addition (XX00 + X00), participants
tended to respond using the verbal format presented in the question. These studies clearly show
that the verbal number’s syntax was parsed at some stage, however, they not demonstrate an
explicit representation of the number syntax, because in both studies the syntactic effect could be
explained as ad-hoc strategies based on low-level syntactic information. For example, the
participants in the dictation task (Lochy et al.) could have detected syntactic markers in the verbal
numbers in an early auditory stage (Fischer-Baum et al., 2018), and may have used this information
to chunk the number correspondingly – either into two pairs or into a digit + triplet.
1.2.3.2. Other syntactic processes
Several studies examined particular syntactic aspects of verbal numbers that could potentially
be low-level or peripheral, and thus less relevant to our research question. For example, some
studies showed that to retrieve the phonological form of a number word, a phonological lexicon is
accessed with two pieces of information – the digit identity and the number word lexical class
(ones, tens, etc.) – the latter being syntactic information (Dotan & Friedmann, 2015; McCloskey
et al., 1986). However, phonological retrieval is a language-dependent peripheral stage; clearly
not the central representation that we wish to examine here. Other studies showed sensitivity to
the order of number words in languages with non-canonical word order – in particular, languages
such as German or Arabic, in which the ones word precedes the tens word, e.g., 123 = “one hundred
three and twenty” (Blanken et al., 1997; Brysbaert et al., 1998; Cohen et al., 1997; Contreras-
Saavedra et al., 2020; Göbel et al., 2014; Hayek et al., 2020; Moeller et al., 2009; Pixner et al.,
2011; Pourquié & Nespoulous, 2018; Proios et al., 2002; Qasim-Masarwa et al., 2020; Zuber et
al., 2009). Nevertheless, word-order too might be handled by peripheral syntactic processes that
operate on a verbal, language-specific representation rather than on a central representation (the
number-reading model in Dotan & Friedmann, 2018 made precisely this assumption).
The present study focuses on verbal numbers, but syntactic mechanisms exist also for
processing digit strings. Dedicated mechanisms process the order of digits – in the visual analyzer
of digit strings (Dotan & Friedmann, 2018; Friedmann et al., 2010; García-Orza & Perea, 2011;
Kallai & Tzelgov, 2012), as well as when writing digits (Lochy et al., 2004). Other visual analysis
processes detect how many digits a number has (Dotan & Dehaene, 2020b; Dotan & Friedmann,
2018). Additional processes encode the positions of 0 and 1 (Benavides-Varela et al., 2016; Cohen
& Dehaene, 1991; Dotan et al., 2021; Furumoto, 2006), two syntactically-important digits. Finally,
experiments that required participants to convert multi-digit strings to quantities, e.g., using a
number comparison task or a number-to-position mapping task, indicate the existence of dedicated
cognitive mechanisms that implement the place-value principle of the decimal system (Dotan &
Dehaene, 2020b; Nuerk & Willmes, 2005).
1.3. The present study
The present study had three goals. First, we aimed to examine whether adults maintain an
explicit cognitive representation of the syntactic structure of verbal numbers, as hypothesized by
McCloskey’s model. We found that they do. Second, we examined whether this syntactic
representation represents the whole multi-digit number, as hypothesized in McCloskey’s model,
or is limited. Our results indicate that the syntactic structure of the whole number is represented,
but this representation is subject to working-memory limits. Last, we aimed to develop a
methodological paradigm that can be used in the future to examine additional aspects of the
syntactic structure of numbers.
The paradigm we introduce, syntactic priming, relies on the idea that processing a stimulus with
a certain syntactic structure facilitates the processing of a subsequent stimulus having the same
syntactic structure. This method was successfully used in language studies to examine the syntactic
processing of sentences: the existence of a syntactic priming effect was taken to show that people
represent the syntactic structure of sentences explicitly (Bock, 1986; Mahowald et al., 2016;
Mehler & Carey, 1967; Pickering & Ferreira, 2008). Moreover, some studies analyzed the degree
of priming between sentences with particular grammatical structures in order to reveal particular
aspects of the syntactic representations of sentences (see review in Pickering & Ferreira, 2008).
Nevertheless, these syntactic priming studies examined the syntactic structure of sentences, so they
do not illuminate on numbers, which have a completely different syntactic structure.
We used syntactic priming to examine the syntactic structure of verbal multi-digit numbers. On
each trial, participants heard a target number and responded by saying another random number.
We examined the degree of similarity between the syntactic structures of the target and the
response. The syntactic structure was defined as the number word frame – the list of lexical classes
(ones, tens, etc.) in the number (Cohen & Dehaene, 1991). For example, the number word frame
of “two hundred and three” is Hundreds + Ones. We reasoned that if the participants consistently
produce responses syntactically similar to the targets, this would indicate that they explicitly
represented the number's syntactic structure. Furthermore, as we shall see below, by analyzing
which parts of the number’s syntactic structure elicited the strongest syntactic priming effect, we
could examine various aspects of this syntactic structure.
2. Method
The results of all tasks, and the code we used to analyze the data, are available in
2.1. Participants
The participants were 37 adults, aged 18-74 (mean = 33;1, SD = 12;9), with no reported
cognitive disorders and with at least 12 years of education. 18 participants were native speakers of
Hebrew, and the remaining 19 were native speakers of Arabic, with good knowledge of Hebrew.
There was no significant age difference between the two groups (t(30) = 1.24, two-tailed p = .22;
Hebrew participants: mean = 30;3, SD = 9;3; bilingual: mean = 35;10, SD = 15;0).
2.2. Stimuli and Procedure
2.2.1. Number elicitation task for syntactic priming
In each trial, the experimenter said a target number between 1 and 9,999 and the participant
responded by saying a random number between 1 and 9,999, which must not be identical with the
target. The task was presented to the participants as a competition game in which each party (the
experimenter and the participant) says random numbers, and then they find out whether the goal
was to produce the larger or the smaller number. After the participant responded, the trial’s goal
(larger/smaller) was revealed and the experimenter declared who "won" that trial. The
experimenter recorded the winner in each trial, and at the end of each block declared the winner
of the entire block, and finally of the entire experiment. Obviously, the probability to win was
50%. The experiment’s real goal – to examine syntactic priming – was not disclosed to the
participants.
Each participant performed 150 trials, divided into 6 blocks with 30 trials in each. There were
7, 21, 50, and 72 targets with 1, 2, 3, and 4 digits, respectively. There were 69 targets with the digit
0 and 11 targets with a teen word. All participants heard the numbers in Hebrew and responded in
their native tongue – either Hebrew or Arabic. Thus, the Hebrew-speaking participants performed
the experiment in one language, and the Arabic-speaking participants performed a cross-language
experiment. In the Supplementary Online Material, we describe in detail the verbal number
systems in Hebrew and Arabic.
The specific list of target numbers was created with two goals in mind: to have a uniform
distribution of target numbers across the valid range (1 – 9,999), and to have a uniform distribution
of number word frames. Obviously, it is impossible to achieve both goals, as they contradict each
other. We therefore tried to compromise between the two goals (there was no specific formal
criterion). The distribution of the targets’ number word frames is shown in Fig. 1.
2.2.2. Memory tasks
The participants performed a forward digit span task (Gvion & Friedmann, 2012) to tap
phonological short-term memory, and a backward digit span task to tap working memory. We
examined whether these measures of memory correlated with the syntactic priming effect size.
2.3. Computation of priming effects
To examine whether a participant had a significant syntactic priming effect, i.e., whether that
participant tended to respond with numbers syntactically similar to the target, we used a bootstrap
method. The essence of this method is simple: first, we examined the degree of syntactic similarity
between the targets and the corresponding responses. Then, we examined whether the observed
target-response syntactic similarity is higher than the degree of similarity expected by chance. The
chance level was computed by generating a large number of random response sets and computing
the target-response similarity in each of these sets.
We also examined whether the priming effect was indeed syntactic. To this end, we compared
the effect of syntactic priming, as computed based on the target-response syntactic similarity,
versus other types of priming effects, computed based on lexical, phonological, or numerical
similarity. The specific algorithms we used to compute the different types of priming effects are
explained below, as part of the results section.
3. Results
3.1. Data cleanup
We used 4 criteria to ensure that the participants indeed responded with random numbers and
did not stick to fixed syntactic structures. For each criterion, we excluded participants with an
th
outlier score (threshold = 75 percentile plus 150% the inter-quartile range). Overall, 5 participants
were excluded. First, two participants were excluded for having a high rate of structural
perseverations, i.e., trials in which the number word frame (NWF) of the response was identical
with the NWF of the previous response. Second, one participant was excluded for producing too
few NWFs. The specific criterion value was the average number of times each NWF was produced
as response in a participant’s data. Third, two participants were excluded for having a high rate of
single-word responses (i.e., round numbers). Fourth, we examined the rate of trials with response
of each of these 4 criteria for each participant.
The remaining 32 participants (16 bilingual, 16 mono-lingual) had an average structural
perseveration rate of 15.2% (SD = 5.0%), an average of 9.0 responses for each NWF (SD = 1.0),
statistics). Their responses were larger than the target number in 52.4% of the trials (SD = 13.1%),
which was not significantly different from 50% (t(32) = 1.03, two-tailed p = .31) – i.e., they did
not show any consistent bias for responding with a number larger or smaller than the target. Still,
as we shall now see, the participants' responses were far from random.
3.2. A syntactic priming effect
Syntactic priming means that the participants’ responses are similar to the targets they heard in
terms of syntactic structure. To measure this syntactic similarity, following models of number
processing (Cohen & Dehaene, 1991; Dotan & Friedmann, 2018), we defined the number's
syntactic structure as the number word frame (NWF) – the sequence of lexical classes (ones, tens,
teens, etc.) in the verbal number. In Hebrew and Arabic, in which the present study was performed,
the verbal number system is slightly different from English, and so is the NWF: both in Hebrew
and in Arabic, hundreds are probably not represented phonologically as a ones word plus the word
“hundreds”, as is the case in English, but as single words – e.g., "five-hundred" is stored as a single
phonological-lexical entry (Dotan & Friedmann, 2015) . For example, the Hebrew NWF of 517 is
{_:hundreds} [and] {_:teens}. Similarly, each thousands word is also a single phonological-lexical
entry. Namely, the number-word lexical classes in English are ones, tens, and teens; but in spoken
Hebrew and Arabic, hundreds and thousands are lexical classes too.
To assess syntactic priming, we examined the syntactic structure of the responses versus that of
the target numbers. Fig. 1 shows the probability for each response NWF given each target NWF.
The high probabilities in the diagonal suggest that the NWF of the response tended to match that
of the target number – a syntactic priming effect. We next proceeded to examine this effect
statistically.
3.2.1. Syntactic priming analysis: method
3.2.1.1. General framework: bootstrap
To examine whether a participant had a significant syntactic priming effect, i.e., whether that
participant tended to respond with numbers syntactically similar to the target, we used the
1 The written form of the hundreds and thousands words in Hebrew and in Arabic is as two words, similar to English
תואמ שמח
(five hundred = , /xamesh meot/). However, in spoken languages the two words are typically pronounced
as one, sometimes even with a phonological modification that makes the merge easier: e.g., 3000 is written in Hebrew
םיפלא תשולש
as , /shloshet alafim/, but is typically pronounced /shloshtalafim/.
following process. First, we examined the degree of syntactic similarity between the responses and
the targets. To this end, we used a target-response similarity function that defined the degree of
similarity between a specific target and a specific response. We used different target-response
similarity functions for slightly different purposes, and they are detailed below (Section 3.2.1.2),
but they all aimed to tap the similarity between the target NWF and the response NWF. A
participant’s overall degree of target-response syntactic similarity was defined as the average
target-response syntactic similarity for that participant’s 150 target-response pairs.
Fig. 1. Distribution of the responses to each target, pooled over all participants and grouped according to
the target and response syntactic structure, defined as the Number Word Frame (NWF) – the sequence
of lexical classes (ones, tens, etc.) in the verbal number. The NWFs of the 1- to 4-digit numbers are denoted
as 1-4 characters, and specify any digit that affects the NWF (i.e., 1 in the tens positions and 0 in any
position). The diagonal reflects trials in which the NWF of the response was identical with that of the
target, supporting a syntactic priming effect. The histogram below the matrix shows the distribution of
target NWFs, and the histogram the left shows the distribution of response NWFs.
Then, to compute whether the participant’s target-response similarity index was higher than
expected by chance, we used a bootstrap method. For each participant, we created a set of random
responses (one per trial) using a random response generation function. In the simplest case, this
function just generated a random response in the valid range (1 - 9,999) for each target, but we
also used other random-response generation functions, as detailed below (Section 3.2.1.3). We
generated 10,000 random-response sets with 150 responses in each, and for each of these random-
response sets we computed the target-response syntactic similarity using the method described
above. The chance-level similarity is the average target-response similarity of these 10,000 random
attempts. Formally, let SimObs denote the average target-response similarity across the 150 real
trials; and let SimRand(i) denote the average target-response similarity in random set #i. The
priming effect size was defined, for each participant, as the priming gain, which reflects by how
much target and response are more similar syntactically to each other in the real data than in the
randomized data:
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4) = (cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10) − (cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:13)((cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:18))
To examine whether the syntactic priming effect was significant at the group level, we
compared the per-participant priming gains to 0 using t-test. One-tailed p values are reported,
because we assumed positive gains. To examine whether the priming effect was significant for a
particular participant, we examined the bootstrap results directly:
(cid:24)(cid:25),(cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25)
∑ (cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:18)((cid:3)) > (cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10)
(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:24)
(cid:20)((cid:20)(cid:14)(cid:3)(cid:7)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:15)) =
10,000
Below, we report the average gain and the group-level significance. In Supplementary Online
Material we report the per-participant priming gains and p values.
3.2.1.2. Target-response syntactic similarity
Syntactic priming means that the target and the response should have similar number word
frames (NWFs). Thus, as an index of syntactic priming we used the degree of similarity between
the target NWF and the response NWF. For each target or response, we coded whether it contained
each of the 5 possible number-word lexical classes: ones, tens, teens, hundreds, and thousands.
Namely, the syntactic structure of each number word was coded as 5 present/absent indicators,
one per lexical class. To compute the degree of overlap between the target and the response, we
considered the minimal number of modifications required in the target NWF to obtain the response
NWF, given that the available modifications are: (1) Addition of a word whose lexical class was
not in the target, e.g., target = 20, response = 73 (a unit word was added). (2) Omission of a lexical
class, e.g., target = 73, response = 20. (3) Substitution of one lexical class with another, e.g.,
target=230, response=507 (the target included a tens word, the response includes a ones word
instead); as long as the substituted class kept the same position in the sequence of words (e.g.,
target = 230, response = 89 cannot be considered as a substitution of a hundreds word into a ones
word). The target-response dissimilarity is the number of such modifications divided by 5 (the
number of possible lexical classes in our experiment), and the target-response similarity is the
complement to 1. Below, we use the term “NWF match rate” to refer to this index of syntactic
similarity.
For example, if the target was 305 and the response was 2470, a minimum of two modifications
is required to change the target NWF (hundreds-ones) into the response NWF (thousands-
hundreds-tens): adding the “thousands” class and changing “ones” to “tens”. In this example, the
target-response dissimilarity is 2/5=40%, and the similarity is 60%. Note that this similarity
measure deliberately considers only the lexical classes of the number words, and ignores the
specific digit values (except 0 and 1). Note that the order of lexical classes does not cause
ambiguity, because in Hebrew and Arabic numbers up to 9,999 each lexical class can appear only
once.
The NWF match rate is the degree of syntactic similarity between the target and response.
Another measure, which we used as control, examined syntactic identity – i.e., it considered
whether the target and the response had precisely the same syntactic structure. The similarity was
defined as 100% if the target and the response had precisely the same NWF, and as 0 if they did
not. For example, the similarity of 305 and 350 is 0, although both contain hundreds words. The
syntactic identity rate is the rate of trials in which the target and response had identical NWFs.
3.2.1.3. Random response generation functions
The trivial randomization method we used was uniform random responses: we generated, for
each trial, a random response between 1 and 9,999, with equal probability for each response.
An important characteristic of this method is that it does not consider biases that the participant
may have towards certain responses over others. Critically, our goal was not to discover such
general biases towards particular responses, but to discover whether participants tend to produce
particular numbers as response to particular targets. To control for this potential confound, we
also used another randomization method – random shuffling: we shuffled the participant’s own
responses in random order, i.e., we randomly paired each of the participant’s responses with one
of the targets. Because this method does not change the responses but only reassigns them to
targets, any overall bias the participant may have towards certain responses would be maintained
also in the random-response sets, so the priming gain would not be affected by such biases.
The uniform random responses and the random shuffling methods are complementary to each
other. The random shuffling method is superior in its ability to capture the participant’s tendency
to match the NWF of a particular response to the particular target, while controlling for any global
bias. On the other hand, the uniform random responses method is superior precisely because it can
capture such global biases, including a participant’s tendency to match the NWF of their responses
to the distribution of target NWFs presented in the experiment.
3.2.2. Syntactic priming analysis: results
We first analyzed the syntactic priming effect using the bootstrap method above, with syntactic
similarity defined as the NWF match rate, and with uniform random responses. Across
participants, the average NWF match rate was 80% (SD = 6.6%) and the average priming gain was
results). We also ran the bootstrap analysis with the random shuffling method (Section 3.2.1.3),
which controls for any overall bias of the participants towards responding with particular syntactic
structures. This computation too showed a significant syntactic priming effect (priming gain =
priming effect was significant also within the Hebrew-only group (with random shuffling, average
NWF match rate = 80%, gain = 12.6%, t(15) = 7.7, p < .001) and within the Arabic-Hebrew
bilingual group (average match rate = 80%, gain = 12.5%, t(15) = 9.9, p < .001), as well as for
each individual participant except one (bootstrap p ≤ .006 for all other participants, Holm-
Bonferroni applied to correct for multiple comparisons. The per-participant gains were between
response similarity was not defined as the NWF match rate, but instead as the NWF identity rate
Fig. 1 suggests that participants’ responses tended to maintain the number length – i.e., to
respond to 2-digit targets with 2-digit responses, to 3-digit targets with 3-digit responses, and so
on. Could it be that the syntactic priming effect is driven by this phenomenon alone, i.e., that the
priming is actually of a single aspect of the number syntax, namely the number length? We refuted
this possibility by analyzing syntactic priming while controlling for the number length: we ran the
bootstrap method described above, but the random shuffle method was modified to shuffle only
among responses having the same length (i.e., an N-digit response was always swapped with
another N-digit response). The syntactic priming effect was still significant (average gain = 3.5%,
as the number of words rather than the number of digits (average gain = 7.0%, t(31) = 10.7, p <
representing only the existence of 0 and 1 in the number: we ran the bootstrap analysis (based on
NWF match rate and the standard random shuffling), now excluding trials that had neither 0 nor 1
in the target, or neither 0 nor 1 in the response. The priming effect was significant (average gain =
length or only the existence of 0 and 1, but several aspects of the number’s syntactic structure.
Below (in Section 3.4), we will see additional evidence indicating that the participants represented
the presence of each of the number words – thousands, hundreds, tens, and units.
In short, the participants showed a clear and strong syntactic priming effect, which was robust
across several analyses. This indicates that they represented the target number's syntactic structure
(number word frame), and that this syntactic structure affected their selection of response.
3.3. The priming effect is indeed a syntactic one
We have shown a clear priming effect. To show that the origin of this priming effect was
genuinely syntactic, we ruled out several alternative interpretations of the priming effect. We
hereby describe each of these alternative interpretations and how it was refuted.
3.3.1. The syntactic priming effect is not an artefact of lexical priming
Lexical priming is a hypothesized tendency of the participants to occasionally repeat, within
the response, one or more of the target number's words. Several arguments rule out the possibility
that the syntactic priming effect was an artefact of lexical priming.
First, as we saw above, the syntactic priming effect was found also for the participants who
heard numbers in Hebrew and responded in Arabic. For these participants, the response words
were always different from the target words, which were in a different language, so the syntactic
priming effect cannot be explained by repetition on target words.
Second, the lexical priming hypothesis assumes that syntactic priming may occur as an artefact
because the participant occasionally repeats the target words, and this increases the NWF match
rate. To control for this putative artefact, we recomputed the syntactic priming effect as described
above (in Section 0, with NWF match rate and random shuffling) with a single change: in the
computation of NWF match rate, we excluded all words that were identical in the target and the
response. For example, If the target was two hundred fifty nine and the response was two hundred
and six, we excluded the "two hundred". In this example, the NWF match rate, computed only for
the 3 remaining words (“fifty nine” and “six”), would be 2/3 = 67%. As this method excludes all
word repetitions, any syntactic priming effect it finds cannot be explained as an artifact of lexical
priming. Still, when computed this way, the average NWF match rate over participants was 80%
The third argument notes that a number word is unambiguously identifiable by a lexical class
(e.g., ones, teens, tens), which reflects its syntactic aspect, combined with a 1-9 digit value
(McCloskey et al., 1986). For example, the combination "teens" and "5" yields the word fifteen. If
the syntactic priming effect was actually an artifact of the participants tending to repeat a target
word, or even similar words, they should repeat not only the lexical class but also the digits.
Namely, the lexical priming hypothesis predicts priming of the lexical classes (which we observed
as a syntactic priming effect), but critically, it also predicts a similar priming of the digit values –
a “digit priming” effect. To examine this prediction we used the bootstrap process used for
syntactic priming (Section 0), with random shuffling, but now the target-response similarity
function was defined as the digit match rate – essentially, the rate of identical digits between the
target and the response. To compute the digit match rate, we first translated each verbal number,
i.e., a sequence of number words, into an ordered sequence of the corresponding digits. For
example, the number 517 has two words (five and seventeen) and the corresponding digit sequence
is 5, 7. The target-response common digits were defined as the longest ordered sequence of digits
that existed in both the target and the response (not necessarily in a consecutive manner). For
example, the common digits between 1,2,4 and 2,3,4,1 are 2,4 (the digit “1” is not counted here as
common because adding it would violate the relative order of digits). The digit match rate of target
T and response R was defined as:
2 $%(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:13)(cid:14) &’ !&(cid:7)(cid:7)&(cid:4) (cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:15)(cid:3) (cid:10)
(cid:31)(cid:3)(cid:15)(cid:3) (cid:7)(cid:2) !ℎ (cid:14)(cid:2) (cid:13) =
(& (cid:2)) (cid:4)%(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:13)(cid:14) &’ *&(cid:14)(cid:18)(cid:10) (cid:3)(cid:4) ( (cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:18) (cid:17)
+×(cid:24)
For example, the digit match rate of 57 and 704 is = 50% (one common digit: 7), and the
+×+
digit match rate of 124 and 2341 is = 57% (two common digits: 2,4).
The digit priming effect was significant (average digit match rate = 23.9%, gain = 5%, t(31) =
3.76, p < .001; for the Hebrew-only group, gain = 4.3%, t(15) = 2.23, p = .04; for the bilingual
significantly weaker than the syntactic priming effect: the per-participant p values of the syntactic
priming were lower than the p values of the digit priming (paired t(31) = 4.04, one-tailed p < .001;
Hebrew-only group, paired t(15) = 3.31, p = .002; Bilingual group, paired t(15) = 2.34, p = .02;
we compared the p values rather than the gains because the similarity functions in the two analyses
are different, so the gains are not comparable directly). At the individual participant level too, the
digit priming effect was significant only for 13 of the 32 participants (bootstrap p < .05 after Holm-
Bonferroni correction).
Altogether, these results show that the syntactic priming effect is not an artefact of lexical
priming.
3.3.2. The syntactic priming effect is not an artefact of phonological priming
Phonological priming is a hypothesized tendency to respond with words that are phonologically
similar to the target words. Several arguments indicate that the syntactic priming effect cannot be
explained as an artefact of phonological priming.
The first argument initially notes that in Hebrew, each number word is created by merging a
stem, denoting the digit, with a suffix denoting the word’s lexical class (e.g., /im/ for tens: 3 =
/shalosh/, 30 = /shloshim/). Syntactic priming essentially means that the participants tend to repeat
the target words’ suffixes. Phonological priming predicts that the responses will phonologically
resemble not only the target’s suffixes but also the stems of the target words.
To assess this prediction, we used our bootstrap method (Section 0) with random shuffling, but
now the target-response similarity function indexed phonological similarity. To focus on
phonological (rather than syntactic) similarity, we examined the similarity between the stems of
the number words in the target and response, and we ignored the affixes (as an example in English,
for the word “fifty” we would ignore the suffix “-ty” and consider only the stem “fif”). The target-
response phoneme match rate was computed as follows. Let T and R denote the stems of the
number words in the target and in the response, correspondingly. Then:
2 × $&. &’ (cid:20)ℎ&(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:10) ℎ(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:13)(cid:18) (cid:3)(cid:4) (cid:9)& ℎ ( (cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:18) (cid:17)
2ℎ&(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:7)(cid:13) (cid:7)(cid:2) !ℎ (cid:14)(cid:2) (cid:13) =
(& (cid:2)) (cid:4)%(cid:7)(cid:9)(cid:13)(cid:14) &’ (cid:20)ℎ&(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:10) (cid:3)(cid:4) ( (cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:18) (cid:17)
To compute the number of phonemes that appeared in both T and R, we counted pairs of
identical target-response phonemes, subject to the limit that each phoneme can only be counted in
one pair. For example, the numbers four (phonemes: /f/, /o/, /r/) and fifty (/f/, /i/, /f/, without the
suffix /ti/) have a total of 6 phonemes, and only one pair of shared phonemes (/f/). Of the two /f/
phonemes in “fifty”, only one can be paired with “four”, because “four” only has one /f/. The
+×(cid:24)
phoneme match rate of “four” and “fifty” is therefore = 33%.
Phonological priming was not computed for the bilingual group, because the phonology of
Hebrew and Arabic is somewhat different, and may be perceived in different ways for different
participants, depending on their accent and on their fluency in Hebrew.
If the priming effect originates in phonological similarity, the phonological priming effect
should be as strong as the syntactic priming effect (Section 3.2.2). A phonological priming effect
relatively weak, and significantly weaker than the syntactic priming effect (the phonological
priming p values were higher than the syntactic priming p values; paired t(15) = 2.54, one-tailed p
= .01). Moreover, at the individual participant level, only half of the participants showed
significant phonological priming after Holm-Bonferroni correction). This weak phonological
priming effect could be completely reduced to digit priming, i.e., repetition on specific digits: when
controlling for digit-repetition priming by excluding digits that were identical in the target and the
response (same method as used above in Section 3.3.1), no group-level phonological priming
effect was observed any longer (gain < 0), and only one participant showed a significant priming
phonological similarity.
Second, if the syntactic priming effect is an artefact of phonological similarity, the bilingual
group should show less priming for the teens word than for the tens words. The reason is that the
tens numbers are more similar between Hebrew and Arabic than the teens are. More specifically,
in both languages the tens and the teens are marked by specific suffixes; the tens suffixes are
phonologically similar across the two languages, but the teens suffixes are phonologically
different. For example, 50 is /xamiʃim/ in Hebrew and /xamsin/ in Arabic, whereas 15 is /xameʃ-
esre/ in Hebrew and /xamistaʃ/ in Arabic. In short, if the syntactic priming effect originates in
phonology, in the bilingual group it should be stronger for the tens than for the teens. To assess
this prediction, we computed the degree of syntactic priming separately for the tens and for the
teens. For each of the two lexical classes, we used our bootstrap method with random shuffle
(Section 0). We analyzed only items in which the target included the lexical class in question
(either tens or teens). When creating the random-response sets, we first generated random
responses for all 150 trials and only then applied this filtering. As target-response similarity
function, we defined similarity as 100% if the response too included the lexical class in question,
and as 0 if it did not. Contrary to the prediction of the phonological priming hypothesis, the teens
priming effect in the bilingual group (average gain = 21.5%) was actually stronger than the tens
Third, if the responses are dominated by phonological priming, both syntactic priming and
lexical priming effects should be higher in the Hebrew-only group than in the bilingual group,
because each Hebrew number word is more similar phonologically to itself than to the
corresponding word in Arabic. Contrary to this prediction, the syntactic priming effect was similar
in the two groups (in both groups, 15 out of the 16 participants had bootstrap p = 0; comparing the
per-participant gains, unpaired t(30) = 0.05, two-tailed p = 0.95). The lexical priming effect,
measured via the digit match rate (Section 3.3.1), was similar across the two groups too
(numerically it was even stronger in the bilingual group, with an average gain of 5.3% versus 4.3%
in the Hebrew group, but this difference was not significant: comparing the per-participant gains
between the two groups, unpaired t(30) = 0.51, two-tailed p = .62).
Altogether, these results show that the syntactic priming effect is not an artefact of phonological
priming.
3.3.3. The syntactic priming effect is not an artefact of numerical distance
Another alternative hypothesis attributes the syntactic priming to a putative tendency to respond
with numbers that are numerically close to the target (an anchoring effect, Tversky & Kahneman,
1974). Close numbers tend to have similar number word frames (e.g., they are likely to have the
same thousand and hundred digits), so a strategy of choosing a close-to-target response could give
rise to a syntactic priming effect in our analysis.
However, such distance effect cannot account for the syntactic priming effect, because the
syntactic priming effect survived the inclusion of numerical distance as a controlled factor. To
show this, we recomputed the syntactic priming effect (as in Section 0, with similarity defined as
the NWF match rate), but crucially, we used a random-response generation function that ensures
that the target-response numerical distance in the randomized sets would be similar to the
participant’s real target-response numerical distance. We ran two different bootstrap analyses, with
two different random-response generation functions.
The first randomization function we used relied on the participant-specific distribution of target-
response distances. For each participant, we computed the mean and the standard deviation of the
target-response distances based on the participant’s real responses. Then, we chose random
responses according to a normal distribution function having the same mean and standard deviation
as in the participant’s real data. The syntactic priming effect computed this way was significant
not an artefact of numerical distance.
The second random-response generation function shuffled each participant’s actual responses,
similar to the random shuffle method described in Section 3.2.1.3. By using random shuffle instead
of random responses, we controlled for any possible target-independent bias towards particular
responses. Importantly, this method maintained the mean and standard deviation of the
participant’s target-response distances. The mean distance is unchanged by shuffling, and the
specific shuffling algorithm we used was designed to ensure that the standard deviation of
distances in the shuffled data would be as close as possible to the real data.
The shuffling algorithm consisted of 3 stages. The first stage shuffled the participant’s
responses randomly (as in Section 3.2.1.3). Two additional stages aimed to obtain target-response
distance distribution similar to the real data. The first improvement stage was a greedy algorithm
aiming to maximize the number of randomized trials in which the target-response distance was
close to a corresponding target-response distance in the real data. The specific algorithm was as
follows. We processed the participant’s shuffled trials one at a time, in random order. If the target-
response distance of the shuffled trial was close enough to one of the target-response distance in
the real data (6(cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:10) (cid:2)(cid:4)!(cid:13) − (cid:18)(cid:3)(cid:10) (cid:2)(cid:4)!(cid:13) 6 ≤ 10), the shuffled trial was considered as valid.
789::;<= ><?;
In this “distance-matching”, each real-data distance could be “used” only once – e.g., taking an
extreme case as an example, it is invalid to create 150 target-response distances that are similar to
each other and to one of the real target-response distances, while ignoring the 149 other real target-
response distances. If the target-response distance of a particular shuffled trial was invalid (i.e., it
could not be matched with any target-response pair in the real data such that |Δdistances| ≤ 10),
the algorithm tried to swap the response of that trial with another random trial, such that both
would have valid distances. This matching-and-swapping procedure was done repeatedly for all
trials (in random order) until no more “improving swaps” were possible.
The second improvement stage used a simulated annealing procedure (simeanneal Python
module, Perry, 2019). Simulated annealing is an optimization algorithm that runs in several
iterations; in each iteration it attempts a random change and accepts the change in a probability
that depends on the change’s effect on a cost function. In our case, the change was swapping two
random trials, and the cost function was the difference between the standard deviation of the 150
target-response distances in the shuffled trials and the standard deviation in the real data. The effect
on Δcost on the likelihood of accepting the change is probabilistic: the more the change reduces
the cost, the more likely it is to be accepted, but cost-increasing changes can also be accepted
occasionally. The probability to accept a change also depends on time: as the process continues
and we presumably get closer to the optimal solution, the algorithm decreases the probability to
accept cost-increasing changes.
We verified that this shuffling method indeed maintained the mean and standard deviations of
the target-response distances. The mean was obviously identical with the real data, as it is not
affected by shuffling; and the differences in standard deviations between the real and shuffled data
were small: excluding two participants, the difference did not exceed 5% in any bootstrap iteration;
This analysis showed a significant syntactic priming effect (average gain = 8.1%, t(31) = 11.7,
were clear: the syntactic priming effect cannot be explained as an artefact of the target-response
numerical distance.
Fig. 2. The distribution of response-target distances (Gaussian smoothing with σ = 10 numerical units was
applied). Positive values indicate response larger than target (over all participants, this was the case in
53% of the trials). The distance (anchoring) effect is clearly visible, however, it does not explain the
syntactic priming.
Although the numerical distance could not account for the syntactic priming effect, it did affect
the participant’s selection of responses: the participants tended to pick responses that were
numerically close to the target (Fig. 2; this effect becomes even clearer when plotting the likelihood
of each target-response pair, Fig. 3). To show that the distance effect was statistically significant,
we used our bootstrap method, with the dependent variable indexing numerical distance: the target-
response similarity function was defined as (and as 0 if the target
-log( |target - response| )
and response were equal). Random responses were generated using the random shuffling method
(Section 3.2.1.3), with an additional limitation – that the shuffling maintains the real response’s
NWF in each trial. Maintaining the NWF ensures that any observed distance effect would not be
an artefact of syntactic priming. The distance effect computed this way was significant (average
selection of responses was affected both by syntactic priming and by the numerical distance.
Fig. 3. The distribution of targets and responses, pooled over participants. The data was smoothed by
ignoring the unit digit, thereby summing each 10x10 data points into a single matrix pixel. Each point in
this graph shows the conditional probability for a particular response given a particular target, i.e., each
column in the matrix sums to 100%. Below and near the matrix: the distributions of the targets
irrespectively of the response, and of the responses irrespectively of the target, presented as the
probability per numerical unit (Gaussian smoothing with σ = 10 numerical units was applied to these
histograms).
3.3.4. Interim summary
The analyses above clearly show that the syntactic priming effect could not be explained as an
artefact of lexical priming, phonological priming, or numerical distance. Thus, the effect is
genuinely syntactic, and indicates that the participants represented the number’s syntactic
structure. We next examine the characteristics of this syntactic representation.
3.4. Number syntax and working memory
We examined whether the syntactic priming effect was elicited by particular syntactic elements
– i.e., by words in particular positions in the number. We started by computing the priming effect
separately for each lexical class – ones, tens, hundreds, and thousands. We used the method
described in Section 3.3.2: for each lexical class, we ran a separate bootstrap analysis with random
shuffle, while including only trials in which the target included the lexical class in question. Target-
response similarity was defined as 100% if the response too included the lexical class in question,
strongest for the thousands words and continuously decreased, with the weakest effect for the ones
words.
strongest for the thousands, and decreases monotonously for “lower” classes.
Thousands Hundreds Teens Tens Ones
NWF Match rate 77% 79% 28% 70% 64%
Gain 35% 14% 19% 7% 5%
t(31) 15.2 13.4 6.0 6.4 5.0
Comparing the gains versus 0 with t-test. All p < .001.
This dependency of the syntactic priming effect size on the lexical class can be interpreted in
two ways. One interpretation is that the “larger” lexical classes (e.g., tens as opposed to ones)
elicited more priming because their cognitive representation is different. For example, they may
be more salient because their impact on the quantity is larger. Another interpretation is that the
priming effect size does not depend on the lexical class per-se, but on the position of the word in
the verbal number, with stronger priming for earlier words. Such serial-position pattern could arise,
for example, from the involvement of working memory mechanisms. The idea is that representing
the verbal number’s syntactic structure may require working memory resources (Bahnmueller,
Galefski, Moeller, Nuerk, & Artemenko, in prep.), and a working memory limit may disrupt the
later words more than the earlier ones (a primacy effect, Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968). As a result,
later words would be under-represented in the syntactic structure, and would therefore elicit a
weaker syntactic priming effect.
To arbitrate between the lexical-class interpretation and the serial-position interpretation, we
examined whether the degree of syntactic priming is best predicted by the lexical class or by the
word’s position in the verbal number. These two parameters sometimes dissociate due to the
presence of 0 (e.g., the word “twenty” has the same lexical class but different positions in 4,021
and 4,321, and so does the word “one”). Fig. 4 clearly indicates that the degree syntactic priming
was modulated by the word position in the verbal number, whereas the effect of lexical class was
not monotonous.
Fig. 4. The match rate for words in particular positions, according to their lexical class and position in the
verbal number. The match rate decreases monotonously for words in later positions in the number, but
the effect of lexical class is not monotonous.
To examine statistically whether the syntactic priming effect of particular number words was
affected by their lexical class or by their position, we used the following analysis. We defined the
priming effect for each number word in the target as the syntactic match: 1 if the participant’s
response included a word having the same class as the target word, and 0 if it did not. Essentially,
the syntactic match denotes whether the particular target word contributed to syntactic priming or
not. We then submitted the syntactic match data to logistic linear mixed model (LLMM) with the
participant as a random factor and with three within-subject factors: the word’s position in the
target number as a numeric factor (1 = first), the word’s lexical class as a numeric factor (1 =
thousand, 2 = hundreds, 3 = tens, 4 = ones), and the number length (how many digits it has) as a
non-numeric factor. We used R (R Core Team, 2019) with the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015).
To determine whether the effect of a particular factor was significant, we used a log likelihood
ratio test that compared the LLMM to a model that was identical but without the factor in question.
For these comparisons, we report the test statistic 2(LL - LL ), which follows a χ distribution
0 1
(LL and LL denote the log-likelihoods of the reduced model and the full model), the
0 1
corresponding p value, and the odds ratio (the exponent of the factor’s coefficient in the full
each target elicited strong syntactic priming, and later words elicited smaller priming effects. In
contrast, the effect of Lexical Class was positive (odds ratio > 1), i.e., in the model that included
both factors, the likelihood for a syntactic match was not decreased by the word having a “later”
2, but was actually increased. Namely, the degree of priming was affected by the word’s serial
position in the verbal number, not by its lexical class.
the linear mixed model (dependent variable = per-word syntactic match). The position
effect was significant, but the lexical class effect was opposite to the predicted direction.
Predictor Odds ratio 95% confidence interval Significance
(Intercept) 2.18 1.53 - 3.11
Position 0.53 0.47 – 0.60 χ2(1) = 111.8, p < .001
Lexical class (numeric) 1.19 1.08 – 1.31 χ2(1) = 12.4, p < .001
Number length χ2(3) = 66.2, p < .001
Length = 2 2.11 1.68 – 2.65
Length = 3 2.72 2.08 – 3.58
Length = 4 3.81 2.75 – 5.28
Random effects
σ2 within participants 3.29
σ2 between participants 0.36
The finding that serial position, not lexical class, is responsible for the syntactic priming slope
responsible for it) is modulated by short-term memory (STM) or working memory (WM): the
participants seem to remember the earlier parts of the syntactic structure better than the later parts.
An additional question concerns the type of these short-term memory processes, which are needed
for syntactic representation: are they domain-general short-term memory processes, or a memory
process dedicated to representing number syntax? If the memory processes in question are domain-
general, a participant’s sensitivity to the word position should be higher for participants with lower
STM or WM. However, this was not the case. We defined the participant’s sensitivity to word
position as the slope of the priming-gain-by-position curve, computed by regressing, for each
participant, the priming gain against serial position. We then examined whether participants with
lower memory spans had steeper gain-by-position slopes (i.e., positive correlation, as the slope
was negative). We used multiple linear regression to regress the gain-by-position slope against the
participants’ forward digit span (an index of short-term memory), their backward digit span (an
index of working memory), and the language group (bilingual or monolingual). This analysis was
done only for 17 participants, because the remaining participants were no longer available at this
time of the study. Neither span predictor had a significant effect (forward digit span, b = -.002,
i.e., opposite to the predicted direction; backward digit span, b = .001, one-tailed p = .46). These
results may suggest that the memory-sensitive syntactic process is not a domain-general memory
process. However, admittedly, to reach a reliable conclusion regarding the precise nature of the
relation between syntactic representation and short-term/working memory, this issue should be
examined more deeply and systematically than the analysis we could do with our present data.
4. Discussion
4.1. An explicit representation of the number’s syntax
The first goal of this study was to examine whether the cognitive system represents explicitly
the syntactic structure of verbal numbers. The participants heard a target number in each trial and
responded with a random number. They clearly represented the number’s syntactic structure,
because the syntactic structure of their response resembled that of the target. In particular, the
participants often responded with numbers having the same lexical classes (ones, tens, teens, etc.)
as the classes that appeared in the target. This priming effect clearly shows that the participants
represented the lexical classes, i.e., the syntactic structure, of both the target and the response, and
could transfer this syntactic information from the verbal input processes (the target) to the verbal
production stage (the response).
Importantly, we refuted several alternative non-syntactic interpretations of this priming effect.
First, we showed that the syntactic priming was not an artefact of lexical priming – a tendency to
include some of the target number’s words in the response. Contrary to the idea of lexical priming,
(a) the syntactic priming effect was observed even when the target and the response were in
different languages, i.e., when they were always different words; (b) the syntactic priming effect
was observed even when we excluded words that were identical in the target and the response,
thereby eliminating any possible effect of word repetition and lexical priming; and (c) the syntactic
priming, i.e., the priming of the number’s lexical classes, was stronger than the priming of digit
values, whereas lexical priming predicts priming of both.
Second, we showed that the syntactic priming was not an artefact of phonological priming – a
tendency to respond to a target number with similar-sounding words. Contrary to the idea of
phonological priming, (a) the similarity of response words to target words was observed in the
words’ morphological affixes, which reflect the number’s syntax, but there was only a small and
non-reliable phonological priming in the number word stems; (b) the bilingual group showed
stronger priming effect for teens than for tens, whereas the phonology of these words predicts the
opposite, because the Hebrew-Arabic phonological similarity is larger for tens than for teens; and
(c) the priming effect was not stronger for monolingual participants than for bilingual participants,
as should have been the case had it been driven by phonology.
Third, the syntactic priming was not an artefact of an anchoring effect (Tversky & Kahneman,
1974) – a tendency to respond with numbers numerically close to the target. Contrary to the idea
of distance-based priming, the syntactic priming effect was observed even when we controlled for
the target-response numerical distance. Nevertheless, we did observe an effect of numerical
distance on top of the syntactic priming effect. Namely, the participants’ responses were affected
both by syntactic priming and by numerical distance as two separate factors.
Having refuted all these alternative interpretations, we could reliably conclude that the priming
effect was a syntactic one.
Several neuropsychological studies showed that the processing of the number’s syntax can be
selectively impaired or selectively spared (Blanken et al., 1997; Cipolotti, 1995; Cipolotti et al.,
1994; Dotan et al., 2014; Furumoto, 2006; Noël & Seron, 1993). These studies indicate the
existence of dedicated mechanisms that process the syntax of numbers. Additional studies showed
that syntactic processing exists not only in general, but even specifically within the verbal-number
processing mechanisms (Dotan & Friedmann, 2018; Lochy et al., 2004). The present study joins
these studies in showing that the human cognitive system processes the syntactic structure of
verbal numbers. Importantly, the present study also extends these previous studies. First, our data
shows that the syntax of verbal numbers is not merely “handled” in some way, e.g., in processes
that handle low-level syntactic information, perhaps even merely for single number words, but is
represented explicitly – as a series of number-word lexical classes or in an isomorphic
representation. Second, our data suggests that the syntactic representation is not comprehension-
specific or production-specific, but a central one. In our paradigm, the participants heard a number
in each trial, and its syntactic structure primed the spoken number’s syntactic structure. Thus, the
syntactic representation is not an input-only or output-only representation, but exists for both. The
most likely interpretation of the comprehension-to-production priming is a central syntactic
representation, accessed by both the input and the output processes, as McCloskey (1992)
proposed. Third, our data suggests that the syntactic representation is capped by working memory,
as detailed below.
4.2. The syntactic representation is capped by memory
Our second goal was to examine whether the syntactic representation incorporates the whole
number or just parts of it. We showed that at least for 4-digit numbers, the full number is
represented: our participants showed a significant priming effect for all words, including the ones
word. Nevertheless, our findings also suggest that the syntactic representation is limited by
working memory: the priming effect was stronger for words occurring earlier in the number, and
weaker for later words. Crucially, we showed that this position effect could not be explained as
stronger priming for particular lexical classes, but was driven by the word’s serial position in the
verbal number, in line with the idea of a working-memory-capped representation. We
acknowledge that our experiment included numbers only up to 4 digits long; it may be that with
longer numbers, some words would have failed to show a syntactic priming effect.
The decline of syntactic priming with word position suggests a memory-limited representation,
yet this position effect did not correlate with the participants’ short-term memory or working
memory measures. This perhaps suggests that representing the number’s syntax involves a
dedicated memory process, which is particular to handling number syntax and is not involved in
general memory tasks such as the tasks that we used here (forward/backward digit span). In
language too, the working memory needed to represent the syntax of sentences seems to be a
dedicated mechanism, dissociable from phonological working memory (Friedmann & Gvion,
2003). Future studies may look more deeply into the putative role of working memory in handling
the number’s syntax.
The idea that representing the number syntax requires working memory resources is in good
agreement with a study that suggested the involvement of working memory in syntactic processing
during number dictation (Zuber et al., 2009). In some languages, e.g., German, digit strings are
written as in English, but in the verbal number the ones word precedes the tens word (i.e., you read
234 as “two hundred, four and thirty”). Zuber et al. showed that in a number dictation task in
German, children sometimes transposed the decade and the unit digits, presumably because they
wrote the digits from left to right in the same order in which they heard the words. Critically, the
probability for such inversion errors correlated with the children’s performance in a working
memory task. Thus, it seems that the syntactic operation of inverting the word order, which is
necessary to write numbers correctly in German, requires working memory resources.
Nevertheless, as we noted in the Introduction, even if number-word inversion (Zuber et al.) and a
central representation (the present findings) can both be referred to as “number syntax”, these are
two different operations which may invoke different cognitive processes (Dotan & Friedmann,
2018).
4.3. Serial or hierarchical syntactic representation?
The present study defined a verbal number’s syntactic structure as the number word frame –
the series of lexical classes in the number. Some models of number processing, including
McCloskey’s, assume that the deep representation of the number’s syntax is not serial, as we
described here, but hierarchical (Barash & Dotan, 2019; Dotan & Friedmann, 2018; McCloskey,
1992). Importantly, such hierarchical models of number syntax do not contradict our conclusions
but complement them, for two reasons. First, we showed that the participants represented the
number’s syntactic structure, but our findings can be easily interpreted also under a hierarchical-
syntax model. We described the number syntax using serial rather than hierarchical terminology
merely because the serial description is simpler. Second, hierarchical and serial representations of
syntax may co-exist side by side in separate processing stages. Indeed, some models of number
processing assume precisely this – that the number’s syntactic structure is represented in a
hierarchical manner, and this hierarchical representation is then translated into a serial
representation – the number word frame (Cohen & Dehaene, 1991; Dotan & Friedmann, 2018).
A related question is whether the number word frame, on which our analyses focused, should
be described as a syntactic representation or a morphological one. One the one hand, the NWF
specifies the lexical class of each word, and decomposing of a number word into a class and a digit
value (or constructing a word from these two parameters) is best described as a morphological
operation. On the other hand, the NWF reflects the relation between the words in a multi-digit
number, and in this sense it is represents a syntactic structure. It could also be possible that the
structure of multi-digit numbers is handled by multiple processes, some of which are better
described as syntactic and others as morphological. Future studies may ask whether the syntax and
morphology of verbal numbers are indeed separate cognitive constructs, or only two different
terminologies that describe the same cognitive processes.
4.4. Syntactic priming as a method to investigate the syntactic
representation of numbers
The last goal of this study was to develop a paradigm that would allow examining number
syntax in detail. We propose that the paradigm we introduced here, syntactic priming, can do
precisely that; and that it could become a powerful method to look into additional aspects of the
syntactic representation of numbers.
Previous studies used different methods to examine the syntactic processing of verbal numbers
– e.g., neuropsychological examination of individuals with selective deficits (Dotan & Friedmann,
2018; Marangolo et al., 2004; McCloskey et al., 1986), manipulating the grammaticality of
number-word sequences (Brutman & Dotan, 2019; Hung et al., 2015), saying the same numbers
with different verbal structure (Lochy et al., 2002; Noël & Seron, 1997), and examining languages
with tens-ones number-word inversion (Blanken et al., 1997; Brysbaert et al., 1998; Cohen et al.,
1997; Contreras-Saavedra et al., 2020; Göbel et al., 2014; Hayek et al., 2020; Moeller et al., 2009;
Pixner et al., 2011; Pourquié & Nespoulous, 2018; Proios et al., 2002; Qasim-Masarwa et al., 2020;
Zuber et al., 2009). Syntactic priming is an additional paradigm, which offers unique advantages:
first, it does not merely tap “sensitivity” to the number syntax, a phenomenon that can occur also
for low-level syntactic processes, perhaps even such that handle syntactic information merely for
single digits or single number words. Rather, syntactic priming can tap the full syntax of a multi-
digit number. Second, syntactic priming can be used to reveal several specific properties of the
syntactic representation. Here we examined one such property – the representation being limited
by working memory. Other variants of syntactic priming may examine additional properties of
number syntax – e.g., whether the syntactic representation is abstract and/or hierarchical (as
hypothesized by McCloskey et al., 1986), whether and how the syntactic processing of numbers is
related with the syntactic processing of sentences, and so on. Moreover, because the method is
simple and does not require much training, it may also be used with young children to examine the
development of number syntax.
In the present study, the participants could say any number that came to their mind, and were
instructed only “to choose a random number”. This free-response design has several advantages –
e.g., it showed that the syntactic representation serves comprehension as well as production
processes, and it allowed examining various properties of the number syntax rather than focusing
on just one aspect. At the same time, the free-response design also has limitations. A major
limitation of this design is that unlike classical priming experiments, in which the experimenter
typically manipulates both the prime and the target, here we could manipulate the prime but not
the stimulus that follows it (which was chosen freely by the participants). Future syntactic priming
studies may use more structured designs, e.g., by choosing both the prime and the target, or by
imposing various restrictions on the participant’s responses, in order to examine specific aspects
of the number syntax.
Another methodological issue concerns the selection of specific targets. This issue is important
because the participants may be affected not only by the target of the specific trial, but also by the
distribution of number word frames in the experiment. For example, this may be one of the reasons
for the high rate of responses without zeros (see Fig. 1) – such numbers were also more frequent
as targets. Indeed, other studies too showed that participants are sensitive to the distribution of
stimuli (Cicchini et al., 2014; Dotan & Dehaene, 2020a; Hanks et al., 2011; Kording & Wolpert,
2004; Summerfield & de Lange, 2014). The question of target distribution was not in the scope of
the present study; to select the specific list of targets, we used a vague compromise between
uniform distribution of numbers and uniform distribution of number word frames. Future studies
may examine more systematically how syntactic priming is affected by a specific trial versus the
experimental context; for example, by using different distributions of targets.
4.5. Conclusion
Processing syntax, in particular that of numbers, is a big cognitive challenge, and
correspondingly several different cognitive mechanisms are involved in this task. The big question
is how precisely the human cognitive system handles this challenge, i.e., how do these syntactic
mechanisms operate. To answer this question, we should look in detail into specific syntactic
processes and the details of specific syntactic representations. The present study offers an initial
step in this direction: we showed an explicit central representation of the number syntax, which is
capped by memory limits. We hope that future studies can use the method we introduced here to
examine this representation in more detail.