Financial Constraints and Purchase Happiness
RODRIGO S. DIAS, EESHA SHARMA, GAVAN J. FITZSIMONS
This version: December 21, 2020
This paper has not been peer reviewed. Please do not copy or cite without author's permission.
Rodrigo S. Dias (rodrigo.dias@duke.edu) is a PhD candidate in marketing at the Fuqua School of
Business at Duke University. Eesha Sharma is Associate Professor of Business Administration at
the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth College. Gavan J. Fitzsimons is the Edward S. & Rose
K. Donnell Professor of Marketing and Psychology at Duke University.
Acknowledgments: The authors thank Jim Bettman, Eduardo Andrade, Jack Soll, and Jordan
Etkin for comments in previous drafts of this manuscript.
Contribution Statement
Several findings suggest that financial constraints increase compensatory consumption.
However, research is silent on whether financial constraints ultimately affect the happiness
consumers derive from their purchases. The objective of the current research is to investigate
whether financial constraints influence purchase happiness, and what a plausible mechanism
underlying this potential effect might be. While conducting a systematic investigation of the
purchase types for which this effect holds is beyond the scope of this work, we meta-analyzed
our entire file drawer to examine interactions with various purchase characteristics. We further
investigate potential downstream consequences, rule out alternative accounts, and examine
boundary conditions.
This work has three main contributions. First, prior research on purchase happiness has
largely focused on purchase categories that influence purchase happiness. The current research
adds to this work by examining perceptions of consumers’ financial resources—a necessary
component of any purchasing decision.
Second, it addresses the open question of how financial constraints influence purchase
happiness. We find that while consumers predict greater happiness with their purchases when
more (vs. less) financially constrained, they actually derive less happiness from those purchases.
This work is the first to our knowledge to demonstrate that financial constraints can have
differential effects on outcomes across consumer decision-making stages. It also adds to the
growing work on financial constraints by focusing on important post-purchase outcomes, in
contrast to the majority of existing literature that has focused on earlier decision-making stages.
Finally, this work offers insights into how related factors (i.e., financial constraints,
income, socio-economic status) are distinct and can make unique predictions. For instance, while
financial constraints decrease purchase happiness, income does not. In addition, our results
increase understanding of potential differences between financial constraints and “depleting a
budget to zero”. For example, prior research shows that depleting a budget to zero increases pain
of paying, which decreases purchase satisfaction (Soster, Gershoff, and Bearden 2014).
However, we find that financial constraints decrease purchase happiness irrespective of
budgetary status and pain of paying. Thus, this work provides initial steps in the direction of
clarifying distinctions between similar conceptualizations of consumers who face resource
constraints.
Word count: 348 (max 350)
Abstract
Financial constraints change attention, choice, and consumption in important ways. This
work examines how financial constraints affect one important outcome at a later stage of the
consumer decision-making process: purchase happiness. Eight high-powered studies (N = 7,481)
demonstrate that financial constraints decrease the happiness consumers derive from their
purchases. This, in turn, leads to a consequential outcome: less favorable consumer reviews. This
effect occurs because consumers who feel more (vs. less) financially constrained are more likely
to consider opportunity costs when evaluating their purchases. Furthermore, this effect is
independent of consumers’ objective constraints (e.g. income) and social class, is not due to a
general decrease in life satisfaction or mood, and is robust across several purchase types.
Consistent with our proposed mechanism, the effect attenuates when opportunity costs are made
salient and when consumers consider purchases for which opportunity costs are naturally less
salient (i.e., planned purchases). Moreover, although financial constraints decrease actual
purchase happiness, they increase expected purchase happiness, suggesting that financial
constraints can have differential effects across decision-making stages. Finally, we meta-analyze
our file drawer (17,750 participants; 33 studies) to examine how the effect differs across
purchase types and discuss theoretical and practical contributions for consumers and marketers.
Word count: 200 (max: 200)
Keywords: financial constraints, purchase happiness, opportunity costs, consumer reviews.
Mounting evidence suggests that money cannot “buy” happiness (e.g., Howell and
Howell 2008; Kahneman and Deaton 2010). Yet, many consumers engage in compensatory
consumption to signal positive attributes or offset deficiencies in their lives (Rucker and
Galinsky 2008; Kim and Rucker 2012). Prior research indicates that the tendency to engage in
compensatory consumption is particularly strong among consumers who feel financially
constrained (Cannon, Goldsmith, and Roux 2019). This is notable given the ubiquity of financial
constraints across all income brackets. For example, despite historically high levels of economic
activity and wealth in the United States in 2019 (U.S. Census Bureau 2019), consumers across a
wide income spectrum reported feeling financially constrained (e.g., Experian Simmons 2019;
Pew Research Center 2019).
Because financially constrained consumers engage in compensatory consumption to
offset the aversiveness of their state, an important but unanswered question is whether consumers
who feel financially constrained actually derive more happiness from their purchases. While
prior research offers several reasons why financial constraints might increase purchase happiness
(Quoidbach et al. 2015; Norton, Mochon, and Ariely 2012), we find the opposite. Furthermore,
we find that the negative effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness leads to a
consequential behavioral outcome: less favorable customer reviews. This effect is robust across a
wide range of purchase categories, emerges when financial constraints are both measured and
manipulated, does not generalize to all resource constraints (e.g. time constraints), is independent
of perceived social class, and is specific to consumers’ subjective perceptions of their financial
situation rather than their objective constraints (e.g. income). While several potential
mechanisms may explain this effect, we find that it occurs, at least in part, because financially
constrained consumers are more likely to consider opportunity costs when evaluating their
purchases. Indeed, this effect occurs over and above decreases in mood or general life
satisfaction and increases in pain of paying. Consistent with our proposed mechanism, the
negative effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness attenuates when (1) opportunity
costs are made salient and (2) consumers consider purchases for which opportunity costs are
naturally less salient (i.e., planned purchases). In a meta-analysis of our entire file drawer (N =
17,750, k = 33), we examine how the effect varies across different purchase types and find that
the effect holds across a wide range of purchases. In a final study, we find that despite the robust
negative effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness, financial constraints increase
predicted purchase happiness, suggesting that financial constraints might have different effects
on consumers across different stages of the decision-making process.
The current work offers several contributions to the literature. First, the majority of
research on financial constraints has focused on their effects on pre-purchase outcomes, whereas
the current work investigates the role of financial constraints on meaningful post-purchase
outcomes. Second, in contrast to the literature on purchase happiness that largely examines
various purchase categories that enhance purchase happiness, we focus on consumers’ financial
resources—a necessary component of any purchase. Moreover, by demonstrating divergent
effects of financial constraints on predicted versus experienced purchase happiness, the current
work highlights that the effects of financial constraints may vary across different stages of the
consumer decision-making process. To our knowledge, this manuscript is the first to demonstrate
such divergent outcomes.
Finally, the current work provides an initial demonstration of distinctions between similar
conceptualizations of consumers who have limited financial resources. For example, prior work
has shown that spending a budget down to zero increases pain of paying, which in turn decreases
purchase satisfaction—the so-called “bottom-dollar effect”—but spending a budget down to a
small, non-zero amount does not (Soster, Gershoff, and Bearden 2014). In contrast, we find that
(a) feelings of constraints decrease purchase happiness irrespective of budgetary status, (b) this
effect is specific to subjective feelings of financial constraints, rather than objective constraints,
and (c) this effect is due to opportunity cost consideration, over and above pain of paying. In
addition, while prior research has shown that higher (lower) SES consumers derive more
happiness from experiential (material) purchases (Lee, Hall, and Wood 2018), we find that
feelings of financial constraints decrease purchase happiness for both material and experiential
purchases, over and above differences in social class. Thus, taken together, our findings suggest
that seemingly similar conceptualizations of consumers’ financial resources might have different,
and sometimes even opposing, effects on consumers.
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Subjective Wealth and Financial Constraints
Subjective wealth refers to consumers’ perceptions of their financial situation.
Importantly, subjective perceptions of wealth do not always correspond to consumers’ objective
wealth. For example, data from the General Social Survey (Smith et al. 2019), a large-scale
representative survey of the American population, show that financial satisfaction was only
modestly correlated with income (r = .12) and wealth (r = .30). Therefore, even consumers with
relatively high levels of objective wealth may perceive their financial resources as constrained.
Consistent with this assertion, a survey with millionaires in the United States found that only
28% of those with one to five million dollars in investable assets considered themselves wealthy
(UBS 2013). Thus, feeling financially flush or constrained is not purely a function of objective
metrics.
In the current work, we examine the role of perceived financial constraints. Financial
constraints are defined as “the extent to which people believe that their financial situation
restricts desired consumption” (Tully, Hershfield, and Meyvis 2015, 60). This definition implies
that financial constraints are subjective and depend on consumers’ perceptions of their desired
consumption. It also suggests that financial constraints are malleable and may change across
contexts. Therefore, the effects of financial constraints may vary depending on how salient they
are in different situations.
Because financial constraints are commonplace, a growing body of research has
examined their effects on consumers. This literature has focused primarily on how financial
constraints affect consumer attention, preference, and choice (Briers et al. 2006; Briers and
Laporte 2013; Nelson and Morrison 2005; Sharma and Alter 2012; Tully, Hershfield, and
Meyvis 2015). A general theme in this body of work is that financial constraints increase
compensatory consumption—i.e., consumption motivated by a desire to reduce a discrepancy
between how one perceives oneself and how one wishes to view oneself (Mandel et al. 2017). In
a review of the literature, for instance, Cannon, Goldsmith, and Roux (2019) argue that one way
in which consumers cope with a scarcity of resources is by seeking to restore control. Several
findings support this assertion. For example, consumers are more likely to purchase lottery
tickets when they are led to perceive their income as low (Haisley, Mostafa, and Loewenstein
2008). Furthermore, consumers who feel constrained or dissatisfied with their financial situation
turn to caloric food items (Briers and Laporte 2013), scarce goods (Sharma and Alter 2012), and
material possessions (Tully, Hershfield, and Meyvis 2015). Given the allure of compensatory
consumption to consumers who feel financially constrained, a ripe question for investigation is
whether and to what extent financial constraints affect the happiness consumers derive from their
purchases.
Purchase Happiness
Over the last couple of decades, a growing literature has investigated how consumers can
maximize the happiness they derive from their purchases. For instance, several studies have
examined how specific purchase types affect the happiness individuals derive from consumption.
Research has shown that consumers are happier when they spend their money on life experiences
(Van Boven and Gilovich 2003; Nicolao, Irwin, and Goodman 2009), when they spend on others
(Dunn, Aknin, and Norton 2008), when their spending fits their personality (Matz, Gladstone,
and Stillwell 2016), and when they spend on time-saving services (Whillans et al. 2017).
Researchers have also investigated individual differences that affect purchase happiness. For
example, consumers high in materialism (Millar and Thomas 2009) and from low social class
(Lee, Hall, and Wood 2018) derive more happiness from material (vs. experiential) purchases,
and consumers derive more happiness from ordinary experiences as they grow older
(Bhattacharjee and Mogilner 2014).
Although consumer researchers have identified several purchase types and individual
differences that contribute to greater happiness from spending, less is known about how
consumers’ perceptions of their finances affect the happiness they derive from their purchases.
The current work addresses this research gap by examining whether and how consumers’
perceptions of their monetary resources—more specifically, their feelings of financial
constraints—affect the happiness they derive from their purchases. Understanding this
relationship is particularly relevant given that those facing financial constraints often turn to
compensatory consumption to cope with the aversiveness of their financial situation.
The Current Research
Existing research offers competing predictions about how financial constraints may
influence purchase happiness. At least two streams of research suggest that financial constraints
may increase purchase happiness. First, prior research has demonstrated that a sense of
abundance decreases people’s ability to savor pleasant stimuli (Quoidbach et al. 2015). Because
savoring is closely linked to consumption enjoyment (Chun, Diehl, and MacInnis 2017),
financial constraints might increase savoring and thus have a positive effect on purchase
happiness. Second, financial constraints might increase the effort consumers need to exert to
make a purchase. Because effort increases valuation (Norton, Mochon, and Ariely 2012) and
feelings of accomplishment (Franke, Schreier, and Kaiser 2010), financial constraints might
cause consumers to value their purchases more and thus derive greater happiness from them.
Contrary to these streams of research, in the current work we suggest that financial
constraints decrease purchase happiness. There are a few potential explanations for this effect. It
is possible that financial constraints simply dampen people’s mood or cause people to be less
satisfied with their lives in general, thereby making them less happy with their purchases. It is
also possible that pain of paying is greater among consumers who feel financially constrained,
and increased pain of paying might decrease purchase happiness. We argue for a third possibility
related to opportunity cost consideration. Opportunity costs refer to the value of the best
alternative a consumer does not choose. Prior work has shown that while consumers often
neglect opportunity costs (Frederick et al. 2009), consumers who feel financially constrained are
more likely to spontaneously consider opportunity costs when making decisions (Spiller 2011).
If so, financially constrained consumers may also be more inclined to consider opportunity costs
when thinking about their purchases, which may in turn decrease purchase happiness. We
present these hypotheses more formally below:
H1: Subjective feelings of financial constraints will decrease purchase happiness, such
that consumers who feel more financially constrained will derive less happiness
from their purchases.
H2: Opportunity cost consideration will mediate the effect of financial constraints on
purchase happiness.
Our prediction that opportunity cost consideration mediates the effect of financial
constraints on purchase happiness suggests situations in which this effect might be attenuated. If
consumers who feel financially constrained derive less happiness from their purchases because
they are more likely to consider opportunity costs, then the effect of financial constraints on
purchase happiness should be attenuated under circumstances where opportunity costs are (a)
more salient for non-financially constrained consumers or (b) less salient for financially
constrained consumers. Based on previous research demonstrating that planning is closely
related to opportunity cost consideration, we suggest that one such circumstance is when
consumers plan their purchases. Specifically, Spiller (2011) finds that while financial constraints
generally increase the consideration of opportunity costs, this effect is reduced among consumers
who are high in propensity to plan. Therefore, we predict that (a) the effect of financial
constraints on purchase happiness will be attenuated for purchases that were planned in advance,
and (b) this attenuation will occur because financial constraints will have a smaller effect on
opportunity cost consideration for planned (vs. unplanned) purchases. More formally:
H3a: The negative effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness will be
attenuated for planned (vs. unplanned) purchases.
H3b: This attenuation will occur because the positive effect of financial constraints on
opportunity cost consideration will be smaller for planned (vs. unplanned)
purchases.
We further suggest that the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness might
vary systematically across different stages of the consumer decision-making process. Indeed,
prior research has documented a temporal asymmetry in the consideration of opportunity costs
(Read, Olivola, and Hardisty 2017), which offers some indication that the salience of opportunity
costs might vary between past purchases and future purchases. There are at least two reasons
why opportunity costs might be more salient for future (vs. past) purchases. First, thinking about
purchases that one will make involves more uncertainty than thinking about purchases that one
has made, which may naturally prompt opportunity cost consideration. Second, because
consumers are motivated to make optimal decisions, thinking about future (but not past)
purchases may naturally prompt consumers to think about alternatives. If there is an asymmetry
in the consideration of opportunity costs of future and past purchases, then there should be a gap
between predicted and experienced purchase happiness. Critically, because financial constraints
naturally prompt consumers to consider opportunity costs, this gap in prediction should be
smaller for financially constrained consumers. Thus, we hypothesize:
H4: There will be a gap between predicted and experienced purchase happiness, and this
gap will be smaller among consumers who feel more (vs. less) financially
constrained.
In the remainder of this manuscript, we report the results of eight studies (and four more
in the Web Appendix) designed to test our hypotheses. In study 1, we find that natural variation
in feelings of financial constraints—but not objective constraints—decrease purchase happiness,
even after controlling for several important purchase characteristics. Two replications reported in
the Web Appendix (supplemental studies 1 and 2) rule out the alternative explanation that this
effect occurs because financial constraints affect consumers’ general life satisfaction. We then
examine an important downstream consequence that might result from lower purchase
happiness: less favorable consumer reviews. We find that consumers who feel financially
constrained write more negative reviews for their purchases both when asked to do so in a survey
(study 2) and in a unique dataset of consumers reviews on Yelp (study 3). Next, we provide
evidence for the causal effect of financial constraints by experimentally manipulating their
salience (study 4). In the remaining studies, we investigate the role of opportunity cost
consideration. In study 5, we show that opportunity cost consideration partially mediates the
effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness. In study 6, we find that increasing the
salience of opportunity costs attenuates the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness.
We also show that the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness is reduced for
planned (vs. unplanned) purchases (study 7), supporting the role of the hypothesized mechanism.
We then explore how consumers’ predicted purchase happiness compares to their actual
purchase happiness in study 8. We find that there is a gap between predicted and experienced
purchase happiness because opportunity costs are more salient for future (vs. past) purchases.
This gap is reduced for more (vs. less) financially constrained consumers, who are more likely to
spontaneously consider opportunity costs. Finally, we conduct a meta-analysis of our entire file
drawer (N = 17,750, k = 33) to examine how the effect varies across several purchase types. We
conclude by discussing the theoretical contributions and practical insights offered by the current
work.
STUDY 1: NATURAL VARIATION IN FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS
In study 1, we tested the effect of naturally occurring variation in feelings of financial
constraints on purchase happiness across a wide range of purchases. We expected consumers
who felt more financially constrained to report lower happiness from their purchases (H1). We
also explored the relationship between income and purchase happiness. Prior research has
demonstrated that opportunity cost consideration is higher among consumers who feel
financially constrained (Spiller 2011), but that lower income consumers are as likely to consider
opportunity costs as are higher income consumers (Plantinga et al. 2018). Because we expected
the effect to be driven in part by opportunity cost consideration (H2), we did not expect to find a
relationship between income and purchase happiness.
Method
Sample and design. We pre-registered this study using AsPredicted
that was representative of the United States with respect to age, gender, and ethnicity, as
calculated by the 2015 US Census. We planned to collect data from 750 participants, and 787
people signed up to participate in the study on Prolific Academic. We followed our pre-
registered exclusion criteria and excluded 35 people who did not finish the survey and 4 people
who provided gibberish or nonsensical responses to the open-ended question, resulting in a final
sample of 748 people (50.8% female, M = 47.06, SD = 15.01).
age age
Procedure. At the beginning of the study, participants were asked to describe the last
purchase they made for themselves that cost more than $100 and less than $1,000. We selected
this price range to ensure that the purchases were comparable and that participants wrote about
meaningful purchases. On the subsequent screen, we measured purchase happiness with the
following item adapted from Van Boven and Gilovich (2003): “When you think about this
purchase, how happy does it make you?” (1 = extremely unhappy, 7 = extremely happy). Next,
each participant indicated the price of their purchase and the time that elapsed from buying it. As
indicated in our pre-registration plan, we also asked participants to report several purchase
characteristics that might correlate with both financial constraints and purchase happiness. They
reported each purchase characteristic on a 7-point continuous scale. For example, they reported
the extent to which their purchase was material or experiential on a scale anchored by 1 = purely
material and 7 = purely experiential. We report a summary of all purchase characteristics
measured in this and subsequent studies in the Web Appendix. To measure financial constraints,
participants answered the following four items adapted from Paley, Tully, and Sharma (2019):
(1) “To what extent do you feel financially constrained?” (1 = not at all, 7 = very much), (2) “To
what extent do you feel you can spend your money freely?” (1 = not at all, 7 = very much,
reverse coded), (3) “How would you rate your financial situation relative to your peers?” (1 =
much worse, 7 = much better, reverse coded), and (4) “How satisfied are you with your financial
situation?” (1 = not at all satisfied, 7 = extremely satisfied, reverse coded). We averaged these
items to form an index of financial constraints (α = .91), with higher scores indicating greater
financial constraints. Finally, participants reported their age, gender, education, ethnicity, and
their household income in the past 12 months.
Results
Purchase happiness. As specified in our pre-registration plan, we regressed purchase
happiness on the financial constraints index. As expected, financial constraints were negatively
correlated with purchase happiness (b = -0.08, SE = 0.03, p = .006), such that greater financial
constraints were associated with lower purchase happiness. We further examined whether this
result held controlling for demographic variables and the purchase characteristics we specified in
our pre-registration plan. To do so, we conducted three linear regressions. In the first model, we
entered financial constraints. In the second model, we included all of the demographic variables
we collected. In the third model, we additionally included all of the purchase characteristics we
collected. The results remained unchanged: financial constraints had a negative and significant
effect on purchase happiness regardless of model specification (Model 2: b = -0.11, SE = 0.04, p
= .002; Model 3: b = -0.08, SE = 0.03, p = .017). We report the results of the regression models
in the Web Appendix.
Because financially constrained consumers prefer material (vs. experiential) purchases
(Tully, Hershfield, and Meyvis 2015) and people derive less happiness from material purchases
in general (Van Boven and Gilovich 2003), one alternative explanation for this effect is that
financially constrained participants were more likely to describe material purchases. However,
our data are not consistent with this explanation. Specifically, financial constraints did not
correlate with how material or experiential participants reported the purchases were (b = -0.01,
SE = 0.05, p = .901), and the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness did not change
after controlling for how material or experiential participants reported the purchases were (b = -
0.08, SE = 0.03, p = .007). Furthermore, there was no interaction between financial constraints
and how material or experiential participants reported the purchases were (b = -0.01, SE = 0.02,
p = .735). Importantly, the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness remained
negative and significant even when we restricted the sample to (1) material purchases (i.e.,
purchases rated below the midpoint of the material-experiential continuum, n = 564, b = -0.07,
SE = 0.03, p = .033), or (2) purchases classified as “purely material” (i.e., scale value = 1; the
lowest point of the material-experiential continuum, n = 377, b = -0.14, SE = 0.04, p = .001).
Income. Although financial constraints were highly correlated with income (r = -.51, p <
.001), income did not affect purchase happiness (r = .01, p = .768). Furthermore, when income
and financial constraints were entered into the same regression predicting purchase happiness,
the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness remained negative and significant (b = -
0.10, SE = 0.03, p = .003), and the effect of income remained non-significant (b = -0.04, SE =
0.03, p = .202).
Discussion
In study 1, we found that naturally occurring variation in subjective perceptions of
financial constraints was negatively correlated with purchase happiness. This effect emerged
across a wide range of purchases made by a sample of participants who were representative of
the United States population with respect to age, gender, and ethnicity, attesting to the
generalizability of the effect. Furthermore, the effect did not change after we controlled for
important purchase characteristics such as price, time elapsed from buying the purchase, and
how material or experiential the purchase was. Importantly, even though financial constraints
were correlated with income, income was not correlated with purchase happiness, and the effect
of financial constraints on purchase happiness did not change after we controlled for income.
This suggests that purchase happiness was not affected by consumers’ objective constraints, but
rather by their subjective perception of financial constraints.
One alternative explanation is that financial constraints cause participants to be less
satisfied with their lives in general (Ruberton, Gladstone, and Lyubomirsky 2016; Ng and Diener
2014). We investigated this possibility in two follow-up studies (see supplemental studies 1 and
2 in the Web Appendix). In supplemental study 1 (n = 352), we examined the relationship
between financial constraints and people’s happiness in two other domains: (1) spending time
with their family and (2) receiving a gift. If the effect of financial constraints on purchase
happiness occurs because of a general decrease in life satisfaction, we should also observe a
decrease in happiness in these two other domains. While we replicated the effect of financial
constraints on purchase happiness (b = -0.17, SE = 0.07, p = .017), we did not observe an effect
of financial constraints on happiness in the other two domains (spending time with family: b = -
0.02, SE = 0.10, p = .836; gift: b = -0.04, SE = 0.06, p = .435). In supplemental study 2 (n = 301),
we directly measured and controlled for general life satisfaction. Once again, financial
constraints were negatively correlated with purchase happiness, even after controlling for general
life satisfaction (b = -0.28, SE = 0.07 p < .001). Together, these supplemental studies cast doubt
on the possibility that the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness occurs because
financial constraints make consumers generally less happy or less satisfied with their lives.
STUDY 2: CONSUMER REVIEWS
We designed study 2 with three objectives in mind. First, we aimed to replicate the
negative effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness found in study 1. Second, we
aimed to examine a behavioral outcome that potentially results from decreased happiness with
purchases: less positive (more negative) consumer reviews. Recent work shows that people who
are more positive about a purchase express more positive emotions in their reviews (Rocklage
and Fazio 2020). Therefore, if financially constrained consumers derive less happiness from their
purchases, they should also write less positive reviews for their purchases. Finally, we examined
whether the effects of financial constraints on purchase happiness are distinct from the effects of
social class (Adler et al. 2000; Lee, Hall, and Wood 2018).
Method
Sample and design. We recruited 600 people on Amazon Mechanical Turk to participate
in a short survey in exchange for a small payment. Six hundred forty-three people signed up to
participate in the survey. We excluded 43 participants who did not finish the survey and 38 who
provided nonsensical responses to the open-ended questions, resulting in a final sample of 562
people (58.4% female, M = 36.17, SD = 12.33).
age age
Procedure. First, participants recalled and described the last purchase they made for
themselves for more than $100 and less than $1,000. Next, we measured purchase happiness
using the same item used in study 1 and asked participants to write a review for this purchase.
We designed the task to mimic the experience of writing an actual consumer review.
Specifically, participants gave a star rating for their purchase, entered a title for their review, and
then wrote the review. We randomized the order of the review and purchase happiness questions.
Because order did not impact our measures of interest, we do not discuss it further.
Next, participants answered the same questions about their purchase’s characteristics and
completed the same 4-item measure of financial constraints used in study 1. To examine whether
the effects of financial constraints on purchase happiness are distinct from the effects of
perceived social class, we also asked participants to complete the MacArthur Scale of subjective
social status (Adler et al. 2000). Finally, participants indicated their age, gender, and income.
Results
In study 2, we were interested in investigating the effect of financial constraints on three
key measures: (a) the same measure of purchase happiness used in study 1, (b) the star rating for
consumers’ purchases, and (c) the content of the reviews. Two research assistants blind to the
hypotheses independently coded the content of each review into one of the following five
categories: extremely negative (-2), negative (-1), neutral (0), positive (1), and extremely positive
(2). The two research assistants agreed on the coding of 72.8% of the reviews, and the codings
were highly correlated (r = .80, p < .001). We therefore averaged the codings to form an index of
how positive the reviews were. To estimate the effect of financial constraints on each of these
three measures, we ran linear regressions controlling for age, gender, income, social class, and
the same set of purchase characteristics we controlled for in study 1. We report the full results of
the regression models in the Web Appendix.
Purchase happiness. Financial constraints had a significant negative effect on purchase
happiness (b = -0.16, SE = 0.05, p = .001), and income was not associated with purchase
happiness (b = 0.00, SE = 0.03, p = .928), replicating the results from study 1. Furthermore, there
was no relationship between social class and purchase happiness (b = -0.04, SE = 0.04, p = .278).
Star rating. Neither financial constraints (b = -0.04, SE = 0.03, p = .143), income (b =
0.03, SE = 0.02, p = .138), nor social class (b = -0.02, SE = 0.02, p = .299) were correlated with
the star rating of the reviews.
Content of the reviews. Financial constraints were significantly associated with the
content of the reviews (b = -0.6, SE = 0.03, p = .055), such that consumers who felt more
financially constrained wrote more negative reviews. Neither income (b = 0.03, SE = 0.02, p =
.170) nor social class (b = -0.02, SE = 0.02, p = .489) were associated with the review content.
Serial mediation. We tested the serial effect of financial constraints on the content of the
reviews through purchase happiness and the star rating of the reviews. Precisely, we estimated
  
the indirect effect financial constraints purchase happiness star rating content of the
review. As in the previous analyses, we controlled for age, gender, income, social class, and the
same purchase characteristics we controlled for in study 1. We estimated the standard errors with
5,000 bootstrapped samples. The results indicate that the serial effect of financial constraints on
the content of the review through purchase happiness and the star rating of the review was
negative and significant (b = -0.03, SE = 0.01, p < .001, 95% CI: -0.05 to -0.01). The serial effect
was not significant for income (b = 0.00, SE = 0.01, p = .935, 95% CI: -0.01 to 0.02) nor social
class (b = -0.01, SE = 0.01, p = .353, 95% CI: -0.02 to 0.01).
Discussion
In study 2, we found a significant relationship between financial constraints and the
content of consumer reviews. The more financially constrained participants felt, the more
negative were their reviews. Neither income nor social class affected the content of the reviews,
further suggesting that the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness is independent of
objective levels of wealth and perceptions of social class.
While we observed an effect of financial constraints on participants’ reviews, we did not
observe an effect of financial constraints on the star ratings. One possibility is that we were
unable to identify an effect on the star ratings because the vast majority of the reviews were
positive (i.e., only 3.9% of the reviews received a star rating below the midpoint of the scale),
thereby reducing our power. We addressed this possibility, while extending our findings to a real
consumer setting, by looking at a unique dataset of consumer reviews on Yelp in study 3.
STUDY 3: YELP REVIEW DATA
In study 3, we aimed to conceptually replicate the results of study 2 with a dataset of
actual consumer reviews. We compiled a unique dataset by merging (1) a database of consumer
reviews scraped from Yelp, (2) consumer data from Experian Simmons (Experian Simmons
2019), and (3) demographic information from the US Census (US Census 2019). Our goal was to
compare reviews from consumers with varying levels of financial constraints. Because of the
observational nature of the data, it was important to ensure that the reviews written by consumers
with different levels of financial constraints referred to purchases that were as similar as
possible. For this reason, we decided to focus on reviews written for different units of popular
restaurant chains. We did not observe individual-level financial constraints in this study. Thus, to
examine the relationship between financial constraints and consumer reviews, we correlated the
average ratings of a given restaurant unit with the average financial constraints of individuals
living in the corresponding geographic area. We expected to find a negative effect of financial
constraints on the star ratings of the reviews.
Method
Yelp review data. We obtained our first dataset from Yelp, one of the largest review
websites in the United States, containing millions of reviews for a variety of businesses (e.g.,
restaurants, barbershops, dry cleaning). When determining the business category on which to
focus our analysis, we had four main goals in mind. First, to increase the generalizability of the
results, we sought businesses that were located in several regions in the United States. Second,
we wanted a business category that was patronized by consumers with varying levels of financial
constraints. Third, to ensure that comparisons were not affected by local trends, we needed a
business category that was somewhat similar across different locations. Fourth, because
businesses sometimes write fake reviews for themselves or their competitors (Luca and Zervas
2016), it was important to focus on a category for which fake reviews were less prevalent. For
those reasons, we decided to focus on chain restaurants. Chain restaurants are present
nationwide, highly similar across different locations, patronized by consumers with varying
levels of financial constraints, and less likely to commit review fraud (Luca and Zervas 2016).
We collected reviews written for all units of the 15 largest restaurant chains in the 15 largest US
cities. To scrape the data, we searched for a particular chain in a given city, and scraped the data
for all of the restaurants that came up in the search. Because Yelp also returns restaurants in
locations that surround each target city, this procedure resulted in a few additional restaurant
units that were located in cities that were proximal to our target cities. We retained these units in
our dataset. This resulted in 903 restaurant units. On average, each unit received 234.0 reviews
(median: 148, range: 1 – 5,468, SD = 330.9). We collected the average star rating of each unit as
of January 2020. On the Yelp website, consumers write a review and assign a star rating for their
reviews by choosing one to five stars. The average star rating was 2.73 (median: 2.74, range: 1 –
4.5, SD = 0.52). We also collected the zip code associated with each unit, which was used to
merge these data with the two other datasets that provided our (1) proxy for consumers’ financial
constraints and (2) demographic information.
Financial constraints. Since we do not observe individual-level financial constraints of
the consumers who wrote each of the reviews on Yelp, we used a proxy for financial constraints
at the zip code level. We used Simply Analytics to retrieve data on consumers’ levels of financial
security. This dataset provides estimates of how financially secure consumers in each zip code in
the US feel, on average. These estimates are based on Experian Simmons’ nationally
representative survey of about 30,000 consumers aged 18 or more (Experian Simmons 2019). In
the survey, consumers indicate their agreement with the following statement: “I feel financially
secure” (1 = disagree a lot, 2 = disagree a little, 3 = neither agree nor disagree, 4 = agree a little,
5 = agree a lot). We reverse coded this item so that higher scores represented higher financial
constraints. We collected the latest available data (2019), retrieved in January 2020.
Demographic information. We also used Simply Analytics to retrieve data from the US
Census on important demographic characteristics that served as control variables in this study.
As with the other two datasets, this dataset was at the zip code level. We collected data on age
(median age), gender (percentage of the population that is female), ethnicity (percentage of the
population that is white), education (proportion of the population aged 25 or more that has at
least a bachelor degree), and income (median household income). We collected the latest
available data (2019).
Final dataset. We used zip codes to merge the three datasets. Of the 903 restaurant units
for which we collected the average reviews on Yelp, we were not able to retrieve data on
financial security for the zip code associated with 51 restaurants. This left us with a final dataset
comprising 852 restaurants.
Results
We were interested in testing whether restaurants in zip codes where consumers felt more
financially constrained received lower star ratings than similar restaurants in zip codes where
consumers felt less financially constrained. To account for differences across restaurants and
locations, we controlled for chain fixed effects and city fixed effects. To account for differences
across zip codes, we controlled for a set of demographic variables (age, gender, education,
ethnicity, and income). We estimated four linear regressions. In the first model, we entered our
proxy for financial constraints. In the second model, we included chain fixed effects. In the third
model, we included city fixed effects. In the fourth model, we included our control variables.
Variables DV: Star Rating
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4
Financial constraints -0.43*** -0.21** -0.25*** -0.15*
(0.10) (0.07) (0.07) (0.08)
Chain fixed effects No Yes Yes Yes
City fixed effects No No Yes Yes
Control variables No No No Yes
Observations 852 852 852 852
R-squared 0.02 0.54 0.60 0.61
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05
Note. Control variables: age (median age), gender (proportion of female population), education (proportion of the
population aged 25 or more with at least bachelor degree), and ethnicity (proportion of white population), and
median household income.
The results show that financial constraints were negatively correlated with the star ratings
the restaurants received. That is, restaurants in zip codes where consumers felt more financially
constrained received lower ratings than did similar restaurants in zip codes where consumers felt
less financially constrained. This effect was robust to controlling for chain fixed effects, city
fixed effects, and demographic differences across zip codes. As in our previous studies, income
was not correlated with the star ratings in model 4 (p = .407). This result is consistent with the
results from studies 1 and 2 showing that while subjective perceptions of financial constraints
affect purchase happiness, objective constraints do not. Because some of the star ratings on Yelp
might be affected by fake reviews (Luca and Zervas 2016), we assessed the robustness of the
results by excluding from the sample restaurant units that were more likely to have received fake
reviews (i.e., those with extremely positive or negative ratings). The results remained unchanged
(see the Web Appendix for more details).
Discussion
In study 3, we found that financial constraints negatively affected the average star ratings
of restaurants on Yelp, conceptually replicating the results of study 2. As in studies 1 and 2,
income did not play a role, and the effect of financial constraints was independent of income.
Building on study 2, study 3 provides further evidence for an important downstream
consequence of the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness in a real consumer
setting.
STUDY 4: MANIPULATING FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS
Thus far, all of our studies have relied on naturally occurring variation in financial
constraints. While this approach provides greater ecological validity, it precludes us from making
inferences about the causal effect of financial constraints. Thus, in study 4, we manipulated
perceived financial constraints and measured their effect on purchase happiness.
Method
Sample and design. Our pre-tests indicated that manipulations of financial constraints
produce small effects on participants’ feelings of financial constraints. Therefore, we decided to
collect enough data to have 80% power to detect a small effect. A power analysis using G*Power
(Faul et al. 2007) indicated that 788 participants were needed for us to have 80% power to detect
an effect of d = 0.20 in a 2-cell between-subjects design with conventional alpha levels (p = .05).
To account for exclusions, we recruited 800 participants on MTurk. Eight hundred and thirty-six
people signed up to participate in the study. We pre-registered our hypothesis, measures, design,
analysis, target sample size, and exclusion criteria using AsPredicted (link:
34 people who did not finish the study and 52 people who provided nonsensical responses to the
open-ended questions, leaving a final sample of 750 participants (55.1% female, M = 34.31,
age
SD = 12.25). Participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions of a 2-cell
age
between-subjects design (financial constraints vs. control).
Procedure. First, participants were asked to recall and describe a purchase they made for
themselves for more than $100 and less than $1,000. Asking participants to describe this
purchase in advance of the financial constraints manipulation mitigated the possibility that
financial constraints systematically varied the nature of the purchases participants described.
Next, we manipulated the salience of financial constraints by randomly assigning participants to
one of two conditions. In the financial constraints condition, participants wrote about factors that
contribute to their financial constraints (adapted from Tully, Hershfield, and Meyvis, 2015).
Specifically, they read the following prompt:
“Everyone has financial constraints in their lives, but the factors that contribute to these
constraints tend to vary. What are the factors that require you to be careful with how you spend
your money? What limits your monthly discretionary income? Include the aspects of your
current situation that most contribute to your financial constraints (e.g., mortgage or rent, family
expenses, uncertainty of future income, health care costs, student loans, lack of income, limited
savings, bills that need to be paid, expensiveness of entertainment...). Please be as detailed as
possible, and write at least a couple of sentences.”
Participants in the control condition were asked to write about their time constraints.
Asking participants in the control condition to write about their time constraints allowed us to
maintain the feeling of constraint constant across conditions, ruling out the possibility that the
results are caused by general feelings of constraints and thus providing a conservative test of the
effect of financial constraints in particular. Precisely, they read the following prompt:
“Everyone has time constraints in their lives, but the factors that contribute to these
constraints tend to vary. What are the factors that require you to be careful with how you spend
your time? What limits your free time? Include the aspects of your current situation that most
contribute to your time constraints (e.g., working, studying, taking care of yourself and/or others,
household management...). Please be as detailed as possible, and write at least a couple of
sentences.”
Next, we measured purchase happiness with the same item used in studies 1 and 2.
Participants also completed the same questions about their purchase’s characteristics as
described in studies 1 and 2. As a manipulation check, participants indicated how financially
constrained they felt by answering the following item: “To what extent do you feel financially
constrained?” (1 = not at all, 7 = very much). Finally, participants indicated their age, gender,
education, ethnicity, and income.
Results
Manipulation check. Participants in the financial constraints condition reported greater
financial constraints (M = 4.99, SD = 1.53) than did participants in the control condition (M =
4.60, SD = 1.65, t(748) = -3.30, p = .001, d = 0.24), indicating that the manipulation was
successful.
Purchase happiness. Participants in the financial constraints condition reported lower
purchase happiness (M = 5.75, SD = 1.22) than did participants in the control condition (M =
5.93, SD = 1.14, t(748) = 2.15, p = .032, d = 0.16). This result does not change when controlling
for purchase characteristics, demographic information, and income.
Discussion
In study 4, participants who felt more financially constrained reported lower purchase
happiness. By manipulating perceptions of financial constraints, this study provides evidence for
the causal effect of financial constraints, thereby ruling out the possibility that the effect is driven
by (a) unobserved differences between people who feel financially constrained (vs. not) or (b)
differences in the purchases recalled by consumers with different levels of financial constraints.
One alterative explanation for this result is that the effect is driven by mood. That is, it is
possible that writing about financial constraints put participants in the financial constraints
condition in a worse mood than those in the control condition. To examine this possibility, we
replicated study 4 with a separate sample of 260 participants drawn from the same population
(see supplemental study 3 in the Web Appendix). In this replication, we measured mood by
asking participants to rate the extent to which they felt happy, sad (reverse-coded), in a bad mood
(reverse-coded), and in a good mood (α = .85). Once again, those in the financial constraints
condition reported lower purchase happiness than did those in the control condition (M
financial
= 5.46 vs. M = 5.95, t(258) = 3.23, p = .001, d = 0.40). Even though mood was
constraints control
positively correlated with purchase happiness (r = .26, p < .001), the effect of condition on
purchase happiness remained significant after we controlled for mood in a linear regression (b =
-0.40, SE = 0.15, p = .008).
STUDY 5: MEASURING OPPORTUNITY COST CONSIDERATION
Thus far, we have shown that financial constraints decrease purchase happiness and
further affect consumer reviews. In the remaining studies in this manuscript, we provide
evidence that opportunity cost consideration is a mechanism explaining this effect. In study 5, we
aimed to provide initial evidence for the role of opportunity cost consideration by directly
measuring it.
Method
Sample and design. We recruited 500 people on MTurk to answer a short survey. Five
hundred thirty-two individuals signed up to participate in the study. Twenty-nine participants did
not finish the survey and were excluded, leaving a final sample of 503 people (53.7% female,
M = 41.61, SD = 13.97).
age age
Procedure. Participants first described a purchase they made for themselves for more
than $100 and less than $1,000 and indicated their purchase happiness using the same item used
in studies 1. On the subsequent screen, we measured opportunity cost consideration with the
following two items: “When I indicated my happiness with the purchase I wrote about, I thought
about ways in which I could've spent my money other than the purchase I described” (1 =
strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree), and “When you indicated your happiness with the
purchase you wrote about, to what extent did you think about other ways in which you could've
spent your money?” (1 = not at all, 7 = very much). These two items were highly correlated (r =
.86, p < .001), so we averaged them to form an index of opportunity cost consideration, with
higher scores indicating greater consideration of opportunity costs. Participants then indicated
the price of their purchase and the time elapsed since buying it (1 = less than a week ago, 13 =
more than 5 years ago).
We then measured financial constraints with the same 4 items used in study 1 (α = .90),
with higher scores indicating greater financial constraints. Finally, participants reported their age,
gender, and income.
Results
Purchase happiness. As in our previous studies, financial constraints were negatively
correlated with purchase happiness (b = -0.08, SE = 0.03, p = .003), and there was no
relationship between income and purchase happiness (b = -0.03, SE = 0.02, p = .136). These
results do not change if we control the covariates we collected.
Opportunity cost consideration. Financial constraints were positively associated with
opportunity cost consideration (b = 0.11, SE = 0.05, p = .042), and income was not (b = 0.01, SE
= 0.04, p = .821). This result does not change if we control for covariates.
Mediation. We examined whether opportunity cost consideration mediated the effect of
financial constraints on purchase happiness. To do so, we estimated the indirect effect financial
 
constraints opportunity cost consideration purchase happiness, with the standard errors
estimated with 5,000 bootstrapped samples. We controlled for all demographic variables (age,
gender, and income) and all purchase characteristics (time elapsed from buying the purchase and
price of the purchase) collected in this study. The results indicate that the indirect effect of
financial constraints on purchase happiness through opportunity cost consideration was
significant (b = -0.02, p = .037, 95% CI = -0.036 to -0.001). The direct effect of financial
constraints on purchase happiness was also significant (b = -0.10, p = .001, 95% CI = -0.163 to -
0.040), suggesting partial mediation. We also tested whether the path income opportunity cost
consideration purchase happiness was significant and did not find supporting evidence (b = -
0.01, p = .296, 95% CI = -0.016 to 0.005).
Discussion
In study 5, we found that financially constrained individuals reported lower purchase
happiness because opportunity costs were more salient in their minds. This provides initial
support for the role of opportunity cost consideration as an underlying mechanism that explains
the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness.
STUDY 6: MANIPULATING OPORTUNITY COST CONSIDERATION
In study 6, we aimed to provide further evidence for the role of opportunity cost
consideration as a mechanism linking financial constraints to lower purchase happiness by
directly manipulating the proposed mediating process (Spencer, Zanna, and Fong 2005). To do
so, we prompted some participants to consider the opportunity costs of their purchases before
rating purchase happiness. If financial constraints affect purchase happiness because financially
constrained consumers are more likely to spontaneously consider the opportunity costs of their
purchases, then prompting consumers to consider opportunity costs should reduce the effect of
financial constraints on purchase happiness. Study 6 tested this prediction.
Method
Sample and design. We recruited 1,500 people to participate in this study on MTurk. We
thousand five hundred and one people signed up to participate in the study. After applying our
pre-registered exclusion criteria, 1,489 people were left in the sample (56.6% female, M =
age
38.73, SD = 13.26). This study adopted a 2 (opportunity cost consideration: high vs. control) x
age
continuous (financial constraints, measured) between-subjects design.
Procedure. First, participants were asked to describe something they purchased for
themselves for more than $100 and less than $1,000. Next, they were randomly assigned to one
of two conditions (opportunity cost consideration: high vs. control). In the ‘high opportunity cost
consideration’ condition, participants were asked to write about the opportunity costs of their
purchases. Precisely, they saw the following prompt:
“Having bought this purchase means that you cannot spend this money on other
purchases. Sometimes people imagine things that they might have spent their money on instead
of their purchases. What are some of the items that you were not able to buy because you made
this purchase? Or, what are some of the things you could've spent this money on?”
In the control condition, participants were asked to describe the benefits they received or
expected to receive from the purchase they described. Precisely, they saw the prompt below:
“Having bought this purchase means that you can benefit from having, using,
remembering, or consuming it. Sometimes people imagine the benefits they have received
from their purchases, even after they have used or consumed them. What are some of the benefits
you've gotten from this purchase? Or, what are some of the benefits you expect to get from this
purchase?”
On the next screen, participants indicated their purchase happiness using the same item
from study 1 and indicated their financial constraints by answering the same four items used in
study 1 (α = .90), with higher scores indicating greater financial constraints. Finally, participants
reported their age and gender.
Opportunity cost manipulation pre-test. We pre-tested the opportunity cost consideration
manipulation using a separate sample drawn from the same population (n = 145). In the pre-test,
participants described a purchase and were assigned to one of three conditions: either one of the
two experimental conditions described in the main study or a baseline condition with no writing
task. They then rated their purchase happiness and completed the same measures of opportunity
cost consideration used in study 5 (r = .84, p < .001). The results confirmed that the opportunity
cost consideration manipulation was successful. Specifically, participants in the ‘high
opportunity cost consideration’ condition reported higher opportunity cost consideration than did
participants in the control (M = 3.94, SD = 1.80; M = 2.59, SD = 1.54, F(1, 142) =
high high control control
14.80, p < .001) and in the baseline condition (M = 3.11, SD = 1.78, F(1, 142) = 5.72,
baseline baseline
p = .018). The difference in opportunity cost consideration between participants in the control
condition and in the baseline condition was not significant (F(1,142) = 2.28, p = .133).
Results
As specified in our pre-registration plan, we regressed purchase happiness on the
opportunity cost consideration condition (1 = high, 0 = control), financial constraints
(continuous), and their interaction. There was a marginally significant interaction between
condition and financial constraints (b = 0.06, SE = .04, p = .091). In the ‘high opportunity cost
consideration’ condition, there was no effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness (b = -
0.03, SE = 0.03 , p = .198). That is, when all participants were prompted to consider opportunity
costs, financial constraints did not affect purchase happiness. In contrast, in the control
condition, there was a significant negative effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness
illustrates this interaction.
manipulation (Study 6)
7.00
6.50
6.00
5.50
5.00
Low (-1 SD) High (+1 SD)
Another way to probe this interaction is to examine the effect of the opportunity cost
consideration manipulation across participants with higher and lower financial constraints.
Among more financially constrained participants (1 SD above the mean), there was no effect of
the opportunity cost consideration manipulation on purchase happiness (M = 5.97, SE =
high high
0.07; M = 6.03, SE = 0.05, p = .410). In contrast, among participants who felt less
control control
financially constrained (1 SD below the mean), purchase happiness was lower in the ‘high
opportunity cost consideration’ condition than in the control condition (M = 6.06, SE =
high high
0.05; M = 6.29, SE = 0.05, p = .001). A floodlight analysis (Spiller et al. 2013)
control control
ssenippaH
esahcruP
Control condition
High opportunity cost consideration condition
Financial Constraints
indicated that the effect of the manipulation was significant among participants whose financial
constraints were lower than 4.89.
Discussion
In study 6, we found that when all consumers were prompted to consider opportunity
costs, financial constraints did not affect purchase happiness. In contrast, when participants were
not prompted to consider opportunity costs, financial constraints had a negative effect on
purchase happiness. This result provides further evidence that opportunity cost consideration is
an underlying mechanism of the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness (H2).
STUDY 7: THE ROLE OF PLANNING
We designed study 7 with two main objectives in mind. First, we sought to replicate the
results of study 5 showing that opportunity cost consideration mediates the effect of financial
constraints on purchase happiness. Second, and more critically, we sought to examine the role of
planning as a moderator of the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness. We
hypothesized that the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness is attenuated for
planned (vs. unplanned) purchases (H3a), and that this attenuation occurs because the positive
effect of financial constraints on opportunity cost consideration is weaker for planned (vs.
unplanned) purchases (H3b). Study 7 tested these predictions.
Method
Sample and design. We recruited 1,000 people on MTurk to participate in a short survey.
1,018 people signed up to participate in the study. We excluded 18 participants who provided
nonsensical responses to an open-ended question, leaving a final sample of 1,000 people (54.4%
female, M = 38.3, SD = 12.7). This study adopted a 3 (purchase type: planned vs. unplanned
age age
vs. control) x continuous (financial constraints, measured) between-subjects design.
Procedure. At the start of the study, all participants were asked to describe a purchase
they made for themselves that cost more than $50 and less than $1,000. However, the exact
wording of this prompt randomly varied by experimental condition. Some participants were
instructed to describe a planned purchase (planned condition), some were instructed to describe
an unplanned purchase (unplanned condition), and others received no further instructions
(control condition). After participants described their respective purchases, they rated their
purchase happiness with the same item used in study 1. We then measured opportunity cost
consideration with the following item: “When you indicated your happiness with the purchase
you wrote about, to what extent did you think about other ways in which you could've spent your
money?” (1 = not at all, 7 = very much). Participants then indicated the price of the purchase
they described and the time elapsed from buying it. Next, they completed a manipulation check
for the purchase type manipulation (“How much in advance did you plan to make the purchase
you described?” 1 = not in advance at all, 7 = extremely in advance). Finally, participants
completed the same 4-item measure of financial constraints used in study 1 (α = .89), with higher
scores indicating greater financial constraints, and indicated their age, gender, and income.
Results
Manipulation check. A one-way ANOVA indicated that the manipulation successfully
affected the extent to which the purchases were planned in advance (F(2, 997) = 570.04, p <
.001, η = .53). As intended, participants in the planned purchase condition describe purchases
that were more planned in advance (M = 5.16, SD = 1.23) than did participants in the unplanned
purchase condition (M = 1.65, SD = 1.16, F(1, 997) = 1057.19, p < .001) and in the control
condition (M = 4.28, SD = 1.68, F(1, 997) = 69.42, p < .001).
Purchase happiness. We estimated a two-way ANOVA with purchase happiness as the
dependent variable and financial constraints (continuous), purchase type (unplanned, planned,
control), and their interaction as independent variables. The results revealed a significant main
effect of financial constraints (F(1, 994) = 24.00, p < .001, η = .02), no main effect of purchase
type (F(2, 994) = 0.12, p = .887), and a marginally significant interaction (F(2, 994) = 2.70, p =
.068, η = .003). Financial constraints had a significant negative effect on purchase happiness in
the control condition (b = -0.10, SE = .04, p = .028), a significant negative effect on purchase
happiness in the unplanned purchases condition (b = -0.21, SE = .05, p < .001), and no effect on
purchase happiness in the planned purchases condition (b = -0.07, SE = .04, p = .105).
Opportunity cost consideration. We estimated a two-way ANOVA with opportunity cost
consideration as the dependent variable and financial constraints (continuous), purchase type
(unplanned, planned, control), and their interaction as independent variables. The results
revealed a significant main effect of financial constraints (F(1, 994) = 17.81, p < .001, η = .02) a
significant main effect of purchase type (F(2, 994) = 2.94, p = .053 , η = 0.01), and, critically, a
significant two-way interaction (F(2, 994) = 4.28, p = .014 , η = .01). Financial constraints had a
significant positive effect on opportunity cost consideration in the control condition (b = 0.32,
SE = .08, p < .001), a significant positive effect in the unplanned purchases condition (b = 0.23,
SE = .08 , p = .004), and no effect in the planned purchases condition (b = .01, SE = .08, p =
.856).
Moderated mediation. We tested whether the effect of financial constraints on purchase
happiness was mediated by opportunity cost consideration and, critically, whether this indirect
effect depended on the type of purchase participants recalled. That is, we tested whether the
 
indirect path financial constraints opportunity cost consideration purchase happiness was
stronger for unplanned purchases than for planned purchases, with purchase type moderating the
with 5,000 bootstrapped samples. The results indicated that for unplanned purchases, the indirect
effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness through opportunity cost consideration was
negative and significant (b = -0.03, p = .018, 95% CI: [-0.050 to -0.005]). In contrast, for planned
purchases, the indirect effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness through opportunity
cost consideration was not significant (b = -0.00, p = .870, 95% CI: [-0.021 to 0.017]).
Discussion
In study 7, we provided further support for the role of opportunity cost as a mechanism
explaining the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness (H2). Furthermore,
consistent with this mechanism, we demonstrated the role of planning as a boundary condition
for the effect (H3a and H3b). Specifically, we found that the effect of financial constraints on
purchase happiness was reduced for planned (vs. unplanned) purchases, because financial
constraints have a smaller effect on opportunity cost consideration for planned purchases. We
conceptually replicated these results in a supplemental study with a separate sample drawn from
the same population (n = 1,705) in which we manipulated financial constraints and controlled for
several factors that may systematically vary between planned and unplanned purchases (see
supplemental study 4 in the Web Appendix).
STUDY 8: PREDICTED VS. ACTUAL PURCHASE HAPPINESS
Thus far, we have demonstrated that financial constraints decrease the happiness
consumers derive from their purchases, and that this effect is mediated by opportunity cost
consideration. We have further suggested that opportunity cost consideration might differ
systematically between past and future purchases. If so, there might be a gap between
consumers’ predicted versus actual purchase happiness. Importantly, however, this gap should be
reduced among financially constrained consumers because they are more likely to spontaneously
consider opportunity costs (H4). We tested this prediction in study 8.
Method
Sample and design. We pre-registered this study using AsPredicted
1,649 people answered the survey on MTurk. After applying our pre-registered exclusion
criterial, we had a final sample of 1,577 people (57.8% female, M = 36.08, SD = 12.20).
age age
This study adopted a 2 (purchase type: past vs. future) x continuous (financial constraints,
measured) between-subjects design.
Pre-test. We tested the assumption that future purchases were associated with higher
consideration of opportunity costs in a pre-test with a separate sample drawn from the same
population (n = 180). In the pre-test, people described either a purchase they wanted to make or a
purchase that they had made, rated their happiness with it, and answered the following measure
of opportunity cost consideration: “When I indicated how much this purchase contributed to my
happiness in life [will contribute to my happiness in life], I thought about ways in which I
could've spent [can spend] my money other than the purchase I described” (1 = strongly
disagree, 7 = strongly agree). As expected, opportunity cost consideration was higher for future
purchases (M = 4.18, SD = 1.89) than for past purchases (M = 3.47, SD = 1.80, t(178) = 2.60, p =
.010, d = 0.39).
Procedure. In the beginning of the survey, participants were asked to describe a purchase
they made (past purchase condition) or wanted to make (future purchase condition) for
themselves for more than $100 and less than $1,000. Next, participants rated purchase happiness
with one item adapted from Van Boven and Gilovich (2003). In the past purchase condition, they
answered the following question: “How much does this purchase contribute to your happiness in
life?” In the future purchase condition, they answered the following question: “How much do
you think this purchase will contribute to your happiness in life?” Participants in both conditions
indicated their answer on a 7-point scale anchored by 1 = not at all, 4 = moderately, 7 = very
much. Participants then indicated the price of their purchase, and on the following screens,
indicated their perceived financial constraints with the same 4 item scale used in study 1 (α =
.89), with higher scores indicating greater financial constraints. Finally, participants reported
their age, gender, and household income in the past 12 months.
Results
Purchase happiness. As specified in our pre-registration plan, we regressed purchase
happiness on purchase type (past = 1 vs. future = 0, manipulated), financial constraints
(continuous, measured), and their interaction. The results revealed a significant interaction (b = -
0.16, SE = 0.05, p = .001). As expected, among consumers who did not feel financially
constrained (1 SD below the mean), predicted purchase happiness was lower than actual
purchase happiness (M = 4.93 , M = 5.23, p = .001), consistent with opportunity costs
predicted actual
being more salient for future purchases than for past purchases. In contrast, among financially
constrained consumers (1 SD above the mean), the difference between predicted and actual
purchase happiness was not significant (M = 5.18 , M = 5.04, p = .154). That is,
predicted actual
because financially constrained consumers are naturally more inclined to consider opportunity
below illustrates the results.
(Study 8)
6.00
5.50
5.00
4.50
4.00
Low (-1 SD) High (+1 SD)
Another way to probe this interaction is to examine the effect of financial constraints on
predicted purchase happiness and actual purchase happiness. In the actual purchase happiness
condition, there was a significant negative effect of financial constraints (b = -0.07, SE = 0.03, p
= .052), replicating the results reported in our previous studies. Unexpectedly, in the predicted
purchase happiness condition, there was a significant positive effect of financial constraints (b =
0.09, SE = 0.03, p = .008).
Because of the correlational nature of the data, one alternative explanation for this interaction is that
financially constrained consumers describe different purchases than non-financially constrained consumers.
However, our data is not consistent with this explanation. If the interaction between financial constraints and
purchase type (past vs. future) on purchase happiness is due to financially constrained consumers describing
different purchases, one would also expect purchase happiness to be affected by (1) the interaction between income
and purchase type and by (2) the interaction between the price of the purchase and purchase type. However,
purchase happiness was neither affected by the interaction between income and purchase type (b = 0.01, SE = 0.04,
p = .720) nor by the interaction between price and purchase type (b = -0.00, SE = 0.00, p = .548).
ssenippaH
esahcruP
Predicted Purchase Happiness
Actual Purchase Happiness
Financial Constraints
Discussion
In study 8, we provided further evidence for the mediating role of opportunity cost
consideration by examining systematic differences in the gap between predicted and actual
purchase happiness. Consistent with our assertion that opportunity cost consideration is greater
for future (vs. past) purchases, we found that, on average, actual purchase happiness was greater
than predicted purchase happiness. Importantly, we found that this gap between predicted and
actual purchase happiness was reduced among financially constrained consumers, as they are
more likely to spontaneously consider opportunity costs. This result offers further support for the
role of opportunity cost consideration as a mechanism underlying the effect of financial
constraints on purchase happiness.
Unexpectedly, we found that financial constraints had a positive effect on predicted
purchase happiness. It is possible that this reversal occurred because of other unobserved
psychological differences between past and future purchase. For instance, it is possible that
financially constrained consumers anticipated their purchases more (Quoidbach et al. 2015),
resulting in higher predictions of purchase happiness. Regardless of the precise mechanism, this
reversal suggests that financial constraints may have opposing effects on consumers across
different stages of the consumer decision making process.
META ANALYSIS
We aggregated all of the data we collected for this project, resulting in a dataset with
17,750 observations across 33 studies. All of the data were collected online from December 2019
to October 2020. In each study, financial constraints were either measured (k = 23) or
manipulated (k = 10), and purchase happiness was measured. Consistent with the results reported
throughout the manuscript, financial constraints had a significant negative effect on purchase
happiness (r = -0.13, 95% CI: [-0.148 to -0.119], p < .001). To our surprise, the magnitude of the
effect was not significantly different for studies where financial constraints was measured or
manipulated (difference = 0.01, 95% CI: [-0.02 to 0.04], p = .715).
Our primary goal in meta-analyzing every study we ran was to investigate how the effect
of financial constraints on purchase happiness might differ across different purchase types. In our
studies, participants rated several characteristics of the purchases they described, either using
continuous scales (e.g., “How would you classify this purchase?” 1 = something common or
usual, 7 = something rare or unusual) or open-ended responses (“What is the price of the
purchase you described?”). To estimate how the effect varied across purchase types, we fit a
2 3
linear regression on the pooled data . Financial constraints , all of the purchase characteristics
we collected, and the two-way interactions between financial constraints and each purchase
characteristic were entered as predictors of purchase happiness, and we controlled for study fixed
effects . This analysis contained only data from studies in which all purchase characteristics
were collected (k = 18, N = 10,458). The results revealed some interesting patterns. Despite the
large sample size, only four purchase characteristics (of the 10 we collected) significantly
interacted with financial constraints to affect purchase happiness. First, the effect of financial
Performing analyses on the pooled data provides many advantages over standard meta-analytic techniques
that rely on analyzing summary statistics from a set of studies (Curran and Hussong 2009). For example, it increases
statistical power, allows for a more heterogeneous pooled sample, and increases the frequency of low base-rate
observations (Curran and Hussong 2009).
Across all our studies, financial constraints were measured with all (or a subset of) the questions used in
study 1. Because the effect of financial constraints did not differ between studies in which they were measured (vs.
manipulated), in the studies where we manipulated financial constraints, we used participants’ responses to the
manipulation checks as a measure of their financial constraints.
We use fixed (instead of random) effects because (1) we are interested in controlling for, rather than
estimating, between-study heterogeneity, and (2) our studies are relatively homogenous with respect to sampling,
design, and measurement.
constraints was stronger for unplanned (b = -0.15, SE = 0.01, 95% CI = [-0.175 to 0.130]) than
for planned purchases (b = -0.08, SE = 0.01, 95% CI = [-0.106 to -0.063]; interaction: b = 0.02,
SE = 0.00, p < .001), corroborating the results reported in study 7. Second, to our surprise, the
effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness was stronger for purchases classified as
necessities (b = -0.15, SE = 0.01, 95% CI = [-0.177 to -0.129]) than for purchases classified as
discretionary (b = -0.08, SE = 0.01, 95% CI = [-0.105 to -0.056]; interaction: b = 0.02, SE =
0.00, p < .001). Third, financial constraints had a stronger negative effect on purchases bought
with the intention to be used or consumed alone (b = -0.14, SE = 0.01, 95% CI = [-0.159 to -
0.113]) than purchases bought with the intention to be used or consumed with others (b = -0.10,
SE = 0.01, 95% CI = [-0.121 to -0.745]; interaction: b = -0.05, SE = 0.00, p < .001). Finally, the
effect of financial constraints was weaker among purchases that could be used many times (b = -
0.09, SE = 0.01, 95% CI = [-0.112 to -0.064]) than those that could be used only once (b = -0.15,
summarizes these results.
95% CI
Purchase Type b t p
Lower bound
Interaction: Price 0.00 -1.07 .286 0.000 0.000
Low ($100) -0.12 -13.86 < .001 -0.131 -0.099
High ($1,000) -0.12 -13.97 < .001 -0.135 -0.102
Interaction: Time elapsed from purchase 0.00 0.36 0.722 -0.004 0.006
Low (-1 SD) -0.12 -10.61 < .001 -0.142 -0.098
High (+1 SD) -0.11 -9.68 < .001 -0.137 -0.091
Interaction: Planned-Unplanned 0.02 4.39 < .001 0.010 0.026
Unplanned (-1 SD) -0.15 -13.14 < .001 -0.175 -0.130
Planned (+1 SD) -0.08 -7.69 < .001 -0.106 -0.063
Interaction: Material-Experiential 0.00 0.04 .968 -0.009 0.009
Material (-1 SD) -0.12 -9.42 < .001 -0.142 -0.093
Experiential (+1 SD) -0.12 -9.44 < .001 -0.141 -0.092
Interaction: Utilitarian-Hedonic 0.01 1.54 .123 -0.002 0.016
Utilitarian (1- SD) -0.13 -10.5 < .001 -0.156 -0.107
Hedonic (+1 SD) -0.10 -8.37 < .001 -0.127 -0.079
Interaction: Necessity-Discretionary 0.02 3.93 < .001 0.008 0.025
Necessity (-1 SD) -0.15 -12.44 < .001 -0.177 -0.129
Discretionary (+1 SD) -0.08 -6.43 < .001 -0.105 -0.056
Interaction: Alone-Others 0.01 2.27 .023 0.001 0.018
To be used/consumed alone (-1 SD) -0.14 -11.69 < .001 -0.159 -0.113
To be used/consumed with others (+1 SD) -0.10 -8.21 < .001 -0.121 -0.075
Interaction: Public-Private 0.00 0.32 .750 -0.006 0.009
Public (-1 SD) -0.12 -10.37 < .001 -0.142 -0.097
Private (+1 SD) -0.11 -10.26 < .001 -0.136 -0.093
Interaction: Common-Rare 0.00 0.54 .590 -0.005 0.009
Common (-1 SD) -0.12 -10.54 < .001 -0.144 -0.099
Rare (+1 SD) -0.11 -9.88 < .001 -0.135 -0.090
Interaction: Frequency 0.02 3.06 .002 0.006 0.028
Frequency of use: Low (-1 SD) -0.15 -11.52 < .001 -0.170 -0.121
Frequency of use: High (+1 SD) -0.09 -7.14 < .001 -0.112 -0.064
constraints, each purchase characteristic, and the interaction between each purchase characteristics and financial
constraints. The rows labeled “interaction” display the interaction coefficient for the corresponding purchase
characteristic, and the other rows report marginal effect of financial constraints at selected values. The model was
estimated on the data of the 18 studies (N = 10,458) where all the purchase characteristics were collected. The model
controls for study fixed effects (omitted for parsimony).
It is worth mentioning a few null effects that emerged in the analysis. As we reported in
study 1, the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness was the same for material (b = -
0.12, SE = 0.01, 95% CI = [-0.142 to -0.093]) and experiential purchases (b = -0.12, SE = 0.01,
95% CI = [-0.141 to -0.092]; interaction: b = 0.00, SE = 0.00, p = .968). Furthermore, the effect
of financial constraints on purchase happiness did not depend on price (interaction: b = 0.00 , SE
= 0.00, p = .286), or on the time elapsed from buying the purchase (interaction: b = -0.01 , SE =
0.01, p = .549). Finally, contrary to our expectations, the effect was the same for ordinary (b = -
0.12, SE = 0.01, 95% CI = [-0.144 to -0.099]) and extraordinary purchases (b = -0.11, SE = 0.01,
95% CI = [-0.135 to -0.090]; interaction: b = 0.00, SE = 0.00, p = .590). Both the significant and
null interaction effects revealed in this meta-analysis provide potentially interesting opportunities
for future research.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Feelings of financial constraints are ubiquitous among consumers with varying levels of
wealth, and prior research suggests that they may contribute to compensatory consumption
(Cannon, Goldsmith, and Roux 2019). Given that compensatory consumption is meant to offset
an undesirable state, in this manuscript we investigated whether and why financial constraints
influence the happiness consumers derive from their purchases. To do so, we reported eight
highly powered studies in the main manuscript, an additional four studies in the Web Appendix,
and a meta-analysis including an additional 21 studies (in sum, 33 studies, N = 17,750).
Our data revealed four main findings. First, we found that financial constraints decrease
the happiness consumers derive from their purchases. This effect is a function of perceived
financial constraints, rather than objective constraints. Second, we found that opportunity cost
consideration is a mechanism underlying financial constraints’ negative effect on purchase
happiness. That is, consumers who feel financially constrained—irrespective of their actual
income level—are more likely to consider the opportunity costs of their purchases, which in turn
decreases purchase happiness. We provide evidence for the role of opportunity cost
consideration both by manipulating (study 6) and measuring it (studies 5 and 7), while ruling out
several competing alternative explanations. Third, we found that the effect of financial
constraints on purchase happiness results in less favorable reviews (studies 2 and 3). Fourth,
consistent with our proposed mechanism, we found that the effect is attenuated for planned
purchases (study 7).
Theoretical Contributions
The current work offers important contributions to the growing literature on consumers’
subjective wealth and, more specifically, financial constraints. While most of this literature has
focused on the effects of financial constraints on consumer attention, preference, and choice, less
is known about their effects at later stages of the decision process (for an exception, see Paley,
Tully, and Sharma 2019). Understanding the effects of financial constraints on purchase
happiness is particularly important because prior research has shown that financially constrained
consumers often turn to compensatory consumption (e.g., Sharma and Alter 2012; Tully,
Hershfield, and Meyvis 2015; Briers and Laporte 2013; Haisley, Mostafa, and Loewenstein
2008). Our results suggest that, even though financial constraints increase consumers’ predicted
happiness with their purchases, they decrease the happiness consumers actually derive from their
purchases. More broadly, our findings raise the provocative notion that financial constraints may
have different (or even divergent) effects on outcomes, depending on the stage of the consumer
decision making process. To our knowledge, our work is the first to provide initial evidence of
such a divergence.
In addition, the current work provides an initial step in the direction of clarifying
potential differences among different conceptualizations of consumers who have limited
resources. Our findings speak directly to prior work by Lee, Hall, and Wood (2018).
Specifically, they find that while high SES consumers class derive greater happiness from
experiences (vs. material goods), low SES consumers derive greater happiness from material
goods (vs. experiences). In contrast, our findings demonstrate that financial constraints cause
consumers to derive less happiness from both material and experiential purchases, and that this
effect is independent of the effect of social class. While there may be correlations between
financially constrained individuals and those in a lower social class, our results suggest that the
two may be meaningfully different and lead to divergent outcomes. Thus, the current manuscript
highlights the need for additional research investigating potentially systematic differences
between concepts (e.g., social class, financial constraints) that may be correlated but
conceptually distinct.
Furthermore, our research contributes to existing understanding of how budgetary status
and financial constraints affect consumer evaluations. For example, one might assume that
spending any portion of one’s budget may increase perceptions of financial constraints and
decrease evaluations. However, Soster, Gershoff, and Bearden (2014) demonstrate that only
spending that exhausts a budget to zero increases pain of paying, which in turn reduces purchase
satisfaction—the so-called “bottom-dollar effect.” In contrast, we demonstrate that subjective
perceptions of financial constraints affect evaluations irrespective of budgetary status and
objective constraints. Furthermore, unlike the effect of spending to zero on purchase satisfaction,
we demonstrate that the effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness occurs because of
opportunity cost consideration, irrespective of differences in pain of paying. Thus, our work
highlights conceptual differences between spending parts of one’s budget and feeling financially
constrained. Finally, we provide evidence that an important downstream consequence—less
favorable consumer reviews—results from the effect of financial constraints on purchase
happiness.
Our work also contributes to the growing literature on consumer happiness—specifically,
factors that may increase or decrease happiness from purchases. Prior research has identified
several ways in which consumers can maximize their happiness from their purchases. This body
of work has largely focused on purchase types (Van Boven and Gilovich 2003; Nicolao, Irwin,
and Goodman 2009; Dunn, Aknin, and Norton 2008; Whillans et al. 2017) and individual
differences (Bhattacharjee and Mogilner 2014; Lee, Hall, and Wood 2018) that contribute to
purchase happiness. Less work has systematically investigated how psychological states—in
particular, subjective wealth perceptions—contribute to purchase happiness. By showing that
subjective perceptions of financial constraints are a key driver of purchase happiness, the current
work demonstrate that consumers’ psychological states may be an important obstacle for “buying
happiness.”
Practical Implications
The current work also offers practical implications for consumer welfare and marketers.
First, our findings suggest that consumers may not derive as much happiness from consumption
when they feel financially constrained. This finding is considerable given (1) the ubiquity of
financial constraints and (2) that financially constrained consumers are precisely those who
expect to experience greater happiness from their purchases. Our work offers a simple
recommendation to mitigate this negative effect: planning. When consumers considered
purchases that were planned in advance, the detrimental effect of financial constraints was
significantly reduced, although it was not completely eliminated. Therefore, our findings suggest
that planning may not only allow consumers to better allocate their resources, but also allow
them to partially counteract the negative effect of financial constraints on purchase happiness.
Our work also offers insights for marketing managers. For instance, we found that
consumers who were not financially constrained were less likely to spontaneously consider
opportunity costs; however, they experienced lower purchase happiness when they were
prompted to do so (study 6). This finding suggests that marketers interested in enhancing
consumers’ purchase happiness are better served by highlighting the benefits consumers may get
from their purchases rather than highlighting competing products (which may increase
opportunity cost consideration). Our work also offers insights for marketers interested in
managing consumer reviews. Although marketers often encourage consumers to write reviews
for their purchases, our work suggests that they should be conscious about when to encourage
their customers to write reviews. Reviews may be particularly negative during times when
consumers are more likely to feel constrained—for example, right before payday (Carvalho,
Meier, and Wang 2016).