The Graduate Advisory Committee for Rachel Lillian Kraus Certifies that this is
the approved version of the following Capstone:
Breastfeeding Outcomes, Maternal Support, and
Postpartum Depression Symptomology
Committee:
Jason Ferrell, Ph.D., Committee Chair
Stephanie Widick, Ph.D., Committee Member
Taylor Randolph, MCP, Committee Member
Breastfeeding Outcomes, Maternal Support, and
Postpartum Depression Symptomology
by
Rachel Lillian Kraus, B. S.
Capstone
Presented to the Faculty of the Department of Psychology
Northwestern Oklahoma State University
in Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements
for the Degree of
Master of Science in General Psychology
Northwestern Oklahoma State University
December 2020
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my husband, Cullen, for encouraging me to become a doula, which
started me on the process to pursuing my Master’s degree. Mothers include a lifetime of thank-
yous, including the ones who participated in this study. They deserve the best, and I hope this
research is a step toward giving them the best. Lastly, to my advisor and mentor, Dr. Ferrell, a
huge thank you for helping me flesh out ideas and encouraging me to dig deeper.
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 1
Breastfeeding Outcomes, Maternal Support, and Postpartum Depression Symptomology
Rachel Kraus
Northwestern Oklahoma State University
Author Note:
This project is for partial fulfillment of the author’s capstone project,
a requirement for the Master of Science in General Psychology program.
This project was supervised by Jason D. Ferrell, Ph.D.
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 2
Abstract
Mothers need education to make the best decisions for herself, her new baby, and her family.
Research on pregnancy, delivery, and the postpartum period is important because it can provide
knowledge to make those decisions. The purpose of the current study is to fill a gap in the
literature regarding postpartum depression symptomology by controlling for the interrelatedness
between breastfeeding outcomes and maternal support, and then examine how they
independently predict postpartum depression symptomology. The research question is: How
does breastmilk production, number of months breastfeeding, and quality of maternal support
predict postpartum depression symptomology. Participants (N = 58) were social media
volunteers who completed measures of breastmilk production, number of months breastfeeding,
quality of maternal support, and postpartum depression symptomology. A multiple regression
analysis revealed that breastmilk production and number of months breastfeeding were not
predictors of postpartum depression symptomology; however, quality of maternal support was a
strong, negative predictor of postpartum depression symptomology. Results and implications are
discussed.
Keywords: breastfeeding, maternal support, postpartum outcomes, mother, baby
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 3
Breastfeeding Outcomes, Maternal Support, and Postpartum Depression Symptomology
When a woman becomes pregnant suddenly a set of options and decisions are opened to
her. She will have to make choices about nutrition, birthing classes, doctors, and a birthing plan.
Those are decisions made before the baby is born. After the baby arrives, the mother and her
partner have many more important decisions to make. The mother and her partner should have
open discussions with her doctor about delivery, breastfeeding options, and postpartum
depression. It is important that the mother and her partner are able to make educated decisions
because of how much those decisions can impact the physical and psychological health, as well
as the social world, of the baby and family. After decisions have been made, it is up to the
partner and family to support the mother. This will create the most conducive environment for
the mother and baby (Simkin, et al., 2016). The purpose of the current project is to examine the
relationships among breastfeeding outcomes, maternal support, and postpartum depression.
Introduction
Pregnancy is taxing on a woman’s body. Labor and delivery are two of the most
challenging things a person can do. Breastfeeding can be a struggle and taking care of a
newborn baby can be a daunting task. It is no coincidence so many new mothers struggle to
thrive. With the increased awareness of mental health over the past few years, postpartum
depression has gained more attention. Postpartum depression is a mood disorder that can affect
women after childbirth, which can have symptoms such as constant anxiousness, crying,
irritability, and withdrawing from friends and family (Simkin et al., 2016). Like other mental
health issues, it is tricky to target one specific cause of postpartum depression, and it can be
difficult to diagnose because of the varying symptoms. Because roughly 7-15% of mothers are
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 4
affected by postpartum depression within the first 3 months after birth, it is crucial to examine
conditions that may correlate with postpartum depression (Watkins et al., 2011).
With the increase of mothers in the workforce and the decrease of maternity leave offered
in the United States, mothers must make difficult decisions. For over a century, mothers have
had to choose among breastfeeding, using fortified formula, or using donated breastmilk to feed
their babies. It is recommended for mothers to breastfeed exclusively for six months and to
continue supplying breastmilk in addition to other food until the baby is at least a year old
(Cross-Barnet et al., 2012). Most women do not come close to meeting the recommendations. It
is well evidenced that breastfeeding has numerous health and cognitive benefits for babies;
however, the benefits for the mother are less known (Cross-Barnett et al., 2012; DHHSOWH,
2003). Breastfeeding outcomes can include the number of months a mother breastfed her baby,
the ease of breastmilk production, and whether the mother exclusively breastfed her baby.
The phrase it takes a village means that it takes support from the people around a family
to help raise a child. Maternal support is the emotional and physical support of the mother while
raising a child (Negron et al., 2013). This support can come from the mother’s spouse or partner,
family, friends, or even the workplace. Support can be anything from talking through a situation
with the mother, helping with chores around the residence, taking care of the baby while the
mother rests, or simply showing and stating complete support for what the mother chooses to do.
There have been studies about the ties between postpartum depression and breastfeeding
outcomes (Battle et al., 2008; Borra et al., 2015; de Sa Vieira et al., 2018; Pope & Mazmanian,
2015; Ross-Cowdery et al., 2016; Watkins et al., 2011). There have also been studies about the
ties between postpartum depression and maternal support (Anokye et al., 2018; Ongeri et al.,
2018). The findings in this literature are inconclusive and mixed.
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 5
There is a gap in the literature about how breastfeeding outcomes, maternal support, and
postpartum depression are interconnected. Information about what is helpful and healthy for
babies is well circulated and well known. Often, this is not the case for knowing what is helpful
and healthy for mothers. For example, it is well evidenced that breastfeeding has numerous
health and cognitive benefits for babies; however, the benefits for the mother are much less
known (Ross-Cowdery et al., 2016). Mothers must make decisions about what is best for their
babies, families, and themselves. One of the most effective ways to ensure a mother makes the
best decisions is through education. Because so many new mothers battle postpartum depression
and the pressure of how to take care of their babies, it is best that families and friends of mothers
are also educated, as they will be the support system for mothers and babies.
Breastfeeding Outcomes
Breastfeeding is known to be the healthiest feeding option for most babies (Borra et al.,
2015; Watkins et al., 2011). The exclusions being feeding options for some premature and sick
babies. Roughly 75 percent of mothers begin breastfeeding; however, by six months postpartum
only 43 percent continue, and 23 percent continue to 12 months (Watkins et al., 2011). Of the 43
percent that make it to six months, only a total of 13 percent exclusively breastfed. This
contradicts the recommendations of breastfeeding exclusively for six months and continuing
breastmilk supply until the baby is at least one year old (Watkins et al., 2011).
Breastfeeding protects babies against illnesses by transmitting the mother’s antibodies
through the breastmilk. Its composition also prevents gastrointestinal infections, respiratory
infections, sudden infant death syndrome, obesity, and malnutrition (de Sa Vieira, Caldeira,
Eugenio, di Lucca, & Silva, 2018). Breastfeeding does not only protect babies. Many women
are not educated on the maternal benefits of breastfeeding, which include postpartum weight
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 6
loss, reduced likelihood of diabetes, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, uterine cancer, and
rheumatoid arthritis (Ross-Cowdery et al., 2016). Some possible negative outcomes when
breastfeeding are mastitis (i.e., which is the infection of breast tissue), difficulty losing weight,
headaches, and decreased libido (Ross-Cowdery et al., 2016).
There are a few medical reasons why a mother may not be able to breastfeed. If a baby is
born prematurely, the mother’s milk may have a hard time coming in because the mother’s body
was not ready to feed a baby. Delivering a baby via cesarean section can disturb the
physiological mechanisms of breastmilk production, leading to some difficulties (Simkin et al.,
2016). There are several transmittable diseases that can prevent a mother from breastfeeding due
to the risk of passing it on to her baby (DHHSOWH, 2003). Drug and alcohol abuse can prevent
a mother from breastfeeding. Depending on the dosage, mothers may be counseled not to
breastfeed their babies. Mothers who ingest low doses of alcohol, tobacco, methadone, and
buprenorphine are encouraged to continue breastfeeding (Bartholomew & Lee, 2019). Mothers
who ingest drugs such as methamphetamine and cocaine are not encouraged to continue
breastfeeding due to the potentially harmful effects on their babies (Bartholomew & Lee, 2019).
Some mothers have issues with their nipple type, and mothers who have had breast enhancement
or reduction surgery may not be able to breastfeed. There are also reasons a mother may choose
not to breastfeed. If a mother was a victim of sexual assault, breastfeeding could trigger a
negative psychological response (Wood, 2010). Some working mothers may believe they do not
have the ability to keep up with breastfeeding, and some women simply do not want to
breastfeed (Simkin et al., 2016).
There are some advantages and disadvantages to formula feeding children as well. With
formula feeding, anyone can feed the baby. It takes more formula than breastmilk to satisfy a
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 7
baby’s nutritional needs, which fills the baby’s stomach for longer. Because of this, most
formula-fed babies sleep for longer stretches of time than breastfed babies. This can help
mothers get on a more regular sleeping schedule. However, formula is not naturally produced;
therefore, babies cannot absorb the nutrients in formula as well as breastmilk, and some babies
do not digest formula well (American Pregnancy Association, 2018). Formula does not contain
antibodies from mothers to support babies’ immune systems. Besides the physical
disadvantages, formula and bottles needed to feed formula to babies can be costly and take more
time to prepare for a baby (American Pregnancy Association, 2018). Breastmilk is naturally the
right temperature, is easily accessible, and is always ready. Formula must be prepared and
warmed to the correct temperature and bottles and nipples must be taken everywhere the baby
goes (American Pregnancy Association, 2018).
For mothers who work away from home, breastfeeding can be difficult. In order to
maintain their breastmilk supply, mothers must pump throughout the day while they are away
from their babies. Mothers have to organize their day around their pumping schedule and have a
private place to pump. After they are finished pumping, they must store the breastmilk in a
refrigerator or freezer to preserve it and clean their pump parts. Places of employment may see
breastfeeding mothers as a liability to productivity in the workplace because employers are
required by law to allow time during the workday and privacy for them to pump (Basrowi et al.,
2018). Mothers who work away from home and formula-feed their babies only need to supply
their childcare provider with their preferred formula and bottles.
Maternal Support
Becoming a mother can be a scary experience for many reasons including body changes,
responsibility for a completely dependent human, sleep deprivation, and relationships can change
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 8
(Simkin et al., 2016). Because of all the changes, it is easy for a mother to feel alone during her
pregnancy and postpartum period. Some mothers hire help or have a family member stay at her
residence to help with chores and cooking. Other moms might hire a postpartum doula to take
care of the baby or the residence while the mother catches up on sleep. Also, it is common for
friends of the mother set up a meal train so one less burden is removed from the new mother and
her family. All of these are ways to physically support mothers.
However, mothers need more than just physical support. A new mother’s body goes
through many physical and hormonal changes, and the only people who can fully understand are
other mothers. Birth can be traumatic or can go differently than planned. Regardless of the
circumstances of a birth, the birth of a child is a major life event and mothers can benefit from
talking through their experiences with other women who have gone through it as well. This
creates a sense of community that supports mothers. It is important for mothers to have the
counsel and support of other mothers to reinforce the idea that they are not alone in their
struggles. Friends and family play a large role in supporting a new mother, both physically and
emotionally. One important thing friends and family need to remember in the excitement of a
new baby is that the mother is new as well. The new mother needs just as much or more
attention and affection from her loved ones as the baby does (Simkin et al., 2016). Oftentimes
the mother’s needs are placed behind the baby’s needs after the baby is born.
If the mother goes back to work while her baby is still young, the support (or lack
thereof) of her workplace can make a big impact on her success. If her boss is more lenient with
the mother and is fully supportive of her and her family, it can boost her self-esteem and let her
know that she can balance being a working mother. Alternatively, if her boss is not supportive, it
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 9
may cause the mother to lose confidence in her ability to be a mom and career woman. This lack
of confidence can lead to guilt in having to choose which gets more attention.
Spouses or partners are typically the most important source of support for the mothers. A
supportive partner can help the mothers make the best decisions for their family and can make
their home have a loving and safe atmosphere. An unsupportive partner can be detrimental to a
mother and can create a hostile living situation (Onegi et al., 2018).
Postpartum Depression
Postpartum depression has garnered increased attention over the past several years which
has been beneficial in helping mothers feel normal and unashamed for having it. Previously,
postpartum depression was mostly known as baby blues. Baby blues is a brief time of
heightened emotions within the first few postpartum days and usually subsides within 10 days
(Pope & Mazmanian, 2016). However, postpartum depression can affect mothers for over a year
after the birth of her child. The women who are most at risk are the ones predisposed to
depression before they got pregnant and women who experienced depression while pregnant
(Anokye, Acheampong, Budu-Ainooson, Obeng, & Akwasi, 2018). Postpartum depression can
be dangerous. While some milder forms are experienced as anxiety and slight withdrawal from
relationships, more severe forms can lead to suicidal ideation or harming the baby if gone
unrecognized and untreated (Pope & Mazmanian, 2016). One of the main reasons postpartum
depression still goes untreated is because many women do not report how they feel to their care
providers. With all the mom-shaming, some new mothers do not want to admit they are
struggling in fear that it makes them look like a bad mother (Anokye, 2018). However, because
the stigma around mental health issues is decreasing, more mothers are talking to their care
providers and receiving the help they need.
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 10
One of the most common ways to determine the presence and severity of postpartum
depression is the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) (Cox, Holden, & Sagovsky,
1987). The EPDS is a screening questionnaire with 10 questions, with a 4-point Likert response
scale. The answers have ranges of duration and severity with a total scoring range of 0-30. In
some studies thresholds are used to categorize severity; such that a score of 13 or higher
postpartum or 15 or higher during pregnancy suggests the mother sees a mental health specialist.
Breastfeeding Outcomes and Maternal Support
Breastfeeding comes more easily for some mothers than for others. Regardless of ease, it
is a fulltime job. Babies, especially when exclusively breastfed, need to eat several times a day,
including at least one night feed. The new mother must sacrifice a lot of time, energy, and
personal space to maintain breastfeeding. Additionally, mothers must be mindful of what they
eat and drink and how much rest they are getting. It is important for breastfeeding mothers to eat
a well-rounded diet so she can pass the nutrients on to her baby (Karcz, Lehman, & Krolak-
Olejnik, 2020). If a mother does not rest well, or is stressed or sick, her milk supply can
diminish. Some mothers do everything by best-practice recommendations and still cannot
produce enough milk (Simkin et al., 2016).
Only 13 percent of mothers meet the six months of exclusive breastfeeding that the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the American Academy of Pediatrics
recommend (ACOG Committee Opinion, 2018; American Academy of Pediatrics, 2012). One
of the biggest contributors to success in exclusive breastfeeding is the mother’s confidence in
herself (Blythe, Creedy, Dennis, Moyle, Pratt, & De Vries, 2002). According to de Sa Vieira
and colleagues (2018), mothers with high self-efficacy in breastfeeding maintained exclusivity
80 percent longer than mothers with medium self-efficacy, and mothers with medium self-
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 11
efficacy maintained exclusivity 48 percent longer than mothers with low self-efficacy. Some of
the sources of low self-efficacy were low level of education, no partner, low number of prenatal
consultations, or the mother had less of a familial and medical support system than the mothers
with high self-efficacy.
There is some evidence that only 3 percent of mothers received full breastfeeding support
from care providers and only 25 percent of the mothers’ care providers showed verbal support of
breastfeeding (Cross-Barnett et al., 2012). Twenty-seven percent stated they received zero
support from any care providers. Only one mother out of the 75 mothers in the study exclusively
breastfed her child, which she did for 10 months. She was the only mother who was able to have
a doula, who is a birth and postpartum support person (Cross-Barnet et al., 2012).
Breastfeeding Outcomes and Postpartum Depression
There is a phrase that says Breast is best because nutritionally breastmilk is the best
option for most babies (Leung & Sauve, 2005). There is also a phrase that says Fed is best
which is used to help remove the shame of mothers formula-feeding their babies. While the
most important thing is that the baby is being fed and is healthy, it is important to know all the
advantages and disadvantages to breastfeeding.
One big hindrance for mothers with a history of depression or mothers struggling with
postpartum depression to breastfeed is that most antidepressants are not safe to take while
pregnant or breastfeeding (Battle et al., 2008). One of the benefits of breastfeeding is the
bonding a mother experiences with her baby. Postpartum depression can interfere with exclusive
breastfeeding and lead to negative interactions with the baby. The average length of time
mothers exclusively breastfed their babies was 38 days for mothers who scored a nine or lower
on the EPDS (de Sa Vieira et al., 2018). The average time was 27 days for mothers with scores
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 12
greater than or equal to 10, meaning the difference was not significant enough to draw any
conclusions. Also, the mother’s breastfeeding intention plays a more substantial role in the
prevalence of postpartum depression than whether a mother breastfeeds (Borra et al., 2015).
Borra and colleagues (2015) found that if a mother intends to breastfeed and does not or cannot,
she will be more susceptible to postpartum depression. Alternatively, if a mother does not intend
to breastfeed, but she does, she will be more susceptible to postpartum depression. Importantly,
this would contradict most people’s intuition that breastfeeding would psychologically benefit a
mother regardless of her intentions.
Another study found that mothers with postpartum depression were less likely to continue
breastfeeding as opposed to mothers without postpartum depression (Watkins et al., 2011). Of
the mothers with postpartum depression, 68.6 percent continued to breastfeed and 74.9 percent of
mothers without continued to breastfeed. The study also found that mothers who did not like
breastfeeding were 1.42 times more likely to have postpartum depression than mothers who
enjoyed it and mothers with postpartum depression were more likely to have severe breast pain
associated with breastfeeding. Watkins and colleagues concluded that a combination of low
breastfeeding self-efficacy, shorter breastfeeding duration, and general concerns surrounding
breastfeeding were associated with depressive symptoms, but not necessarily postpartum
depression (Watkins et al., 2011).
Maternal Support and Postpartum Depression
Postpartum depression is typically not tied to one event or cause. There are many things
that can cause a mother to be susceptible to it. A predisposition to depression before and during
pregnancy, stressful life situations during pregnancy, single marital status, low income, and lack
of social support increase the risk of postpartum depression (Ongeri et al., 2018). A study
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 13
showed that the only factors with a strong correlation to postpartum depression were the
mother’s number of children, antepartum depression, economic stress, and conflict with her
partner (Ongeri et al., 2018). After each checkup throughout the mother’s postpartum period, the
factor that maintained the most significant increased risk for postpartum depression was conflict
with her partner. According to Ongeri and colleagues (2018), if a mother has a healthy and
supportive relationship with her husband or partner, it can help create a strong support system for
the mother. Stress causes increased levels of cortisol, which increases the risk of postpartum
depression. Furthermore, stress can be better managed with adequate support of a partner.
A study explored the four most common interventions used for mothers with postpartum
depression: psychosocial support, postpartum home visits, interpersonal psychotherapy, and
cognitive therapy (Anokye et al., 2018). In the study, postpartum depression had a prevalence
rate of seven percent, ranging from mild to severe depression. Healthcare workers applied
several types of potential treatments of postpartum depression on the mothers in the study, which
are listed above. Anokye and colleagues chose the treatment types because previously published
articles boasted of decreases in postpartum depression caused by the different types of treatment.
Only psychosocial support was found to significantly decrease the symptoms of postpartum
depression (Anokye et al., 2018).
The Current Study
The correlations between breastfeeding outcomes and postpartum depression,
breastfeeding outcomes and maternal support, and maternal support and postpartum depression
have all been researched. However, there is a gap in the literature, such that the correlation
between postpartum depression, breastfeeding outcomes, and maternal support have not been
explored all together. It is important to study these variables together, because at some level,
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 14
they are all related, and a more accurate understanding of postpartum depression can come from
analyses that control for their interrelatedness.
The purpose of the current study is to fill that gap in the literature by accounting for the
interrelatedness between breastfeeding outcomes and maternal support, and then examining how
they independently predict postpartum depression symptomology. The research question is:
How does breastmilk production, number of months breastfeeding, and quality of maternal
support predict postpartum depression symptomology. The hypotheses were that (a) breastmilk
production will negatively predict postpartum depression symptomology, (b) number of months
breastfeeding will negatively predict postpartum depression symptomology, and (c) quality of
maternal support will negatively predict postpartum depression symptomology.
Method
Ethical Consideration
Ethical consideration oversight and approval for the current study was provided by the
Northwestern Oklahoma State University Institutional Review Board, IRB #11-6-20 Kraus-
Ferrell.
Participants
Participants (N = 58) were volunteers from social media websites, and were mothers
between six months and two years postpartum. The mean age was 27.73 years (SD = 3.92
years). Participant reported ethnicity was 84.50% White/Anglo, 10.30% Hispanic or Latina/o,
3.75% Asian, 1.70% Native American or Alaskan Native, and 3.40% other. The participants
were not incentivized for participation. The social media websites used for recruitment were
Facebook and Instagram via the following social media groups (a) Love What You DOULA, (b)
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 15
NW Oklahoma Breastfeeding Coalition – Task Force, (c) Mom to Mom: Breastfeeding Support
for NW Oklahoma Families, (d) Super Doulas!, and (e) Motherboard Birth.
Measures
Postpartum Depression Symptomology. One of the most commonly used
questionnaires to measure the level of postpartum depression symptomology is the Edinburgh
Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS; Cox et al., 1987), and it was used in the current study. See
Appendix B for the EPDS. It has demonstrated to be a reliable and valid way to measure
postpartum depression (Cox et al., 1987; Pope & Mazmanian, 2016). Importantly, this measure
does not identify or diagnose clinical or abnormal depression, but instead measures individual
differences in levels of postpartum depression symptomology at non-clinical and normal levels.
It has 10 questions with four answer options each, and three of the questions are negatively
worded (and reverse scored). A mean composite score of the 10 questions was used in final
analyses because Pope and Mazmanian (2016) recommend that postpartum depression
symptomology be measured on a continuum (instead of categorical) and that the EPDS is an
appropriate measurement tool to do that.
Maternal Support Quality. Maternal support quality will be measured by the Quality of
Relationship Inventory (QRI), which can be used to describe a partner, family member, friend,
boss, or anyone in contact with the mother (Pierce et al., 1994). See Appendix C for the Quality
of Relationship Inventory. It has demonstrated to be a reliable and valid way to measure
postpartum depression (Pierce et al., 1994). The QRI has 25 questions regarding how a mother
perceives their closest supporting relationship, with each question having four response options,
and 10 of the questions are negatively worded (and reverse scored). Each participant was
instructed to complete the QRI regarding their closest supporting relationship to them as a
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 16
mother (e.g., partner, family member, close friend, neighbor, etc.). A mean composite score of
the 25 questions was used in the final analyses.
Demographic and background characteristics. Participants completed a demographic
and background characteristics questionnaire including information about age, gender, ethnicity,
a question to verify if they are a mother between 6-months and 2-years postpartum (i.e., the
inclusion criteria), and the breastfeeding outcomes questions.
Breastfeeding Outcomes. Breastfeeding outcomes were defined as (a) the number of
months spent breastfeeding and (b) the amount of breastmilk production. The number of months
spent breastfeeding was chosen from a dropdown menu, and a scale from 0-24 months was used
in final analyses. The amount of breastmilk production question was chosen from the following
options: nonexistent/did not breastfeed (coded as 0), very light (coded as 1), light (coded as 2),
medium (coded as 3), heavy (coded as 4), very heavy (coded as 5). The scale from 0-5 was used
in the final analyses.
Procedure
Researchers recruited participants through Facebook and Instagram via social media
groups (a) Love What You DOULA, (b) NW Oklahoma Breastfeeding Coalition – Task Force,
(c) Mom to Mom: Breastfeeding Support for NW Oklahoma Families, (d) Super Doulas!, and (e)
Motherboard Birth. Researcher shared the following recruitment message publicly on the
timelines of the social media groups, “Hi! If you are a mother who is between 6-months and 2-
years postpartum: please consider helping with understanding about postpartum outcomes by
participating in this 5-minute study being conducted at Northwestern Oklahoma State University
focusing on maternal support and postpartum outcomes. Click the following link to read about
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 17
online survey in Google Forms which was the informed consent. See Appendix A for the
informed consent.
If participants consented to participate, they completed the EPDS, QRI, and
demographics and background questionnaire with breastfeeding outcome questions. Lastly,
participants were thanked for their participation and provided contact information in case they
needed/wanted to contact the researchers.
Results
Researchers conducted all data analyses in Jamovi statistics software (The Jamovi
Project, 2020). Data from two participants were not included in analyses because they did not
meet the inclusion criteria of a mother between six months and two years postpartum. Data from
all other participants (N = 58) were included in analyses. The results were analyzed using a
multiple regression analysis where the model included quality of relationship, breastmilk
production, and months of breastfeeding entered as predictors of postpartum depression
symptomology. This analytical approach controls for the correlations between quality of
relationship, breastmilk production, and months of breastfeeding to get a sense of how they
independently predict postpartum depression symptomology.
Overall, the multiple regression model was a significant predictor of postpartum
depression symptomology, F(3, 53) = 6.94, p < .001. Adjusted R2 for the model is .24, meaning
the model explained 24% of the variance in postpartum depression symptomology. The mean
postpartum depression symptomology score on a scale from 0-3 was 1.15 (SD = 0.55). Looking
at the independent predictors and their hypotheses:
Hypothesis A, Breastmilk Production: Hypothesis A was that breastmilk production
negatively predicts postpartum depression symptomology. This hypothesis was not supported by
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 18
the data; standardized β = .02, p = .887. That is, after controlling for the correlation between
breastmilk production and number of months breastfeeding (r = .51) and quality of maternal
support (r = .19), breastmilk production did not predict postpartum depression symptomology.
The mean breastmilk production on a scale from 0-5 was 3.02 (SD = 1.29).
Hypothesis B, Number of Months Breastfeeding: Hypothesis B was that number of
months breastfeeding negatively predicts postpartum depression symptomology. This hypothesis
was not supported by the data; standardized β = -.09, p = .489. That is, after controlling for the
correlation between number of months breastfeeding and breastmilk production (r = .51) and
quality of maternal support (r = .11), number of months breastfeeding did not predict postpartum
depression symptomology. The mean number of months breastfeeding on a scale from 0-24 was
8.76 (SD = 6.22).
Hypothesis C, Quality of Maternal Support: Hypothesis C was that quality of
maternal support negatively predicts postpartum depression symptomology. This hypothesis was
supported by the data; standardized β = -.52, p < .001. That is, after controlling for the
correlation between quality of maternal support and breastmilk production (r = .19) and number
of months breastfeeding (r = .11), quality of maternal support was a strong, negative predictor of
postpartum depression symptomology. Higher levels of relationship quality predicted lower
relationship. The mean quality of maternal support score on a scale from 0-3 was 2.16 (SD =
0.54).
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 19
relationship and postnatal depression symptomology. The grey range includes the 95%
Confidence Interval of the slope [-.76, -.28] to help visualize confidence and variability in the
estimate of the slope.
Discussion
The hypothesis that breastmilk production would negatively predict postpartum
depression symptomology was not supported by the findings. There was no significant
relationship between the two variables. While there was not any literature found to back the
hypothesis, information from mothers led to the deduction that breastmilk production would
negatively predict postpartum depression symptomology. Mothers with medium to very heavy
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 20
amount of breastmilk production would not have to worry about whether their bodies could
adequately produce enough for their baby, but mothers with nonexistent to light amounts would
potentially worry about it. Fortunately, according to the current study, this does not predict
postpartum depression symptomology.
The hypothesis that the number of months spent breastfeeding would negatively
predict postpartum depression symptomology was also not supported by the findings.
Breastfeeding releases hormones, which facilitate breastmilk production and aid in mother-child
bonding. The longer a mother breastfeeds, the longer those hormones course through her body.
Despite those facts, there was no significant relationship between the number of months spent
breastfeeding and postpartum depression.
The hypothesis that quality maternal support would negatively predict postpartum
depression symptomology was supported by the findings. There is a significant relationship
between the quality of maternal support and postpartum depression symptomology. The higher
the quality of support from the mother’s closest support person, the less likely the mother would
experience postpartum depression symptomology. This finding is important because it helps to
better understand the complex relationship between breastfeeding outcomes, quality of maternal
support, and postpartum depression symptomology. The finding that quality of maternal
support, but not breastfeeding outcomes, predict lower levels of postpartum depression
symptomology can help provide more accurate recommendations to mothers and better inform
families about what factors may mitigate postpartum depression.
One strength of the study is how strong the relationship is between maternal support
and postpartum depression symptomology. This means that the negative direction of the
relationship is likely to be reproducible in further studies, even if this specific effect size is not.
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 21
There was a great variety in answers from the mothers. Because the survey was anonymous,
they felt free to choose whichever answers they felt. Another strength is the external validity
(i.e., generalizability) of the study because there was a wide range of ages, and variability in the
predictor and outcome variables, including several women who did not breastfeed. Lastly, to the
researcher’s knowledge, this is the first study to control for the relationships between
breastfeeding outcomes and quality of maternal support, to appropriately see how these variables
predict postpartum depression symptomology.
There are a few limitations of the current study as well. The sample size was not large
(N=58), so the data analysis was sensitive to every response submitted. After examining for
outliers, none were identified. The majority of the participants identified as White/Anglo
mothers, meaning external validity (i.e., generalizability) is somewhat limited regarding
ethnicity. To ensure reliability and generalizability of the current study’s findings, future studies
should replicate our methodology with larger and more diverse samples. Also, the survey was
posted in breastfeeding support groups, so it was more likely that breastfeeding mothers saw the
survey and submitted a response. Seven mothers who did not breastfeed their most recent child
participated. An important limitation of the current study is its inability to make causal claims
because experimental methodology was not used. Future studies should rely on longitudinal
studies to help uncover causal mechanisms. However, ecological validity of the current study is
relatively high because we were able to measure real-life outcomes in real-life situations. If the
study is replicated in the future, there are a few demographic questions that could be important to
include in analyses. Based on Ongeri and colleagues’ (2018) research, socioeconomic status
could predict postpartum depression symptomology, as well as whether a mother’s pregnancy
was planned or not.
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 22
Breastfeeding outcomes are not significantly related to postpartum depression
symptomology. However, it can reduce the severity of baby blues and it impacts the physical
health of mother and baby. According to Watkins and colleagues, low breastfeeding self-
efficacy, shorter breastfeeding duration, and general concerns surrounding breastfeeding were
associated with depressive symptoms, but not necessarily postpartum depression. Based on the
current study, shorter breastfeeding duration is not associated with postpartum depression
symptomology. Low breastfeeding self-efficacy could be a symptom of low quality maternal
support, which is a strong predictor of postpartum depression symptomology, and that would be
an important question for future research to answer.
Ongeri and colleagues (2018) stated that conflict with the mother’s partner was one of
the only predictors of postpartum depression. The further the mothers were into their postpartum
journeys, only one factor remained as a significant predictor of postpartum depression: conflict
with the partner. Anokye and colleagues (2018) concluded that the best form of treatment for
mothers with postpartum depression symptoms was psychosocial support. Both of these studies’
findings converge with the findings of the current study. This converging evidence supports the
claim that mothers need the support of their spouses, partners, friends, and family to reduce their
risk of suffering from postpartum depression symptoms.
The initial purpose of the current project was to inform mothers about what they can
do to mitigate their risk of postpartum depression. Given the results of the current study, the
more appropriate questions would be, “What can others do to mitigate the risk of mothers
suffering from postpartum depression?” The decision to make set the parameters for the subjects
was deliberate. Only analyzing data from mothers between six months and two years postpartum
eliminates the possibility of baby blues symptomology skewing the results. Mothers within the
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 23
first few months postpartum are susceptible to baby blues, regardless of how well their labor and
delivery went, whether they breastfeed, and the quality of their relationships. It happens because
of the drastic highs and lows of hormones and the stress of newborn parenting. Much of the
symptomology of baby blues overlap with the symptomology of postpartum depression. It is
clear from the results of the current study that neither the amount of months spent breastfeeding
nor amount of breastmilk production has much influence on postpartum depression
symptomology, so mothers should be educated about the true pros and cons of breastfeeding. It
is important for mothers to be informed of their options and what the possible ramifications are
for each option. Breastfeeding benefits both mother and baby physically and also helps with
bonding between the mother and baby. Although breastfeeding seems to reduce the risk of baby
blues, it does not necessarily relate to postpartum depression in that way.
Societally, is it normal and acceptable for fathers, or parents who are not the biological
mother, to be not as present or engaged in parenting as the mother. Mothers are considered to be
more nurturing and biologically attached to their children, so they should bear the brunt of
raising them. This possibly stems from the “traditional” family of the past, where the father’s
responsibility was to bring home money and the mother’s responsibility was to tend to the
children and the home. Thankfully, it seems that an increasing number of men have started to
take seriously the issues with this set up and have started to see the importance of being helpful
and supportive partners in the home.
What do mothers need to be the healthiest mentally? Based on the current study,
mothers need highly supportive and stable relationships with one or a few key people in their
lives. They need to feel and know that they are not alone during the difficult and potentially
isolating job that is mothering. Mothers need to know they can completely rely on those closest
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 24
to them because becoming a mother can be a scary thing. There are body changes, responsibility
for a completely dependent human, sleep deprivation, and relationships can change. It is so
important for mothers to know that during all the change, they have at least one constant in their
lives, a steady relationship with the person they rely on most.
BREASTFEEDING, SUPPORT, AND POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION 25