Running Head: NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV
Evidence for Neuropsychological Health Disparities in Black Americans with HIV Disease
Jennifer L. Thompson, Ilex Beltran-Najera, Briana Johnson, Yenifer Morales,
and Steven Paul Woods*
University of Houston, Houston, Texas
*Corresponding author: Steven Paul Woods, Psy.D. Email: spwoods@uh.edu. Address: 126 Heyne
Building, Suite 239D, Houston, TX 77004-5022. Phone: 713-743-6415.
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 2
Abstract
Objective: Black Americans are at high risk for HIV disease and associated morbidity. However,
we know little about the neuropsychological impact and correlates of HIV disease among Black
Americans. Methods: Participants included 40 Black persons with HIV (PWH), 83 White PWH, 28
Black HIV- and 64 White HIV- individuals. Neurocognition was measured with raw, sample-based z-
scores from a clinical battery. Everyday functioning was assessed using self- and clinician-rated measures
of cognitive symptoms and activities of daily living. HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders were
classified using the Frascati criteria. Results: We observed a significant three-way interaction between
HIV, race, and domain on neurocognitive z-scores. This omnibus effect was driven by large effect size
decrements in semantic memory and processing speed in Black PWH compared to the other groups.
Black PWH participants also demonstrated higher frequencies of HIV-associated neurocognitive
disorders as compared to White PWH. Unexpectedly, global neurocognition was negatively related to
everyday functioning for White PWH, but not for Black PWH. Conclusions: Systemic disadvantages for
Black Americans may combine with HIV disease to compound some neurocognitive impairments in this
vulnerable population. Prospective studies are needed to identify better ways to prevent and manage HIV-
associated neurocognitive disorders among Black Americans.
Keywords: Race; Assessment; Activities of daily living; Health disparities; Cultural psychology
Word count: Abstract 196; Manuscript 4,878
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 3
Evidence for Neuropsychological Health Disparities in Black Americans with HIV Disease
In the United States (U.S.), there is a stark overrepresentation of Black Americans in the HIV
epidemic. Approximately 13% of the U.S. population identifies as Black, but Black Americans comprised
42% of all new HIV infections and 41% of all HIV cases in 2018 (CDC, 2020). Several sociocultural
factors may combine to increase HIV transmission and infection rates for Black Americans, such as
cultural stigmas and higher rates of incarceration (Blankenship et al., 2005, Williams et al., 2009).
Medical mistrust stemming from historical atrocities (e.g., the Tuskegee Syphilis study) and lived
experiences of racism in the medical system may decrease engagement in HIV prevention and detection
behaviors (Ball et al., 2013). Indeed, Black people with HIV (PWH) evidence longer durations from HIV
diagnosis to initiation of antiretroviral therapy (ART) and virologic suppression as compared to White
PWH (Haines et al., 2016). Experiences of poverty, social stigmatization, and structural racism contribute
to challenges in long-term HIV management in Black PWH (Freeman et al., 2020). In particular,
discrimination and suboptimal management of mental health disorders (e.g., depression, substance use
disorder) are associated with worse medical treatment adherence for Black PWH (Casagrande et al., 2007;
Rawlings & Masters, 2008). These multi-fold challenges for Black PWH have serious adverse
consequences as evidenced by greater risk for medical co-morbidities (e.g., hepatitis C virus, renal and
vascular disease; Rawlings & Masters, 2008) and higher mortality rates than that of White and Hispanic
PWH (Siddiqi et al., 2015). These health disparities highlight the need to better understand the many
health challenges experienced by Black PWH.
Racial disparities are also evident in the neurocognitive health of Black Americans. Relative to
White samples, Black Americans sometimes obtain lower scores on measures of verbal and visual
learning and memory, executive functions, attention, and information processing speed, with effect sizes
ranging from small to large (Heaton et al., 2004a; Manly et al., 2002; Norman et al., 2011; cf. Henderson
et al., 1998; Strickland et al., 1997). Additionally, the relationship between sociodemographic factors and
neurocognition may differ across race; for example, older age has been more strongly associated with
lower neurocognitive performance among healthy Black versus White adults (Heaton et al., 2004a).
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 4
Social and psychological phenomena including stereotype threat and perceived discrimination (e.g.,
Thames et al., 2013), socioeconomic disparities (e.g., Manly & Echemendia, 2007), low education quality
(e.g., Byrd et al., 2005), and acculturation (e.g., Manly et al., 2004) may partly explain the lower
neuropsychological test scores sometimes observed among Black Americans. Most notably, lower
literacy (i.e., proxy of education quality) is reliably associated with the score disparities in memory,
language, and executive functions among Black Americans (Manly et al., 2005).
Taken together, the various sociodemographic, medical, and psychological factors that contribute
to lower neurocognitive performance in Black Americans may interact with HIV disease to lead to worse
brain health outcomes. For example, lower educational attainment and opportunities for Black Americans
may decrease cognitive reserve (i.e., capacity to sustain cognitive disruption or compensate for losses
using other cognitive regions; Stern, 2002), which can sometimes buffer against HIV-associated
neurocognitive declines (Milanini et al., 2016; Vo et al., 2013). Oral word-reading is a commonly used
proxy for cognitive reserve and can enhance diagnostic accuracy (i.e., in lieu of years of education for
normative corrections) for detecting cognitive impairment in Black PWH (Rohit et al., 2007). Moreover,
discrepancies between years of education and reading grade level are observed at higher rates in Black
PLWH and are linked to lower neurocognitive scores (Ryan et al., 2005). Socially, experiences of
adversity and lower acculturation for Black PWH may partially explain poorer outcomes in executive
functions, processing speed, and episodic memory (Manly et al., 1998; Thames et al., 2018). Medical risk
factors, including elevated rates of cardiovascular disease and viremia may also hasten the development
of neurocognitive deficits among Black PWH (Storholm et al., 2019; Tedaldi et al., 2015). Furthermore,
psychological disorders (e.g., depression) may exacerbate neurocognitive declines in Black Americans
with medically symptomatic HIV (Richardson et al., 1999). Yet we still know little about the combined
and unique effects of race and HIV on neuropsychological functioning.
Several published studies have examined the neuropsychological aspects of HIV disease in
predominantly (e.g., Fogel et al., 2017) or exclusively (e.g., Durvasula et al., 2000) Black samples of
PWH. However, such designs are limited in the extent to which they can dissect racial disparities for
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 5
Black PWH. A smaller number of studies have examined the effects of race among PWH. Overall, those
studies tend to show that Black PWH perform below White PWH (but comparable to Hispanic PWH) on
measures of verbal fluency, information processing speed, executive functions, and working memory
(Cruz et al., 2020; Marquine et al., 2016; Vo et al., 2013). For example, Winston and colleagues (2013)
reported that Black PWH were over seven times more likely to meet Frascati-defined (Antinori et al.,
2007) criteria for neurocognitive impairment than were White PWH. In a large exploratory study of 1,653
women with and without HIV, Manly and colleagues (2011) found that Black women scored lower than
White women on measures of processing speed, executive functions, and word reading, irrespective of
HIV serostatus. Thus, we can reliably assert that both race and HIV are associated with lower
neurocognitive test scores, but it is unclear whether Black PWH experience an additive or synergistic
burden of HIV disease on neurocognitive functioning.
Of course, a major motivation to understand racial disparities in neuropsychological functioning
is its potential downstream implications for health behaviors and everyday functioning. Although
functional declines have been examined in aging (e.g., Morgan et al., 2012) and neuropsychologically
impaired (e.g., Heaton et al., 2004b) HIV populations, relatively little is known about ethnoracial
differences among PWH. The literature suggests that Black PWH exhibit difficulties in medication
management and adherence relative to their White counterparts (Patton et al., 2012; Thames et al., 2012).
Waldrop-Valverde et al. (2010) reported that poorer medication management skills as measured in the
laboratory were explained by lower numeracy in Black PWH. More broadly, greater declines in basic
ADL domains (e.g., bathing, grooming) were observed in Black PWH who exhibited elevated biomarkers
of allostatic load (i.e., lifetime and daily stressors; Fazeli et al. 2020). However, beyond these findings
there is a dearth of research explicitly investigating the expression and neurocognitive correlates of
everyday functional difficulties for Black PWH.
The current study investigated the individual and combined effects of race (i.e., Black versus
White race) and HIV serostatus on neurocognitive outcomes across six domains. We hypothesized that
Black PWH would show greater deficits in neurocognitive performance relative to White and
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 6
seronegative individuals. In particular, we predicted that lower scores would be notable for Black PWH in
declarative memory, executive functions, and processing speed based upon previous literature which
suggests impairment in these domains for individuals with HIV and for those who identify as Black. A
secondary aim was to examine differences in rates of neurocognitive disorders based on racial group and
HIV serostatus. We predicted that higher rates of neurocognitive disorders would be observed in Black
PWH. A third aim of this study was to investigate the ways in which neurocognition relates to clinical
HIV biomarkers and everyday functioning within Black and White PWH. Based on prior work which
established links between low health literacy and poorer HIV biomarkers within Black, but not White,
PWH (Walker et al., 2018), we predicted that lower CD4 cell counts (nadir and current) and detectable
viral loads would be more strongly associated with poorer neurocognitive functions for Black relative to
White PWH. We also expected poorer neurocognitive functions to be associated with greater difficulties
in everyday functioning for both HIV groups and a particularly strong association within Black PWH.
Methods
Participants
The sample included 40 Black PWH, 83 White PWH, 28 Black HIV- and 64 White HIV- adults
aged 18 to 66 years. Participants were enrolled in a study of memory housed at the University of
California San Diego (UCSD) HIV Neurobehavioral Research Program, which recruits from community-
based organizations, local clinics, and regional advertisements. Individuals were excluded from the study
if they met any of the following criteria: history of psychotic disorders, intellectual disability, and major
neuromedical conditions (e.g., active central nervous system opportunistic infections, head injury with
loss of consciousness more than 30 min, stroke with neurological sequelae, non-HIV-related dementias).
In addition, participants were screened for substance use disorders (SUD) using the Diagnostic and
th
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4 ed.; American Psychiatric Association, 1994) and illicit drug
use on the day of testing. Participants were excluded if they met criteria for current SUD or if they tested
positive on a breathalyzer or urine toxicology screening on the day of testing (with marijuana as the
exception). HIV serostatus was confirmed using Medmira or western blot test. All participants provided
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 7
written, informed consent. Note that the current sample was derived from a larger parent study cohort
described in Matchanova et al. (2020), Shepherd et al. (2020) and Tierney et al. (2017). Investigators for
the current study were blinded to neurocognitive status of participants in the parent study cohort and
extracted the four study groups (i.e., Black PWH, White PWH, Black HIV-, and White HIV-) on a case-
sociodemographic and health characteristics of the final study sample.
Procedures
Neurocognitive Functions
Participants were administered a comprehensive neuropsychological battery that assessed
attention, executive functions, processing speed, episodic memory, semantic memory, and motor
functions. Attention was measured using the Digit Span subtest of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale,
rd
3 edition (WAIS-III; Wechsler, 1997a), and Trial 1 of the California Verbal Learning Test-second
edition (CVLT-II; Delis et al., 2000). Executive functions were assessed with the Total Moves score from
the Tower of London Test (Drexel Version; Culbertson & Zillmer, 1999), Action (verb) fluency test
(Woods et al., 2005), and Trail Making Test, Part B (Army Individual Test Battery, 1944; Heaton et al.,
2004a). Measures evaluating episodic memory included Logical Memory I and II from the Wechsler
Memory Scale, 3rd edition (WMS-III; Wechsler, 1997b) and the Total Trials 1-5 and Long Delay Free
Recall scores from the CVLT-II. Semantic memory was evaluated using the Boston Naming Test (BNT;
Kaplan et al., 1983) and the Famous Faces subtest of the Kaufman Adolescent and Adult Intelligence Test
(KAIT-FF; Kaufman & Kaufman, 1993). Processing speed was assessed with Trail Making Test, Part A
and execution time for the Tower of London Test. Lastly, motor functions were assessed via time to
complete dominant and nondominant hands on the Grooved Pegboard Test (Heaton et al., 2004a; Kløve,
1963). For the primary analyses, the score for each subtest was converted to sample-based z-scores to
allow comparison across study groups without the confounding influence of demographically-adjusted
normative standards. Average sample-based z-scores were calculated for each neurocognitive domain
based on the subtests detailed above.
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 8
Everyday Functioning
Multiple domains of everyday functioning were also assessed in accordance with Frascati
guidelines (Antinori et al., 2007). Self-reported daily functioning was examined with the Lawton & Brody
Activities of Daily Living Questionnaire – Heaton Revision (ADLQ; see Heaton et al., 2004a, b; Woods
et al., 2004), which assessed functioning across 16 instrumental ADL domains at “best” and “now.” The
Karnofsky Performance Status Scale (KPSS; Karnofsky & Burchenal, 1949) provided a clinical rating of
participant functional status on a scale from 0 (dead) to 100 (normal activity). Self-reported employment
status was gathered via semi-structured interview and coded into one of four levels: employed, retired,
unemployed, or disabled. Everyday memory symptoms were evaluated using the 16-item Prospective and
Retrospective Memory Questionnaire (PRMQ; Smith et al., 2000), which quantifies the frequency of
memory concerns in daily life on a scale from 1 (never) to 5 (very often). Lastly, the 7-item Confusion
and Bewilderment Scale from the Profile of Mood States (POMS; McNair et al., 1981) was used to
measure perceived cognitive symptoms (e.g., unable to concentrate) over the past week on a scale from 0
(not at all) to 4 (extremely).
Each functional measure was used to determine functional status in line with Matchanova and
colleagues’ (2020) operationalization of the Frascati criteria (i.e., intact functioning, mild decline, or
major decline). Additionally, each functional measure was coded such that “1” indicated functional
decline (i.e., Frascati classification “mild” or “major” for that measure) and “0” indicated no functional
decline. Then, a continuous global functional score was generated by summing these codes across the five
functional measures for each participant whereby higher scores indicated a greater number of dependent
functional domains (see Doyle et al., 2013).
Classification of Neurocognitive Disorders
The level of neurocognitive and functional impairment was assessed for each participant to
classify HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders according to the Frascati criteria (Antinori et al., 2007;
Woods et al., 2004). For clinical classification purposes, each raw neurocognitive subtest score was
converted to a standardized T-score using normative data adjusting for age, education, sex, and race when
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 9
available. Tests in the current battery with normative data that specifically corrected for race/ethnicity
included BNT, Trails Making Test Parts A and B, and Grooved Pegboard. Cognitive impairment was
determined using the Global Deficit Score (GDS) approach which assigns values from 0 (no impairment)
to 5 (severe impairment) to the individual standardized T-scores, which are then averaged. Based upon
these scores, cognitive functioning was dichotomized as either “impaired” or “within normal limits” using
a cut-point of 0.5 (see Carey et al., 2004). Next, the GDS and Frascati functional diagnoses were both
evaluated to classify neurocognitive disorders for each participant. For participants whose GDS was
within normal limits, they were classified as neurocognitively “normal.” Participants were classified with
subsyndromic neurocognitive disorder when GDS was impaired and global Frascati functioning was
intact. Syndromic neurocognitive disorders (e.g., mild neurocognitive disorder or HIV-associated
dementia) were classified by impaired GDS and any level of global Frascati functional impairment (i.e.,
mild or major decline).
Data Analysis
The four study groups were comparable on age, education, SUD, and hepatitis C virus (HCV). A
data-driven approach was used to select covariates (Field-Fote, 2019), whereby any sociodemographic
model were included as covariates for that model. A multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) was
utilized to examine main effects and interactions of HIV serostatus and race on sample-based z-scores
across six cognitive domains. Planned post-hoc analyses were then conducted using a one-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) to compare neurocognitive domain scores across the four study groups. Any
significant ANOVAs were followed up with all pairwise comparisons to examine specific group
differences using the Tukey-Kramer HSD correction to reduce Type I error. A logistic regression was
employed to determine whether HIV serostatus, race, or their interaction were associated with clinical
classifications of neurocognitive disorders. Additionally, nonparametric Spearman’s rho correlations were
employed within the HIV groups to examine the relationship of global neurocognition with both HIV
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 10
disease markers and everyday functioning separately within Black and White PWH. A critical alpha of
.05 was used for all primary analyses.
Results
A MANOVA was conducted to examine the main effects and interactions of HIV serostatus and
race across six neurocognitive domains, covarying for WTAR VIQ. The omnibus model was significant,
F(4,208) =24.86, p<.001, h =.48, and revealed main between-subjects effects of HIV serostatus, F(1,208)
2 2
=5.95, p=.016, h =.03, and WTAR VIQ, F(1,208) =66.48, p<.001, h =.32. There was no main effect of
race, (p=.677) and the HIV by race interaction was not significant (p=.729). A significant within-subjects
effect of neurocognitive domain was also observed, F(5,204) =5.28, p<.001, h =.13. However, these main
effects were tempered by a significant three-way interaction between HIV, race, and neurocognitive
domain, F(5,204) =3.23, p=.008, h =.08.
Planned post-hoc analyses were then conducted using ANOVA and Tukey-Kramer HSD pairwise
domains of semantic memory (F(3,214) = 17.28, p < .001) and processing speed (F(3,214) = 3.19, p =
.025) both showed significant omnibus effects that were driven by the Black PWH participants scoring
lower than the White PWH and HIV- groups (ps < .045, mean Cohen’s d = .80). The domains of attention
(F(3,214) = 8.02, p < .001) and episodic memory (F(3,214) = 7.80, p < .001) also showed significant
omnibus effects, but these domain findings were characterized by higher scores in the White HIV- group
as compared to both the White and Black PWH groups (ps < .001, mean d = .74). There were no
significant omnibus group differences observed in the domains of motor skills (F(3,212) = 1.03, p = .38)
or executive functions (F(3,214) = 1.48, p = .22).
Next, we conducted a logistic regression to determine whether HIV serostatus, race, or their
interaction were associated with clinical classifications of neurocognitive disorders. Lifetime affective
disorder and WTAR VIQ were included as covariates in the model. The overall model was significant,
2 2
X (10, N=215) = 48.59, p < .001, and lifetime affective diagnosis (X = 10.06, p = .007) and WTAR VIQ
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 11
(X = 18.10, p < .001) emerged as significant predictors. The race by HIV interaction term fell at the level
of a trend (X = 5.64, p = .059). Post-hoc chi-square analyses were conducted in order to compare
neurocognitive disorder classification rates between the study groups. Findings revealed greater rates of
subsyndromic and syndromic neurocognitive disorder classifications for Black PWH participants
classifications across the four study groups.
Finally, we examined the association between global neurocognition and both HIV disease
markers and global everyday functioning in the PWH sample. Nonparametric correlations between HIV
disease markers and global neurocognitive sample-based z-scores were all small (range r = -.19 to .22)
and non-significant (ps > .05) in both the Black and White PWH groups. The Spearman’s rho correlation
between global neurocognitive z-score and global functional impairment was significantly smaller (z =
s s
Discussion
Black Americans are at high risk for HIV disease and associated morbidity. However, we know
little about the neuropsychological impact and correlates of HIV disease specifically among Black
Americans. Using a full factorial design, the current study showed that HIV and race have synergistic
adverse effects on some aspects of neuropsychological functioning. Specifically, we observed large effect
size score disparities for Black PWH in the domains of semantic memory (i.e., naming objects and
famous faces) and speeded information processing (i.e., visuomotor sequencing and visual planning
speed). The score disparities for Black PWH in this study were not better explained by other
sociodemographics (e.g., educational attainment, estimated VIQ), psychiatric factors, or medical
comorbidities. Of particular importance in this regard was the inclusion of estimated VIQ (i.e., oral word
reading) in these models, which prior studies show is an important modulator of the effects of race on
neuropsychological test scores (e.g., Manly et al., 2004). Overall, these findings align with prior work
showing lower scores in these neuropsychological domains for Black Americans with and without HIV
disease (e.g., Vo et al., 2013), but extend that work by demonstrating the combined effects of these two
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 12
risk factors. In other words, Black Americans may be at greater risk for experiencing the adverse effects
of HIV disease on neuropsychological function and other aspects of brain health. The reasons for these
brain health disparities in HIV remain to be determined by future research, which will require larger
samples and the measurement of relevant constructs such as perceived racial stress, stereotype threat,
education quality, and provider trust.
It is also important to highlight the several domains in which we did not observe the synergistic
adverse effects of HIV and race in this study. First, the pattern of results for the domains of attention and
episodic memory was unexpected. Specifically, both Black and White individuals with HIV performed
worse than White seronegatives in these two domains, indicating there was no additive effect of HIV for
Black participants. This was interesting considering that episodic memory is historically one of the most
sensitive domains to HIV disease (e.g., Carey et al., 2004). Type II error is a possible explanation for this
finding, as our sample of Black Americans was relatively small. Alternatively, prior findings link HIV
and social adversity (e.g., low childhood SES, racial discrimination) to reduced volume in the amygdala
and hippocampus, as well as poorer observed learning and memory performance (Thames et al., 2018).
Perhaps in our sample both White and Black individuals experienced social adversity related to their HIV
status, and thus revealed comparable performance in this domain. Null group-level differences were
observed for motor skills and executive functions, such that Black and White individuals with and
without HIV disease demonstrated comparable performance in these domains, after controlling for oral
word reading. These findings were also surprising given that these domains are often impacted in HIV
disease at small-to-medium effect sizes (Walker & Brown, 2018; Woods et al., 2009). However, one
study found the effect of HIV on executive functions was attenuated after accounting for race and
educational factors (Manly et al., 2011). Taken together with our results, these findings indicate the
importance of controlling for and investigating the roles of sociodemographic variables, and especially
race, to elucidate the influences of HIV disease versus contextual factors on cognitive outcomes.
Next, we examined the clinical implications of these raw score findings by assessing whether race
and HIV combined to impact rates of neurocognitive disorders in the sample. Even though several of the
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 13
tests in this battery were normatively adjusted for race, which arguably increases our risk of Type II error,
we nevertheless observed a modest, trend-level interaction between race and HIV serostatus on the
frequency of neurocognitive disorders. Planned post-hoc analyses showed significantly higher rates of
subsyndromic and syndromic neurocognitive disorders in Black individuals with HIV compared to the
rest of the sample. Findings were associated with a medium effect size and were independent of critical
covariates, including estimated VIQ. Nearly half of the Black PWH in our sample met criteria for a
neurocognitive disorder, with half of those persons being classified as syndromic (i.e., exhibiting
functional impairments). This observed frequency of HAND was aligned with neuroepidemiological
estimates in the cART era (e.g., Heaton et al, 2010; Wang et al., 2020). Likewise, the rate of impairment
in the seronegatives is reasonable for a comparison sample that includes persons with risk factors for
neurocognitive impairment (e.g., depression, SUD, HCV). Oddly, the rate of HAND was lower than
expected in the White PWH, reasons for which are not entirely clear, but could be due to sampling bias in
an urban Southern California community, or greater concurrence in quality and quantity of education for
White PWH, which tends to influence better neurocognitive outcomes (e.g., Ryan et al., 2005). Additional
explanations for the stark discrepancy in HAND rates for Black and White PWH might include healthcare
discrimination that impacts HIV management (e.g., Casagrande et al., 2007), and potential influences of
acculturation on neurocognitive assessments (e.g., BNT; Manly et al., 1998). At this juncture, however,
these interpretations remain speculative. Future research is needed to explore the driving forces behind
these discrepancies in rate of clinically significant impairment.
The diverging frequency of HAND was not driven by HIV disease severity for Black or White
participants. Indeed, there was no relationship between HIV biomarkers with neurocognitive performance
in either group and the accompanying effect sizes were small. Ultimately, the literature on HIV
biomarkers and their association with neurocognitive outcomes across race/ethnicity is mixed and
somewhat inconsistent. Although lower nadir CD4 counts are reliably linked to HIV-associated
neurocognitive impairment (Ellis et al., 2011; Hassanzadeh-Behbahani et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020)
and brain volumes (Jernigan et al., 2011), the effect sizes tend to be small. In Black PWH, global
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 14
neurocognition has been linked to current CD4 cell counts (Marquine et al. 2016). However, the same
study found HIV RNA did not relate to neurocognition for either Black or White PWH. Domain specific
findings reveal associations between viral load and poorer semantic memory (Fama et al., 2011) and
motor functions (Lyons et al., 2011). Moreover, low current CD4 counts were linked to poorer language
fluency and motor functions (Lyons et al., 2011), and reveal moderate associations with poorer health
literacy for Black PWH specifically (Walker et al., 2018). In our current small HIV sample, we did not
observe any meaningful relationships between HIV biomarkers and neurocognition for Black or White
PWH. Future work might examine potential race differences in the association between cognition and
other biomarkers relevant to HIV disease, including markers of inflammation, neural injury, astrocytosis,
and vascular disease (Chan & Brew, 2014).
A particularly intriguing finding from this study was that lower raw neuropsychological test
scores were not associated with worse everyday functioning for Black PWH. The effect size was very
small, null, and significantly lower than the medium association between cognition and everyday
functioning that was observed in White PWH. The literature shows a robust, reliable relationship between
poorer neuropsychological scores and many aspects of everyday functioning in HIV disease (Heaton et
al., 2004b), which raises the question as to why this same relationship was not present in this sample of
Black PWH. Again, issues of Type II error and sampling are possible, but unsatisfactory explanations.
Prior studies suggest that cognitive activity (e.g., read newspaper, attend concert, visit museum) may play
a uniquely strong role in the brain health of Black PWH (Krueger et al., 2017), which can affect everyday
functions (e.g., Morgan et al., 2012). It is also possible that other barriers that are unique to (or amplified
in) Black PWH could interfere with health behaviors and everyday functioning, including structural
barriers (e.g., financial, legal), food insecurity, social adversity (e.g., institutional racism, social isolation),
and HIV stigma (Freeman et al., 2020; Watson et al., 2019). From a clinical standpoint, it is important to
note that functional impairment may present itself prior to and independent of neurocognitive deficits, and
perhaps in the current study we observed this uniquely within Black PWH (Heaton et al., 2004b; Kraal et
al., in press). Finally, we might consider how positive psychological factors, like resilience and wisdom,
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 15
could provide some everyday functioning protection from neurocognitive impairment in Black PWH
(Moore et al., 2018). These hypothesized explanations inspire future investigations which are required to
understand the clinical presentation of Black PWH in order to target their specific cognitive and
functional needs.
This study has several limitations that should be considered in interpreting and applying its
findings. First, the sample is largely middle-aged men from urban areas in Southern California and may
not be representative of Black Women, older adults, and/or people from highly affected areas (e.g., the
Southeast U.S. or Africa). Second, this study did not include any neuroimaging, neuropathology, or brain
biomarkers (e.g., tau), which will be important for future studies of brain health disparities in Black PWH.
Also, we did not assess some important socioeconomic and cultural variables, nor did we include
measures of perceived or experienced racial discrimination which may illuminate possible explanations
for the negative cognitive outcomes we observed in Black PWH. Moreover, health literacy may be
another important contributing variable that could have reciprocal effects on neurocognitive and health
outcomes in HIV (Walker et al., 2018). To assess everyday functioning, we included clinician-rated and
self-report measures, all of which are subject to reporter biases and may not accurately capture functional
capacity for individuals whose insight into actual functioning is limited. Studies using performance-based
measures of everyday functioning (e.g., financial skills) and health behaviors (e.g., medication
management) will be important in diverse populations with HIV. Future work could also examine
Internet-based disparities, since Black PWH may have difficulty with access (e.g., Mayben & Giordano,
2007) and performance (Matchanova et al., in press) on these increasingly common tools for daily living.
Despite those limitations, findings from this study point to fundamental brain health disparities
for Black PWH that warrant the attention of clinicians and scientists. At the level of inclusion, we need to
be conscious of using modern community engagement efforts to recruit, enroll, and retain Black PWH
and at-risk seronegatives in our research to ensure representativeness (Dancy et al., 2004; Gwadz et al.,
2014). We also need to actively examine possible main effects and interactions with race at all levels of
analysis in neuroAIDS studies. Too often race is treated as a “nuisance” variable to be dismissed as a
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 16
confound, rather than being considered as a primary variable of scientific interest. Our findings reveal the
existence of racial differences for cognitive health outcomes in Black PWH that require our attention to
fully understand the scope of these effects. Taken a step further, we also need to develop cognitive
rehabilitation strategies that may enhance neurocognitive performance in Black PWH and reduce
disparities in brain health for this population. Intervention studies should consider the role of race and the
possibility that existing and/or novel strategies may show different efficacy and effectiveness for Black
PWH. Based upon the domains in which we observed synergistic effects of HIV and race, we can
recommend increasing cognitive reserve (e.g., by using spaced-retrieval practice; Avci et al., 2017) and
training speed of processing (e.g., Vance et al. 2012) as starting points for cognitive interventions for
Black PWH.
Acknowledgements and Disclosure Statement
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health under grants R01-MH73419 and
P30-MH62512. The authors thank the University of California, San Diego HIV Neurobehavioral
Research Program (HNRP) Group (I. Grant, PI) for their infrastructure support of the parent R01. In
particular, we are grateful to Donald Franklin, Dr. Erin Morgan, Clint Cushman, and Stephanie Corkran
for their assistance with data processing, Marizela Verduzco for her assistance with study management,
Dr. Scott Letendre and Dr. Ronald J. Ellis for their assistance with the neuromedical aspects of the parent
project, and Dr. J. Hampton Atkinson and Jennifer Marquie Beck for their assistance with participant
recruitment and retention. The views written in this article are those of the authors and do not reflect the
official policy or position of the Department of the Navy, Department of Defense, nor the United States
Government. The authors would also like to thank the study volunteers for their participation.
NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL DISPARITIES IN HIV 17