In press: Nature Human Behavior
Homophily and Acrophily as Drivers of Political Segregation
1*
Amit Goldenberg
Joseph M. Abruzzo
Zi Huang
Jonas Schöne
David Bailey
Robb Willer
Eran Halperin
James J. Gross
*1
Harvard University, Harvard Business School, Cambridge, United States
Northwestern University, Kellogg School of Management, Chicago, United States
University of Oxford, Department of Experimental Psychology, Oxford, England
Stanford University, Department of Sociology, Stanford, United States
Hebrew University, Department of Psychology, Jerusalem, Israel
Stanford University, Department of Psychology, Stanford United States
Corresponding Author: Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Amit
Goldenberg. E-mail: agoldenberg@hbs.edu.

Abstract
Political segregation is a significant social problem, increasing polarization and impeding
effective governance. Prior work has viewed the central driver of segregation to be political
homophily, the tendency to associate with others who have similar views. We propose that in
addition to homophily, people’s social tie decisions are driven by political acrophily, the
tendency to associate with others who have more extreme political views (rather than more
moderate). We examined this using a paradigm in which participants share emotions and
attitudes on political policies, observe others’ responses, and choose which others to affiliate
with. In four studies (N = 1235), both liberal and conservative participants’ social tie
decisions reflected the presence of acrophily. We found that participants who viewed peers
who expressed more extreme views as more prototypical of their political group also tended
to engage in greater acrophily. These studies identify a previously overlooked tendency in tie
formation.
The extreme levels of political segregation evident in the United States today presents
a major social challenge . Political segregation reduces interactions between group members,
which contributes to polarization and intergroup hostility, and undermines political civility
2–4
and effective governance .
Prior work has focused mainly on one key driver of segregation, namely political
5–9
homophily, defined as the tendency to affiliate with others with similar political views .
Political homophily is a pervasive and enduring propensity , which results in the formation
11,12
of echo chambers of like-minded people who rarely interact across political lines . But does
homophily alone drive individuals’ decisions about who to affiliate with in political contexts?
In the current paper, we propose that in addition to political homophily, people’s tie
selection decisions are also driven by political acrophily, which we define as the tendency to
prefer to affiliate with others who represent more extreme (as opposed to more moderate)
political views in the direction of one’s political leaning. Take for example a case in which a
conservative selects between two conservative peers of the exact same distance from their
view, one who is more extreme and the other is more moderate. The prediction of who is
chosen based on homophily would suggest an equal probability to both ties, whereas a
prediction based on acrophily would suggest a preference for the more extreme peer.
Determining whether political acrophily is evident in addition to homophily is important
because it could be a critical catalyst of political segregation in social networks, and by
extension, a driver of attitudinal and affective polarization.
Homophily and acrophily are not mutually exclusive, and given the documented
strength of political homophily, they are likely to co-occur. To illustrate how the two may
integrate, consider a liberal who responds with outrage to an incident of police brutality and
then encounters others’ responses to the same incident. We illustrate three combinations of
would be asymmetrically biased towards the one side of the scale that is considered a more
extreme view related to one’s political beliefs, in this context others who express more
outrage than they do. However, the chooser would not completely exclude others who
expressed less outrage if their responses were similar. Finally, under acrophily, the chooser
would elect to affiliate only with others who express more extreme responses than their own,
on a continuum, and dividing them into these three categories is done for heuristic purposes.
Nevertheless, considering the strength of homophily, our assumption is that participants’
choices should be most similar to the homophily+acrophily strategy.
Indirect evidence for its occurrence can be found in existing work. One relevant
finding is from research on group deviance, which suggests that people evaluate deviation
from group norms towards the extreme more favorably than deviations towards more
13–16
moderate views . A second relevant finding is that people like others who present more
17–19
coherent political views, a tendency which is often associated with more extreme views .
20–22
Third, acrophily can be extrapolated from the notion of “directional voting” , which
suggests that people have a clear preference for representatives of their side, even if the
distance in attitudes to these representatives is bigger than to representatives on the other
side. One corollary of this idea is that people are attracted, to a certain extent, to
representatives who are more extreme than them. However, this idea has been the focus of a
23,24
great debate without clear empirical evidence for its occurrence . Furthermore, it is not
clear that preference for representatives on the one hand, and social ties, on the other hand,
capture an identical phenomenon. Finally, a fourth indication of a tendency to prefer extreme
25–31
views comes from the literature on attitude polarization . One driver of polarization,
among many, is people’s tendency to express extreme views to be “better” than others in
32–36
their group . Interestingly, while the mechanisms that drive such polarization point to an
attraction toward extreme views (as in acrophily), the individual-level immediate outcomes
are actually opposite in the two cases. When polarizing, people adopt more extreme views,
and therefore become more extreme in relation to others. Selecting ties based on acrophily,
however, results in individuals becoming less extreme than others in their group because
they have selectively affiliated with more extreme others. While acrophily may eventually
lead to polarization, the process by which this occurs is completely different.
If acrophily were in fact robustly demonstrated, why might people prefer affiliating
with more extreme group members? We suggest that one possibility is that more extreme
views may be perceived as more prototypical of one’s political group. People tend to believe
37–41
their group holds more extreme views on average than they actually do . If people
estimate the views and emotional responses of their political group to be more extreme than
they actually are, they may be more attracted to extreme compared to moderate views
because they think that these views are more prototypical representations of their political
group.
We conducted four studies with the goal of examining the occurrence of acrophily. In
Studies 1-3 we examined participants’ tie selection strategies as they choose other
participants based on others’ responses of moral outrage to cases of police brutality. In Study
3 we show that one mechanism for acrophily is the perception that the prototypical view of
the group is more extreme. Study 4 was designed to examine the occurrence of acrophily in a
different context from emotions to police brutality, providing evidence of its existence when
selecting social ties based on support for political policies.
Results
Analyses for all studies were conducted in R using mixed models for repeated
measures. Assumptions of normality (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test) and equal variance (Levene
test) were done for all main analyses (see sections on Formal Tests of Assumptions in SI for
full report). When these assumptions were violated, we conducted a robust estimation of
mixed effects using the package robustlmm finding similar results in all cases (see SI).
Acrophily Based on Moral Outrage to Police Brutality
The goal of Studies 1-3 was to examine participants’ tie selection strategies when
evaluating responses of moral outrage to pictures of police brutality against Black
demonstrators. We chose to focus on expressions of outrage – defined as a negative emotional
response, primarily consisting of anger, toward a transgressor in reaction to a wrongdoing
44,45
– because it has been shown to be especially important in social signaling and in driving
18,46
affiliation decisions . We chose to specifically focus on responses to police brutality both
because it is a highly salient issue and because responses to police brutality vary greatly by
political affiliation in the U.S . In Study 1 we examined liberals’ tie selection decisions when
choosing from a network of liberals and conservatives. In Study we 2 transitioned to an
online design which allowed us to increase the sample size to include both Liberals and
Conservatives. In Study 3 we replicated the findings of Study 2 and examined a potential
mechanism for the effects, namely the tendency to evaluate the prototypical belief of one’s
group as more extreme. We had a few pre-registrations of hypotheses (Studies 1 and 2 were
review), the most central one was that participants’ tie selection decisions would involve
some degree of acrophily, such that participants’ tie selection choices would be
asymmetrically biased toward preferring responses that represented a more extreme view
based on their political view. In the case of outrage to police brutality, acrophily for liberals
meant preferring peers that expressed stronger outrage and acrophily for conservatives
meant preferring peers that expressed weaker outrage.
Task. The task was similar in Studies 1-3, with small variations described in each
demonstrators intended to elicit negative emotions. For each picture, participants were first
asked to provide their emotional response to the picture in a few words and then to rate their
emotions in response to the picture on a scale of 1 (no negative emotion) to 9 (a lot of
negative emotion). After rating and responding to the picture, participants then saw six boxes
with unique colors, each containing a peer response to the same picture that they just rated.
Each box included a name that was congruent with the participant’s gender, a peer rating,
and their text response to the same picture. Peer ratings and responses were collected in a
pre-test and included real ratings by real participants. After observing the responses for five
seconds, participants’ choices were different in the choice versus no choice conditions. In the
choice condition, participants were asked to select three peers they would not want to see in a
subsequent trial by clicking on the boxes they wished to eliminate. In the no choice condition,
participants were asked to eliminate a random subset of three names colored in red. In both
conditions, participants were told that the eliminated peers would be eliminated completely
from the entire task and their names and responses would not be seen again, while the kept
participants would be seen in the subsequent trial. We created the two conditions to examine
the occurrence of homophily (which was found) and to examine potential differences in
ratings as a result of tie selection (which were not found). The lack of difference in ratings
allowed us to omit the control condition from Studies 3 and 4. See SI for full analysis.
Participants completed the task for 20 trials (see methods for full description).
Studies 1 -2. Participants in Study 1 were self-identified liberals who completed the
task in the lab. Participants in Study 2 were both liberals and conservatives who completed
the study online with an effort to increase the sample size and diversity in political affiliation
(compared to what could be found around Stanford). In both studies, participants were
randomly divided into the choice and no choice conditions. This was mainly designed to
provide evidence for the occurrence of homophily which was found in both studies, and to
look at changes in ratings as a function of condition, which were not found (see Analysis of
Participants’ Emotions in SI). Our main analysis of acrophily focuses on results from the
choice condition.
To examine the occurrence of acrophily we conducted two tests, both focusing on the
choice condition. Our first test of acrophily was done by creating an acrophily coefficient for
each participant in each trial and tested whether these coefficients were similar or different
from zero, and whether they changed over time. Our acrophily coefficient was designed to
estimate the difference between participants’ actual choices and what would have been a
symmetrical homophily choice. Recall that in each trial, participants were presented with
ratings of 6 peers, and were asked to eliminate three peers (and keep three peers).
Participants therefore had ! " = 20 possible choices of sets of peers to keep in each trial. Of
these 20 average combinations, one combination (or more) reflected the most homophilous
choice in each set. In order to create our coefficient, we calculated a difference score between
the most homophilous combination of potentially chosen peers, and the combination that
participants actually chose. A positive number indicated that the combination of peers that
participants chose to keep expressed stronger emotions on average than the most
homophilous combination of peers, and the opposite for a negative number. Zero reflected no
acrophily in participants’ choice (see Acrophily Coefficient section in SI for mathematical
representation). We standardized the acrophily coefficient by dividing it by the standard
deviation of all possible choices of sets of peers.
In both Studies 1 and 2, we calculated an acrophily coefficient for each participant in
each trial in the choice condition and we created a mixed-model analysis predicting the
acrophily coefficient from trial number. We standardized trial number in order to be able to
evaluate the average coefficient using the intercept of the model. In addition, and similar to
the previous analysis, we used a random intercept of participants’ id. Furthermore, in Study 2
we added an interaction term with political affiliation to evaluate differences in acrophily
between the political groups. We report results by political affiliation although no significant
1 0
differences were found between political groups (See Acrophily and Political Affiliation in SI).
Notice that coefficients for all of our analysis are in standardized values and can be compared
across studies.
For our liberal participants, results suggested that the acrophily coefficient was
significantly positive (Study 1: b =.33, t (30) = 2.51, p = .01, R = .23, 95% Confidence
Intervals = [.07, .60]; Study 2: b =.29, t (195) = 3.56, p < .001, R = .32, 95% Confidence
Intervals = [.11, .44]), pointing to an acrophily. Furthermore, results of Study 2 (same
direction to Study 1 with less power) suggested that liberal tendency for acrophily increased
over time (Study 1: b =.08, t (588) = 1.49, p = .13, R = .23, 95% Confidence Intervals = [-.02,
.19]; Study 2: b =.05 [.001, .11], t (3760) = 1.98, p = .04, R = .32, Confidence Intervals = [.02,
We then examined the same effects with our conservative participants in Study 2.
Looking first at the intercept of the model, results suggested that the acrophily coefficient was
negative and significantly different from zero (b =-.21, t (196) = -2.53, p = .01, R = .32, 95%
Confidence Intervals = [-.40, -.06]), pointing to an acrophily tie selection strategy toward a
less emotional response. Unlike Study 1 (and Study 3) we did not find a change in
conservatives acrophily coefficient over time (b =.02, t (3760) = 0.73, p = .46, R = .32, 95%
Confidence Intervals = [-.03, .03]).
While our first test of acrophily was able to show a difference in tie selection relative
to a homophilous, balanced choice, we could not compare the degree of acrophily seen by
participants to other strategies. Our second test of acrophily was designed to address this
limitation by comparing participants’ actual tie selection choices in the choice condition to
1 1
what they would have chosen if they used four different tie selection strategies: a no choice
strategy, homophily (without any acrophily), and two complete acrophily strategies (one
toward more emotional ratings, and one toward less emotional ratings). Simulating
participants’ tie selection choice in these strategies was done by using participants’ actual
ratings to the pictures they saw, but instead of making the actual tie selection choices that
they made, our simulation executed one of the four tie selection strategies mentioned above.
Notice that trials in our task are dependent, such that the peers that participants saw in a
given trial were dependent on their choices in previous trials. Therefore, our simulation was
designed to replicate the task structure from the first trial and allow the simulation choices in
each trial to affect the peers in the following trial.
In the random selection strategy, agents in our simulations chose peers randomly. In
the homophily strategy, agents in our simulations chose in each trial the three peers closest to
participants’ ratings, regardless of whether they were more moderate or more extreme. In
both of our acrophily simulations (more outrage and less outrage), agents in our simulations
chose the peers closest to their own rating, but only on one side of the scale, either more
outrage or less outrage. Only if there were no available peers in designated side (more or less
depending on the simulation) agents chose the closest peer from the other side.
We ran 1000 iterations of each of the four simulations (random selection, homophily,
acrophily higher, acrophily lower) such that each simulation generated an average of rating
of the kept peer in each trial. We then ran 1000 models in which we compared participants’
actual average kept ratings (the peers that participants decided to keep) to the average rating
of the peers that were kept in each of the four simulations. Each analysis was done using a
1 2
mixed-model analysis comparing between the actual average kept ratings by each participant,
and the average kept ratings of each of our four simulations in the same model. We also
included a by-participant random intercept in each model. We report here the b and t values
for each comparison between the actual kept ratings and one of the simulations with a 95%
Looking first at the liberal participants, results suggested that the average rating of
the actually kept peers was significantly higher than the homophily simulation (Study 1:b = -
.646, t= -3.58, 95% Confidence Intervals = [-.650, -.643], p < .001; Study 2: b = -.27,t= -2.60,
95% Confidence Intervals = [-.275, -.273], p = .010 [.010, .11]), and significantly lower from
the more outrage acrophily strategy in Study 2 but not in Study 1 (Study 1: b =.327, t= 1.82,
95% Confidence Intervals = [.323, .330], p = .088 [.084, 0.92]; Study 2: b =.396, t= 3.75,
95% Confidence Intervals = [.395, .397], p < .001), indicating that participants’ tie selection
strategy was between homophily and acrophily in Study 2 and marginally significantly
different from acrophily in Study 1. Coefficient sizes indicate that differences from acrophily
high was ~50% smaller in Study 1 and 44% bigger in Study 2 than the distance to homophily.
These findings suggest that despite the fact that participants’ choices in both studies fell
between homophily and acrophily, there was quite a lot of variance in whether participants
behavior was closer to homophily or acrophily. Finally, as expected, the average kept ratings
in participants’ actual choice was also significantly higher than a random selection (Study 1: b
=-1.111, t=-6.15, 95% Confidence Intervals = [-1.117,-1.106], p < .001; Study 2: : b =-1.313, t=-
12.44, 95% Confidence Intervals = [-1.316,-1.311], p < .001) and the acrophily lower strategy
(Study 1: b =-1.911, t= -10.58, 95% Confidence Intervals = [-1.915,-1.907], p < .001; Study 2: b
1 3
=-1.351, t= -12.80, 95% Confidence Intervals = [-1.353, -1.350], p < .001). Results from our
comparisons in the choice condition provided further evidence that participants’ tie selection
choice included a combination of homophily + acrophily toward more emotional responses.
Looking next at the conservative participants in Study 2, as expected, results
suggested the exact opposite: conservatives peer choices were lower than what they would
have chosen with just homophily (b =.271, t= 2.02, 95% Confidence Intervals = [.269, .272],
p = .04 [.044, .45]) and higher than the acrophily lower simulation (b =.515, t= -3.85, 95%
Confidence Intervals = [-.517,-.514], p < .001), suggesting that choices were in between
homophily and acrophily lower (but 88% closer to homophily in this case), which
represented a more extreme conservative view. As expected, the average rating of the actually
kept peers was significantly lower than a random selection (b =.860, t=6.43, 95% Confidence
Intervals = [.857, .862], p < .001) and also significantly lower than the acrophily higher
simulation (b =1.192, t= 8.91, 95% Confidence Intervals = [1.190, 1.194], p < .001). Results
from our comparisons in the choice condition provide further evidence that participants’ tie
selection choices involved a combination of homophily and acrophily, but in this case toward
less intense ratings.
Study 3. The goal of Study 3 was to replicate findings of Study 2 and further test a
potential mechanism driving acrophily. We hypothesized that participants were selecting ties
who are more extreme because they evaluated these extreme responses as more prototypical
of their groups’ responses. To evaluate this hypothesis, participants first completed a task
that was similar to that of Studies 1 and 2 (with some minor differences, see Methods). At a
second stage, participants were then shown six of the trials they completed again (with the
1 4
exact same peer responses) and were asked to rank the three responses that represented the
most prototypical response of their own political group. We did not provide participants
further details regarding the meaning of that term but assumed that participants understood
it to be related to the political spectrum.
Similar to Studies 1 and 2, we first found evidence for homophily (see Homophily
Analysis in SI). We then tested whether participants’ tie selections were also driven by
acrophily. Looking first at the acrophily coefficients using the same analysis as in Studies 1
and 2, results suggested that the coefficient for the liberal participants was positive,
significantly different from zero and very similar to the one found in previous studies (b =.32,
t (374) = 6.54, p < .001, R = .28, 95% Confidence Intervals = [.22, .42]). Similar to Studies 1
and 2, the acrophily coefficient became stronger with trial number for liberal participants (b
=.04, t (7161) = 2.46, p = .01, R = .28, 95% Confidence Intervals = [.01, .08]). For the
conservative participants, results suggested that the acrophily coefficient was negative,
significantly different from zero, and slightly smaller than in Study 2 (b =-.15, t (374) = -3.06,
p = .001, R = .28, 95% Confidence Intervals = [-.25, -.05]), pointing to an acrophily tie
selection strategy. Interestingly, results suggested that the acrophily shown in our
conservative participants decreased with trial number (b =.06, t (7161) = 3.46, p < .001, R =
.28, 95% Confidence Intervals = [.03, .10]). It is unclear why acrophily decreased for
conservatives and increased for liberals. This could be caused by the salience of strong
emotional responses that reduce the strength of acrophily over time, or by some inherent
differences in the way acrophily operates between liberals and conservatives.
1 5
We then turned to our second method of evaluating acrophily, by comparing it to
simulated data of various strategies replicating the results of Study 2. Looking first at liberals,
results suggested that the average rating of the actually kept peers was significantly higher
than just homophily (b =-4.87, t= -5.06, 95% Confidence Intervals = [-4.86, -4.89], p < .001),
and significantly lower compared to the acrophily higher simulation (b =5.88, t= 6.11, 95%
Confidence Intervals = [5.87, 5.89], p < .001), revealing again a mix of homophily and
acrophily, with distant from acrophily ~20% bigger. Finally, as expected, the average kept
rating in participants’ actual selection was significantly higher than a random selection (b =-
15.22, t=-15.81, 95% Confidence Intervals = [-15.24, -15.20], p < .001), and also significantly
higher than the acrophily lower simulation (b =-19.26, t= -20.00, 95% Confidence Intervals =
[-19.27, -19.25], p < .001), suggesting that average kept ratings are between homophily and
acrophily. Findings of the conservative participants were as expected, the exact opposite. The
average rating of the conservative tie selection was lower than just homophily (b= 2.28, t=
2.28, 95% Confidence Intervals = [2.27, 2.29], p < .001), and higher than the acrophily lower
simulation (b= -7.24, t= -7.25, 95% Confidence Intervals = [-7.25, 7.23], p < .001). In this
case, however, conservative choices were much closer to homophily that previously seen
(although still significant on average). Finally, as expected, the average kept rating in
participants’ actual choices was also significantly lower than a random selection (t=21.26,
t=21.29, 95% Confidence Intervals = [21.24, 21.29], p < .001) and significantly lower than the
acrophily higher simulation (b= 18.47, t= 18.49, 95% Confidence Intervals = [18.46, 18.48], p
< .001).
1 6
After establishing the existence of acrophily, we then turned to examine one possible
mechanism for acrophily. As a reminder, after completing the first phase of the task,
participants were shown 6 previous trials that were identical to those they just saw and were
asked to rank the most prototypical response of their group of the available 6 peers, from 1-3.
To analyze this phase of the task, we created a difference score between participants’ ratings
and the peers participants marked as prototypical, such that a positive number indicated that
the chosen prototypical person that was chosen by our participant rated the pictures more
strongly than the participant and the opposite for a negative number. As participants chose
prototypical peers in order (1-3), we did this for each of the three peers chosen by
participants. We then conducted an interaction between the rank of prototypical peer (1-3)
and participants’ political affiliation in predicting the difference score between participants
and the prototypical peer. The outcome could tell us whether the first selected prototypical
peer was higher or lower than participant’s rating (the intercept of the model), whether this
difference was reduced for the second or third selected peer (slope), and whether this was
different between liberals and conservatives (interaction).
In order to evaluate the difference from the most prototypical peer chosen by
participants, we made sure that the intercept of the model was equal to the first peer. We
first centered our model on the liberal participants. The intercept of the model was
significantly positive, suggesting that the most prototypical peer designated by the liberal
participants was estimated to express more negative emotions compared to participants’ own
ratings by 8.07 points on the 1-100 scale (b =8.07, t (545) = 6.02, p < .001, R =.30, 95%
Confidence Intervals = [5.45, 10.70]). As expected, going down the prototypicality rank led to
1 7
reduced difference between participants and the prototypical peer (b =-4.15, t (545) = -7.50, p
< .001, R =.30, 95% Confidence Intervals = [-5.25, -3.07]), as fewer peers who expressed
conservative participants. The intercept of the model was significantly negative, suggesting
that the most prototypical peer designated by the conservative participants was estimated to
express less negative emotions compared to participants’ own ratings by 4.47 points (b =-
4.47, t (545) = -3.23, p < .001, R =.30, 95% Confidence Intervals = [-7.17, -1.76]). As
expected, going down the prototypicality rank led to reduced difference between participants
and the prototypical peer (b =.56, t (545) = 6.23, p < .001, R =.30, 95% Confidence Intervals
= [2.44, 4.68]). Notice that conservatives’ third choice was on average higher in rating than
participants’ own ratings. This is likely caused by the fact that on average there weren’t
enough conservatives who were more extreme than participants by the third choice. Results
also revealed a stronger difference for liberals, such that liberals assumed prototypical
members to be more extreme compared to the assumption made by conservative (see
Prototypicality and Political Affiliation in SI for further information).
Finally, to further investigate participants’ evaluation of prototypical peers as a
potential mechanism for acrophily, we examined the association between two tendencies:
participants’ degree of acrophily and their tendency to mark more extreme participants as
prototypical. Given that the acrophily tendency and the ratings of prototypicality were done
in different trials, we decided to average participants’ acrophily coefficient as well as
participants’ average rating of the prototypical peer. Results suggested a significant
association between participants’ acrophily and participants’ choice of the prototypical
1 8
members of their political group (b =.30, t (375) = 6.29, p < .001, r = .09, 95% Confidence
Intervals = [.34, .44]), supporting the idea that participants choice of prototypicality was
associated with their degree of acrophily.
Study 4. The goal of Study 4 was to address key limitations of Studies 1-3. First, we
wanted to examine whether acrophily can be seen in tie selection based on other types of
responses than emotions, asking participants to rate and choose ties based on support for
four different political policies associated with four highly contentious topics: affirmative
action, gun control, hunting, and military budget. Second, we wanted to see whether
acrophily is evident when participants choose to keep, rather than eliminate peers. Third, we
wanted to simplify the task to allow acrophily to be detected without using simulations. In
order to be able to achieve these goals, Study 4 has quite a different design from the previous
studies. However, we believe that by addressing the limitations of Studies 1-3, we were able
expand the notion of acrophily in important ways. In the revised task, participants provided
text responses and rating of support (1-7 scale) for four political policies. After rating each
policy, participants saw 7 peers who provided all potential responses to the policy on a 1-7
scale. Then, participants were asked to choose one peer whose response they would like to
To evaluate acrophily, we created an acrophily difference score such that higher scores
always indicated choosing to keep a peer whose rating represented a more extreme view in
relation to the specific policy and political affiliation of the chooser. This allowed us to
compare acrophily among participants with different political affiliations. We then conducted
an analysis with participants’ political affiliation as the independent variable and the
1 9
acrophily difference score as the dependent variable. The model also included two random
intercepts, one of participants’ id and one of policy type. Looking first at the intercept of the
model, which was our liberal participants, results suggested that our liberal participants
chose to keep peers whose rating represented a more extreme view compared to their own (b
=.12, t (427) = 3.62, p < .001, R =.02, 95% Confidence Intervals = [.05, .18]). There was no
difference between liberals and conservatives in their degree of acrophily (b =.01, t (415) =
0.19, p = .84, R =.02, 95% Confidence Intervals = [-.08, .10]) as conservatives also showed a
tendency for acrophily. Results provide important additional evidence regarding acrophily.
First, it seems that acrophily can occur in context other than emotions. This is important
because it suggests that acrophily is even more common than initially though and can occur
when choosing ties based on a variety of response types. Second, it suggests that acrophily
can occur when people choose new ties, rather than eliminate existing ones, again expanding
the situations in which acrophily can occur. Third, the simplicity of the current task provides
evidence that acrophily can occur in a much simpler contexts, in which participant do not
need to make decisions on multiple ties at the same time. This is encouraging because it
presents a road map for future research on this topic. Importantly, the effect that were found
in this final study are relatively small, and much smaller for those in the previous studies.
However, notice that this analysis includes participants who rated certain stimuli as 7 or 1
and therefore cannot reach acrophily. Removing such ratings (which represent 31.3% of all
ratings) doubles the effect (see Study 4 Analysis in SI). Albeit small, these results are
especially striking given the structure of the task and the fact that participants just rated their
2 0
response to the stimuli and then immediately chose users whose ratings are more extreme
than their own.
General Discussion
The goal of the current project was to introduce the concept of acrophily – the
tendency to prefer to affiliate with others with more extreme (as opposed to more moderate)
political views – and to assess whether acrophily is evident in tie selection decisions as an
additional driving force of political segregation and polarization. In four studies, we showed
that participants tended to keep ties whose ratings reflected a preference toward more
extreme (versus more moderate) views. Importantly, we found strong evidence for
homophily as well, and participants’ tie selection strategy seemed to reflect a mix of
homophily and acrophily.
Our findings have important implications for understanding political segregation. If
people’s tie selection is affected by acrophily in addition to homophily, we should assume that
segregation occurs at a faster rate and leads to more extreme outcomes than would otherwise
be expected. To evaluate this possibility, we created an agent based model (see section on
Agent-Based Model of Network Segregation in SI) that randomly populated a network of both
liberals and conservatives and examined the rate and degree of network segregation as a
result of homophily alone, acrophily alone, or a combination of homophily and acrophily
similar to that found in our studies. As expected, our simulation suggested stronger
segregation in either version featuring acrophily, relative to homophily alone.
Research on acrophily is especially important in the current digital era, in which
people make many tie selection decisions every day. Social media algorithms are often
2 1
designed to increase or decrease strength in ties based on users’ activity. Liking a certain post
on social media is likely to lead to an increase in tie strength with the person who produced
the post, and ignoring a post is likely to contribute to weakening of a social tie. Therefore, in
the many hours that people spend on social media everyday they make many tie selection
decisions. Further specifying tie selection strategies and the psychological processes that give
rise to them is of utmost importance in light of their daily prevalence and their impact on
social segregation.
In addition to providing evidence for the existence of acrophily, results of Study 3 also
provided an indication of why acrophily may be occurring, suggesting that one reason for the
preference for more extreme views is that participants see the prototypical group member as
more extreme than they actually are, and may want to have ties to these prototypical ingroup
members. Further analysis supporting this idea revealed that individual-level tendencies to
evaluate prototypical peers as extremes were associated with increased tendencies for
acrophily. One limitation of the current measure is that participants were asked to indicated a
prototypical member of their group, without specifically indicating a political group. Future
work should reexamine this evaluation with a more specific indication of political group.
Despite this encouraging evidence, it is likely that other mechanisms also contribute to
acrophily. One such mechanism is the relative salience of extreme views. Such salience may
48,49
be caused by increased certainty , the use of more covert signals of one’s own group
membership , and the fact that increased certainty is likely associated with increased
willingness to express political views. In the current set of studies, acrophily was found while
keeping the frequency of occurrence constant. Yet, in real social interactions, extreme users
2 2
may be even more salient, which should increase the effect of acrophily. Further studies
should further examine these potential mechanisms looking at more natural interactions.
Our experiments leave open several questions regarding how acrophily is translated to
emotions, attitudes, and behavior outside the lab. One limitation relates to the fact that in
each study participants chose ties based on peers’ responses to a single issue, whereas in the
real world multiple issues drive processes of tie selections. We chose to minimize the
complexity of information about the peers that participants saw in order to reveal the
occurrence of acrophily. However, it is likely that tie selection decisions that are made based
on responses to a single issue are more susceptible to acrophily than more complex tie
selection decisions, in which people need to balance multiple issues . Future studies should
examine the existence of acrophily in natural social settings, e.g., on social media, or in closed
organizations such as companies and schools. Future studies should also examine whether
acrophily occurs in topics which are not political in nature.
A second limitation relates to the goals that participants had for keeping certain peers.
In the current study, the goal was much simpler than in many interactions in real life: to keep
seeing their response in a subsequent trial. In many situations outside the lab, people choose
ties to achieve various affiliative and strategic needs. Future studies should modify the goals
for participants’ interactions and examine how they affect the occurrence of acrophily.
A third limitation of the current work is that we focused on providing evidence for
acrophily rather than thinking about what could mitigate the effects of acrophily. Future
work should examine the possibility of mitigating participants’ tendency toward acrophily by
2 3
either making them aware of such tendency, or by providing them information of the true
prototypical ratings of their group members.
Finally, our findings raise interesting questions about the drivers of recent changes in
political segregation. Given that we see much higher levels of segregation and polarization in
the US and in other societies around the globe now than ever before, one interesting question
is what has changed. A related question is what the future holds given the tendency of
acrophily. It’s possible that acrophily tendencies would taper off when segregation reaches an
extreme level, but whether and when this would happen is not clear. We believe that our
demonstration of the presence of both homophily and acrophily in political tie selection
decisions can inform investigation of segregation and we see great potential in not only
further investigating acrophily but also perhaps finding ways to reduce acrophily and
segregation.
Methods
This research was approved by Stanford University (Study 1: IRB7373) and Harvard
University (Studies 2-3: IRB19-1409, Study 4: IRB21-0698). All participants provided
informed consent and were compensated for their time.
Studies 1-3
Participants. In Study 1, we used data from a task that resembled the task used in the
present research in order to be able to estimate the required sample size. Our estimated
sample size for Study 1 was based on finding evidence for homophily. Results suggested that
using 30 participants completing 20 trials in our experimental condition would be enough to
obtain almost 100% power for the study (see SI for power estimations based on each sample
2 4
size). As our study included both choice and no choice conditions, the final sample of Study 1
included 70 participants (Males: 26, Females: 42, Other: 2; Age: M= 21.30, SD = 9.20)
randomly assigned either to a choice condition or to a no choice condition (described in detail
below). All of the participants were American citizens who self-identified as liberals.
Participants were recruited using the Stanford University paid participant pool, which
includes a mix of Stanford students and community members. Participants received $10 for
their participation in the study. Notice that this lab study was merely the first examination of
the phenomenon and sample sizes were dramatically increased in Studies 2 and 3 when
transitioning the task to online studies. No participants who completed the study were
removed from the analysis.
Study 2 was designed with the goal to recruit a larger and more diverse participant
sample. For this reason, we converted our lab task into an online task and increased the
target sample size to 400 participants (200 in the choice condition), with the hope of
recruiting 200 liberals and 200 conservatives and increasing the power to almost 100% (see
Power Analysis in SI). Participants were recruited using the online platform Prolific in
exchange for $2.50 (~20 minutes). Out of the 400 participants who completed our task, we
removed 8 participants for providing nonsensical text responses or not providing their
demographics. Our final sample therefore included 392 participants (Males: 228, Females:
160, Other: 4; Age: M= 37.15, SD = 13.49), who were randomly divided into no choice and
choice conditions. All participants were American citizens. We were aiming to get an equal
number of participants in each political side. Accordingly, in terms of their political affiliation,
2 5
184 participants identified as liberals, 180 identified as conservatives, and 28 identified as
located in the middle. We removed middle participants from the main analysis.
In Study 3, as in Study 2, we recruited 400 participants with the hope of recruiting
200 liberals and 200 conservatives. Participants were recruited using the online platform
Prolific in exchange for $3.5 (~30 minutes). Out of the 400 participants who completed our
task, we removed 13 participants for providing nonsensical text responses or not providing
their demographics. Our final sample therefore included 387 participants (Males: 236,
Females: 149, Other: 2; Age: M= 43.25, SD = 13.14). All participants were American citizens.
In terms of their political affiliation, 194 participants identified as liberals, 183 identified as
conservatives, and 10 identified as located in the middle. Similar to Study 2, we removed
middle participants from the main analysis.
Tie Selection Task. The structure of the tie selection task was the same in all studies
with a few modifications which will be described below. Participants were told that they were
taking part in a study with the goal of understanding how people respond emotionally to
political situations, as well as how they make decisions about what responses they would like
to see. The task included 3 practice (in which participants saw anger-inducing pictures
relating to driving) and 20 actual trials. In the actual trials, participants saw pictures of police
brutality against Black demonstrators. Pictures were pre-tested to elicit negative emotions,
primarily anger (see full description in the Image Pool below). For each picture, participants
After providing their response, participants were asked to rate their emotions in response to
the picture on a scale of 1 (no negative emotion) to 9 (a lot of negative emotion). We chose to
2 6
use a neutral to negative emotion scale rather than a positive to negative scale for two
reasons. First, measuring tie decisions based on a neutral to negative scale allowed us to test
in Study 2 whether acrophily is caused by just attraction to more emotion, or rather to
extreme views expressed by either no emotion or a lot of emotion, depending on one’s
political beliefs. Second, we specifically selected pictures that were evaluated as eliciting
negative emotions by more than 90% of the participants including conservatives (see
description below), which means that positive raters would be outliers and would change the
focus of the task.
After rating and responding to the picture, participants then saw six boxes, each
containing a peer response to the same picture that they just rated. Each box included a name
that was congruent with the participant’s gender. Names were chosen randomly from a list of
popular names from 2017 (see SI for full list). Below the peer name, participants saw the peer
rating and their text response to the same picture. Each box had a unique color to help
participants identify the peer in future trials. Peer ratings and responses were collected in a
pre-test and reflected real ratings by real participants (see Image and Peer Pool for further
details). Participants were forced to look at the 6 responses for 5 seconds before making any
decisions. After 5 seconds, participants’ choices were different based on whether they were
assigned to the choice versus no choice conditions. In the choice condition, participants were
asked to select three peers they would not want to see in a subsequent trial by clicking on the
boxes they wished to eliminate. Clicking on each box eliminated it from the screen. We chose
to instruct participants to eliminate those they didn’t want to see rather than selecting those
they did want to see in order to emphasize the fact that eliminated participants are never
2 7
shown again. In the no choice condition, a random subset of three names was colored in red.
Participants were asked to click on the boxes with the red names. In both conditions,
participants were told that the eliminated peers would be eliminated completely from the
entire task and their names and responses would not be seen again, while the kept
participants would be seen in the subsequent trial.
After eliminating three peers in each trial, participants transitioned to the next trial, in
which they were again asked to provide a text response and rate their emotional response to
a new picture of police brutality. Participants were then shown 6 boxes with 6 responses to
the new picture. In every trial except for the first, three of the six boxes were of peers who
were kept from the previous trial. These boxes retained the same location, color, and name
from the previous trial, and the peer ratings and responses were produced by the same
original person who participants kept from the previous trial. The other three boxes were
randomly generated from the peer pool and included new names, ratings, and responses.
After completing 20 trials in which they provided their responses to new pictures and chose
to eliminate three new peers, participants completed a short survey described below.
Image and Peer Pool. We conducted a pilot study to create the image pool for the
study, testing 40 candidate pictures of police brutality against Black citizens. One hundred
and four participants were presented with each picture and were asked to first provide a text
response to the picture. Participants were then asked to rate their emotional response to the
picture using the same scale that was used in the task. Finally, participants were asked to
select whether observing the picture elicited a negative emotion, positive emotion, or no
emotion at all. This question did not appear in the actual task and was used to select which
2 8
pictures would be used. Two criteria were used to select the pictures. First, all of the selected
pictures were rated by fewer than 10% of participants as positive. Second, we excluded
pictures whose average rating was higher than 7 or lower than 3 (to allow variance in peer
responses). As expected, our pictures were rated as eliciting significantly more negative
Out of the 104 participants who completed the pilot study, we chose 63 participants to
be part of our peer pool to allow for the elimination of three peers in each trial in addition to
six peers in the first trial (19*3+6). Our first criterion in choosing peers was to make sure
that our peer pool was heterogeneous in terms of political affiliation. We chose 30
conservative, 30 liberals, and 3 participants who self-identified as middle. Our second
criterion for choosing our peers was participants’ text. We chose participants who mostly
provided more than one-word responses to all of the pictures, and ones whose text responses
were more or less similar to their ratings in terms of emotional intensity. After choosing our
peer pool, we provided final editing of participants’ responses to make sure that the peer text
was coherent, and that it matched their ratings of the pictures. In Study 2 we slightly
modified our peer pool by removing some liberal peers who provided less elaborate text, and
substituting them with data from participants from Study 1. Similar to Study 1, our final peer
sample included 30 conservatives, 30 liberals and 3 peers who identified as being in the
middle of the political spectrum.
Study 3 was based on Study 2's procedure with four meaningful changes. First,
participants were only assigned to the select condition, as the goal was to get a better sense of
the mechanism for acrophily. Second, we recreated our peer pool from that of Study 2, by
2 9
employing a new set of peers who provided new responses to the pictures of police brutality
in the task. The reason for this change is that the social movement related to the death of
George Floyd occurred between Studies 2 and 3 and we suspected that such a large-scale
movement may have changed people’s attitudes toward police brutality. We therefore ran an
additional pilot in which we created a new peer pool to the same pictures of Studies 1-2 (see
SI). Third, we changed the scale participants used to rate their emotions from 1-9 to 0-100, 0
indicating no outrage and 100 very strong outrage. This was done to increase the variance in
participants’ responses. The fourth and most important change to the task was our
measurements of the prototypicality of response. After completing the task in a similar way
to Studies 1 and 2, participants then completed six additional trials in which they saw a copy
of a previous trial (trials 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18) and were asked to rank the responses that
represented the top three most prototypical responses of their political group using this
question: “Choose the three peers that represent the most prototypical response of your
political group.” After completing these six trials, participants were forwarded to a survey
that included a few final questions described below.
Measures. While completing the task, we collected participants’ ratings and text in
response to each picture. We also recorded which peers they chose to keep versus eliminate.
In Study 1, after completing the task, participants completed a survey which included two
questions relating to their motivation to keep certain peers based on similarity and
difference. In the similarity question participants were asked: “To what extent did you choose
people who felt similar emotions to you in response to the pictures?” In the difference
question participants were asked the same question, but using the words “different emotions”
3 0
instead. Participants rated their response using a scale from 1 (not at all) to 6 (very much so).
Participants also completed a few scales including a group identification scale , a
heterogeneity test in which participants were asked to estimate what portion of their social
environment has different race, socio-economic status, a political affiliation measure, a need
53 54
to belong scale , and a personality scale . These scales were measured with the intention of
testing them as potential mechanisms for acrophily (See Supplementary Tables 1, 5-6, 10-11 in
SI for full description and analysis of the connection between these scales and acrophily). In
Study 2 we removed the need to belong scales from our survey and added a few new scales in
which we examined potential motivations for acrophily (choosing people because they are
more creative, provided new interpretations, made the participants feel good, etc.), feeling
thermometers for various groups , as well as participants’ political identification (see SI for
further analysis). In Study 3, after participants completed the task, we measured participants’
ranking of peers’ prototypicality using the task described above. Finally, participants
answered a few survey questions that were similar to Study 2 (see SI).
Study 4
We recruited 400 participants after processing results from Study 3 to ensure that a
sample of this size would produce power of >.9, even when we reduced the stimuli from 20 to
4. Participants were recruited using the online platform mTurk in exchange for $3.5 (~30
minutes). Out of the 400 participants who completed our task, we removed 14 participants
for providing nonsensical text responses or not providing their demographics. Our final
sample therefore included 386 participants (Males: 199, Females: 183, Other: 4; Age: M=
39.88, SD = 12.04). All participants were American citizens. In terms of their political
3 1
affiliation, 217 participants identified as liberals, 169 identified as conservatives. We had no
participants identified as middle in this study as participants had to make a binary choice at
the beginning of the task.
Tie Selection Task. The structure of the task was based on the task used in Studies 1-
3 with a few important modifications. The task included 1 practice trial and 4 actual trials.
Participants saw texts describing a political policy (see description below). For each policy,
participants were first asked to provide their text response to the policy in a few words. After
providing their response, participants were asked to rate their support for the policy on a
scale of 1 (completely against) to 7 (completely support).
After rating and responding to the policies, participants then saw seven boxes, each
containing a peer response to the same policy that they just rated. While the type of content
in the boxes was similar to Studies 1-3 and included a name, a rating, and a text, there were a
few important differences in this stage compared to the task used in Studies 1-3. First, we
made sure that all seven optional responses were present at each trial, covering the whole
scale from 1 to 7. This was designed to allow participants in each trial to choose the exact
rating that they wanted and not be limited by what was available from the random draw. We
decided to use this structure to simplify the detection of acrophily. The order of ratings was
randomized to make sure that participants looked at the whole screen. Here again,
participants had to watch all the boxes for 5 seconds before making their pick. Second,
instead of choosing to eliminate peers, participants chose the peer they wanted to keep. This
was to make sure that acrophily can be detected both in decisions to keep and to eliminate.
Third, participants were asked to choose just one peer of the seven on the screen. This was
3 2
modified because there was always one peer per rating. Fourth, peers who were kept in a
certain trial were not necessarily carried forward to the next trial due to the structure of the
task. Unlike previous tasks, participants were not told explicitly that choosing to keep certain
people would mean that participants would see them in subsequent trials.
Policy and Peer Pool. We conducted a pilot study to create the policy pool for the
study, testing multiple six candidate policies. One hundred and six participants were
presented with each policy and were asked to first provide a text response to the picture.
Participants were then asked to rate their support for the policy using the same 1-7 scale that
was used in the task. We selected the four policies that produced the least polarized ratings
(to allow for the possibility of acrophily), with the intention of selecting two eliciting more
support among conservatives and two among liberals: (“Gradually increasing military
budget”, “Reducing the power of the federal government over states”, “Increasing affirmative
action to minorities”, “Increasing restrictions on hunting”). As expected, our policies were
For each policy and for each rating (from 1-7), we chose 4 responses based on
cases in which it was possible, we tried to get two responses by a liberal and two responses
by a conservative for each rating. In the few cases in which such responses were not
available, we used responses from the other political group. This meant that participants in
our task saw responses that were mostly produced by people who identified with their own
political group, despite the fact that these included all ratings from 1-7 in response to each
policy.
3 3
Measures. While completing the task, we collected participants’ ratings and text in
response to each picture. We also recorded which peers they chose to keep versus eliminate.
After completing the task, participants completed a survey which included a few questions,
similar to Study 2, in which we examined potential motivations for acrophily (choosing
people because they are more creative, provided new interpretations, made the participants
feel good, etc.), a personality scale, as well as participants’ political identification (see
Data availability:
Code availability:
Acknowledgements:
The authors wish to thank Maria Reyes, Naila Ebeid, and Nathanial Hunt for their assistance
in running the lab studies, Vibha Puri for her assistance in developing the simulations and
processing the peer information, and Andrei Boutyline and Jillian Jordan for their comments
on the research.
JS is supported in part by the German Academic Scholarship Foundation
(Promotionsförderung der Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes). The funder had no role in
3 4
study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the
manuscript.
Author Contribution Statement:
AG, JJG, EH, RW and JMA conceived and designed the experiments. AG, ZH, JS and DB ran the
experiments. AG and JMA analyzed Studies 1-4. AG wrote the paper and EH, RW, JMA and JJG
were involved in reviewing and editing the manuscript.
Competing Interests Statement:
The authors declare no competing interests.
moral outrage to a certain case of police brutality. The blue tickers represent potential ties’
moral outrage, and the numbers represent the order of choosing. When applying homophily
(A), the chooser elects to keep others whose responses are closest, regardless of whether they
are more or less intense. When applying homophily + acrophily, the chooser has a preference
for high outrage responses (B). When applying acrophily (C), the chooser keeps only others
who are expressing higher outrage.
police brutality against a Black demonstrator, participants were asked to: (1) provide a text
response to the picture; (2) rate their negative emotions from 1-no emotion to 9-a lot of
emotion; and (3) view 6 peer responses to the same picture (each response includes a name, a
rating, and a text response) and choose 3 peers they do not wish to see in subsequent trials.
The three peers that participants chose to keep stay for the next trial, and participants are
able to see their responses to the following image. An enlarged version of a representative
peer response is shown in panel 4.
acrophily coefficient (reverse scaled for conservatives for ease of comparison) over trial
number, where positive values represent a tendency for acrophily. Error bars represent 95%
confidence intervals. Panel B represents a summary of comparisons between the average kept
ratings and the four simulations (acrophily higher, acrophily lower, homophily, random).
Each simulation was repeated 1,000 times and was compared to the actual average kept
ratings. The zero line represents the average of participants’ kept rating. Each red dot
represents the average b coefficient for the simulation and its distribution. Participants’
3 5
average kept ratings are located in between a pure homophily tie selection strategy and a
pure acrophily strategy, higher for liberals and lower for conservatives.
they chose as most prototypical of their political camp in a rank order of 1 to 3 (N = 387).
Liberals evaluated the first most prototypical peer as well as the second most prototypical
peer to be expressing stronger emotions than their own emotions. The third peer seems to be
equal to participants’ emotions, but this is caused by the fact that there were not available
peers who were expressing stronger emotions after the first two. Conservatives show the
same patter but in the opposite direction. Conservatives evaluated the first most prototypical
peer as well as the second most prototypical peer to be expressing less strong emotions
compared to their own emotion. The third most prototypical peer seems to be expressing
stronger emotions, but this is caused by the fact that there were not available peers who were
expressing weaker emotions after the first two. Error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.
from which participants were asked to choose one peer they would like to keep. Panel B
represents the acrophily difference between participants and the peer they chose to keep in
response to each concept (N = 386). Positive values represent acrophily and results suggest
acrophily in both the liberal and Conservative users. The boxes represent the interquartile
range (IQR). The lines represent the first quartile − 1.5 IQR and the third quartile + 1.5 IQR.