Running Head: FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 1
Fearless Dominance/Boldness is not strongly related to externalizing behaviors: An item
response-based analysis
Michael L. Crowe
University of Georgia
Brandon M. Weiss
University of Georgia
Chelsea E. Sleep
University of Georgia
Alexandra M. Harris
University of Georgia
Nathan T. Carter
University of Georgia
Donald R. Lynam
Purdue University
Joshua D. Miller
University of Georgia
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Michael L. Crowe or Joshua D.
Miller, Department of Psychology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602. Email:
crowem@uga.edu; jdmiller@uga.edu. For access to data or other inquiries contact the first
author.
Acknowledgements: Nathan T. Carter’s contribution was supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant SES-1561070. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science
Foundation.
In press in Assessment.
Abstract
There is substantial and ongoing debate regarding the centrality of Fearless Dominance/Boldness
(FD/B) to psychopathic personality due, in part, to its generally weak relations with externalizing
behaviors. In response to these findings, proponents of FD/B have offered two hypotheses. First,
FD/B may have non-linear associations with externalizing outcomes such that FD/B may lead to
resilience at moderate levels, but an overabundance of FD/B will yield maladaptive behavioral
outcomes. Second, FD/B may be related to antisocial outcomes when paired with high scores on
other psychopathic traits such as self-centered impulsivity (SCI), meanness, or disinhibition. The
current study tests these two possibilities using two large samples (Study 1: 787 undergraduates;
Study 2: 596 MTurk participants). An Item-Response Theory (IRT) scoring approach
particularly sensitive to curvilinearity was used to maximize our ability to find a true curvilinear
effect, if present. No evidence in favor of the curvilinearity hypothesis was found. Only a single
significant interaction predicting substance use was observed between boldness and meanness.
These findings contribute to a growing literature raising concerns regarding the relevance of
FD/B to psychopathy.
Keywords: Nonlinear, Curvilinearity, Antisocial PD, IRT
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 3
Fearless Dominance/Boldness is not strongly related to externalizing behaviors: An item
response-based analysis
Psychopathy is one of the most commonly examined and well-validated personality
disorder constructs. However, considerable debate remains regarding its underlying structure and
the centrality of certain components (e.g., Lilienfeld et al., 2012; Lynam & Miller, 2012; Miller
& Lynam, 2012). One of the most widely debated elements of psychopathy is Fearless
Dominance (FD)/Boldness (B), which is characterized by resilience to stress and anxiety,
fearlessness, and social influence. Formulations of the FD/B construct are represented in certain
th
classic clinical descriptions of the disorder from the mid to late 20 century, in which
psychopathic individuals are described as at once callous, egocentric, impulsive, and
irresponsible while also seemingly well-mannered, charming, and agentic (e.g., Cleckley, 1976;
Miller, Lynam, Widiger, & Leukefeld, 2001; Crego & Widiger, 2016). However, FD/B traits do
model and measure, the Psychopathy Checklist (PCL; Hare, 1980; PCL-R; Hare, 2003), or its
derivatives such as the Self-report Psychopathy Scale (Paulhus, Neumann, & Hare, 2017) and
Levenson Self-report Psychopathy Scale (Levenson, Kiehl, & Fitzpatrick, 1995). These traits
were excluded due to their lack of relations with other psychopathy-relevant traits and outcomes
(Hare & Neumann, 2008; Miller & Lynam, 2012). For instance, a meta-analysis of the
Psychopathic Personality Inventory (PPI; Lilienfeld & Andrews, 1996) showed that FD
manifested null to small positive relations with antisocial behaviors that some consider the sine
qua non of psychopathy-related outcomes (Miller & Lynam, 2012; cf., Skeem & Cooke, 2010).
A recent meta-analytic review of the Triarchic Psychopathy Measure (Patrick, 2010) revealed the
same pattern for Boldness (Sleep, Weiss, Lynam, & Miller, 2019).
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 4
Two hypotheses for the importance of FD/B have been proposed. First, FD/B may have
non-linear associations with externalizing outcomes such that FD/B may lead to resilience at
moderate levels, but an overabundance of FD/B will yield maladaptive behavioral outcomes.
Second, FD/B may be related to antisocial outcomes when paired with high scores on other
psychopathic traits such as self-centered impulsivity (SCI), meanness, or disinhibition. The
present study tests both hypotheses.
Measures of Fearless Dominance/Boldness
The Psychopathy Personality Inventory (PPI; Lilienfeld & Andrews, 1996), as well as its
subsequent revision, the PPI-Revised (PPI-R; Lilienfeld & Widows, 2005), is a widely used
measure that treats FD/B as a major factor of psychopathy. PPI-based measures contain eight
subscales that can be grouped into two higher order factors titled Fearless Dominance (PPI FD –
comprising 3 subscales: Fearlessness, Stress Immunity, and Social Influence) and Self-centered
Impulsivity (PPI SCI – comprising four subscales: Machiavellian Egocentricity, Rebellious
Nonconformity, Blame Externalization, and Carefree Nonplanfulness). An eighth subscale –
Coldheartedness (PPI C) – is a separate scale that does not load on either of the two higher order
factors.
More recent measures such as the Triarchic Psychopathy Measure (TriPM; Patrick, 2010)
and the Elemental Psychopathy Assessment (EPA; Lynam et al., 2011) have followed suit in
including an FD-like construct as a component of psychopathy. The TriPM is based on Patrick,
Fowles, and Krueger’s (2009) triarchic psychopathy model, which includes three central
psychopathy traits – Boldness, Meanness, and Disinhibition. Empirically, TriPM Boldness
overlaps very strongly with PPI FD (e.g., rs >.80). In general, PPI FD and TriPM Boldness
Referred to as the PPI in rest of manuscript for sake of parsimony.
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 5
appear to measure the same construct as both are mutually characterized by resilience to fear and
anxiety, social dominance, low neuroticism, and high extraversion (e.g., Patrick et al., 2009) and
are very highly correlated (meta-analytic r = .79, Sleep et al., 2019).
Controversy of Fearless Dominance/Boldness
Although the PPI-R and TriPM are widely used (e.g., Ross, Benning, Patrick, Thompson,
& Thurston, 2009; Witt, Donnellan, & Blonigen, 2009), empirical support for the FD/B construct
is mixed, with a growing number of findings raising questions regarding FD/B’s relevance to
psychopathy. While some researchers have suggested that FD/B serves to assess psychopathic
traits represented by Factor 1 of the PCL and its subsequent revision, the Psychopathy Checklist
- Revised (PCL-R; Hare, 2003), they share only a small amount of variance. In fact, the variance
shared between Factor 1 of the PCL-R and FD is smaller than that shared between Factor 1 and
SCI (see Marcus, Fulton, & Edens, 2012; Miller & Lynam, 2012). Previous findings also
indicate that FD/B bears null to weak positive relations with many other psychopathy measures
and subscales, suggesting weaker convergent validity than other components of psychopathy
(Miller & Lynam, 2012; cf., Murphy, Lilienfeld, Skeem & Edens, 2016). For example, PPI FD
shows null to weak relations with the other higher order factor, PPI SCI, which is thought to
assess core psychopathy traits (Crego & Widiger, 2014; see Miller & Lynam, 2012 for a meta-
analysis); the same is true for TriPM Boldness and its relations with Meanness (meta-analytic r =
.16) and Disinhibition (meta-analytic r = -.05; Sleep et al., 2019). Such null findings run counter
to theories that suggest low anxiety is the foundation of psychopathy (Lykken, 1995). They are,
however, contrasted by the meta-analytic finding that PPI-FD has a moderate to strong
association with Factors 1 and 2 of the SRP (Marcus et al., 2012).
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 6
It is possible that previous meta-analyses on the relationship between FD/B and other
components of psychopathy are misleading due to their reliance on the PCL-R, which puts little
emphasis on boldness (Lilienfeld et al., 2016), although relations with other psychopathy
measures are relatively small as well (Sleep et al., 2019). FD/B’s relations with non-PCL-based
measures of psychopathy are stronger – but the magnitude of those effects is quite variable.
Second, there is limited empirical evidence indicating that PPI FD and TriPM Boldness
converge with other psychopathy scales in relation to important correlates of psychopathy. For
instance, FD generally manifests null to small relations with externalizing behaviors thought by
many, but not all (Skeem & Cooke, 2010), to be characteristic of psychopathy such as
aggression, substance use, and antisocial behavior (see Miller & Lynam, 2012). Similar findings
have been reported regarding TriPM Boldness; a recent meta-analysis found relations for
Boldness with indices of externalizing behaviors to range from .05 to .12 (Sleep et al., 2019).
Third, previous findings indicate that FD/B is more strongly related to adaptive outcomes
than maladaptive ones. While the construct does show moderate convergence with an expert-
generated prototype of Cleckley-based psychopathy from the perspective of the Five Factor
Model (Lilienfeld et al., 2012; Miller & Lynam, 2012), it is associated with lower risk of
psychopathology and greater emotional stability (e.g., Crego & Widiger, 2014; Miller & Lynam,
2012). FD/B is also strongly associated with low neuroticism/negative emotionality and high
extraversion/positive emotionality, suggesting that it may be linked to such positive life
outcomes as subjective well-being, self-esteem, physical health, and longevity, among others
(Ozer & Benet-Martinez, 2006). Smith, Lilienfeld, Coffey, and Dabbs (2013) have shown that
FD/B traits are associated with acting heroically and altruistically in daily life – behaviors not
typically associated with psychopathy. FD/B is also associated with qualities that underlie
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 7
prosocial behavior including emotion recognition, empathy, and sociability, as well as prosocial
behavior itself (Gatner et al., 2016). There is some evidence that FD/B is related to grandiose
narcissism (e.g., Sellbom & Phillips, 2013) but these shared aspects are largely limited to the
more adaptive, extraversion-related components of narcissism that do not involve the
interpersonal antagonism characteristic of psychopathy and narcissism (Krusemark, Campbell,
Crowe, & Miller, 2018; Miller, Sleep, Crowe, & Lynam, 2020). This is consistent with
narcissism and FD/B’s shared association with FFM extraversion, but divergent association with
agreeableness (e.g., Crego & Widiger, 2014; Maples et al., 2014; O’Boyle, Forsyth, Banks,
Story, & White, 2015). Finally, when the personality profile associated with boldness is
presented without any psychopathy-related labeling or context, experts rated it as less relevant to
psychopathy than Meanness or Disinhibition (Miller, Lamkin, Maples-Keller, & Lynam, 2016;
cf., Berg, Lilienfeld, & Sellbom, 2017). In fact, unlike other dimensions of psychopathy, the
personality correlates of FD/B align strongly with expert ratings of “healthy personality”
(Bleidorn et al., in press).
There have been several attempts to explain FD/B’s null to limited relations with
psychopathy-relevant outcomes such as antisocial behavior. The first is an interaction-based
hypothesis that suggests that FD/B will be related to externalizing behaviors when paired with
higher scores on other psychopathy components such as PPI SCI, meanness, or disinhibition.
Lilienfeld and colleagues (2012) suggest that “fearless dominance...gives rise to the full clinical
picture of psychopathy in the presence of elevated disinhibition, meanness, or both… there is no
requirement that PPI-FD by itself should be associated with maladaptive functioning” (p. 332),
although they note that these interactions have been difficult to detect (Lilienfeld et al., 2012).
Empirical examinations of the interaction hypothesis have yielded mixed results, with a few
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 8
studies noting FD x SCI interactions in relation to treatment failure (Rock, Sellbom, Ben-Porath,
& Salekin, 2013), and sexually predatory attitudes (Marcus & Norris, 2014), while other studies
have found no evidence of interactive effects (e.g., Gatner et al., 2016; Maples et al., 2014;
Miller, Maples-Keller, & Lynam, 2016; see Lilienfeld, Patrick, et al., 2012 for other examples).
For example, across 42 outcomes, Vize et al. (2015) found evidence for only two FD by SCI
interactions, and neither was in the anticipated direction. More recently, the interaction
hypothesis was tested in a correctional sample (Weiss et al., 2019). Weiss and colleagues found
no evidence of FD by SCI interactions for any of the four outcomes tested. Indeed, if FD/B
interacts with the other components of psychopathy, some findings suggest that it may provide a
protective effect. For instance, Gatner and colleagues’ (2016) demonstrated that at higher levels
of TriPM Boldness, (a) Disinhibition and Meanness failed to exhibit stronger relations with
negative outcomes; (b) meanness exhibited weaker relations with social aggression and
impulsiveness.
A second possible explanation for why examinations of FD/B have failed to find
expected relations with antisocial behavior and other externalizing behaviors was put forward by
Blonigen (2013), who hypothesized that FD/B may bear curvilinear relations with maladaptive
outcomes, such that optimal outcomes are shown in those with moderate standing on FD,
whereas those with very high levels are disposed toward problematic behavior. Specifically,
Blonigen (2013) stated:
[A] certain amount of boldness, fearlessness, confidence, and social dominance is likely
to engender resilience in the face of adversity and success in a number of important life
domains; however, an overabundance of such traits is likely to be expressed as
narcissism, arrogance, recklessness, and risk-taking… (p. 88).
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 9
Unlike the interaction-based explanation, this curvilinear hypothesis regarding FD/B’s relations
to externalizing behaviors has received little attention to date. Vize and colleagues (2016) tested
the effect of FD/B on both concurrent and future behavior, and found that FD/B, measured by
proxy in early adolescents, showed a curvilinear effect for three of 42 possible outcomes;
importantly, none of these curvilinear effects were of the same form and only one was consistent
with Blonigen’s hypothesis. Similarly, Gatner et al. (2016) tested TriPM Boldness’ curvilinear
relation with several antisocial criteria, finding that Boldness exhibited a small incremental
nonlinear effect when predicting TriPM Meanness and physical aggression. The authors
interpreted their effect sizes as too small in magnitude to support Blonigen’s (2013) hypothesis.
In general, these two studies cast doubt on the existence of important curvilinear relations among
FD/B and externalizing outcomes, but both had limitations. First, a null finding in the Vize et al.
study for curvilinear relations does not necessarily preclude the possibility that extreme levels of
FD/B in adulthood (versus early life) predict antisocial behavior. Second, the use of a proxy
measure of FD limited the authors’ ability to test whether the lower-order components of FD
(e.g., stress immunity) demonstrate curvilinear relations with externalizing behavior. Given the
multi-faceted nature of FD, it is possible that curvilinear effects associated with lower order
subcomponents may have been obscured in the higher-order analysis. Lastly, both simulated and
traditional analyses have indicated that traditional scoring methods are limited in their ability to
detect curvilinearity at extreme ends of trait distributions (Carter et al., 2014, 2016, 2017). More
recently, Weiss and colleagues (in press) evaluated the curvilinearity hypothesis on a
correctional sample, finding no support for the hypothesis, but their analysis was limited to the
PPI.
Study Aims
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 10
In the present study, we test both key hypotheses regarding how FD/B may relate to
externalizing outcomes. We specifically examine whether FD/B shows an increasingly strong
positive association with externalizing at high ends of the FD/B trait distribution (Blonigen,
2013), and whether FD/B interacts with high SCI, disinhibition, or meanness to predict
externalizing behavior. We utilize the two most common measures of FD/B (i.e., PPI-R and
TriPM) and test these hypotheses in a large undergraduate sample and a large Mechanical Turk
sample, both of which are large enough to be reasonably well-powered for such analyses (see
Results and Supplemental Power Analysis in supplemental materials for more details on the
power analysis conducted). For the sake of comprehensiveness, we also test whether the non-
FD/B related scales of the PPI-R and TriPM’s (e.g., PPI-R Coldheartedness; TriPM Meanness)
bear curvilinear relations with externalizing behaviors. By examining the subscales of the PPI-
R’s FD factor we can conduct a more granular test of where curvilinear relations may exist
within the broader construct.
To investigate curvilinearity, we use an ideal point Item Response Theory (IRT) model,
namely, the Generalized Graded Unfolding Model (GGUM; Roberts, Donoghue, & Laughlin,
2000), which is an approach towards reproducing response patterns for self-report measures of
personality (e.g., Stark, Chernyshenko, Drasgow, & Williams, 2006), attitudes (e.g., Carter &
Dalal, 2010), and affect (LaPalme, Tay, & Wang, 2017). Most importantly for the current
investigation, the ideal point approach to scoring has been shown to more accurately recover
curvilinear relationships in simulated (Carter, Dalal, Guan, LoPilato, & Withrow, 2017) and
empirical (Carter et al., 2014, 2016) data.
Method
Sample 1: Participants and Procedure
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 11
Sample 1 comprised 787 participants recruited from the research pool at a large Southern
state university in the United States in exchange for research credit (53% men; mean age =
19.34; SD = 2.19; 83% Caucasian; 7% Asian; 6% African American). Upon signing informed
consent, participants completed a packet of self-report questionnaires and were debriefed. Some
of these data were used in previous studies on the factor structure of the EPA and the validity of
brief psychopathy measures (Few, Miller, & Lynam, 2013; Miller, Few, et al., 2012), not for
tests of curvilinearity. Institutional review board approval was provided for this study.
Sample 2: Participants and Procedure
Participants included 865 participants recruited from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
(MTurk) website. Research utilizing MTurk has shown that the MTurk population is a reliable
source of data with more demographic diversity than most undergraduate populations (Chandler
& Shapiro, 2016; Miller, Crowe, Weiss, Maples-Keller, & Lynam, 2017). To participate,
participants had to be 18 years of age or older and reside in the United States. Participants were
paid $2.00 for their participation. Of the 865 participants who completed informed consent, 269
participants were removed for failing one or both validity scales (see Measures section), for
finishing the study in a time deemed invalid (> 20 minutes), for having more than 25% missing
data, or for random responding. The final dataset consisted of 596 participants (63% female;
83% White; 10% Black; 8% Asian; 6% Hispanic; M age = 37.04, SD = 11.75). Some of these
data were used in previous studies clarifying the nomological network of narcissism (Crowe,
Sleep, Carter, Campbell, & Miller, 2018; Miller, Lynam, Siedor, et al., 2018; Miller, Lynam,
Vize, et al., 2018; Vize et al., 2017), not for studies on psychopathy in general and curvilinearity
more specifically. Institutional review board approval was provided for this study.
2 Participants could endorse more than a single racial category and thus these percentages sum to greater than 100%.
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 12
Measures
Psychopathic Personality Inventory-Revised (PPI-R). The PPI-R (Lilienfeld &
Widows, 2005) is a 154-item measure of psychopathy that provides scores for eight subscales, as
well as a global psychopathy score and two psychopathy factor scores (PPI-R Fearless
Dominance [PPI FD] and PPI-R Self-centered Impulsivity [PPI SCI]). The PPI-R was given in
Sample 1. Alphas for the 8 PPI-R subscales range from .83 to .88 with a median of .85.
Triarchic Psychopathy Measure. (TriPM). The TriPM (Patrick et al., 2009) is a 58-item
self-report measure of psychopathy that provides a global psychopathy score (α = .87) as well as
three scales: Boldness (19 items; α = .87), Meanness (18 items; α = .89), and Disinhibition (20
items; α = .87). While there are typically 19 items in the TriPM Meanness scale, one item (“I
sympathize with others’ problems”) was dropped from the scale due to misfit. See discussion in
Scoring Methods. The TriPM was used in Sample 2.
Crime and Analogous Behavior Scale (CAB). The CAB (Miller & Lynam, 2003) is a
self-report inventory that assesses a variety of externalizing behaviors. A substance use variety
count was created by giving participants a “1” for every substance they endorsed using (6 items;
M = 1.96; SD = 1.43). An antisocial behavior count was created by giving participants a “1” for
every antisocial act they endorsed (10 items; M = .90; SD = 1.03). The following acts were
included in the antisocial behavior scale: theft (of more and less than $50 value), car theft,
physical fighting, threat with a weapon, assault with a weapon, intentional injury of another
person, burglary, and been arrested (for DUI and something other than DUI). Because these
represent counts of behaviors, special analytic approaches for counts were used. The full CAB
was given in Sample 1, whereas a brief version was used in Sample 2. In Sample 2, a substance
3 The data analyzed from both samples were collected as part of larger assessment batteries that included measures
not related to the current study. Not all measures collected are reported here.
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 13
use variety count was created by giving participants a “1” for every substance they endorsed
using (5 items; M = 1.84; SD = 1.36). An antisocial behavior count was created by giving
participants a “1” for every antisocial act they endorsed (10 items; M = 1.08; SD = 1.40).
Reactive and Proactive Aggression Questionnaire (RPA). The RPA (Raine et al., 2006)
scale consists of 23 self-report items assessing two aggression scales: Proactive Aggression (12
items; M = 1.51, SD = 2.44) and Reactive Aggression (11 items; M = 6.83, SD = 3.66). Items are
scored in the following manner: 0 (never), 1 (sometimes), and 2 (often). In Sample 2, the
coefficient alphas for the proactive and reactive scales were both .82. Reactive and proactive
aggression were substantially correlated, r = .55.
Validity Scales. Two validity scales from the Elemental Psychopathy Assessment
(Lynam et al., 2011) were used, the Infrequency Scale and the Too Good to be True Scale.
Participants were removed from the analyses if they received a score of four or more on the
Infrequency Scale or a score of three or more on the Too Good to be True Scale.
Data Analysis
Scoring Methods
In the current investigation, we utilize IRT scoring for all self-report measures, except
those that are based on behavioral count data. The use of IRT-based scores is particularly
important to the current investigation due to recent findings that they yield more accurate tests of
curvilinearity (Carter et al., 2017). IRT models generally assume that participant’s responses to
test items are influenced by characteristics of the person as well as the idiosyncratic
characteristics of the measure administered. Responses are thought to be only partially
determined by the level of the measured personality trait possessed by the respondent. IRT
models also propose that responses are determined by the extremity of the item content, which is
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 14
alternatively referred to as item difficulty, location, or popularity. Finally, IRT models consider
that responses are also partially determined by the extent to which the item can differentiate
between those with higher versus lower trait standing, referred to as discrimination (which can
be thought of as similar to factor loadings). By accounting for item-level idiosyncrasies in test
scoring, IRT scoring controls the type 1 error in tests for curvilinearity caused by items whose
content expresses more extreme levels of the trait than most persons being assessed, which
Carter et al. (2017) showed is typical of commonly-used personality measures.
Dominance vs. Ideal Point Models. Although IRT scoring generally increases the
accuracy of tests for curvilinearity, Carter et al. (2016) pointed out that it is also crucial to utilize
an IRT model that appropriately characterizes the item response process (i.e., the way
respondents “use” the scale to respond to the item content). The majority of IRT models (as well
as classical sum-scores and factor scores) assume a dominance response process which implies
that those with higher levels of a personality trait will always be more likely to endorse a
positively keyed item. Although this assumption is sensible for measures of ability – in which
respondents attempt to “dominate” the item, or answer correctly – and measures based on
behavioral frequency, recent work has cast doubt on the validity of the dominance assumption
for personality tests with Likert-type endorsement scales (e.g., LaPalme et al., 2017; Stark et al.,
2006; Roberts, Laughlin, & Wedell, 1999).
Counter to the assumption of a dominance process, ideal point models assume that
individuals are most likely to endorse items with content that matches their own personality trait
level. Thus, under ideal point model assumptions, an individual can be less likely to fully
endorse an item (i.e., “strongly agree”) both because the item is too extreme and because the
item is not extreme enough. For example, a statement such as “I keep my room clean most of the
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 15
time” may not be endorsed by persons low in conscientiousness because they do not keep their
room clean, but may also not be endorsed by persons with very high conscientiousness because
they keep their room clean all the time, not just “most of the time.”
There is debate regarding the necessity of ideal point models for personality constructs
(Drasgow et al., 2010; c.f., Reise, 2010), but research has shown the ideal point assumption
generally shows better fit to self-report personality measures (e.g., Stark et al., 2006). While
overall scores within a sample may not show substantial differences across the two scoring
approaches, assuming a dominance process when an ideal point process is more appropriate
causes confusion in rank-order at the top end of the trait distribution (see Roberts et al., 1999).
Thus, ideal point models have proven particularly useful for uncovering curvilinear relationships
where they exist (Carter et al., 2014, 2016), and reducing false flags (i.e., type 1 errors; Carter et
al., 2017). However, as noted previously, the advantage of IRT scoring is predicated on the
correct choice of an IRT model for scoring personality tests (Carter et al., 2016). Therefore, we
consider the fit of both ideal point and dominance IRT models in the current investigation.
Model Estimation and Fit. The generalized partial credit model (GPCM; Muraki, 1992)
assumes a dominance response process and is appropriate for polytomous Likert-type scores.
The generalized graded unfolding model (GGUM; Roberts et al., 2000) assumes an ideal point
response process and is suited for polytomous Likert-type responses. The GPCM was estimated
using the ‘mirt’ package in R (Chalmers, 2012), and the GGUM was estimated using the
GGUM2004 software program (Roberts, Fang, Cui, & Wang, 2006). Both programs utilize
marginal maximum likelihood (MML) estimation to determine item parameters and Expected a
Posteriori (EAP) scoring to determine persons’ trait levels.
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 16
See Supplemental Tables for all fit statistics used for model selection. Relative model-
data fit for the GPCM (i.e., dominance model) and GGUM (i.e., ideal point model) was
evaluated by comparing the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC; Akaike, 1973; Bozdogan, 1987).
The GGUM showed superior model-data fit for all measures in Sample 1. GPCM showed
superior model-data fit for all measures in Sample 2. The MODFIT program (Stark, 2007) was
used to evaluate absolute model-data fit (i.e., χ /df ratios) of the GGUM (Sample 1) and GPCM
(Sample 2). Evaluation of absolute model-data fit was necessary to verify that the data meets
model assumptions of unidimensionality, which has been called into question for the TriPM
Boldness domain (Shou et al., in press). The χ /df ratio compares the actual responses in the data
to the responses predicted by the IRT model via the χ statistic divided by the degrees of freedom
for the test; ratios greater than three are generally considered to indicate model-data misfit.
In Sample 1, all PPI-R GGUM models showed ratios less than three. In Sample 2, GPCM
TriPM Boldness and Disinhibition models showed acceptable model-data fit. As both the
GGUM and GPCM assume unidimensionality, adequate model-data fit is indicative of an
acceptable unidimensional structure for these traits. TriPM Meanness manifested unacceptable
model-data fit as all ratios were greater than three. Further evaluation revealed that the misfit of
the model was the result of multidimensionality. Once the single worst fitting item (“I
sympathize with others’ problems”) was removed, model-data fit was appropriate with all ratios
falling below three. All analyses were conducted using estimates from this 18-item version of the
scale.
The GGUM was used to estimate all component scores in Sample 1. PPI-R domain-level
scores were also generated in Sample 1. GGUM estimates of measured traits () were averaged
to generate higher-order factor scores. The PPI-R SCI factor was estimated by averaging Blame
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 17
Externalization, Carefree Nonplanfulness, Machiavellian Egocentricity, and Rebellious
Nonconformity scores. The PPI-R FD factor was estimated by averaging Fearlessness, Social
Influence, and Stress Immunity scores. The GPCM was used to estimate all TriPM scores for
Sample 2 as well as reactive and proactive aggression scores.
In IRT, test information is conceptually similar to scale reliability and can be thought of
as the scale’s measurement precision at a particular level of the latent trait, θ . Test information
can be used to generate at Test Reliability Function (TRF), which depicts measurement
reliability at all levels of the latent trait. The TRF and observed distribution of latent psychopathy
traits were examined as part of our evaluation of the samples’ appropriateness for testing the
curvilinearity hypothesis. Histograms of latent traits and response distributions were also
examined.
Regression Models
As count data (such as the CAB) often deviate from the assumptions of OLS regression,
alternative models were applied in the present analyses. Poisson regression is often applied to
count data and assumes that the variance of data is congruent with the mean. When the variance
of data deviates substantially from the mean, negative binomial regression is more appropriate.
Negative binomial regression accounts for overdispersion (i.e., when variance exceeds the mean)
by estimating an additional dispersion parameter () and applying more conservative tests of
significance in proportion to the degree of dispersion and standard error (Atkins, Baldwin,
Zheng, Gallop, & Neighbors, 2013). For all regressions, the appropriateness of modeling with
Poisson and negative binomial was evaluated by comparing model fit using Bayesian
Information Criterion (BIC; Raftery, 1995), which includes a correction for the increased
complexity of the negative binomial model. Poisson and negative binomial regressions were only
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 18
considered for the CAB. For the non-count data outcomes (i.e., reactive and proactive
aggression) standard OLS regression with robust standard errors was used.
To examine curvilinearity, all latent trait scores were standardized, and the polynomial
term was calculated from the standardized value (Cohen, Cohen, West, Aiken, 2002). In the first
step of all analyses standardized psychopathy scores (i.e., GGUM latent trait estimates) were
entered as a predictor of externalizing behavior. In the second step, the squared value of the
standardized psychopathy score was entered as an additional predictor and the change in model-
data fit was evaluated to assess for curvilinearity.
The incremental contribution of the curvilinear effect for each model was evaluated using
2 2
BIC (Raftery, 1995), and R or Pseudo R (McFadden, 1974). BIC was the primary fit index used
when evaluating whether the curvilinear model indicated considerable improvement upon the
simpler linear model. Raftery’s (1995) suggestion of a BIC difference greater than two was used
as positive evidence of a better fitting model. McFadden’s (1974) pseudo-R calculation was
used for all Poisson and negative binomial models, which do not have a statistical equivalent to
2 2 2
OLS R . Although the intended use of McFadden’s pseudo-R is similar to the OLS R metric, its
values tend to be much smaller and cannot be interpreted as variance accounted for by the model.
McFadden R values ranging from .2 to .4 are thought to be indicative of excellent model fit,
comparable to OLS R values of .7-.9 (McFadden, 1979).
To examine interaction effects, the standardized latent trait estimates were entered as
predictors of externalizing behavior along with the product term of the predictors. When a
significant interaction term was identified, simple effects were evaluated at one standard
deviation above and below the mean of the non-FD/B term. All potential domain level FD/B
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 19
interaction effects were evaluated (i.e., FD x SCI; FD x Coldheartedness; Boldness x Meanness;
Boldness x Disinhibition).
Results
Item response theory models estimate individual latent traits scores (θ). These scores are
on a standardized scale with zero being the population mean of the latent trait and one being one
standard deviation above the population mean of that trait. Histograms of all θ score distributions
and outcome counts are included in the supplemental materials along with additional descriptive
Reliability Functions (TRFs; Supplemental Figures 8-11). In Sample 1, the average maximum
latent trait score across PPI-R scales was 3.04 standard deviations above the population mean
and the average range was 6.14 standard deviations wide. The smallest maximum latent trait
score was 2.06 (Carefree Nonplanfulness; range = -3.68 to 2.06). The largest raw Carefree
Nonplanfulness score was 45 out of a possible 57 and a total of 9 participants endorsed at least
three quarters of the scale (i.e., 15 of 19 items) or more. The largest maximum latent trait score
was 4.29 (Social Dominance; range = -4.36 to 4.29). The largest raw Social Dominance score
was 52 out of a possible 54 and 202 participants endorsed at least three quarters of the scale (i.e.,
14 of 18 items). Sample 1 test reliability functions revealed marginal reliabilities at three
standard deviations above the population mean that ranged from .68 (Stress Immunity) to .88
(Carefree Nonplanfulness). In Sample 2, the average maximum TriPM latent trait score was 3.22
standard deviations above the population mean and the average range was 5.64 standard
deviations wide. The smallest maximum latent trait score was 3.09 (Meanness; range = -1.76 to
3.09). The largest raw Meanness score was 65 out of a possible 72, and three participants
4 Accounts for reverse scoring and refers to individuals who responded “mostly true” or “true” in the case of the
PPI-R, “somewhat true” or “true” in the case of the TriPM. and “sometimes” or “often” in the case of the RPA.
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 20
endorsed at least three quarters of the scale (i.e., 14 of 18 items). The largest maximum latent
trait score was 3.41 (Reactive aggression; range = -2.09 to 3.41). The largest raw reactive
aggression score was 22 out of a possible 22, and 128 participants endorsed at least three
quarters of the scale (i.e., 9 of 11 items). Sample 2 test reliability functions revealed marginal
reliabilities at three standard deviations above the population mean that ranged from .70
(Boldness) to .92 (Meanness).
curvilinear regression analyses are reported in Tables 1-4. Over-dispersion was evaluated for all
models predicting CAB externalizing outcomes by comparing the BIC fit of the Poisson model
to the negative binomial model. Results indicated that Poisson regression was appropriate when
using PPI-R scores to predict CAB outcomes in nearly all cases. Only the prediction of CAB
antisocial behavior from PPI-R Social Influence required the use of negative binomial analyses.
When TriPM subscales were used, Poisson was most appropriate for substance use, while
negative binomial analysis was most appropriate for antisocial behavior. Model fit was also
evaluated for the reactive and proactive aggression scales. Fit suggested that while ordinary least
squares (OLS) analyses were acceptable for the prediction of reactive aggression, negative
binomial analyses were more appropriate for the prediction of proactive aggression.
Note that both Poisson and negative binomial regression predict the natural log of the
expected count variable. Unless otherwise indicated, all reported coefficients are reported in log
(cid:3051)
units. To convert coefficients to count units they must be exponentiated (i.e., 𝑒 ). However, to
do so changes their interpretations from additive to multiplicative (see Coxe, West, & Aiken,
2009 for review).
Evaluating Curvilinearity
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 21
Substance Use. Step 1 of all analyses evaluated only linear effects. All eight of the PPI-R
facets and both factor score estimates showed statistically significant linear effects when
predicting substance use. PPI-R standardized regression coefficients ranged in size from .06 (p <
.05; Stress Immunity) to .18 (p < .01; Fearlessness). When TriPM scales were used to predict
substance use, regression coefficients ranged in size from .02 (p = ns; Boldness) to .19 (p < .01;
Disinhibition). In Step 2 of all regression analyses linear and quadratic terms were included.
When predicting substance use, all PPI-R SCI scales (i.e., Blame Externalization, Carefree
Nonplanfulness, Machiavellian Egocentricity, and Rebellious Nonconformity) and
Coldheartedness yielded statistically significant quadratic effects ranging in magnitude from -.12
(p < .01; Machiavellian Egocentricity) to -.04 (p < .05; Blame Externalization). Of these five
effects, BIC values indicate that only the quadratic effects of Machiavellian Egocentricity,
Rebellious Nonconformity, and Coldheartedness represent meaningful improvements over the
linear model. At the factor level, PPI-R SCI also yielded a statistically significant quadratic
effect that improved model fit. No TriPM facets to show a meaningful quadratic effect for the
prediction of substance use. All identified quadratic effects are negative in direction, which
indicates a reduction in substance use at higher latent trait levels, contrary to the direction
hypothesized (Blonigen, 2013) (See Supplemental Figures 1-4).
Antisocial Behavior. In Step 1 of analyses predicting antisocial behavior, seven of eight
PPI-R subscales and two of three TriPM subscales showed statistically significant effects. PPI-R
subscale coefficients ranged in size from .04 (p = ns; Social Influence) to .28 (p < .01;
Fearlessness). TriPM subscales ranged from .08 (p = ns; Boldness) to .48 (p < .01;
Disinhibition). In Step 2, PPI-R Fearlessness (-.05; p < .05), Machiavellian Egocentricity (-.14; p
< .01), Blame Externalization (-.07; p < .05), and the SCI factor (-.16; p < .05) showed
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 22
statistically significant quadratic effects. Of these, only Machiavellian Egocentricity
meaningfully improved the fit of the model. Again, the directionality of the curve was the
Reactive and Proactive Aggression. In Step 1, all TriPM subscales were significant
linear predictors of reactive aggression with standardized coefficients ranging from -.13 (p < .01;
Boldness) to .42 (p < .01; Disinhibition). Only Boldness failed to predict proactive aggression
with coefficients ranging from -.01 (p = ns; Boldness) to .36 (p < .01; Disinhibition). Significant
quadratic effects were found when Meanness and Disinhibition were used to predict proactive
aggression. These effects were consistent with Blonigen’s hypothesized direction, albeit for
different psychopathy domains (See Supplemental Figures 6 and 7).
Evaluating Interactions
No significant interactions were identified between FD and SCI or FD and
Coldheartedness. An interaction between Boldness and Meanness was identified when predicting
substance abuse (β = .59, p < .001; β = .03, p = .389; β = .05, p = .087; β = .09 p = .003).
0 B M B*M
Boldness was positively associated with substance abuse, but only at high levels of Meanness (-
1SD Meanness: β = -.19, p = .003; +1SD Meanness: β = .20, p = .005). An interaction between
B B
Meanness and Disinhibition was also identified when predicting proactive aggression (β = -.07,
p = .02; β = .17, p < .001; β = .28, p < .001; β = .14 p < .001), such that high levels of
M D B*M
meanness increased the association between disinhibition and proactive aggression (-1SD
Meanness: β = .22, p < .001; +1SD Meanness: β = .57, p < .001). No other significant
D D
interactions were found.
Discussion
There have been two primary explanations offered for FD/B’s failure to relate to
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 23
externalizing outcomes characteristic of psychopathy. The first hypothesis, put forward by
Blonigen (2013), suggests that FD/B’s relevance to these maladaptive outcomes may only be
seen at high levels of these traits. To date, this hypothesis has been tested three times with each
finding no evidence to suggest a curvilinear relation with behavioral outcomes typical of
psychopathy (Gatner et al., 2016; Vize et al., 2016, Weiss et al., in press). Second, some
researchers have argued that FD/B may be more relevant to these outcomes through synergistic
interactions with antagonism/meanness and disinhibition in predicting maladaptive behavioral
outcomes (Lilienfeld et al., 2012). However, these interactions do not materialize consistently
(e.g., Gatner et al., 2016; Maples et al., 2014; Miller, Maples-Keller, & Lynam, 2016; Vize et al.,
2016; cf., Marcus & Norris, 2014; Rock et al., 2013).
Effectively evaluating curvilinear effects at extreme ends of the trait continuum requires
sufficient variability of psychopathic traits within the sample. Sample 1 included latent trait
estimates more than three standard deviations greater than the population mean for all facets of
FD. Each facet of FD also had over 100 individuals endorse at least three quarters of the item
content. Sample 2 also included Boldness latent trait estimates exceeding three standard
deviations beyond the population mean and over 100 individuals endorsed at least three quarters
of the items. Equally important, the Test Reliability Function suggested that individuals at
extreme ends of all PPI-R and TriPM traits were reliably measured. Samples 1 and 2 therefore
seem to include sufficient variance for providing a reasonable test of Blonigen’s (2013)
curvilinearity hypothesis. There are fewer observations at the extreme ends of the PPI-R SCI
facets in Sample 1, and Meanness and Disinhibition factors in Sample 2, but extreme responses
were observed. Latent trait estimates greater than three were measured for three of the four PPI-
R facets (the only exception being Carefree Nonplanfulness) and all TriPM facets. The amount
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 24
of raw item endorsement was relatively small for Carefree Nonplanfulness in Sample 1 and
Meanness and Disinhibition in Sample 2. This may have made some of the interaction
hypotheses more difficult to identify. However, not all Sample 1 SCI factors were so limited. In
Sample 1, Machiavellian Egocentricity and Rebellious Nonconformity included in excess of 30
individuals that endorsed at least three quarters of the scale.
Our analysis found no evidence for a curvilinear relation between FD/B and externalizing
outcomes. However, it is noteworthy that in Sample 1, FD, and Fearlessness in particular, had
linear effects comparable to the SCI domain. This is consistent with factor analyses which show
that Fearlessness tends to load on both FD and SCI factors suggesting that, relative to other
facets of the FD domain, it may contain more antagonism and disinhibition (both definitive
features of SCI) content (Benning et al., 2003; Neumann et al., 2008; Weiss et al., 2019). This
finding also highlights the importance of considering associations at the level of subscales rather
than domain scores. One curvilinear effect was observed for Fearlessness in the prediction of
antisocial behavior counts, but the effect was negative (indicating a reduction in antisocial
behavior at higher ends of the spectrum) and small in magnitude. Additional quadratic effects
were identified but these were observed for non-FD/B scales.
In line with the interaction hypothesis, a Boldness x Meanness interaction was found
suggesting that Boldness, when paired with high Meanness, is positively associated with
substance use. This was, however, the only statistically significant FD/B interaction observed in
the two samples. These findings provide little evidence for the hypothesis that FD/B domains
interact with other components of psychopathy to increase problematic externalizing behavior.
These null effects are consistent with previous tests of the hypothesis (Vize et al., 2016; Gatner
et al., 2016; Weiss et al., in press). It is important to acknowledge that null findings are often
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 25
difficult to interpret due to potential alternative explanations related to shortcomings in study
design (e.g., small sample size, measurement error). While we cannot be certain that no such
shortcomings have resulted in our failure to observe the hypothesized effects (see also the
Limitations section below), unique aspects for of these analyses provide some support for the
validity of our findings. The GGUM IRT model was utilized as it is the most precise statistical
tool available for latent trait measurement. Furthermore, as verified by Monte Carlo simulations
(see Supplemental Power Analysis), our analyses were powered to detect relatively small effects.
Taking our results together with previous findings suggests that there is little evidence in
favor of the interaction or curvilinearity hypotheses. Consistent with findings from relevant
meta-analyses (Miller & Lynam, 2012; Sleep et al., 2019), our results suggest that FD/B manifest
small positive linear associations with certain externalizing outcomes. For instance, the FD
subscales were positively linearly related to substance use and antisocial behavior. No such
linear associations were found for boldness.
PPI-R SCI subscales, PPI-R Coldheartedness, TriPM Disinhibition, and TriPM Meanness
were also evaluated for curvilinear effects in the prediction of externalizing behavior.
Statistically significant curvilinear relations were observed, but they were modest in size and
negative in nearly all instances suggesting a reduction in, or perhaps more likely a leveling-off of
externalizing behavior at high levels of the trait. Two of four PPI-R SCI scales (Machiavellian
Egocentricity and Rebellious Nonconformity) and the PPI-R SCI factor revealed this pattern in
the prediction of substance use in the undergraduate sample, as did Coldheartedness. Modest
negative curvilinear effects were also found in the prediction of antisocial behavior, but only for
PPI-R Machiavellian Egocentricity. These results are inconsistent with those of Weiss and
colleagues (2019), who found modest positive curvilinear effects for Coldheartedness and
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 26
Carefree Nonplanfulness in the prediction of Antisocial Behavior. Sample 2 revealed two
curvilinear effects in the prediction of proactive aggression from TriPM Meanness and
Disinhibition. Proactive aggression was more strongly associated with higher levels of Meanness
and Disinhibition.
It is notable that in most instances, where curvilinear relations were found, the pattern of
curvilinearity did not match the convex pattern that Blonigen (2013) hypothesized for FD/B
domains. More often, the coefficient indicated a reduction in slope towards the extreme ends of
the trait (See Supplemental Figures 1-7). For example, externalizing behavior appears to decline
with increasing levels of PPI Machiavellian Egocentricity. It is possible that the identified
curvature is indicative of a plateau effect such that beyond certain levels of these traits there is no
longer a meaningful increase in externalizing behaviors. However, because associations at the
most extreme ends of the trait continuum are necessarily driven by a relative few, it is also
possible that the reduction observed was an idiosyncratic sample-driven effect. Such an
explanation is more likely for SCI factors as well as Meanness and Disinhibition, each of which
be important for future research to address the degree to which these curvilinear relations
replicate and what they mean for psychopathy’s relations with externalizing behaviors.
Regarding the interaction hypothesis, our results are consistent with previous null
findings. Of the 18 interactions tested, only one effect consistent with predictions was identified.
Meanness moderated the association between Boldness and substance abuse with only
individuals high in Meanness showing a positive association between boldness and drug use.
There was also an interaction between Meanness and Disinhibition such that individuals high in
5 Sample 1 means for ME exceeded offender sample means (d = 0.50; Lilienfeld & Widows).
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 27
both traits had particularly high proactive aggression scores, but this interaction falls outside the
scope of the FD/B interaction hypothesis.
Limitations
Some limitations of the current study and approach must be acknowledged. First, Sample
1 was composed of a relatively homogeneous undergraduate sample. Although samples of this
nature are commonly employed in the study of psychopathy (e.g., Berg, Hecht, Latzman, &
Lilienfeld, 2015; Blagov, Patrick, Oost, Goodman, & Pugh, 2016), restriction of range could
have affected the sizes of correlations found between psychopathy and criteria, particularly
antisocial behavior and proactive aggression, which were both heavily skewed. The statistical
methods used attempt to accommodate such distributions, but it is possible that stronger
associations could be found in populations with higher base rates of such behaviors (e.g.,
forensic populations). Future examinations of the interaction hypothesis may require
oversampling for externalizing behaviors.
Sample size may have been a related limitation. Although the study was well powered to
detect most effects (see Supplemental Power Analysis), a larger sample would have allowed for
additional data at the most extreme ends of the psychopathy spectrum. TriPM Disinhibition (d =
-1.811) and TriPM Meanness (d = -1.16) means from our sample were more than one standard
deviation below means from offender samples (Lilienfeld & Widows, 2005; Stanley, Wygant, &
Sellbom, 2013). It is possible that interaction effects could be found in forensic samples with
more extreme levels of such traits, although recent analyses limited to the PPI found no such
interaction (Weiss et al., 2019). FD/B means from our samples adequately matched offender
sample means suggesting that the range for the trait most central to the curvilinearity hypothesis
was not particularly restricted.
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 28
The number of outcome measures should also be considered. As we are aware of few
specific hypotheses regarding which specific antisocial behaviors FD/B is most likely to predict
and given the sample size needed to assess the hypothesized effects, we chose to briefly measure
a few prominent outcomes while emphasizing sample size. Some have argued that, given FD/B’s
association with grandiose narcissism, it may predict antagonistic interpersonal behaviors
observed among narcissistic individuals (e.g., entitlement, superiority, manipulativeness;
Lilienfeld et al., 2012). It is possible that significant curvilinear or interaction effects could be
found for FD/B were different outcome measures such as these collected.
Conclusion
These analyses used advanced statistical methods to evaluate two of the most prominent
hypotheses for the role of FD/B in predicting externalizing outcomes. We found no evidence to
support the curvilinearity hypothesis that FD/B traits are more strongly related to externalizing
behaviors at higher levels. We also found little evidence to support the hypothesis that FD/B may
interact with other components of psychopathy to result in externalizing behaviors. These
hypotheses were tested in well-powered samples with common measures of FD/B.
No single study can provide definitive evidence of a null effect, but the absence of
statistically significant findings in the present study are noteworthy. In this case, power
simulations estimate 60-92% power to detect 22 boldness-related effects. Failure to find the
hypothesized effects in the present paper contributes to a growing literature suggesting that FD/B
may not be as relevant to psychopathy as some have proposed. If FD/B warrants a role in
psychopathy, we believe it may be better understood as a peripheral feature, rather than an equal
sized partner to antagonism/meanness and disinhibition, which are more strongly associated with
the behavioral correlates that have made psychopathy the focus of such intense examination.
FEARLESS DOMINANCE AND CURVILINEARITY 29