Page 1 of 41 Cerebral Cortex
Title: Frontopolar cortex response to positive feedback relates to non-incentivized task
persistence
Abbreviated Title: Neural substrates of task persistence
Authors: Sarah M. Tashjian1,*, Adriana Galván1,2
1Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
2Brain Research Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
Cerebral Cortex Page 2 of 41
Abstract
When individuals make decisions whether to persist at a task, their decision-making is informed
by whether success is pending or accomplished. If pending, the brain facilitates behavioral
persistence; if the goal is accomplished or no longer desired, the brain enables switching away
from the current task. Feedback, which is known to differentially engage reward neurocircuitry,
may modulate goal-directed behavior like task persistence. However, prior studies are
confounded by offering external incentives for persistence. This study tested whether neural
response to feedback differed as a function of non-incentivized task persistence in 99 human
participants ages 13-30 (60 females). Individuals who persisted engaged the frontopolar cortex
to a greater extent during receipt of task-relevant positive feedback compared to negative
feedback. For individuals who quit, task-irrelevant monetary reward engaged the frontopolar
cortex to a greater extent compared to positive feedback. Frontopolar cortex activation in
response to positive feedback is identified as a key contributor to task persistence.
Keywords: adolescence; fMRI; frontopolar cortex; persistence; reward
Page 3 of 41 Cerebral Cortex
Task persistence is a complex goal-directed behavior that is revered as an essential
element of success (Bandura 1999). However, little is known about the neural systems that
contribute to persistence. Most existing neural investigations either correlate self-report
measures with resting state fluctuations (e.g., Wang et al., 2018), offer external incentives to
motivate continued engagement (i.e., points, money) (e.g., Kolling et al., 2018), or provide
opportunities to repeatedly reengage with a goal (e.g., Bhanji & Delgado, 2014). These
approaches introduce confounds that prevent identification of neural systems that underpin
naturally occurring differences in persistence. In the real world, external incentives for
persistence are typically distal in time or abstract in value (i.e., obtaining a degree), and as such
likely lack immediate relevance at the time of decision-making. Persistence decisions are also
often unaccompanied by opportunities to immediately reengage (i.e., dropping a course). The
current study incorporates these real-world components of persistence in a new paradigm to test
how neural response to feedback relates to one-shot persistence decisions in the absence of
external incentives.
Persistence is associated with numerous positive benefits both in terms of psychological
well-being and objective measures of success. For example, individuals who persist at life goals
report higher subjective well-being and are more resilient under stress (Bandura 1997; Carver
and Scheier 2000). Greater persistence in adolescence is linked to higher educational
attainment, income, and occupation level in adulthood (Andersson and Bergman 2011). Other
work identifies associations between persistence and psychological well-being in adults (Steger
et al. 2008). For example, individuals who report more persistence have been found to maintain
positive emotions and expectations toward difficult tasks even when encountering failure (Lucas
et al. 2015), and to report higher optimism (Lovering et al. 2015) and life satisfaction
(Duckworth et al. 2009). The potential benefits of persistence beg the question: what facilitates
persistence?
Cerebral Cortex Page 4 of 41
Models of goal-directed behavior typically consider reward optimization as the motivator
of persistence. Reward is linked to robust engagement of the striatum to positive feedback and
better learning (Hiebert et al. 2014; Peters and Crone 2017; Cox and Witten 2019). However,
persistence may be better conceptualized as an internal goal associated with consistent effort
(Duckworth et al. 2007; Jachimowicz et al. 2018). Mastering a new or difficult task requires
continued exploitation even if reward is not immediately attained (Porter et al. 2020). A
distributed network of medial frontal cortices regulates executive control of goal-directed
behavior to optimize exploitation and minimize costs (Frank et al. 2009; Mansouri et al. 2017).
Feedback can inform whether to continue expending effort by signaling whether task success is
likely, unlikely, or already accomplished. If task success is unlikely, performance-based costs can
be interpreted as negative and the goal may be updated to explore alternatives. However, if task
success is possible with continued effort, performance-costs may be seen as beneficial and
exploitation will be prioritized (Wigfield and Eccles 2000). Estimations about whether one will
succeed at a given task influence motivation and interact with enlistment of cognitive effort
(Meyniel et al. 2013). As such, the extent to which continued behavior is needed because success
is pending has particular relevance for persistence. It is important to disentangle neural
contributors to persistence from differences in basal functioning of the reward system because
of the involvement of reward and cost systems in motivating persistence. In the current study,
responsivity of mesolimbic circuitry to task-relevant (non-monetary positive feedback) and task-
irrelevant (money) reward was examined. Perceived agency in achieving a reward increases
activation of the striatum compared to passive receipt of reward (Tricomi et al. 2004). Thus, it
was hypothesized that those who persisted would show greater responsivity to task-relevant
reward (i.e. non-monetary positive feedback) compared to those who quit and compared to
responsivity to task-irrelevant monetary reward. The current task did not offer external
incentives for persistence to reduce confounds between task persistence to achieve success and
task persistence as a form of incentivized reward seeking.
Page 5 of 41 Cerebral Cortex
Beyond the reward system, the frontopolar cortex (FPC) may subserve persistence. The
FPC is thought to track the relative advantage of exploiting a current behavior versus
disengaging during self-directed decision making (Boorman et al. 2009), and transcranial
stimulation studies have identified a causal role of the human FPC in arbitrating between
exploration and exploitation (Raja Beharelle et al. 2015). Despite the unique expansion of the
FPC in the human brain, the FPC also plays a role in evaluating self-generated decisions during
feedback in nonhuman primates (Tsujimoto et al. 2010). Monkeys with FPC lesions are unable
to disengage from a course of action when the current goal is deemed to be no longer optimal
(Mansouri et al., 2015). The ability to track evidence in favor of or against continuing with a
course of action is necessary for the hallmark of persistence. When external incentives are
offered, the FPC tracks the value of unselected targets to promote advantageous exploration
(Boorman et al. 2009) and facilitates motivation for effort-based reward seeking (Soutschek et
al. 2018). However, the FPC may also guide persistence by directing effort toward high-cost,
high-benefit behavior through evaluation and rejection of choice alternatives, including quitting
(Hosoda et al. 2020). The current study tests whether the FPC is relevant for persistence
decisions in the absence of external incentives for persistence.
Persistence does not unilaterally lead to positive outcomes. Costly persistence has been
identified as the inability to disengage from costly pursuits (Lucas et al. 2015), which is
associated with poorer physical health and subjective well-being (Wrosch et al. 2007). Although
there may be contexts in which persistence is harmful, these contexts are generally
conceptualized as those in which long-term goals are unable to be realized. Little work has
characterized costly persistence using tasks, opting to focus on self-report that better captures
long-term behavior (Wrosch et al. 2003). This is an important distinction from contexts in
which a challenge is encountered but the likelihood of goal attainment is unclear. Prior to clear
signals of impossibility, strategic directed exploration facilitates goal success (Somerville et al.
2017) and is linked to frontopolar cortex activation (Zajkowski et al. 2017). Directed, as opposed
Cerebral Cortex Page 6 of 41
to random, exploration is guided by the value of information that would be gained from making
a particular decision. In the current study, feedback indicated at least 40% failure rate during
the task. Thus, persisting would give participants additional opportunity to gain information
about the likelihood of task success.
Developmental differences were examined given adolescence is a time of increased
exposure to unfamiliar obstacles (Crone and Dahl 2012) and persistence is tied to achievement
in adulthood (Andersson and Bergman 2011). Directed exploration also emerges during
adolescence (Somerville et al. 2017), which may support persistence prior to goal fulfillment.
Although persistence decisions are absent from the developmental cognitive neuroscience
literature, prevailing understanding of neurobiological maturation informed hypotheses that
persistence would increase from adolescence to adulthood. For example, neural development
during adolescence contributes to the cognitive control necessary to modify behavior in
response to feedback (DePasque and Galván 2017; Insel et al. 2017). Greater reliance on the
frontoparietal network during feedback processing from adolescence to adulthood (Peters et al.
2016) was hypothesized to contribute to age-related improvements in persistence.
Materials and Methods
Data availability
Task code and data generated during this study are available at Open Science Framework
https: osf.io/h69bu/.
Participants
One-hundred adolescents and young adults ages 13-30 (61 females; M =18.330,
age
SD=3.213) completed the study. Ninety-nine participants completed the Persistence Task while
undergoing fMRI (60 females; M =18.353, SD=3.22). One participant (female, age=16) was
age
unable to complete the task during the scan session due to a technical error. Analyses were
conducted for the 99 participants for whom fMRI data were obtained.
Page 7 of 41 Cerebral Cortex
All participants were right-handed and free of metal. Additional exclusionary criteria
included previous diagnosis of a psychiatric, neurological, or developmental disorder, and use of
psychotropic medications.
Participants were recruited via flyers and prior participation in laboratory studies. After
receiving approval from the Institutional Review Board, participant eligibility was determined
by email (adults) or a phone screening with a parent (adolescents). Adult participants provided
informed written consent. Adolescent participants provided informed written assent and their
parent or guardian provided informed written consent. Participants were treated in accordance
with the ethical standards of American Psychological Association.
Behavioral task
Participants completed the Persistence Task, a new task created to assess non-
incentivized decisions to persist on a challenging task, in a 3T Siemens Magnetom Prisma MRI
outside of the scanner before beginning the experimental session.
Participants were told they were going to complete a series of mental rotations and that
after a practice set they could choose a path for the rest of the experiment. No encouragement or
incentive was provided for persistence decisions. The task began with a series of 50 mental
presented on a black background for 3500 milliseconds (ms). Duration of presentation was
based on average reaction time (RT) for the most difficult shape rotation (150 degrees)
identified in prior work with adults (3191 ms) (Ganis and Kievit 2015) to ensure all participants
could successfully respond to a sufficient number of trials, which was confirmed during piloting.
Additional time was added (309 ms rounding up to 3500 ms presentation) to eliminate
developmental differences in successful completion. When the shapes offset, participants saw a
response screen during which they were instructed to make a button press to indicate whether
or not they thought the shapes were identical. A separate decision screen was provided to
Cerebral Cortex Page 8 of 41
discourage inattentive responding during mental rotation presentation. Mental rotation was
chosen as the challenge task rather than a more familiar task (e.g., math) to reduce pre-task
differences in ability beliefs, which have been shown to influence performance (Wigfield and
Eccles 2000). Additionally, spatial reasoning skills have been linked to success in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics domains improving ecological validity (STEM; Wai et
al., 2009).
Participants received feedback for 1500 ms indicating that their responses were either
correct (positive feedback) or incorrect (negative feedback). Feedback was quasi-manipulated
such that 40% of trials received negative feedback regardless of performance to ensure a
minimum number of negative feedback trials without increasing task difficulty. The focus of this
study was on how feedback relates to persistence decisions rather than how ability relates to
persistence, thus trial difficulty was kept consistent across participants. Perceived and actual
task difficulty have been previously identified as relevant for feedback-related performance
(DePasque Swanson and Tricomi 2014). Sixty percent of trials received performance-based
feedback. Manipulated negative feedback was randomly interspersed between performance-
based feedback trials and manipulated feedback was not given for the easiest trial type to reduce
suspicion that feedback was controlled. A high percentage of negative feedback served two
purposes: providing a sufficient number of trials for comparison with positive feedback, and
indicating to participants that task success had not yet been achieved. Early work on persistence
suggests a certain amount of failure is necessary to evoke persistence (Maehr and Videbeck
1968). Inter-trial intervals (ITIs) of 1000 ms onset after the feedback screen and before the next
mental rotation presentation.
Upon completing the set of mental rotations, participants made decisions as to whether
they would continue on a path requiring more mental rotations (Path A, persist) or quit (Path B,
however participants were aware that “Path A” included additional mental rotation trials
Page 9 of 41 Cerebral Cortex
whereas “Path B” included no mental rotations and would end sooner. Participants were told
that Path B would end sooner to reduce the likelihood that participants chose Path B out of
curiosity to attempt a new task (i.e., exploration) and rather as a decision to “quit” (i.e., reduce
effort). In everyday contexts, the decision to quit a challenge is often accompanied by a break in
effortful expenditure. Additionally, lesion work in monkeys supports the notion that
advantageous exploration may rely on the FPC (Mansouri et al., 2017) and we sought to isolate
persistence from incentivized reward optimization. If participants chose to quit (Path B), they
were shown 15 trials of simple rotated shapes. Simple rotation was included for participants who
quit to approximate the amount of time on the task and additional receipt of feedback given to
to persist (Path A), they completed an additional five mental rotations (100 and 150 degree
rotations only) and were given accurate performance-based feedback. Path A participants were
four total options to switch paths after the initial persistence choice.
Last, all participants completed a simple monetary reward game similar to a coin flip,
monetary reward game prior to starting the Persistence Task in order to reduce the likelihood
that participants chose to persist because of a belief they would win more money. During the
monetary reward game, participants overturned colored cups to earn money and received a
percentage of their earnings as bonus payment. Location of the red and blue cups was
counterbalanced. Rewards randomly varied in amount from $0.40 to $2.00 and were presented
for 2000 ms.
Task questionnaire
Outside of the scanner after the Persistence Task, participants completed a questionnaire
consisting of 13 questions regarding their choices and feelings about the Persistence Task. Three
binary choice questions were analyzed for associations with decisions: path selection rationale,
Cerebral Cortex Page 10 of 41
mental rotation enjoyment, and comparative task enjoyment. Several free-response questions
eight participants completed the Task Questionnaire. One participant who chose to quit did not
complete the questionnaire. Of the 98 participants who completed the questionnaire, 59 chose
to quit and 40 chose to persist.
Analytic plan
Behavioral data analyses were performed using R statistical software (version 4.0.3).
Linear models were tested using the lm() function and logistic models were tested using glm().
Analyses predicting persistence were conducted using logistic regression (0=quit, 1=persist).
Effect sizes are reported as 95% confidence intervals. Significance was determined using p-
values < .05.
fMRI data acquisition
The scan was conducted on a 3T Siemens Magnetom Prisma MRI scanner. Parameters
for acquisition were as follows: voxel size=3.0 x 3.0 x 4.0 mm, slices=34, slice thickness=4.0
mm, repetition time (TR)=2000 ms, echo time (TE)=30.0 ms, flip angle=90 degrees,
interleaved slice geometry, field of view (FOV)=192 mm. A magnetization-prepared rapid-
acquisition gradient echo (MPRAGE) scan was acquired for registration purposes (TR=1900 ms,
TE=2.26 ms, FoV=250 mm, slice thickness=1 mm, 176 slices per slab). AutoAlign was used for
automated positioning and alignment of anatomy-related slices using alignment perpendicular
to the midsagittal plane and tilted along the corpus callosum contour. Images were slice aligned
along the anterior/posterior commissure line to allow for interrogation of whole-brain effects.
Stimuli were projected onto a flat screen mounted in the scanner bore. Participants
viewed the screen using a mirror mounted on a 32-channel head coil. Extensive head padding
was used to minimize participant head motion and to enhance comfort. Participants made their
responses with their right hand using a 4-finger-button response box.
fMRI preprocessing
Page 11 of 41 Cerebral Cortex
Preprocessing was conducted using FEAT (FMRI Expert Analysis Tool) version 6.00,
RRID:SCR_002823). Preprocessing consisted of nonbrain removal using BET (Brain Extraction
Tool for FSL), high-pass filtering (100 s cutoff), and spatial smoothing using a Gaussian kernel
of FWHM 5 mm. The first three volumes were discarded to allow for image stabilization. Motion
correction was performed with MCFLIRT (intra-modal motion correction tool) using 24
standard and extended regressors as well as additional individual spike regressors created using
fsl_motion_outliers (frame displacement threshold=75th percentile plus 1.5 times the
interquartile range). Two participants exceeded 2.0 mm maximum displacement (1 adolescent
2.778 mm and 1 adult 3.986 mm). Analyses were replicated removing these participants and
results remained the same. Each participant’s functional data was registered to their MPRAGE
using boundary-based registration (Greve and Fischl 2009) and then to MNI (Montreal
Neurological Institute) 2.0 x 2.0 x 2.0 mm stereotaxic space with 12 degrees of freedom using
FSL’s registration method via FLIRT (FMRIB’s Linear Image Registration Tool). Alignment was
visually confirmed for all participants.
One general linear model (GLM) (Friston et al. 1994) was defined for each individual
including regressors for each event: mental rotation stimuli, mental rotation decisions, positive
feedback presentation, negative feedback presentation, instruction screens, post-decision
mental rotation stimuli, post-decision mental rotation decision, post-decision positive feedback,
post-decision negative feedback, monetary reward gamble, monetary reward receipt. Events
were modeled with a canonical (double-gamma) hemodynamic response function for a duration
from stimulus onset to stimulus offset. Temporal derivatives were included as covariates of no
interest for all regressors, allowing a better fit for the whole model and reducing unexplained
noise. Motion parameters were included as covariates of no interest. ITIs were not explicitly
modeled and served as an implicit baseline.
Whole-brain analyses
Cerebral Cortex Page 12 of 41
For group-level analyses, FILM (FMRIB’s Improved Linear Model) prewhitening was
performed to estimate voxelwise autocorrelation and improve estimation efficiency. Group-level
analyses were performed using the FMRIB Local Analysis of Mixed Effects (FLAME-1) module
in FSL (Beckmann et al. 2003), Z>3.1, FWE-corrected p<.05. Outliers were de-weighted in the
multisubject statistics using mixture modeling (Woolrich 2008). All results are reported in MNI
space.
First, whole-brain analyses were conducted to assess differences in activation by task
state across all participants. Next, whole-brain effects by persistence decision (Path A choosers
versus Path B choosers) were tested for each task contrast. Figures and results focus on decision
contrasts of persist > quit, but the nature of whole-brain GLM contrasts indicate the inverse
association is also true for the opposite contrast (e.g., a region activated to a greater extent for
persist> quit for positive > negative feedback is activated to a greater extent for quit > persist for
negative feedback > positive feedback). Last, a single-group average with additional covariate
design was used with age as a demeaned regressor (mean centered across all participants) to
examine associations between age and neural activation at a whole-brain level.
Parametric modulation analyses
Over the course of goal-pursuit, relevance of positive versus negative feedback shifts.
Positive feedback acts to instill goal commitment early on and negative feedback provides
signals for increase effort after goal commitment is established (Fishbach et al. 2010).
Parametric modulation analyses were conducted to determine whether there were differences in
response to positive and negative feedback accumulation over the course of the task. In two
separate individual-level models, one for positive and one for negative feedback, linear
modulation regressors were added to test trial-by-trial fluctuations in neural activation
modulated by the amount of prior feedback received. Modulation regressors were
orthogonalized with respect to the lower order regressor representing average activation of
positive and negative feedback trials (Mumford et al. 2015).
Page 13 of 41 Cerebral Cortex
Results
Persistence decisions
Forty participants (40.40%, 20 females M =19.28, SD=3.82, range=14-30 years) chose
age
to persist (Path A). Fifty-nine participants (59.60%, 40 females M =17.73, SD=2.60, range=13-
age
26 years) chose to quit (Path B).
Of the 40 participants who persisted, 12 chose Path A throughout the entire course of the
task and 28 chose to quit at some point after the initial decision. Average accuracy on the post-
path mental rotation trials was 84.70%, SD=16.2%, which did not differ among those who
persisted throughout versus those who eventually quit, t(38), -.65, p=.520. Of those who
eventually quit, only 4 cited frustration or task performance as a reason for quitting whereas the
Of the 59 participants who quit initially (Path B), 25% reported reflecting on their decisions with
negative appraisal (i.e., regret).
Persistence was associated with age but not accuracy nor amount of
manipulated negative feedback
On average, participants were accurate on 39.6 (79.37%) of the first 50 mental rotation
trials, range=23-50, SD=5.94. Of those correct trials, 15.72 (39.60%) received manipulated
negative feedback, range=8-20, SD=2.61. Accuracy and amount of manipulated negative
feedback received were not significantly associated with persistence, accuracy Estimate=.063,
SE=.077, z=.816, p=.415, 95%CI[-.087, .219]; feedback Estimate=.050, SE=.173, z=.290, p=.772,
95%CI[-.288, .399]. Those who chose to persist answered on average 2.67 more questions
correct than those who chose to quit. Those who chose to persist received manipulated negative
feedback for 1.10 additional mental rotation trials compared to those who quit.
Age was significantly positively associated with persistence, Estimate=.156, SE=.069,
z=2.270, p=.023, 95%CI[.026, .299]. This association held controlling for accuracy,
Estimate=.164, SE=.069, z=2.375, p=.018, 95%CI[.032, .305]. Age was not significantly
Cerebral Cortex Page 14 of 41
associated with mental rotation accuracy or amount of manipulated negative feedback received,
accuracy Estimate=-.029, SE=.187, t=-.152, p=.879, 95%CI[-.400, .343]; feedback
Estimate=.001, SE=.082, z=.011, p=.991, 95%CI[-.162, .164]. There were no significant sex
differences in mental rotation accuracy or amount of manipulated negative feedback received,
accuracy t(98)=.847, p=.399, 95%CI[-1.320, 3.284]; feedback t(98)=.656, p=.514, 95%CI[-.689
1.369].
Persistence was motivated by self-reported challenge seeking
Path selection rationale. Seventy-eight percent of participants who chose to persist
(n=31 out of 40) reported that they chose Path A because it was more difficult whereas 100% off
participants who chose to quit (n=57 out of 57) reported they chose Path B because it was less
difficult (one participant who chose to quit reported “neither” as the decision reason and was
excluded from this analysis). This group difference in path rationale was significant, X2 (1,
N=97)=61.409, p<.001. Age was not significantly associated with path rationale, Estimate=.059,
SE=.067, z=.871, p=.384, 95%CI[-.075, .193].
Mental rotation enjoyment. Sixty-three percent of participants who chose to persist
(n=25 out of 40) reported enjoying the mental rotation trials they got correct more than those
that were challenging and 78% (n=45 out of 58) of participants who chose to quit reported the
same, which did not significantly differ by group X2 (1, N=98)=1.953, p=.162. Age was
significantly associated with enjoying mental rotation trials that received positive feedback
versus those that were challenging, Estimate=.180, SE=.073, z=2.450, p=.014, 95%CI[.041,
.332], such that more older participants reported liking challenging trials compared with
younger participants. The association between age and mental rotation enjoyment held
controlling for persistence decisions, age Estimate=.162, SE=.075, z=2.158, p=.031,
95%CI[.020, .317].
Comparative task enjoyment. Eighty-two percent of participants who chose to quit
(n=48 out of 58) reported they enjoyed the monetary reward game more than the mental
Page 15 of 41 Cerebral Cortex
rotations whereas only 43% of participants who chose to persist reported enjoying the monetary
reward game more (n=17 out of 40). This group difference was significant, X2 (1, N=98)=15.424,
p<.001. Comparative task enjoyment was significantly associated with age, Estimate=.239,
SE=.077, z=3.088, p=.002, 95%CI[.096, .402], such that older participants reported liking
mental rotation trials more than monetary reward trials. The association between age and task
enjoyment held controlling for persistence decisions, age Estimate=.201, SE=.083, z=2.474,
p=.012, 95%CI[.051, .380].
Reaction time reflected individual differences
On average, participants made mental rotation decisions in 994.394 ms after receiving
positive feedback and in 1032.996 ms after receiving negative feedback. RT after positive and
after negative feedback were strongly correlated, r(99)=.822, p<.001, 95%CI[.745, .877],
indexing an individual difference in RT. RT after negative feedback was not significantly related
to persistence decisions, Estimate=-.399, SE=.543, z=-.735, p=.463, 95%CI[-1.515, .642], nor
was RT after positive feedback, Estimate=-.820, SE=.611, z=-1.341, p=.180, 95%CI[-2.070,
.348]. Average RT after negative feedback was quadratically associated with task accuracy such
that those with respectively fast RT and respectively slow RT after receiving negative feedback
had highest accuracy, Estimate =17.630, SE =5.571, t =3.164, p =.002,
quadratic quadratic quadratic quadratic
95%CI[6.571, 28.689]. This association held controlling for persistence decision and average RT
across the full task, Estimate =14.023, SE =5.532, t =2.535, p =.013,
quadratic quadratic quadratic quadratic
95%CI[3.038, 25.007]. Average RT after positive feedback was linearly associated with accuracy,
Estimate=-6.253, SE=1.588, t=-3.937, p<.001, 95%CI[-9.405, -3.100]. This association held
controlling for persistence decision and average RT across the full task, Estimate=-12.729,
SE=4.999, t=-2.546, p=.013, 95%CI[-22.654, -2.804]. Persistence did not significantly moderate
either RT – accuracy association, negative feedback RT: Estimate =.649,
interaction
SE =3.013, t =.215, p =.830, 95% CI [-5.334, 6.631]; positive feedback RT:
interaction interaction interaction
Cerebral Cortex Page 16 of 41
Estimate =4.571, SE =3.458, t =1.322, p =.189, 95% CI [-2.295,
interaction interaction interaction interaction
11.436].
Persistence was associated with increased frontopolar response to positive
feedback
Across participants, whole-brain analyses revealed negative versus positive feedback
elicited activation in salience network hubs whereas positive versus negative feedback elicited
demonstrated heightened activation in the FPC and occipital cortex to positive versus negative
feedback whereas participants who quit demonstrated comparatively blunted occipital cortex
Age. Feedback elicited differential activation associated with age such that older
participants exhibited greater activation in the right posterior superior frontal gyrus (SFG) and
juxtapositional lobule cortex (formerly supplementary motor cortex, SMA) to positive versus
with persistence, Estimate=.007, SE=.003, z=2.223, p=.026, 95%CI[.001, .014], such that those
who persisted had increased activation to positive versus negative feedback.
Habituation and sensitization to feedback. Parametric modulation analyses revealed
participants showed habituation (decreased response) to linear accumulation of negative
feedback in the FPC, thalamus, anterior cingulate gyrus, bilateral anterior insula, and occipital
feedback was observed in the precentral gyrus, posterior cingulate gyrus, precuneus, and
of positive feedback, but habituation to positive feedback was observed in the bilateral striatum,
anterior cingulate gyrus, FPC, bilateral angular gyrus, bilateral dorsolateral PFC (dlPFC), and
Page 17 of 41 Cerebral Cortex
level was associated with accumulation of either negative or positive feedback. No significant
differential activation by age at the whole-brain level was associated with linear accumulation of
either negative or positive feedback.
Manipulated feedback. On manipulated negative feedback trials, there was no
differential activation on trials for which participants received negative feedback for correct
responses versus those for which participants received negative feedback for incorrect
responses. Age was not significantly associated with activation on manipulated feedback trials.
Rate of negative feedback received was not associated with activation for the contrasts of
positive feedback versus negative feedback, mental rotations after positive versus after negative
feedback, or positive feedback versus monetary reward.
Persistence was associated with greater parietal operculum engagement
following negative feedback
During mental rotation trials following negative feedback compared those following
positive feedback, greater activation was elicited in the mPFC, posterior cingulate gyrus, and
for altering goal-directed behavior (Pearson et al. 2011). Compared to individuals who quit,
individuals who persisted demonstrated heightened activation in the parietal operculum cortex,
positive feedback compared to following negative feedback. Age was not significantly associated
with differential response on trials following negative feedback compared those following
positive feedback.
Across all trials, mental rotation decisions evoked activation in anterior salience network
hubs, including the anterior cingulate and bilateral insula, as well as regions of the visuospatial
Cerebral Cortex Page 18 of 41
significant for mental rotation decisions versus baseline. Age was not significantly associated
with mental rotation decisions versus baseline.
Quitting was related to greater corticolimbic activation to monetary reward
Across all participants, monetary reward receipt versus baseline elicited activation in
distributed reward regions including the striatum, lateral orbitofrontal cortex, bilateral insula,
persisted activated the lateral orbitofrontal cortex, bilateral insula, thalamus, and middle and
Activation to monetary reward receipt versus baseline was not significantly associated with age.
Persistence was associated with greater FPC activation to task-relevant positive
stimuli
When compared with positive feedback, monetary reward evoked greater activation in
the striatum, paracingulate gyrus, bilateral anterior insula, and other lateral cortical regions
feedback versus monetary reward receipt evoked greater activation in several cortical regions
including the medial orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, bilateral posterior insula, and
bilateral superior temporal gyrus, as well as the bilateral hippocampus and bilateral amygdala
Participants who persisted activated the medial and lateral FPC, anteromedial SFG, and
right postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe to a greater extent for positive feedback versus receipt
of monetary reward whereas those regions were activated to a greater extent for monetary
associated with neural response to positive feedback versus monetary reward receipt in the left
Age-related activation in the occipital cortex was not significantly associated with persistence,
Estimate=.001, SE=.001, z=1.035, p=.301, 95%CI[-.0005, .002].
Page 19 of 41 Cerebral Cortex
Head motion was not associated with age or decisions
Age was positively associated with persistence, and, in general, younger participants tend
to have greater in-scanner head motion, which can lead to spurious results. However, no
significant age differences were observed in motion parameters: average translation,
Estimate=.010, SE=.011, t=.895, p=.373, 95%CI[-.012, .032]; average rotation, Estimate=.0002,
SE=.0002, t=1.003, p=.318, 95%CI[-.0002, .0005]; maximum translation, Estimate=.018,
SE=.019, t=.933, p=.353, 95%CI[-.020, .055]; maximum rotation, Estimate=.0006, SE=.0004,
t=1.329, p=.187, 95%CI[-.0003, .001]. Persistence was also not significantly associated with
motion: average translation, Estimate=-.483, SE=.639, z=-.756, p=.450, 95%CI[-1.937, .676];
average rotation, Estimate=-71.107, SE=48.837, z=-1.456, p=.145, 95%CI[-181.119, 11.610];
maximum translation, Estimate=-.276, SE=.374, z=-.738, p=.461, 95%CI[-1.098, .414];
maximum rotation, Estimate=-30.994, SE=21.674, z=-1.430, p=.153, 95%CI[-81.680, 4.491].
Discussion
This work identifies neural systems associated with task persistence. Persistence was
associated with increased activation in the FPC after positive feedback and enhanced
recruitment of task-relevant resources in the parietal operculum following negative feedback.
Individuals who persisted also demonstrated greater activation in attentional control regions
(SFG, SMA) and the FPC to positive feedback compared with monetary reward. Theoretical
models demonstrate flexible responsivity in the brain depending on motivational signals via
external factors like feedback and reward, as well as their interactions with goal expectancy (e.g.,
Kim, 2013). The Persistence Task elucidates how motivationally-relevant neural systems
respond to such factors and findings point to the importance of feedback evaluation and control
processes for persistence.
The FPC responded to positive feedback to a greater extent than negative feedback for
those who persisted compared to those who quit. Those who quit showed positive activation in
the FPC to negative feedback compared to positive feedback, demonstrating differential tracking
Cerebral Cortex Page 20 of 41
of disparately-valenced evidence as a function of persistence decision. Compared to monetary
reward, which is also positively valenced, task-relevant positive feedback elicited greater
activation in the medial and lateral FPC, anteromedial SFG, and parietal lobe for participants
who persisted compared to those who quit. These regions comprise a network involved in goal-
pursuit (Mansouri et al. 2017). The importance of positive feedback for persistence is consistent
with the motivational relevance of positive feedback in instilling goal commitment and the
assertion that positive feedback increases goal attainment expectancies (Fishbach et al. 2010).
The FPC in particular may support this goal commitment by removing alternative actions from
the current choice space when success has not been attained but is perceived as achievable. This
conclusion is supported by recent work showing upregulation of the FPC via transcranial direct
current stimulation increases the willingness of humans to exert effort to achieve incentivized
reward (Soutschek et al. 2018). The current study extends upon this work to identify a role for
the FPC in motivating non-incentivized persistence.
Although RT was not significantly related to persistence, RT after negative feedback was
quadratically associated with improved accuracy. Negative feedback provides valuable
information that facilitates performance monitoring and strategy adaptation in order to improve
subsequent performance (Holroyd & Coles, 2002). The quadratic association is interpreted to
reflect two strategies for improved accuracy after negative feedback: increased deliberation
(slow RT) and increased attention or motivation (fast RT) (Tricomi et al. 2006). Neurally, those
who persisted demonstrated recruitment of the parietal operculum on trials following negative
feedback. The parietal operculum is involved in cognitive task performance, including mental
rotation. Recruitment of this task-relevant region after negative feedback is interpreted to reflect
strategy evaluation for participants who persisted (Fishbach et al. 2010). A linear association
was present between slower RT after positive feedback and reduced accuracy. Slower RT after
positive feedback thus likely does not reflect increased deliberation but rather reduced attention
or motivation.
Page 21 of 41 Cerebral Cortex
Individuals who persisted reported a challenge-oriented motivation: 78% of those who
persisted reported they chose to persist because it was more difficult whereas 100% of those who
quit reported they chose to quit because it was easier. Persistence was also associated with
enjoying mental rotation trials more than monetary reward trials, which coincided with greater
FPC activation to positive feedback compared to reward for those who persisted. Importantly
persistence was not associated with the extent to which participants enjoyed getting mental
rotation trials correct. Thus, it was not that participants who quit did not value doing well on the
mental rotations, but that those who persisted perceived the challenge of the task as more
rewarding. Additionally, 25% of participants who quit reported reflecting on their decision with
disappointment or another negative appraisal. It may be that reflection could facilitate
persistence in individuals who experience aversive responses to negative feedback by illustrating
that quitting is not always accompanied by relief. Offering “opt-in” options to reflect on regretful
quit decisions would be a fruitful avenue for future investigation as would trial-by-trial changes
in willingness to persist as positive feedback is encountered.
As hypothesized, older participants were more likely to persist than younger
participants. However, the prefrontal cortex was not differentially activated as a function of age.
Older participants demonstrated increased activation of the right posterior SFG/SMA in
response to positive compared to negative feedback. This region shows linear increases in
activity from pre-adolescence to early adulthood (Peters et al. 2016), and adolescents
demonstrate a shift from reliance on the ACC to SMA during feedback learning (Johnson 2011).
Increases in SFG/SMA activity are associated with better cognitive control and response
inhibition (Hu et al. 2016), both of which are likely important contributors to persistence. Age
was also positively associated with left occipital cortex activation to positive feedback versus
monetary reward receipt. Reward-stimulus associations influence representation of sensory
information in the occipital cortex in order to guide subsequent behavior (Serences 2008;
Anderson et al. 2014). That the FPC did not demonstrate age-related differences but did
Cerebral Cortex Page 22 of 41
distinguish persistence behavior is important to highlight. General trajectories of protracted
prefrontal cortex development across adolescence have been well documented, but recent work
also identifies substantial individual differences in brain maturation (Becht and Mills 2020;
Mills et al. 2021). Similarly, individual differences in the development of delay of gratification
abilities have been observed (Romer et al. 2010). Interestingly, the FPC has been shown to
orchestrate precommitment, which relies on delay of gratification and bears similarity to
persistence in that it involves imposing costs for deviating from long-term goals (Crockett et al.
2013). It may be that individual differences in FPC maturation hamper persistence development
for those with impaired delay of gratification skills. However, because experiential inputs lay the
foundation for future neural responding (Spear 2013; Gabard-Durnam et al. 2016), working to
improve delay of gratification may help adolescents promote development of neural systems
important for persistence. Together, these findings point to various neural systems beyond
prefrontal circuitry that contribute to age-related differences in feedback processing and suggest
individual differences in FPC engagement relate to persistence independent of age.
Interpretation of the current findings should be made in the context of study specifics.
Causal conclusions cannot be made between behavioral persistence and neural activation. The
Persistence Task was not designed to test all possible external factors that may influence
persistence. For example, fatigue or cognitive load may play a role in assessment of personal
resources available for continued effort expenditure (Shenhav et al. 2017; Müller and Apps
2019). The task was not individualized to each participant’s interests, thus it is possible some
participants may not have been equally engaged or motivated by the task (Jachimowicz et al.
2018; Uusberg et al. 2019). However, there are several factors that point toward the ecological
validity of a task that does not attempt to tap individualized interests. For example, in academic
domains, adolescents and young adults are often required to pursue success without regard for
task-level interest. Participants were not told about the monetary reward game in advance, thus
eliminating potential confounds that those who persisted did so to increase monetary reward or
Page 23 of 41 Cerebral Cortex
that those who quit did so to expedite playing the monetary reward game. Participants were not
told about the purpose of the study (i.e., that the study focused on task persistence) and
therefore made their decisions to persist or quit independent of any experimenter
encouragement or acquiescence bias, which has been shown to affect task performance
(McCambridge et al. 2012). Although it is possible that manipulated negative feedback had
differential effects based on underlying performance abilities, no differential neural activation
was observed based on amount of manipulated feedback received nor was persistence associated
with amount of manipulated feedback. Additionally, post-task surveys revealed participants
believed feedback was veridical.
Adolescents and young adults face a myriad of challenges every day. Persisting in the
face of challenge can lay the foundation for future achievement by instantiating neural
responses that help sustain engagement. Although mesolimbic circuitry is often highlighted in
decision neuroscience, the striatum was not differentially activated by persistence decisions.
Rather, persistence was associated with increased FPC response to positive feedback compared
with negatively feedback as well as engagement of the FPC and other attentional resources to
positive feedback compared with task-irrelevant monetary reward. This study supports the
supposition that the FPC is involved in evaluating whether one should emphasize exploiting a
current behavior rather than exploring alternative options if pending success is signaled.
Behavior was elicited rather than evoked by promises of external incentives for persisting,
improving the generalizability of findings to naturally occurring differences in persistence.
Persistence did not hinge on down-regulation of negative information but instead reflected
increased neural response to success signals. These findings indicate persistence may be
potentially enhanced by targeting perceived utility of positive feedback when balancing goal
exploitation versus alternative task exploration.
Cerebral Cortex Page 24 of 41
Funding
This work was supported by the Jeffrey/Wenzel Chair in Behavioral Neuroscience to AG and an
American Psychological Association Dissertation Award to SMT. Preparation of this manuscript
was supported in part by the National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship to SMT
(2016207607).
Acknowledgments
The authors report no conflict of interest. Corresponding author Sarah M. Tashjian, Department
of Psychology, University of California, 1285 Franz Hall, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563. E-mail:
smtashjian@ucla.edu
Page 25 of 41 Cerebral Cortex