Uncontrolled Eating in Healthy Women Has Limited Influence on Food Reward Sensitivity and
Food-Related Inhibitory Control
1 2 1 3
Maud Grol , Luis Cásedas , Danna Oomen , Desiree B. Spronk , Elaine Fox
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, UK
Author Note
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Maud Grol
e-mail: maudgrol@gmail.com, Department of Experimental Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent
University, Henri Dunantlaan 2, 9000 Gent, Belgium
Maud Grol and Danna Oomen have since moved to the Department of Experimental Clinical and Health
Psychology at Ghent University, Belgium
Luis Cásedas has since moved to the Mind, Brain, and Behavior Research Center, Department of
Experimental Psychology, Universidad de Granada, Spain
3 Desiree Spronk has since moved to the Trimbos institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Abstract
Uncontrolled eating—in the general population—is characterized by overeating, hedonic hunger and
being drawn towards palatable foods. Theoretically, it is the result of a strong food reward signal in
relation to a poor ability to exert inhibitory control. How food consumption influences inhibitory
control and food reward sensitivity, and how this relates to the continued urge to eat, remains
unclear though. We used fMRI (N=40) in order to investigate the neural mechanism underlying food
reward sensitivity and food-specific response inhibition (go-nogo task), by comparing women
reporting high versus low/average uncontrolled eating across two sessions: during an inter-meal
hunger state and after consumption of a high-caloric snack. We found no effects of individual
differences in uncontrolled eating, food consumption, nor their interaction on food reward
sensitivity. Differences in uncontrolled eating and food consumption did interact in modulating
activity in the left superior occipital gyrus during response inhibition of non-food stimuli, an area
previously associated with successful nogo- vs. go-trials. Yet, behavioural performance on the go-
nogo task was not modulated by uncontrolled eating nor food consumption. Women with a
low/average tendency for uncontrolled eating may need more cognitive resources to support
successful response inhibition of non-food stimuli during food ‘go’ blocks in an inter-meal hunger
state, whereas women with a high tendency for uncontrolled eating showed this after food
consumption. Considering current and previous findings, it seems that individual differences in
uncontrolled eating in healthy women have only limited influence on food reward sensitivity and
food-related inhibitory control, whereas differences in weight status (e.g., obesity) may have more
impact.
Keywords: uncontrolled eating, food reward sensitivity, inhibitory control, superior occipital gyrus,
food consumption, hedonic hunger
Uncontrolled Eating in Healthy Women Has Limited Influence on Food Reward Sensitivity and
Food-Related Inhibitory Control
In an ever more food-rich environment, overeating of energy-dense foods is an important
contributor to rising levels of obesity (Hill et al., 2000). Uncontrolled eating is characterized by a
tendency to overeat with a sense of being out of control and finding it hard to stop (Anglé et al.,
2009). Higher levels of uncontrolled eating—in the general population—are associated with higher
intake of energy-dense foods (De Lauzon et al., 2004) and increased weight (Mustelin et al., 2017).
Only when uncontrolled eating is regular and accompanied by additional features such as distress,
guilt, eating alone due to embarrassment, or eating much more rapidly than normal, it is considered
a binge eating disorder (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). Given the potential role of (non-
clinical) uncontrolled eating in weight gain and obesity, it is important to increase our understanding
of what factors contribute to individual differences in uncontrolled eating. We utilized functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to investigate individual variability in uncontrolled eating with a
particular focus on the role of food reward sensitivity and inhibitory control. fMRI is useful in that it
provides a measure of (reward) responsivity to food cues that cannot be observed at the behavioural
level, and is less prone to the demand effects that can influence self-report measures.
1.1 Food Reward Sensitivity and Inhibitory Control
Uncontrolled eating is a tendency to overeat accompanied by a sense of being out of control
or finding it hard to stop, and has been operationalized as a combination of features that tap into
overeating, hedonic hunger and craving for palatable foods (Three Factor Eating Questionnaire -
R18; Anglé et al., 2009). Overeating behaviour has been proposed to arise from an imbalance
between food reward sensitivity and inhibitory control (Appelhans et al., 2011). Food reward
sensitivity reflects cue-elicited reward responses that contribute to the motivation to eat. It is likely a
composite process that contains both the hedonic reaction (“liking”), incentive salience and
4 Clinical instances of binge eating are also characterized by overeating with a loss of control and could be a
way to cope with negative feelings, but these lead to feelings of excessive guilt and distress.
cognitive desire (“wanting”), as well as associative and predictive learning components (Berridge et
al., 2010). On the other hand, inhibitory control is an executive function that permits an individual to
inhibit impulses and dominant behavioural responses to stimuli. As an example, food-cue elicited
craving can be controlled, so that behaviours (e.g. eating less, eating healthy) can be selected that
are in line with one’s (long-term) goals (Miyake et al., 2000) such as losing excess weight. Inhibitory
control contributes to successful self-regulation of eating behaviour (Dohle et al., 2018) and is
relevant for goal-directed behaviour such as following a healthy diet and lifestyle. In support of this
view, despite some failures to replicate (Guerrieri et al., 2008), behavioural studies have shown that
poorer performance on inhibitory control tasks is associated with higher trait food craving (Meule &
Kübler, 2014) and increased food intake in laboratory settings (Allom & Mullan, 2014; Guerrieri et
al., 2007; Price et al., 2016).
There is growing evidence that body weight, food selection and intake vary as a function of
individual differences in food reward sensitivity (for a meta-analysis see Boswell & Kober, 2016).
Obesity and individual differences in (trait) food craving have also been shown to be associated with
differences in the neural response to food cues in brain regions that are part of the reward system,
such as striatal areas, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), insula, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), and
amygdala (García-García et al., 2013; Stice et al., 2008; Ulrich et al., 2016; Verdejo-Román et al.,
2017). Interestingly, higher food reward sensitivity has been associated with greater palatable food
intake in a laboratory setting (Appelhans et al., 2011) or greater weight gain across a year
(Nederkoorn et al., 2010) only for individuals with lower levels of inhibitory control. Inhibitory
control thus seems to be important in that it can moderate the relationship between food reward
sensitivity and differences in weight status.
The interaction between inhibitory control and food reward sensitivity is also clear when
considering the underlying neural network that supports inhibitory control. Food-specific inhibitory
control is associated with activity in a wide network of frontal and parietal regions (Batterink et al.,
2010; He et al., 2014; Sebastian et al., 2013). Explicit cognitive regulation during reward cue
exposure has also been associated with increased activity in similar areas such as middle frontal
gyrus, postcentral gyrus, inferior parietal lobule, temporal gyrus and superior occipital gyrus, which
was accompanied by relatively reduced activity in areas of the reward system mentioned earlier
(Delgado et al., 2008; Kober et al., 2010). Inhibitory control can thus influence the neural response to
rewarding cues, such as visual food cues, and thereby potentially influence food intake, but this
ability may differ across individuals.
1.2 Effects of Satiation
Individual differences in both food reward sensitivity and inhibitory control are thus likely to
be important drivers for differences in uncontrolled eating. However, attention for food (Stamataki
et al., 2019) and activity in response to food cues in brain regions that are part of the reward system
(Führer et al., 2008; Goldstone et al., 2009; LaBar et al., 2001; Morris & Dolan, 2001), have also been
shown to change with acute states of energy balance, i.e., a fasted versus satiated state. Palatable
(high-caloric) foods have been shown to elicit greater responses in striatal regions, amygdala, insula,
OFC, ACC, dorsolateral prefrontal gyrus, anterior fusiform and (para-)hippocampal gyrus when in a
hungry state as compared to a satiated state (Führer et al., 2008; Goldstone et al., 2009; LaBar et al.,
2001). A study comparing a natural inter-meal hunger state with a satiated state showed that
satiation attenuated activity to food cues in the ventrolateral and ventromedial PFC, nucleus
accumbens, OFC, hypothalamus, and (left) insula, while activity increased in the dorsolateral PFC and
(right) insula (Thomas et al., 2015). These satiation-related changes in food reward sensitivity could
reflect a (relative) decrease in the rewarding value and incentive salience of foods, and reduced
motivation to obtain food when homeostatic needs are met, thereby regulating eating behaviour.
However, it has recently been shown that weight status can modulate such satiation effects on food
reward sensitivity, with normal weight individuals showing attenuated activity in response to food
cues in ACC, dorsolateral PFC and posterior cingulate cortex after eating, while obese individuals did
not (Puzziferri et al., 2016). It is possible that individual differences in effects of food consumption
on the response to food cues, could also underlie differences in uncontrolled eating.
Most studies (for exceptions see, Dimitropoulos et al., 2012; Thomas et al., 2015) that have
investigated effects of satiation, have compared more ‘extreme’ states: a satiated and fasted state (>
8hrs of fasting). These findings therefore mostly relate to effects of homeostatic hunger and eating
to remove an energy deficit. Instead, uncontrolled eating has been characterized by problems with
stopping eating once people start and also by hedonic hunger. This is not to say that uncontrolled
eating cannot start from a drive to remove an energy deficit, but individuals have difficulties
stopping even after homeostatic needs are met or eat in the absence of homeostatic hunger. Given
that uncontrolled eating does not necessarily happen in the context of fasting, but reflects an
excessive appetite to consume (palatable) food also in the absence of an energy deficit, it is
important to examine food consumption-related differences in food reward sensitivity and inhibitory
control when comparing to a normal inter-meal hunger state. Moreover, previous studies have
examined how obesity modulates effects of food consumption on food reward sensitivity, but
whether potential food consumption-related differences in food reward sensitivity or inhibitory
control depend on the tendency for uncontrolled eating in a normal-weight population remains
unclear.
1.3 Current Study
We will therefore investigate 1) if individual differences in uncontrolled eating influence
food reward sensitivity and food-related inhibitory control in healthy women; 2) whether food
consumption influences food reward sensitivity and food-related inhibitory control; and 3) whether
effects of food consumption are further modulated by individual differences in uncontrolled eating,
that is, whether there is an interaction between hunger state and individual differences in
uncontrolled eating. We compared healthy women who report low to average levels of uncontrolled
eating behaviour (i.e., low UE group) to women who report higher levels of uncontrolled eating (i.e.,
high UE group). We focussed on women because in the general population, women (13.7%) more
often than men (5.5%), report features such as uncontrolled eating (Mustelin et al., 2017). First, this
will allow us to examine if individual differences in both food reward sensitivity and inhibitory
control are relevant for understanding differences in non-clinical uncontrolled eating. Second, we
can investigate if food consumption also changes sensitivity to food cues and inhibitory control when
comparing to an inter-meal hunger state rather than a fasted state. Finally, by investigating whether
potential effects of food consumption on food reward sensitivity and inhibitory control depend on
differences in uncontrolled eating, we could present a possible explanation for why some people
find it harder to stop (over)eating than others.
Based on previous work on obesity and individual differences in (trait) food craving (García-
García et al., 2013; Ulrich et al., 2016; Verdejo-Román et al., 2017), we expected to find greater food
cue related activity in areas of the reward system, including striatal areas, ACC, insula, OFC, lateral
and medial PFC, and amygdala, in individuals with higher levels of uncontrolled eating, relative to
individuals with low to average levels of uncontrolled eating. In terms of food reward sensitivity we
also expected that during the post food consumption state, as compared to the inter-meal hunger
state, there would be attenuation of food cue related activity in these areas of the reward system
(García-García et al., 2013; Stice et al., 2008; Verdejo-Román et al., 2017). Furthermore, we expected
these effects of eating to be more pronounced in individuals with low to average levels of
uncontrolled eating as compared to individuals who report higher levels of uncontrolled eating.
Our hypotheses regarding effects of food consumption on control-related processes are
more explorative, as to date there is very little (behavioural and imaging) research on this and
results are mixed. One behavioural study has shown that hungry, healthy participants made more
commission errors in a go-nogo task when responses had to be inhibited to food-associated words
as compared to when non-food-associated words were the nogo-category, which was not observed
in satiated participants (Loeber et al., 2013). On the other hand, a behavioural study that compared
healthy women who had not consumed any food for at least 3 hrs to those who had consumed a
bowl of kefir, found no effects of food consumption on go-nogo performance in a task with food and
neutral images (Meule, Lutz, et al., 2014). When considering food reward sensitivity and inhibitory
control not to be independent of each other, we would expect that inhibitory control is higher—
operationalized as less commission errors—1) in individuals with low to average levels of
uncontrolled eating as compared to individuals with higher levels of uncontrolled eating, and 2) after
snack consumption as compared to an inter-meal hunger state, especially for food stimuli. Finally,
we would expect that this change after food consumption is more pronounced in individuals who
report low to average levels of uncontrolled eating as compared to individuals with higher levels of
uncontrolled eating.
To our knowledge, no imaging studies to date have directly investigated the effects of food
consumption on inhibitory control. Similarly, imaging studies on individual differences in food-
related inhibitory control are scarce. One study in adolescents found that more overweight
adolescents showed reduced activation of frontal inhibitory regions, including frontal gyrus,
ventrolateral and medial prefrontal cortex, and OFC, relative to leaner individuals (Batterink et al.,
2010). Although this question is thus more exploratory, we expected greater control-related activity
in individuals with low to average levels of uncontrolled eating, as compared to individuals with
higher levels of uncontrolled eating, in a network that has been associated with response inhibition,
including frontal gyrus, postcentral gyrus, inferior parietal lobule, temporal gyrus and
middle/superior occipital gyrus (Batterink et al., 2010; Sebastian et al., 2013). Similarly, we expected
greater control-related activity after food consumption, as compared to an inter-meal hunger state,
in this fronto-parietal network, and that these effects of eating would be more pronounced in
individuals with lower/average levels of uncontrolled eating, as compared to individuals who report
higher levels of uncontrolled eating.
2. Method
2.1 Participants
A screening survey was completed by 208 individuals. Forty-six participants met the
eligibility criteria according to the screening survey and were invited to participate in the study.
Individuals were screened using the uncontrolled eating (UE) subscale of the Three-Factor Eating
Questionnaire-R18 (Karlsson et al., 2000) and considered eligible for the study if they either scored
≤18 (low UE group) or ≥20 (high UE group). These cut-off scores for the TFEQ-R18 were determined
based on a large community sample from the same area (n = 237; unpublished data) and reflected
th
the lower half (i.e., 50 percentile and below) and upper third. A study that included a large sample
(n = 919) of British women (Keskitalo et al., 2008) and had no BMI restrictions (the average BMI in
that sample—25.8—was slightly higher than in our sample), reported an average score of 16.1 on
the uncontrolled eating subscale. We thus compared individuals who report lower to middle levels
of uncontrolled eating behaviour to individuals who report a higher tendency for uncontrolled eating
behaviour. Additional inclusion criteria were right-handedness, female and aged 18-40 years old.
Participants were excluded based on the following criteria: specific dietary needs or preferences
(i.e., vegetarian, vegan, or diabetic), self-reported glucose intolerance, being on a diet with the aim
to lose weight, food allergies for the snack provided, BMI below 18.5 or above 30 (i.e., being
underweight or obese), having sought professional help for any mental health issue during the six
months prior to participation, and contraindication for MRI scanning. We excluded individuals with a
vegetarian or vegan diet as they may have aversive responses to certain food stimuli that contain
meat. We included women who are overweight (BMI 25-29.9), because the average BMI for women
in the United Kingdom is 27.2 (Conolly & Saunders, 2017).
The TFEQ-R18 was re-administered during the test session to check whether participants still
met the selection criterion. Based on UE subscale scores from this assessment, one participant was
excluded who did not meet the cut-off score. We also measured height and weight during the first
test session to calculate BMI. One participant was excluded based on a BMI > 30. One participant
decided to stop the MRI scan during the first session and did not continue participation. Functional
MRI data from three participants could not be analysed due to substantial movement. Data for these
participants was excluded from further behavioural analyses as well. The final sample therefore
consisted of 21 participants in the high UE group (age M = 22.67; SD = 3.31) and 19 in the low UE
group (age M = 23.84; SD = 4.43). Participants were reimbursed for their time. The experiment was
approved by the Central University Research Ethics Committee of the University of Oxford
(R47826/RE007).
2.2 Measurements
2.2.1 Screening Survey
The screening survey assessed the inclusion and exclusion criteria: age, gender, handedness,
following a special diet, glucose intolerance, food allergies, restriction of food intake to control
weight, and having sought professional help for an eating disorder and/or other mental health
problems in the last six months. To calculate BMI for initial screening, we asked individuals to
indicate their height and weight. Additionally, participants completed the items of the uncontrolled
eating subscale from the TFEQ-R18 and we assessed MRI safety criteria.
2.2.2 Questionnaires.
2.2.2.1 Three Factor Eating Questionnaire – R18. The Three Factor Eating Questionnaire
(Karlsson et al., 2000) was used to measure three different eating styles: cognitive restraint eating,
uncontrolled eating, and emotional eating. Participants indicate on a 4-point scale (one item is
answered using an 8-point scale) either how true a statement is (e.g., ranging from ‘definitely true’
to ‘definitely false’) or the frequency of a certain behaviour (e.g., ranging from ‘never true’ to ‘at
least once a week’). Scores for the cognitive restraint factor range from 6-28, for the uncontrolled
eating factor from 9-36, and for the emotional eating factor from 3-12. The internal consistency of
the TFEQ-R18 subscales in the current sample were good (restrained eating: α = 0.79; uncontrolled
eating: α = 0.90; emotional eating: α = 0.88).
2.2.2.2 Binge Eating Scale. Binge eating was assessed with the Binge Eating Scale (Gormally
et al., 1982), which assesses behavioural, cognitive, and affective symptoms of binge eating. For
each item participants select 1 of 3 or 4 statements that best describes the way they feel about
problems controlling their eating behaviour. The total score ranges from 0-32, with higher scores
5 We also assessed mood at the start of each session using Visual Analogue Scales but this data will not be used
to test the hypotheses of the current study.
indicating more severe binge eating symptoms. Internal consistency of the BES in the current sample
was good (α = 0.85).
2.2.2.3 Food Craving Questionnaire – Trait. Individual differences in food craving were
measured with the short version of the Food Craving Questionnaire – Trait (Meule, Hermann, et al.,
2014). Participants indicated to what extent items apply on a 6-point Likert scale ranging from 1
‘never’ to 6 ‘always’. Total scores can range from 15-90. Internal consistency of the FCQ-T in the
current sample was very good (α = 0.95).
2.2.2.4 Food Craving Questionnaire – State. To assess state food craving we used the Food
Craving Questionnaire – State (Cepeda-Benito et al., 2000). Participants indicate to which extent
items apply to them at that moment on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 ‘strongly disagree’ to 5
‘strongly agree’, resulting in a total score ranging from 15-75. The internal consistency of the FCQ-S
in the present study was excellent (eating session first assessment: α = 0.93; eating session second
assessment: α = 0.92; non-eating session: α = 0.93).
2.2.2.5 Short UPPS-P Impulsive Behaviour Scale. Individual differences in impulsivity were
assessed using the short version of the UPPS-P Impulsive Behavior Scale (Cyders et al., 2014; Lynam,
2013). Cyders et al. (2014) confirmed 5 factors of impulsivity, each consisting of 4 items: negative
urgency, (lack of) premeditation, (lack of) perseverance, sensation seeking, and positive urgency.
Participants rated the items on a 4-point scale ranging from 1 ‘strongly agree’ to 4 ‘strongly
disagree’, resulting in a total score ranging from 20-80 with higher scores indicating more impulsive
behaviour. For this study we only looked at the total score. Internal consistency of the SUPPS-P total
score in the present study was good (α = 0.77).
2.2.2.6 Grand Hunger Scale. During both test sessions we measured state hunger using the
Grand Hunger Scale (Grand, 1968). The scale contains two open-ended items asking participants
how many hours it has been since their last meal and how many hours it will be until their next
planned meal. Additionally, two items ask participants to indicate how hungry they are at that
moment on a scale ranging from 1 ‘not hungry at all’ to 7 ‘extremely hungry’ and how much of their
favourite food they could eat at that moment on a scale from 1 ‘none at all’ to 6 ‘as much as I could
get’.
2.2.2.7 Snack Rating. Following consumption of the snack, participants rated two 9-point
Likert scales ranging from ‘not at all’ to ‘very much’ on how much they liked the snack and how full
they feel at that moment.
2.2.3 Blood Glucose Level Measurement
We tested for differences in blood glucose between the high UE and low UE group before
and after food consumption, because blood glucose regulation is part of metabolic homeostasis and
measurement is relatively non-invasive. Blood glucose levels were measured with a finger prick test.
Participants washed their hands before the measurement and gently massaged the finger to
stimulate the blood flow. We used single-use lancets from Accu-Check Safe-T-Pro Plus (Roche,
Mannheim, Germany) to obtain a drop of blood from the finger. The drop of blood was then applied
onto a single-use test strip for a MediTouch2 blood glucose monitor (Medisana, Neuss, Germany).
Blood glucose levels were measured in units of mmol/L.
2.2.4 Functional MRI Tasks
Tasks were programmed using Presentation® software v.18.3 (Neurobehavioral Systems,
Berkeley, California). Pictures of food and non-food items for both tasks were selected from the
Food-pics database (Blechert et al., 2014). None of the pictures in the food reward sensitivity
paradigm overlapped with pictures in the go-nogo task. For a list of used pictures see Supplemental
2.2.4.1 Food Reward Sensitivity. Food reward sensitivity was assessed with a passive
viewing task in which participants were presented with blocks of food and non-food items. Thirty
food pictures depicted appetizing food items (e.g., chocolate bar, hamburger, or ice-cream) and 30
non-food pictures depicted items that can be found around the house (e.g., stationary, furniture, a
clock). The food pictures depicted high-caloric items that on average contain 421.7 kcal/100 grams
(SD = 120.77). Food and non-food pictures were selected such that these categories were balanced
for valence, t(58) = 0.83, p = .409, arousal, t(58) = 1.79, p = .078, complexity, t(58) = 1.07, p = .290,
and brightness, t(58) = 0.11, p = .916. In each block 10 pictures of either food or non-food items
were presented in the centre of the screen on a white background. Each picture was presented for 3
s resulting in a block duration of 30 s. The task always started with a food block, and food and non-
food blocks were presented in an ABAB order. Picture blocks were interleaved with the central
presentation of a fixation cross which was displayed for 15 s. Participants were not required to press
any buttons during the task but were instructed to pay attention to the pictures. The task finished
with a bogus memory task (no fMRI data was collected during this memory task) in which
participants were presented with eight food and non-food pictures for which they had to indicate
whether the pictures had appeared during the task blocks or not. Participants were informed about
this memory task before going into the scanner. The sole aim of this memory task was to encourage
participants to pay attention to the presented pictures.
2.2.4.2 Food Go-Nogo Task. Inhibitory control was measured with a rapid event-related go-
nogo task in which participants were presented with pictures of food and non-food items. Thirty-
three food pictures depicted appetizing food items (e.g., chocolate cake, pastry, or ice-cream) and
33 non-food pictures depicted flowers and leaves. The food pictures depicted high-caloric items that
on average contain 365.7 kcal/100 grams (SD = 155.6). Food and non-food pictures were selected
such that these categories were balanced for valence, t(64) = 1.68, p = .097, arousal, t(64) = 1.10, p =
.275, complexity, t(64) = 0.30, p = .764, and brightness, t(64) = 0.32, p = .754. The task consisted of
five food go blocks and five non-food go blocks. During food go blocks, participants were required to
respond as fast and accurately as possible, by pressing a button with their right index finger, when a
food item was presented and to withhold their response when a non-food item was presented.
Conversely, in the non-food go blocks participants were instructed to respond when a non-food item
was presented and to withhold their response when a food item was presented. In each trial (see
which was presented with a jittered duration ranging between 1100 and 2900 ms in steps of 100 ms
(M = 2003.25 ms). Participants had a maximum of 1500 ms to respond from the onset of the trial.
During each block, 40 trials were presented of which 75% were go trials and 25% nogo trials. Specific
block instructions were presented before the onset of each block for 10 s. Food go blocks and non-
food go blocks were presented in an ABAB order. The initial block was either a food go block or a
non-food go block, which was counterbalanced across groups and session order.
Task design illustrating two consecutive trials of the food go block.
2.3 Procedure
2.3.1 Recruitment
Potential participants were recruited through flyers and online message boards from the
university. Women who were interested in taking part emailed the main researcher and completed
the screening survey. If inclusion criteria were met, a short follow-up phone call was arranged to
double check MRI safety criteria. If all requirements were met, two test sessions were planned on
separate days: the non-eat session and eat session. Session order (i.e., eat session first vs. non-eat
session first) was counterbalanced across participants in each group. We planned the test sessions
no more than one week apart, but for five participants (three from the low- and two from the high
UE group) this period was longer (10-39 days apart) because participants required a rescheduling or
because the scanner was out of use for a longer period due to technical problems.
2.3.2 Test sessions
For both test sessions participants were instructed to eat something 2 hrs prior to the test
session and then refrain from eating. At the start of the first test session participants signed
informed consent and received an elaborate explanation about the MRI scanning procedure and
different scans/tasks to be performed. Before the scan, participants practiced the go-nogo task. Each
practice block consisted of 12 trials, 9 go trials and 3 nogo trials. Additionally, height and weight
were measured during the first session, which were used to calculate BMI. The MRI scanning
procedure was identical across sessions: first the food reward sensitivity paradigm, then a structural
scan, followed by the go-nogo task, and ending with acquiring fieldmaps. The procedure for each of
depiction of the procedure of the two sessions.
2.3.2.1 Non-Eat Session. Participants first completed a demographic survey (i.e., age,
gender, and handedness) and baseline questionnaires: BES, FCQ-T-r, TFEQ-R18, SUPPS-P, and the
Grand Hunger scale. Additionally, they filled out the survey checking MRI safety criteria. Participants
then completed the FCQ-S, followed by a measurement of their blood glucose level. Afterwards,
participants were prepared for the scanner and were fitted with earplugs before going into the
scanner. Upon ending of the imaging procedure, the session was completed.
2.3.2.2 Eat Session. Participants started the session by completing the Grand Hunger Scale.
This was followed by the first FCQ-S assessment and measurement of blood glucose level. Following
this, participants consumed a triple chocolate muffin (~90 grams, 400 kcal). We looked at the effects
of consumption of a high-caloric snack as binge-type meals are often palatable, high-caloric foods
rich in fat and sugar (Yanovski et al., 1992). The amount of calories was comparable to what is
advised for a breakfast meal (400 kcal) by the National Health Service (NHS, n.d.). Participants were
asked to consume the muffin within 10 min and then complete the two snack rating scales
afterwards. Thirty min after snack consumption (approx. 40 min after start of consumption) we
measured state craving (FCQ-S) and blood glucose level once more. This time frame was chosen
because in healthy individuals blood glucose typically begins to rise 10 min and peaks about 30-60
min after the start of a meal (American Diabetes Association, 2001; Rozendaal et al., 2018). During
the 30 min wait time, participants completed the survey checking MRI safety criteria. Participants
were prepared for the scanner in the same way as during the non-eat session. Upon ending of the
imaging procedure, the session was completed.
2.4 fMRI Data Acquisition
Scanning was performed with a Siemens Magnetom Prisma 3T scanner (Siemens Medical
Systems, Erlangen, Germany) and 32-channel head coil. After manual shimming, we started the food
reward sensitivity paradigm. We used an echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence (72 interleaved slices,
voxel size = 2 x 2 x 2 mm, TR = 1570ms, TE = 30ms, GRAPPA acceleration factor = 2, multi-band
acceleration factor = 3, FoV = 216mm, flip angle = 70°) orienting the field-of-view at approximately
30° with respect to the AC-PC line to minimize signal distortions in orbitofrontal areas. For the food
reward sensitivity paradigm we acquired 583 volumes. During each session we then acquired T1-
weighted 3D high resolution MPRAGE images in the transversal plane (192 slices, voxel size = 1 x 1 x
1 mm, TR = 1900 ms, TE = 3.97 ms, TI = 904 ms, FoV = 192 mm, flip angle = 8°). Following the
structural scan we started the go-nogo paradigm. We used the same EPI sequence as for the food
reward sensitivity paradigm but collected 715 volumes. Finally, fieldmap images (phase difference
and magnitude images) were acquired for B0 unwarping to aid registration of functional EPI images.
2.5 Data Analysis
2.5.1 Behavioural Data
Data was analysed using R (R Core Team, 2019). Measures of eating style, binge eating, trait
food craving and impulsive behaviour were used to describe the participant sample, and we report
correlations amongst these measures in the current sample. We used one-way ANOVAs to test
whether the low and high UE groups differed on the baseline measures, how much they liked the
snack and how full they felt after eating. Where parametric assumptions were violated we report the
Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test.
Linear mixed effect models were tested with the nlme package (Pinheiro et al., 2018) to
examine effects of snack consumption on state craving and blood glucose levels, and to investigate
whether this differed across UE groups. We used maximum likelihood estimation to compare nested
models with different fixed effects. Planned contrasts were set to compare levels before and after
snack consumption in the eat session, and to compare levels before snack consumption in the eat
session to levels in the non-eat session. We first built a model with a fixed effect of time on state
food craving or blood glucose levels and included random intercepts (model 1). Building on this
model, we included random slopes for time (model 2). Following this we included the main effect of
UE group and its interaction with time (model 3).
To investigate behavioural changes in food-related inhibitory control, we examined the
commission error rate (i.e., number of responses to nogo trials divided by total number of nogo
trials), as commission errors are thought to reflect response inhibition for nogo stimuli (Veling et al.,
2017). Linear mixed effects models were used to test whether the commission error rate was
different depending on stimuli (non-food vs. food), session (eat vs. non-eat session), UE group (low
vs. high), and their interactions. We first built a model with a fixed effect of stimulus and included
random intercepts (model 1). Building on that model we included the effect of session and its
interaction with stimulus, and added random slopes for session (model 2). Finally, we added the
effect of UE group and all interactions between stimulus, session and UE group (model 3). Although
our hypotheses were specific to commission errors, we also explored similar associations with
reaction times (RT) for correct go-trials and omission errors (i.e., number of missed responses to go
trials divided by total number of go trials) to determine if results were specific to inhibitory control
or related to overall task performance (see supplemental material).
2.5.2 Imaging Data
fMRI data were analysed using FSL (Smith et al., 2004). We used FEAT in FSL for image pre-
processing and first-level analysis, keeping standard settings. Motion correction was applied using
the MCFLIRT tool (Jenkinson et al., 2002), which provided six motion regressors that were included
in the fMRI analyses as confound regressors. We corrected for the effects of large motion using the
FSL motion outliers tool. Functional images were spatially smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with
4mm full-width half-maximum, and temporally high-pass filtered. A high-pass filter cut-off for the
food reward sensitivity paradigm was set to 90s and for the go-nogo task it was set to 128s. B0
unwarping was carried out using boundary-based registration (Greve & Fischl, 2009) in FMRIB’s
Linear Image Registration Tool (Jenkinson et al., 2002; Jenkinson & Smith, 2001) which performs
registration to the structural image and simultaneously incorporates fieldmap correction. High
resolution structural images were processed using the Brain Extraction Tool (Smith, 2002) to
separate brain tissue from non-brain tissue and were then registered to Montreal Neurological
Institute (MNI) space using FMRIB’s Nonlinear Image Registration Tool (Andersson et al., 2010).
Registration followed a two-step process: functional images were first registered to the high-
resolution structural images using BBR with fieldmaps and then the structural image was registered
to standard space. The data were pre-whitened before first-level analysis.
Individual protocol time files were created for first-level analysis (GLM), that represented the
onset and duration of task events. For the food reward sensitivity paradigm we specified two
regressors, indicating the onset and duration (i.e., 30 s) of the food blocks and non-food blocks. For
the go-nogo task we specified 6 regressors, indicating the onset and duration of the different trial
types (i.e., food go, non-food go, food nogo, and non-food nogo; duration 0.5 s), the onset and
duration (i.e., 0.5 s) of incorrect trials, and the onset and duration of instructions throughout the
task. Six motion regressors from MCFLIRT and the confound matrix from FSL motion outliers were
added as (confound) regressors of no interest. The blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) response
was modelled by convolving the neural functions with a double-gamma hemodynamic response
function. Temporal derivatives were added, and the same temporal filtering was applied to the
model as was applied to the data. For the food reward sensitivity paradigm, we set four contrasts:
mean food, mean non-food, food > non-food, and non-food > food, with food > non-food being the
main contrast of interest. For the go-nogo task we set eight contrasts: mean food go, mean non-food
go, mean food nogo, mean non-food nogo, food nogo > food go, non-food nogo > non-food go, food
go > food nogo, and non-food go > non-food nogo. To explore the effects on inhibitory control we
contrasted nogo activations to go activations, that is, the nogo > go contrasts were the main
contrasts of interest. Results were cluster-corrected with cluster z threshold = 2.3 and p < 0.05.
First-level analyses were used as input for group-level whole-brain analyses. For inference on
second-level analyses, we performed permutation tests with 5000 permutations and threshold free
cluster enhancement TFCE using Randomise v2.9 (Winkler et al., 2014). We first performed one
sample t-tests (i.e., group mean) on the contrasts of interest, comparing food to non-food stimuli
from the food reward sensitivity paradigm, and on nogo > go trial contrasts from the go-nogo task.
To test our research questions, we performed a two-sample unpaired t-test to compare the low and
high UE group (main effect UE group), and a paired sample t-test for changes across the eating and
non-eating session (main effect session) on the contrasts of interest. The Group x Session interaction
was tested by performing two-sample unpaired t-tests on the session difference, to test if changes
across the eating and non-eating session differed between the low and high UE group.
3. Results
3.1 Behavioural Data
3.1.1 Descriptive Statistics
statistics on baseline measures of binge eating, trait food craving, eating styles, impulsive behaviour,
and BMI. We find positive correlations between uncontrolled eating, emotional eating, binge eating,
trait food craving and impulsive behaviour. BMI was not significantly related to the other variables,
possibly because we restricted the BMI range.
Descriptive statistics and correlations between baseline variables.
Variable 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1. Binge Eating (BES) - 0.84*** 0.37* 0.68*** 0.76*** 0.41** 0.29
2. Food Craving trait
- 0.27 0.84*** 0.79*** 0.43** 0.21
(FCQ trait)
3. Restraint Eating
- 0.30 0.19 -0.06 0.14
(TFEQ-R18)
4. Uncontrolled Eating
- 0.66*** 0.35* 0.10
(TFEQ-R18)
5. Emotional Eating
- 0.40** 0.13
(TFEQ-R18)
6. Impulsive Behaviour
- 0.07
(SUPPSP total)
7. BMI -
Low UE group M (SD) 4.05 (3.66) 27.79 (8.40) 13.47 (4.09) 14.84 (2.50) 5.11 (1.91) 37.21 (6.01) 22.17 (2.56)
High UE group M (SD) 10.67 (5.10) 44.62 (8.87) 15.14 (2.97) 24.24 (2.96) 7.90 (2.19) 41.14 (5.46) 21.97 (2.44)
* p <.05; ** p <.01; *** p <.001.
3.1.2 Group Differences
The high UE group scored higher as compared to the low UE group not only on uncontrolled
eating, W = 0, p < .001, r = -0.86, but also on emotional eating, F(1,38) = 18.38, p < .001, ω = 0.30,
binge eating, W = 52, p < .001, r = -0.63, trait food craving, W = 19, p < .001, r = -0.77, and on
impulsive behaviour, F(1,38) = 4.71, p = .036, ω = 0.09. Groups did not significantly differ in terms of
cognitive restraint eating or BMI, ps > .05.
UE groups did not differ in the number of hours they ate something prior to the non-eating
session (low: M = 3.11, SD = 2.94; high: M = 2.69, SD = 1.76), or eating session (low: M = 2.26, SD =
0.71; high: M = 2.33, SD = 0.64). The groups neither differed on self-reported hunger level at the
start of the non-eating session (low: M = 3.21, SD = 1.13; high: M = 3.57, SD = 1.21) or eating session
(low: M = 2.79, SD = 1.51; high: M = 3.38, SD = 1.07), all ps > .10. All participants indicated to have
eaten something at least 2 hours prior to both sessions. The low and high UE groups did not differ in
how much they liked the consumed snack (low: M = 7.47, SD = 0.96; high: M = 7.71, SD = 1.85), nor
in how full they felt afterwards (low: M = 6.63, SD = 1.30; high: M = 6.57, SD = 1.33), all ps > .10.
A) Levels of state food craving across the different sessions; B) Blood glucose levels across the
different sessions. Error bars represent standard errors of the mean.
3.1.3 Effects of Snack Consumption
We tested the effect of snack consumption on state craving (FCQ-S) and blood glucose
levels, and whether this differed across UE groups. We compared levels before and after snack
consumption in the eat session, and levels before snack consumption in the eat session to levels in
the non-eat session. Model comparison for effects on state craving showed that the final model had
the best (relative) fit, χ (3) = 20.90, p < .001. There was a main effect of time for the comparison
before and after snack consumption, b = -3.58, t(76) = -2.67, p = .009, but not for the comparison of
state craving before consumption in the eating session to the non-eating session, b = 0.11, t(76) =
0.05, p = .963. Additionally, there was a main effect of UE group, b = 11.70, t(38) = 4.52, p < .001, and
UE group further modified the effect of time for the comparison before and after snack
consumption, b = -5.94, t(76) = -3.21, p = .002. Both groups showed a significant decrease in food
craving after snack consumption, but this was more pronounced in the high UE group, possibly
consumption, the high UE group reported greater state food craving, t(37.84) = 2.38, p = .022.
Model comparison for tests on blood glucose level showed that adding random slopes to the
baseline model which included random intercept and main effect of time did not improve fit, χ (5) =
5.10, p = .404, nor did adding UE group further improve fit, χ (3) = 1.17, p = .761. The baseline model
showed a main effect of time for the comparison of blood glucose levels before consumption in the
eating session to the non-eating session, b = -0.45, t(74) = -2.92, p = .005. Blood glucose levels did
not significantly increase across 30 min after snack consumption, b = 0.29, t(74) = -2.92, p = .060, but
the effect was in the expected direction. Blood glucose levels tended to be higher after snack
consumption and blood glucose levels in the non-eating session were lower than baseline blood
3.1.4 Go-Nogo Task
Go-nogo data from one participant was missing because the MRI scan was stopped and data
from three participants was excluded from further analyses due to the large amount of errors
committed on nogo trials (i.e., more than 2.5SDs from the mean in the UE group), resulting in n = 36.
We tested whether the commission error rate was different between food and non-food stimuli,
across the two sessions, and whether this was modulated by UE group. Model comparison for tests
on commission error rate showed that adding effects of session and random slopes to the baseline
model which included random intercept and main effect of stimulus did not improve fit, χ (4) = 7.47,
p = .113, nor did adding UE group further improve fit, χ (4) = 3.61, p = .461. The baseline model
showed a main effect of stimulus, b = -0.03, t(107) = -3.60, p < .001, reflecting that overall less
commission errors were made for food stimuli, but there was no effect of session, UE group nor
can be found in supplemental material.
Commission error rates across the different sessions and UE groups. Error bars represent standard
errors of the mean.
3.2 Imaging Data
3.2.1 Food Reward Sensitivity
Overall (i.e., across all participants and during both sessions), exposure to food stimuli, as
compared to non-food stimuli, was related to activity in areas including visual cortex, insula,
high UE group, no significant difference between the eating and non-eating session, nor was the
effect of session further modulated by UE group.
Exploratory analyses on UE group differences within the eating and non-eating session,
based on previous work in obese individuals (Dimitropoulos et al., 2012), are reported in
compared to the low UE group, showed increased activity in response to food stimuli (vs. non-food
stimuli) in a small cluster in the dorsal part of the left ACC. No group differences were found in the
non-eating session.
Neural activation for food > non-food contrast (permutation tests TFCE-corrected).
3.2.2 Inhibitory Control
Across all participants and both sessions, response inhibition for food stimuli (food nogo >
food go) activated a wide network of brain areas including the right pre- and postcentral gyrus
extending to frontal gyrus, temporal occipital fusiform gyrus and inferior temporal gyrus, right
frontal operculum, right dorsal anterior cingulate gyrus, and superior parietal lobule and anterior
reveal significant differences between UE groups, sessions, nor were effects of session modulated by
UE group.
Neural activation for food nogo > food go contrast (permutation tests TFCE-corrected).
Across all participants and both sessions, response inhibition for non-food (non-food nogo >
non-food go) also activated a wide network of brain areas including right precentral gyrus extending
to postcentral gyrus and superior frontal gyrus, right inferior parietal lobule/ supramarginal gyrus
and superior temporal gyrus, temporal-occipital/occipital fusiform gyrus and inferior temporal gyrus,
frontal operculum/insula, right cuneal cortex, left amygdala, and right paracingulate gyrus (see
Neural activation for non-food nogo > non-food go contrast (permutation tests TFCE-corrected).
There were no differences between the UE groups that reached above threshold activation,
nor any differences between sessions, but there was a significant Session (eating vs. non-eating) x
Group (low vs. high UE group) interaction for response inhibition for non-food stimuli that was
related to activity in a small cluster in the left lateral, superior occipital cortex. This interaction
seemed driven by relatively more activity in the left lateral, superior occipital cortex for this contrast
(i.e., non-food nogo > non-food go) during the non-eat session as compared to eat session in the low
UE group, whereas in the high UE group there was relatively more activity during the eat session as
Maximum percent BOLD signal change in the functionally defined ROI in the left superior parieto-
occipital cortex, based on the Session x Group interaction effect on the non-food nogo > non-food go
contrast. Error bars represent standard errors of the mean.
4. Discussion
In the current study we investigated effects of food consumption on food reward sensitivity
and (food-specific) inhibitory control, and how this differed depending on non-clinical levels of
uncontrolled eating. Our results on food reward sensitivity showed that generally the response to
high-caloric foods (vs. non-food) was associated with activity in the visual cortex, insula, amygdala,
left inferior temporal gyrus/fusiform gyrus, and left orbitofrontal cortex, consistent with previous
fMRI research on visual food cues (for review see García-García et al., 2013). However, differences in
the tendency for uncontrolled eating and snack consumption did not significantly change BOLD
activity when viewing food cues. In terms of performance on the response inhibition task, we did not
see any behavioural differences in food-related inhibitory control across sessions, nor based on
levels of uncontrolled eating. Imaging data showed that generally response inhibition for both food
and non-food stimuli activated a wide fronto-parietal-occipital network. This network is consistent
with previous findings on the go-nogo task when nogo-trials are infrequent (Kolodny et al., 2017;
Sebastian et al., 2013) and overlaps with brain areas previously associated with food-specific
inhibitory control (Batterink et al., 2010). Our main finding showed differences in activity during
response inhibition of non-food stimuli in the superior occipital gyrus, depending on an interaction
between session and the tendency for uncontrolled eating.
Contrary to expectations, neither differences in uncontrolled eating behaviour nor food
consumption seemed to influence food reward sensitivity. Previous work on food reward sensitivity
has shown that individual differences in weight status can influence the response to food cues,
showing greater activity in reward-related brain regions in response to food stimuli in individuals
who are overweight or obese, as compared to healthy weight individuals (García-García et al., 2013;
Stice et al., 2008; Verdejo-Román et al., 2017). Considering our results it is possible that individual
differences in (non-clinical) uncontrolled eating—in the absence of obesity—do not have a strong
influence on food reward reactivity. Similarly, research has shown that satiation can influence the
response to visual food cues with greater activity in reward-related brain areas when exposed to
high-caloric foods (vs. low-caloric foods/non-foods) in a fasted state, than when in a satiated state
(Führer et al., 2008; Goldstone et al., 2009; LaBar et al., 2001). However, in all of these studies
individuals had fasted for at least 8 hrs or more. It is therefore hard to know if these effects of
satiation can be generalized to understand what is underlying ‘hedonic eating’ and uncontrolled
eating, which involve eating also in the absence of physiological hunger. One other study that
compared inter-meal hunger to a satiated state showed attenuated activity to food stimuli (tasting
fluids with pleasant, neutral and unpleasant taste) in reward related brain areas (Thomas et al.,
2015), but the food intake was much higher with an average > 1000 kcal. It is thus possible that a
much longer fasting period and/or more substantial food intake is necessary to see any significant
changes in activity in reward related brain areas, but that such changes in the neural response are
not apparent in the context of an inter-meal hunger state and consuming a snack with equivalent
calories to a breakfast (NHS, n.d.).
The ability to self-regulate could be relevant to ‘overcome’ reward-related responses to
food, reflected in individual differences in (food-specific) inhibitory control. However, behavioural
performance in inhibitory control was not influenced by differences in the tendency for uncontrolled
eating, nor different between an inter-meal hunger state and after snack consumption. We found
that across both sessions participants made less commission errors for food stimuli as compared to
non-food stimuli. Previous research has actually shown differences between commission errors for
food and non-food stimuli in both directions across two studies (Meule, Lutz, et al., 2014).
Exploratory analyses on reaction times for go-trials showed that participants were generally faster
for non-food go-trials than for food go-trials. It thus seems that participants were generally faster in
correctly responding in non-food go blocks and made less errors inhibiting their responses to food
nogo-trials, i.e., overall better performance in dominant non-food ‘go’ blocks. Importantly though,
behavioural effects on inhibitory control (i.e., commission errors) were not influenced by food
consumption, nor differences in uncontrolled eating.
Whereas several studies have shown a link between individual differences in weight status
and performance on food-specific response inhibition tasks (e.g., Batterink et al., 2010; Lavagnino et
al., 2016; Nederkoorn et al., 2006; Price et al., 2016), it is possible that individual differences in levels
of uncontrolled eating—in the absence of obesity—do not influence food-specific response
inhibition. This is supported by previous findings that obesity was associated with reduced inhibitory
control, but that the presence or absence of binge eating disorder did not impact this effect
(Lavagnino et al., 2016). One other study that directly tested effects of food consumption on
inhibitory control, compared healthy women who had not consumed food for at least 3 hrs to those
who had consumed a bowl of kefir (lower in calories than our snack). They also found no effects of
satiation on performance in a go-nogo task with food and neutral images (Meule, Lutz, et al., 2014).
We extend previous research, showing for the first time how food consumption can
influence neural activation underlying (food-specific) inhibitory control. We found that individuals
with a low/average tendency for uncontrolled eating showed relatively more activity in the left
superior occipital gyrus when they had to inhibit responses to non-food stimuli in an inter-meal
hunger state as compared to after snack consumption. On the other hand, individuals who reported
a higher tendency for uncontrolled eating showed relatively more activity in this area after snack
consumption (vs. an inter-meal hunger state). Activity in this area has previously been associated
with successful nogo- vs. go-trials when using neutral stimuli (Kolodny et al., 2017). Yet, behavioural
performance was similar across sessions. Although speculative, it is possible that individuals with a
low/average tendency for uncontrolled eating needed greater cognitive resources to support
successful response inhibition of non-food stimuli in blocks with a dominant food ‘go’ response,
during an inter-meal hunger state when appetitive drive is increased (as compared to after food
consumption). On the other hand, individuals with a higher tendency for uncontrolled eating
showed such potential compensatory effects after eating, as if response inhibition during dominant
food ‘go’ blocks becomes less efficient or more challenging after eating, requiring extra cognitive
resources. Such ‘hidden costs’ of inter-meal hunger on inhibitory control efficiency can only be
observed when examining (differences in) neural activation during an inhibitory control task.
It is important to consider the limitations of the study when interpreting the effects. Our
sample consisted of young, non-obese adult women who have not sought help for an eating disorder
or other mental health issues in the last six months. Although we included individuals who report
differing levels of uncontrolled eating behaviour, this restricts generalizability of our findings to
people with obesity or binge eating disorder. However, it is important to understand if and what
factors can contribute to individual differences in eating behaviour in the general healthy population
if this could be a risk factor for increased weight or clinical binge eating. Second, self-reported
uncontrolled eating was highly correlated with emotional eating, binge eating, and trait food craving.
Although the overlap between these concepts is not surprising, it does mean that the current
findings may not be specific to uncontrolled eating but could also be expected as a function of trait
food craving or (non-clinical) binge eating behaviour more broadly. Third, participants consumed a
high-caloric snack rather than a full meal which has mostly been used in previous research, but this
is in keeping with binge-type foods that are often rich in fat and sugar (Yanovski et al., 1992).
Moreover, the amount of calories is comparable to what is advised for a breakfast meal by the
National Health Service (NHS, n.d.) and participants reported a significant decrease in state food
craving after consumption. Additionally, we measured changes in blood glucose levels and food
craving in response to food consumption as markers of satiety or appetite differences. Although
blood glucose regulation is part of metabolic homeostasis we did not measure any levels of satiety
or appetite-related peptides (e.g., ghrelin, cholecystokinin, glucagon-like peptide-1) and how these
may differ across individuals, but measuring these peptides is difficult and it remains unclear
whether it is a better marker of satiety than self-report (Gibbons et al., 2019). We thus had no
physiological measure of appetite or satiety, but measured self-reported hunger levels at the start of
each session and subjective food craving before and after snack consumption. Finally, due to
planning constraints in MRI data collection we were unable to keep time between sessions constant,
but we tested most participants no more than one week apart and order of sessions was
counterbalanced.
To conclude, we investigated effects of individual differences in uncontrolled eating and
food consumption on food reward sensitivity and (food-specific) inhibitory control. We did not find
any effects of differences in the tendency for uncontrolled eating, snack consumption, or their
interaction on BOLD activity when viewing food and non-food cues. In terms of control-related
processes, we did not see any differences in behavioural performance on the response inhibition
task as a result of food consumption, nor based on levels of uncontrolled eating. We did find
differences in BOLD activity during response inhibition of non-food stimuli associated with food
consumption, that depended on the tendency for uncontrolled eating. It seems that individuals with
a low/average tendency for uncontrolled eating needed greater cognitive resources to support
response inhibition performance during dominant food ‘go’ blocks in an inter-meal hunger state,
whereas individuals with a higher tendency for uncontrolled eating showed such potential
compensatory effects after eating. We thus observed small differences depending on non-clinical
levels of uncontrolled eating, modulated by food consumption, in inhibitory control which could
contribute to finding it harder to stop once eating. However, based on our findings it does seem that
non-clinical levels of uncontrolled eating have no, or only limited influence on food reward
sensitivity and food-related inhibitory control, whereas previous research suggests differences in
weight status (e.g., obesity) may have a bigger impact.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European
Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013)/ERC grant agreement no: [324176] to EF.
MG is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship of the Research Foundation – Flanders
(FWO2017/PDO/201). Funding sources had no involvement in study design, data collection, analysis
and interpretation of data, writing of the report, nor in the decision making to submit the article for
publication. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Credit Author Statement
Maud Grol: Conceptualization, methodology, validation, formal analysis, investigation, data
curation, writing – original draft, visualization, project administration; Luis Cásedas: methodology,
investigation, writing – review & editing; Danna Oomen: methodology, resources, writing – review &
editing; Desiree B. Spronk: conceptualization, methodology, writing – review & editing; Elaine Fox:
Conceptualization, supervision, funding acquisition, writing - review & editing.
Data Availability
The neural datasets generated and/or analysed during the current study are available from
the corresponding author on reasonable request. Behavioural data and R scripts are available on the