Nature Human Behaviour Postprint
CITATION
Bayer, J. B., & Hofstra, B. (2020). Toward Curation and Personality-Driven Social Networks. Nature Human
Behaviour, 4, 123-125.
Toward Curation and Personality-Driven
Social Networks
Joseph B. Bayer1,2 and Bas Hofstra3
1 School of Communication, The Ohio State University
2 Translational Data Analytics Institute, The Ohio State University
3 Graduate School of Education, Stanford University
Whether or not social networks are significantly changing due to emergent
technologies continues to be contested by researchers. Our understanding may
advance by clarifying the cognitive mechanisms through which people curate
their connections, along with the accompanying role of personality in shaping
networks in the future.
o humans have bigger or smaller social networks today? We reflect on the state of this research
question and assert that an updated approach is needed to understand the effects of emergent
technologies on network structure. Although the absolute changes in average network size are
likely to remain elusive, recent perspectives converge on the idea that online technologies make
it easier for individuals to shape—or curate—their social connections. Here we merge conflicting
views and specify mechanisms through which curation technologies may impact personal network
structure. Looking forward, we suggest personality will become more influential in network
formation and maintenance when aided by technological levers. Consequently, curation tech-
nologies have the potential to increase differences in networks between types of people (for
example, extroverts vs introverts) and thus generate new forms of social stratification, despite
preserving a stable network size on average. The Comment concludes with empirical and
theoretical implications, including the importance of attending to dispersion and examining the
societal ramifications of personality-driven curation.
Corresponding author: Joseph B. Bayer [bayer.66@osu.edu]
Bayer & Hofstra, 2020 Toward Curation
Changes to Personal Networks
Many studies have sought to determine whether personal network size climbs or declines
with Internet and mobile technologies. This question is crucial because the ways in which people
construct and are constrained by their networks affect the accrual of social resources, as well as
potential outcomes such as intergroup disparities (for example, job placement), social fragment-
ation (for example, racial segregation) and group polarization (for example, echo chambers)1,2.
Nonetheless, our knowledge of the psychological factors that underpin personal networks
remains scant and scattered, particularly when peering beyond the small core of intimate ties.
And this challenge is further complicated with the ascent of novel network technologies.
Regrettably, past efforts do not lend themselves to straightforward answers to the principal
question above. There are certainly more ways to reach personal ties today given the numerous
channels available (for example, Facebook or LinkedIn), not to mention the many sub-channels
within platforms (for example, Newsfeeds or Messages). But paving more sidewalks is not akin
to knowing more neighbours. Indeed, empirical research is unclear as to whether people today
have smaller or larger networks than individuals of the past. Some research supports growth in
average network size2, while other studies have suggested null or nebulous effects3,4.
The conflicting findings, in turn, have produced divergent viewpoints concerning the effects
of new technologies on personal networks. One core perspective suggests that technologies
cannot overcome the limitations of human cognition that would be required to maintain more
friends4. Another fundamental view indicates that networks are becoming larger and more varied,
highlighting ways in which humans have greater choice and control over their interactions2. That
is, the former perspective emphasizes cognitive demands that limit having more ‘real’ friends,
whereas the latter view stresses customizable levers that enable having more relationships.
Altogether, one angle asserts that technologies do not alter the key network dimensions, while
the other argues networks are being broadened and diversified.
The pair of classic perspectives thus come into conflict when answering the question of why
personal networks are (or are not) in fact very different today. The challenge of identifying social
network changes is compounded by a lack of specificity used to measure the technological
behaviour in mind. This issue is significant given that other research areas (for example, digital
inequality) have shown that measures of online access, adoption or features are insufficient to
assess effects of technology; rather, individuals utilize the same tools in diverse ways. The
takeaway is that average network changes evolving from institutional changes (for example, the
genesis of online technologies) are surprisingly hard to capture.
In response to these obstacles, a revised approach is needed that clarifies how humans use
technologies to shape their networks and considers a wider spectrum of effects. To bridge past
perspectives, we propose shifting future research on technology effects toward network
curation5,6—i.e., how people prioritize communication with and attend to the communication of
certain people. Whether or not humans maintain more friends in aggregate, curation tools may
impact how different types of individuals build their networks. The following sections offer
guidance on (i) identifying the cognitive mechanisms of curation and (ii) assessing the personality
drivers of curation, along with their social consequences.
Bayer & Hofstra, 2020 Toward Curation
Mechanisms of Network Curation
From MySpace’s Top 8 to Facebook’s Newsfeed, online platforms have unveiled a widening
set of tools to maximize or minimize the salience of particular ties. A curation technology can be
understood as any tool that facilitates the (re-)prioritization of certain relationships in addition
to—or at the expense of—others. In their simplest forms, curation technologies increase the
potential range of relationships visible by default use, as seen in phone contact lists or physical
address books. Increasingly, however, network curation technologies encompass not only the
abilities to (un)friend or (un)follow others, but also a growing toolkit to categorize key connect-
ions and prioritize their placement in automated streams of information. By centering technology
behaviour on the process of curation itself, as opposed to the adoption or usage of particular
devices or features, researchers will be better positioned to pinpoint network changes over time
and space.
Importantly, future research should evaluate how technologies influence personal network
structure (or lack thereof) by specifying the role of cognition. Past perspectives agree that
relationship selection and maintenance are limited by cognitive demands, yet the precise pathways
through which technologies matter for these processes remain ambiguous. As such, curation
provides a lens through which to explicate and examine the cognitive mechanisms that underlie
how people shape their network structure via technology. A cognitive approach to social network
curation considers how technologies affect which friends come to mind, even if the objective
amount of social behaviour is unchanged. Research is thus needed that assesses the degree to
which social network cognition is altered through curation technologies, and two mechanisms to
pursue are social network reflection and automation.
Specifically, curation technologies may influence network cognition by revising the relation-
ship choice process with heightened reflection. Relationship maintenance has always involved the
preference of certain ties over others, and online selection by no means overrides prior life
experiences, contextual boundaries and social milieus that inherently narrow tie selection. Still,
the control afforded by recent and rising channels gives humans a wider range of choices at each
moment, during which they can elect to narrow or broaden their network scope. A range of
tools contribute to the current flexibility of communication toolboxes7, and these are likely to
be supplemented by more options (for example, virtual assistants, behavioural tracking, network
visualization) that facilitate long-term network reflection.
Additionally, curation technologies may impact network cognition by automating the effortful
work required to maintain ties. Whether one has to stroll down a street or swipe down a screen,
relationship maintenance requires effortful engagement4. However, some research suggests
individuals can groom relationships with more people through ‘low-cost’ one-to-many media7. In
parallel, automated features such as feeds, reminders, notifications allow individuals to
communicate with reduced cognitive effort. As such, newer technologies have the potential to
offload cognitive steps in the maintenance process. For example, curation tools can streamline
how people schedule intimate interactions, monitor life events and reactivate dormant relation-
ships. With the right tools, one may not need to work so hard to keep up with Craig from college
or Roman from high school; WhatsApp or WeChat will do it for you.
Bayer & Hofstra, 2020 Toward Curation
Personality-Driven Social Networks
Emergent curation technologies thereby give humans more options in their social behaviour
and may allow them to distribute cognitive resources in more versatile ways. This raises a
secondary question about what types of people might adopt the tools that help rewire or offload
the mental processing of social networks. Prior research demonstrates that personality is pivotal
in explaining differences in personal network structure, as well as determining how people
perceive and retrieve information about social networks8. For these reasons, personality traits
are likely to guide which individuals adopt or avoid the cognitive tools available in a given culture.
Even among the adopters, the discrete ways in which humans curate their social networks are
likely to vary considerably—i.e., users will respond to the default and customizable settings of a
given technology in distinct ways. In other words, the flexibility to reinforce certain relationships
(as well as to ignore others) does not necessarily cause individuals to desire more friends, and it
may not translate into more friends of equal quality.
Use of curation technologies has the potential to generate a spreading effect on personal network sizes.
Individuals who engage in a high degree of curation behaviour (pink) may gravitate to a wider range of social
network sizes that reflect their social preferences, as compared to individuals who make less use of curation
technologies (green and yellow).
Curation Low Medium High
0 100 200 300
Network Size
Bayer & Hofstra, 2020 Toward Curation
A focus on curation, therefore, raises broader questions about how emergent technologies
widen or narrow the variation (i.e., dispersion or spread) in personal networks—not just how
they cause changes to average network size. Despite the frequent focus on average network size
in research on tech effects, network sizes vary considerably from one another9, especially in the
case of online networks4. As depicted in Fig. 1, higher use of curation technologies (pink histo-
gram) may increase the spread in the distribution of network sizes without shifting mean size (in
this case, 150 friends for all histograms). Rather, this curation-to-variation hypothesis suggests
individuals will engage in curation as a function of their network-relevant personality8. Conse-
quently, research is needed to investigate how curation and personality jointly drive network
structure. As humans are granted more mental tools to engage in curation, personality is poised
to play a more pronounced role in shaping social networks.
As the level of curation behaviour rises, personality differences may facilitate higher variation in social network
characteristics, independent of changes to average network size. The example below illustrates the potential
spreading of network sizes through the interaction of curation and extraversion. Whereas extroverts (dashed
green line) may maintain more friendships than in the past, introverts (dashed blue line) may reinforce fewer
friendships—thus preserving the population average (white line).
0 25 50 75 100
curation
ezisten
Introverts
Average
Extroverts
0 25 50 75 100
curation
ezisten
Introverts
Average
Extroverts
0 25 50 75 100
curation
ezisten
Introverts
Average
Extroverts
Level of Curation
eziS
krowteN
Bayer & Hofstra, 2020 Toward Curation
In this way, curation technologies have the potential to shift network size in divergent
directions through the prism of personality. To illustrate this, we revisit the established positive
relationship between extroversion and network size as an exemplar10. As displayed in Fig. 2,
enhanced curation may lead extroverts (dashed green line) to choose to maintain more friends,
and lead introverts (dashed blue line) to sustain fewer friends, without altering the mean (solid
white line). Depending on the predispositions guiding an individual, curation capabilities hold the
potential to increase, decrease or maintain their active network size. Thus, future networks may
not be bigger in aggregate, but there is reason to expect bigger differences between them—i.e.,
spreading effects—as humans more fully exercise their social preferences.
Over the long-term, the ascent of personality-driven curation en masse also has the potential
to influence collective, societal processes. In addition to curating the number of friendships that
individuals maintain actively, individuals may curate other aspects of their networks too, such as
prioritizing friends with certain personalities, families with certain morals, or cliques with certain
norms. For instance, cognitive network curation may come to influence the level of personality
homophily in communities, with certain network formations harmonizing and others conflicting
with one another. These societal implications are comparable to recent concerns about elevated
opinion homophily due to political newsfeed curation. Yet here we assert that social technologies
have the potential to facilitate an array of novel stratification effects via the interaction of curation
and personality.
Conclusions
This comment has sought to clarify and specify how emergent technologies relate to human
network structure, offering a path for consolidating the contested literature on technology
effects. We argue that past work has overlooked crucial mechanisms and outcomes, neglecting
potential changes within subsets of individuals. Integrating past viewpoints, we chart a revised
approach that targets the cognitive mechanisms underlying network curation. This perspective
expands the research scope to consider whether technology causes humans to curate similar or
different networks from one another. Hence, future work should test for differences in group
variation (i.e., dispersion) in line with recent calls to attend to variation10.
In widening the research focus from technology usage to curation behaviour and from
averages to dispersion, new findings may exhibit greater resilience across eras, locations and
channels. Looking forward, we anticipate that social preferences will become more critical in
evolving networks; or more tersely, personality matters more in personalized networks. As a
consequence, curation technologies have the potential to widen the variation in personal network
structure between types of individuals—and thus generate new forms of personality-driven
stratification—whether or not future networks are ‘bigger’.
Bayer & Hofstra, 2020 Toward Curation