Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Title: Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts
apathy
Author list:
Akshay Nair*, 1,2, 
Ritwik K. Niyogi*,
Fei Shang,
1,4
Sarah J. Tabrizi,
4,5
Geraint Rees,
2,4,6
Robb B. Rutledge.
*: joint first authors, : Corresponding author
Affiliations:
(1) Huntington’s Disease Centre,
UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology,
University College London,
Russell Square House
10-12 Russell Square
London, WC1B 5EH.
United Kingdom
(2) Max Planck UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research,
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology,
University College London,
Russell Square House
10-12 Russell Square
London, WC1B 5EH.
United Kingdom.
(3) Department of Psychiatry,
Yale University,
New Haven,
CT 06510,
USA.
(4) Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging
UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology,
University College London,
12 Queen Square
LONDON WC1N 3AR
United Kingdom
(5) UCL Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience
UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology,
University College London,
17-19 Queen Square,
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
London, WC1N 3AZ.
United Kingdom.
(6) Department of Psychology,
Yale University,
New Haven,
CT 06511,
USA.
Corresponding author:
Dr Akshay Nair
Huntington’s Disease Centre,
UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology,
University College London,
Russell Square House
10-12 Russell Square
London, WC1B 5EH.
United Kingdom
akshay.nair@ucl.ac.uk
Keywords: motivation, apathy, reinforcement learning, opportunity cost
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Abstract:
Background: Apathy, a disabling and poorly understood neuropsychiatric symptom, is characterised
by impaired self-initiated behaviour. Although the computational mechanisms that determine self-
initiation are poorly understood, it has been hypothesised that the opportunity cost of time (OCT) may
be a key variable linking self-initiated behaviour with motivational status. Using a novel behavioural
task and computational modelling, we investigated the relationship between OCT, self-initiation and
apathy. OCT represents the amount of reward which is foregone per second if no action is taken. We
predicted that higher OCT would engender shorter action latencies, and that individuals with greater
sensitivity to OCT would have higher behavioural apathy.
Methods: We modulated the OCT in a novel task called the ‘Fisherman Game’, Participants freely
chose when to self-initiate actions to either collect rewards, or on occasion, to complete non-rewarding
actions. We measured the relationship between action latencies, OCT and apathy for each participant
across two independent non-clinical studies, one under laboratory conditions (n=21) and one online
(n=90). ‘Average-reward’ reinforcement learning was used to model our data. We replicated our
findings across both studies.
Results: We show that the latency of self-initiation is driven by changes in the OCT. Furthermore, we
demonstrate, for the first time, higher apathy was showed greater sensitivity to changes in OCT in
younger adults. Our model shows that apathetic individuals experienced greatest change in subjective
OCT during our task as a consequence of being more sensitive to rewards.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that OCT is an important variable for determining free-operant action
initiation and understanding apathy.
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Introduction:
Apathy is a common, disabling and hard-to-treat neuropsychiatric symptom found in a range of
neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, depression, Parkinson’s Disease (PD), Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) and Huntington’s disease (HD) (Husain & Roiser, 2017; Krishnamoorthy & Craufurd,
2011; Le Heron et al., 2017). In these populations, clinical apathy is commonly associated with reduced
self-care, functional decline and the need for external support (Konstantakopoulos et al., 2011;
Pagonabarraga et al., 2015; S. E. Starkstein et al., 2006; Van Duijn et al., 2010). In the non-clinical
population, apathy is thought to affect academic performance, productivity and health-related outcomes
like weight control and later-life frailty (Ang et al., 2017; Ayers et al., 2017; Desouza et al., 2012;
Katzell & Thompson, 1990). Despite the prevalence and significance of apathy, it remains poorly
understood. Apathy is characterised by reduced motivation and impaired self-initiated goal-directed
behaviour (Le Heron et al., 2018; Levy & Dubois, 2006; Marin, 1991; Sergio E. Starkstein, 2000). In
part, our limited understanding of apathy may reflect limited understanding of a key component of
ecological behaviour at the heart of apathy – self-initiation. If we better understood the environmental
and computational mechanisms which drive self-initiation, can we better understand apathy?
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a prominent theoretical framework that has been used extensively to
build computational models of animal and human decision making and motivation(Chowdhury et al.,
2013; Garrison et al., 2013; Huys et al., 2016; Niv et al., 2007; Noonan et al., 2012; Pessiglione et al.,
2006; R. B. Rutledge et al., 2010; Schultz et al., 1997; Voon et al., 2011). Despite the extensive use of
RL to model trial-by-trial behaviour, there have been limited attempts to extend this framework to the
study of self-initiated, or free-operant, behaviour. Niv et al (2007) began to address this theoretical gap
by considering the choice of free-operant action initiation latency as an optimal decision-making
problem. They framed the problem of action initiation as a semi-Markov decision process and used a
branch of RL known as ‘average reward’ RL to model free-operant action initiation in animals
(Mahadevan, 1996; Niv et al., 2007; Puterman, 2005; Sutton et al., 1999). In their influential
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
computational model, the decision maker chooses not only which action to pick but when to take their
next action. Niv et al (2007) argued that the decision maker must have computed the average ‘reward
rate’. This variable encodes the amount of reward, on average, that can be extracted from the
environment, per unit time. This allows the decision maker to calculate the amount of reward which
could be lost if action initiation is delayed – put simply, the cost of sloth. By weighing this ‘opportunity
cost of time’ (OCT) against the energetic or ‘vigour cost’ of acting too rapidly, the decision maker can
derive an optimal latency that maximises their net rewards over a period. Prompts are not required to
engender action as, immediately after the last action is completed, the decision maker begins to accrue
opportunity cost, which drives them to act again. In this model, the OCT is also governed by an animal’s
motivational status. For example, hungry animals have been shown to complete non-rewarding actions
faster, such as grooming (Dickinson & Balleine, 2002; Hull, 1943; Niv et al., 2005). Within the OCT
framework this is predicted as hunger increases the utility of food: penalizing time spent away from
seeking food. Thus, the OCT theory outlines a theoretical framework for understanding both self-
initiation and motivation. Despite such insight , although this model has been applied to trial-based
cognitive tasks (Beierholm et al., 2013; Guitart-Masip et al., 2011), there is currently limited evidence
to suggest that in a free operant setting, healthy participants choose action latencies based on the OCT.
Furthermore, the relationship between apathetic symptoms and sensitivity to OCT has not been
explored. In this study, we seek to address these lacunae.
We developed a novel behavioural paradigm in which participants were free to choose when to self-
initiate actions while we experimentally manipulated the OCT. Firstly, we predicted that in this free-
operant setting, participants would rapidly adapt their choice of action latencies based on the OCT.
Higher levels of opportunity cost would encourage more frequent action initiation. Secondly, as
described above, we predicted that high opportunity cost would invigorate the completion of non-
rewarding actions. Finally, we asked whether sensitivity to the OCT within our task predicted
behavioural apathy scores. We hypothesised that motivated individuals would perceive even small
rewards as highly rewarding. They would perform tasks as if there was a higher degree of opportunity
cost throughout the task. As such, when exposed to a task with fluctuating levels of opportunity cost,
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
motivated individuals would consistently act quickly, showing little variation in chosen action latencies.
By comparison, we predicted that apathetic individuals would show a strong inverse relationship
between OCT and chosen action latency, choosing to go faster only when the opportunity cost is high
and slowing down when it is low. Based on previous work, we fit our data using a new, average-reward,
RL model and predicted that differences in reward sensitivity parameters in our model could explain
the relationship between apathy and the OCT.
Methods:
Samples:
Both studies were performed before the COVID-19 pandemic. We recruited healthy participants with
no known psychiatric or neurological history and who were not taking any psychotropic medication.
Participants were told that they could earn up to £5 depending on their performance. Participants who
felt that they struggled with motivation were encouraged to sign up to the study, but participants were
not pre-screened on apathy scores. Twenty-one participants were recruited into Exp. (1). This study was
approved by the UCL ethics committee (3450/002). Ninety adult participants from the Prolific online
inclusion and exclusion criteria for Exp. (2)). The study was run on the Gorilla testing platform with
task code written in Javascript. Participants received additional payment to ensure that hourly earnings
for participation were at least £5 per hour. This study was approved by the UCL ethics committee
Questionnaire data:
Participants completed two questionnaires after finishing the task – the Apathy and Motivation Index
(AMI), a validated questionnaire designed to measure apathy in the general population; and the Hospital
Depression and Anxiety Scale (HADS), a brief self-reported screening tool for assessing depressive
and anxiety symptoms (Ang et al., 2017; Stern, 2014). AMI is scored such that higher scores correspond
to higher apathy levels. Given the focus of our experiment was on behavioural apathy, our primary
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
outcome for these experiments was the behavioural apathy score from the AMI, as opposed to the
emotional or social apathy scale.
Task overview:
Fig. 1: Overview of task design. (A) Following assessment of maximum tapping speed, instructions and training,
participants completed two counterbalanced environments in which they earned ¥ for fish caught with key presses:
high OCT and low OCT environment indicated by the monetary value of ¥3000 (£4 or £0.50) and the colour of
the water (blue water representing high value and white water representing low value). When not pressing to catch
fish, nothing on screen prompted action. To register that a fish was caught, the angle of the fish graphic changed
by 45o. A bell sounded each time the price for fish changed. Information regarding environments and range of
fish prices was present on screen at all times. The price of the fish changed every 12-13 seconds and prices were
randomly drawn from a set of 6 prices ranging from ¥0.1 - ¥2.5 per fish. Each price was seen four times in an
environment and the order of prices was the same in both environments but randomly generated for each
participant. (B) Six times in each environment, the participant’s fishing rod broke. To fix it they were required to
repeatedly tap an alternative button, for no immediate reward and for a fixed number of times. While the rod was
broken, no price was displayed on screen; instead, participants saw a large red cross which decreased in size with
every tap. Time within the task was not stopped while the rod was being fixed and participants were aware of this.
Participants played our novel task, ‘The Fisherman Game’ shown in Fig. (1). Participants were told that
they would be earning money, in fictional yen ¥, by catching fish. To catch fish, participants pressed
the down arrow key on a keyboard. This action required minimal effort and the force of tapping was
not relevant to outcome. Every time they pressed down, they ‘caught’ a fish. The number of yen earned
for each fish was displayed on the screen next to a fish icon. This value changed every 12-13 seconds
and was drawn at random from a set of 6 numbers ranging from ¥0.1 to ¥2.5. When the price changed
participants also heard a bell to alert them to the change in price to minimise effects of poor attention.
As this task was designed to test the timing of self-initiated behaviour, the screen was static and there
were no prompts to initiate actions.
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Participants were told that they would play the fisherman game in two ‘environments’ each containing
two blocks. One block consisted of 12 changes in price following which block participants were given
a self-paced rest. Participants were told that in one environment earning ¥3000 would result in payment
of £4.00. In the other environment, they were told earning ¥3000 would only result in a payment of
£0.50. The order of the environments was counterbalanced between subjects, and all subjects knew
before starting the game that they would have to play both environments. The change in OCT across
the prices and environments represent the two OCT manipulations participants experienced in this
study.
Finally, a non-rewarding action was included in both environments of the game. Participants were told
that their fishing rod may break randomly during the game. To fix the rod, participants were told to tap
the right arrow key on the keyboard five times successively. On the screen, rod breaking was indicated
by a red cross which reduced in size with each successive tap. Rod fixing yielded no additional yen or
fish and at the time the rod broke the current price of fish was not displayed, only the environment
value. The only utility of fixing the rod quickly was to be able to return to collecting fish. The fishing
rod broke six times per environment. When the rod broke, time in the task was not stopped and
participants were aware of this task feature. The order of price changes and timings of the rod breaking
were randomly determined in each participant and fixed across the two environments. The task user
interface and design elements are further shown and described in Fig. (1). Before starting the
experiment, participants read detailed instructions on all aspects of the task including a practice period
catching fish for 20 seconds whilst the price changed and a period fixing the rod. They were told to go
as fast or as slow as they wanted throughout the experiment. The task itself lasted approximately 15
minutes. The task was designed and implemented in Cogent 2000, a Matlab toolbox for psychological
experiments.
The task online for Exp.2 was almost identical to the one described above; however, the minor
differences are described in the Supplementary Methods. Additional inclusion and exclusion criteria
for Exp. 2 are also found in the Supplementary Methods. The task was coded in JavaScript and hosted
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Outcome measures:
The key variable of interest in this study was the latency between two successive actions, calculated as
the difference in the stored timestamps between two key presses. The price and the environment were
manipulated as described above. Action latencies for fishing and fixing a broken fishing rod were
recorded.
Statistical analysis:
Statistical analysis was identical in both studies. Basic task metrics were first computed to assess the
effect of the environmental manipulation of the OCT. The number of action initiations were compared,
within subject, between the high and low opportunity cost environments. The mean latency per price in
each environment was also calculated and used to illustrate the effect of price and environment
manipulation. To determine the effect of environment on rod fixing latencies, the mean log transformed
rod fixing latency in each environment were compared.
Outliers were removed from latency data using median absolute dispersion technique. This outlier
removal technique is itself more robust to the presence of outliers and has been recommended for use
with latency data (Leys et al., 2013). Using this approach, an outlier is defined as being greater than 3
scaled absolute deviations from the median (median(|Y -median(Y)|). Outliers were removed from the
raw latency data for each subject in each environment. Latencies were then log transformed for use in
linear regression models.
We modelled our data using a linear mixed effects model. The log transformed latencies were specified
as the dependent variable in our model. At the fixed effects level, we included three variables (1) price,
(2) environment (low or high as a dummy variable) and (3) the number of cumulative taps the subject
had performed in the environment up to that point. Each of these effects was also estimated at the
subject level as random effects. Subject level slopes for price and environment were used as individual
measures of sensitivity to our two manipulations of opportunity cost. Linear mixed models were fit in
MATLAB 2017a using the fitlme function. Models were estimated by fitting an unstructured variance-
covariance matrix using a restricted maximum likelihood (REML) fit method.
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
We also asked whether these individual sensitivities to opportunity cost (i.e., price beta, environment
beta) were predictive of bAMI. In Exp. (1), we built a linear regression model to determine whether
individual sensitivity to opportunity cost predicted bAMI scores whilst controlling for demographics
(age and gender) and symptoms of depression and anxiety entered separated (D-HADS and A-HADS
scores). Exp (2), the online study had a wider age range as compared to the lab study (see Results).
Based on the results from Exp. (1), post-hoc, we asked whether the effect would be present in young
adults (age 18-35) and we divided our cohort in Exp. (2) into young (age 18-35) and older adults (age
36-65).
Computational modelling:
Following Niv et al. (2007) we formulated the task as a real-time cost-benefit decision-making problem,
in which participants trade-off the OCT against the energetic cost of acting quickly. Formally, our
approach constitutes an ‘average reward’ reinforcement learning problem. We assumed that each [price
of fish, environment] condition is a separate “state”. A participant, in a state, chooses a latency, then
returns to the same state, and the process repeats. Central to our model, participants choose action
latencies (𝜏) by balancing the cost of vigour cost (C /) and the OCT (𝑅). The vigour cost is inversely
proportional to the latency, with an individually fitted cost parameter (C ), rising rapidly as the
participant responds closer toward their fastest motor latency. The OCT denotes the average reward
foregone by responding at a particular latency: slower responses in a high reward environment lead to
greater reward foregone. OCT is calculated by multiplying the reward rate, average reward available
per second (𝑅), by the latency. Aside from the C parameter, we also fit a reward sensitivity (S )
v R
parameter to each subjects data. In our model, a subject with low S would perceive little difference in
subjective rewards between prices or environments. For such a subject, the subjective reward remains
high even when the price or environment value is low. By comparison, with high S , subjective reward
would relate more closely with the value of the price or environment. For more modelling details
including model specification, fitting procedure and model comparison see Supplemental Methods and
Fig. S1.
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Results:
Cohort description:
EXPERIMENT 1 (N = 21) EXPERIMENT 2 (N = 90)
AGE 22.5 ± 2.9 38.6 ± 10.6
(min: 19, max: 32) (min: 21, max: 63)
GENDER (F%) 76.2% 51.7%
AMI TOTAL 1.4 ± 0.4 1.6 ± 0.5
BEHAVIOURAL AMI 1.6 ± 0.9 1.6 ± 0.8
HADS TOTAL 13.7 ±7.2 12.7 ± 6.8
Mean total Apathy and Motivation Index (AMI), behavioural AMI sub-score and total Hospital Anxiety and
Depression Scores (HADS) shown (values shown as mean ± SD).
we sought to recruit healthy adult participants. Exp. (1) took place under laboratory conditions whereas
Exp. (2) was completed online using the Gorilla and Prolific testing platforms.
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Opportunity cost invigorates both rewarding and non-rewarding actions in healthy participants
Fig. 2: Opportunity cost invigorates rewarding actions - (A-B) In both lab-based (A) and online (B)
experiments, increased opportunity cost (manipulated by environments with a higher price for fish) produced the
predicted reduction in chosen free-operant action initiation latencies. Mean choice latency is plotted by price
(¥/tap) and environment (+/- SEM) for (A) Exp. (1) in-lab sample and (B) Exp. (2) online sample. (C-D) Higher
opportunity cost was associated with more frequent self-initiated action initiation (i.e., more taps) during the fixed
environment duration in subjects in both (C) Exp. (1) in-lab and (D) Exp. (2) online studies. Blue dots represent
the number of taps performed by each subject in each environment (low vs. high opportunity cost). Line of no
effect is shown as a dashed red line. We predicted more frequent free-operant action initiation in the environment
associated with higher opportunity cost (i.e., more points below the line). The t statistics included show difference
between mean log latencies, ** p < 0.01 *** p < 0.001
The effect of OCT on mean latencies and free-operant action initiation is shown in Fig. (2) for both in-
lab (Fig. 2A) and online samples (Fig. 2B). Mean latencies decreased as price of fish increased both
experiments. Further, mean latencies were lower in the high OCT environment, in which ¥3000 was
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
worth £4.00 as compared to £0.50 in the low OCT environment. Using mixed linear models to
summarise the group level effect of both OCT manipulations on action latency, we found that
participants in both Exp. (1) and Exp. (2) adapted their action latencies with respect to OCT for both
price and environment. For both price (Exp. (1): β = -0.056, CI: -0.07 to -0.03, p < 0.001, Exp. (2): β =
-0.039, CI: -0.05 to -0.03, p < 0.001) and environment (Exp. (1): β = -0.049, CI: -0.08 to -0.01 p =
0.001, Exp. (2): β = -0.041, CI: -0.06 to -0.02, p < 0.001), as OCT increased, action initiation latency
decreased. There was also a gradual drift towards slower latencies over the course of the experiment
(Exp. (1): β = 6.9*10-5, CI: 4.8*10-5 to 8.8*10-5, p < 0.001, Exp. (2): β = 4.0*10-5, CI: 3.1*10-5 to 4.9*10-
5, p < 0.001) in both experiments. In keeping with our predictions, participants in both studies also took
longer to fix the broken fishing rod in the low OCT environment as compared to the high OCT
environment (Exp. (1) – Fig. (3A), t(20) = -3.0, p = 0.0076, Exp. (2) – Fig. (3B), t(89) = -4.0, p < 0.001,
Fig. S2). Fixing the fishing rod was associated with no reward itself, other than a faster return to fishing.
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Individual sensitivity to opportunity cost predicted behavioural apathy scores in young adults
Fig. 3: Sensitivity to opportunity cost depends on apathy - Example timeseries from the task as performed by
a participant with low behavioural apathy (A – bAMI: 0.83) and a participant with high behavioural apathy (B –
bAMI: 3.5) in Exp. (1). Blue timeseries shows chosen action latencies and orange lines indicate the current fish
price. Changes in fish price signal change in OCT, here in the low OCT environment in both examples. Highly
motivated individuals like the participant in (A) showed little sensitivity to change in opportunity cost. By
comparison, the example apathetic individual in (B) showed a negative relationship between action latency and
OCT. (C-D) Relationship between behavioural apathy scores measured by bAMI and OCT sensitivity (subject-
level price beta from linear mixed model) in C. Exp. (1), in-lab (n = 21) and D. Exp. (2), online young adults (18-
35 years, n = 45). Behavioural apathy scores were significantly associated with OCT sensitivity in both lab ( =
-0.60, p = 0.004) and online samples ( = -0.50, p = 0.0005) in young adults. ** p < 0.01 *** p < 0.001
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
As this task was designed to assess the effect of OCT on free operant action initiation, we hypothesized
that sensitivity to OCT would predict behavioural apathy scores (bAMI). Fig. 4(A) and Fig. 4(B) show
example timeseries from two participants from Exp. (1) with low and high behavioural apathy scores,
respectively. The high apathy individual showed a strong inverse relationship between latency and
price. This effect was also seen at a group level. A linear regression model was used to assess whether
participants’ sensitivity to opportunity cost: either price or environment, could predict behavioural
apathy scores after controlling for age, gender, and anxiety and depression scores. In Exp. (1), both
price and environment sensitivity predicted behavioural apathy (Price GLM: β = -11.5, t = -3.1, p =
0.002, Fig. 4C, Environment GLM: β = -5.2, t = -2.2, p = 0.04).
We next tested whether apathy was correlated with both price and environment sensitivity in Exp. (2).
Including the entire cohort (n = 90), we did not initially find the same relationship between behavioural
apathy scores and price or environment sensitivity scores (Price GLM: β = -3.4, t = -1.7, p = 0.08,
Environment GLM: β = 1.2 t = -1.6, p = 0.1). As compared to Exp. (2), all participants in the first in-
lab study fell within the young adult age bracket, namely between 18-35 years. We therefore completed
a post-hoc analysis dividing the cohort into young (age: 18-35, n = 45) and older adult cohorts (age: 36-
65, n = 45) predicting that we would replicate the relationship between bAMI and price sensitivity in
the young cohort. Replicating the results from Exp. (1), we found that price sensitivity predicted bAMI
scores in young adults after correcting for age, gender, anxiety and depression scores scores (Young
Adult Price GLM: β = -9.9, t = -3.2, p = 0.003, Fig. 4D). This result was not seen in the older adults
(Older Adult Price GLM: β = 3.0, t = -1.2, p = 0.25). This result was not explained by a lack of effect
of a price manipulation in older adults (Older adults: β = -0.041, t = -3.4, p < 0.001; β = -0.029, t
price env
= -1.5, p = 0.13; Young adults: β = -0.036, t = -7.4, p < 0.001, β = -0.053, t = -2.3, p = 0.018).
price env
Environment sensitivity was not predictive of behavioural apathy scores in either the young or old adults
(Young Adults: β = 0.69 t = -1.4, p = 0.62, Older Adults: β = 1.6 t = 1.9, p = 0.06). In summary, the
sensitivity of young adults, tested either in the lab or online, to adapt their action latencies to changes
in OCT predicts behavioural apathy.
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Reward sensitivity and opportunity cost of time correlate with apathy scores in young adults
Fig. 4: Apathy modulates reward rate: (A-B) We found a strong positive relationship between reward
sensitivity and apathy using our average reward RL model. (C-D) As a result of this variation in reward sensitivity,
apathetic individuals showed larger changes in subjective opportunity cost of time derived from the model
between different environments (plot shows the difference in modelled opportunity cost between states with the
highest and lowest opportunity cost) *p < 0.05 ** p < 0.01 *** p < 0.001
Using our average reward RL model, we found that reward sensitivity in young adults was correlated
with independently assessed apathy scores in both Exp. (1) (ρ = 0.62, p = 0.008) and Exp. (2) (ρ = 0.52,
p = 0.0009), Fig. 4(A-B). In our model, a subject with high reward sensitivity would perceive large
differences in subjective reward between prices and environments. By comparison, with low reward
sensitivity, as found in motivated individuals the subjective reward remains high even when the price
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
or environment reward value is low. As a result, our model also suggests that apathetic individuals in
our studies showed the largest change in the subjective OCT throughout our task. This is demonstrated
in Fig. 4(C-D) which show the correlations, in both Exp. (1) and Exp. (2), between individual
behavioural apathy scores and the change in model-derived subjective OCT between states with the
highest and lowest opportunity cost in our task.
Further, our modelling revealed that more apathetic individuals experienced higher OCT in the highest
environment (Fig. S3(A-B)). This modelling result makes an intriguing prediction: more apathetic
individuals will respond faster in the highest reward state (highest price and environment). We found
that, in keeping with the modelling, higher apathy was surprisingly associated with a lower median
action initiation latency in the highest reward state, with a negative correlation in Exp. (2) (ρ = -0.48, p
= 0.0008) and a similar trend in Exp. (1) (ρ = -0.35, p = 0.1). These data are shown in Fig. S3(A-D).
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Discussion:
One of the hallmarks of apathy is reduced self-initiated goal-directed behaviour (Levy & Dubois, 2006;
Marin, 1991). In this study, we show that healthy participants adapt the timing of self-initiation
according to the opportunity cost of time (OCT), the amount of reward lost per unit time by not acting.
By manipulating the OCT within our novel behavioural task, we show in two independent studies that
healthy participants rapidly adapt action initiation latencies for rewarding actions to changes in OCT.
We also show that high OCT invigorates non-rewarding actions. Furthermore, we find that individual
sensitivity to OCT predicted behavioural apathy scores in young adults in both studies. Building on
these results we fit a novel computational model to behaviour in our task. Using our average-reward
reinforcement learning model we find that differences in reward sensitivity correlated with motivational
status as assessed by a standard apathy questionnaire. This meant that apathetic young adults in our
studies showed the largest change in the subjective OCT.
We believe that our study has several strengths. Firstly, the task we developed encourages free operant
action initiation without adopting a discrete trial-by-trial design, making it highly ecological. Secondly,
by making explicit the current reward rate, we minimised behavioural differences between participants
driven by differences in learning. Furthermore, changes in OCT were signalled with salient visual and
auditory stimuli to minimise the impact of inattention. As a result of these design elements, we contend
that variance in the behaviour we observed is driven primarily by variance in the sensitivity of
individuals to opportunity cost. Through these design elements, we also hope our task will be of value
in a range of clinical populations. Following on from the first experiment, we also sought to
independently replicate our results by running our second experiment online. By adopting this approach,
and replicating our main results, we sought to avoid effects driven by any recruitment bias associated
with laboratory cognitive testing or any demand effect due to the presence of the experimenter.
Although we predicted a relationship between opportunity cost sensitivity and apathy, we did not a
priori predict that this relationship would be influenced by aging. In our online study, older apathetic
adults were not more sensitive to opportunity cost and this finding requires further investigation. This
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
may reflect that fact that in the older adult cohort, the effects of the opportunity cost manipulations were
weaker than in the young cohort. It is also known that aging influences a range of factors related to
reward-based decision making and these changes may have contributed to our results(Chowdhury et
al., 2013; Green et al., 1999; R. B. B. Rutledge et al., 2016).
To our knowledge, our study represents the first demonstration that opportunity cost drives free-operant
action initiation. In two important earlier studies it has been shown that in a trial-by-trial cognitive
paradigm participants modulate reaction times based on experimentally controlled average reward rates
(Beierholm et al., 2013; Guitart-Masip et al., 2011). However, those studies used cognitive paradigms
and were unable to test whether opportunity cost drives free-operant action initiation because
participants in both studies were prompted to act and additionally had to account for a speed-accuracy
trade-off in their decisions. Perhaps most relevant to our findings of a link to apathy was a null result
recently reported by Kos et al (2017), who identified in a sample of 39 young adults aged 18-40, a lack
of relationship between self-initiation latencies and apathy (Kos et al., 2017). Participants initially were
cued to respond, then asked to choose between two actions and were free to decide on the timing of
their chosen action. Three key differences between our studies may explain the lack of association
reported by Kos et al (2017): responses were cued, the decision-making component also may affect
latencies, and finally the OCT was not easy for participants to compute. Our task is similar to many
problems faced in the natural world, and perhaps the key to our identification of a novel link to
behavioural apathy.
We also present an average reward RL model for human free-operant behaviour. Using this
computational approach, we find that low apathy young adults act as though they were experiencing a
similar OCT across all conditions in our task. In comparison, high apathy young adults experienced the
greatest change in subjective OCT. In both experiments, our computational model showed that reward
sensitivity can explain the relationship between apathy and task performance. The reward sensitivity
parameter governs the change in subjective reward as participants move between states with different
levels of reward. As predicted, highly motivated (low apathy) individuals acted as if all rewards were
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
subjectively highly rewarding and consequently, they were invigorated in all states. By comparison,
apathetic individuals acted as if they found small rewards subjectively less rewarding, choosing only to
act rapidly for larger rewards. Our computational modelling also revealed that participants with greater
apathy had higher OCT in the highest reward state. This result led us to uncover an unexpected and
intriguing aspect of our data: in the highest reward state, apathetic individuals on the whole acted more
quickly than non-apathetic individuals. These findings suggest that in both laboratory and online young
adult cohorts, the effects of apathy on attaining rewards may be overcome by reserving effort for high
value environments, and this surprising result is worthy of further investigation. Finally, although
average-reward RL models are not common in computational modelling, they make the argument that
in large, ergodic, environments the long-run average of rewards can be used to optimise behaviour
(Mahadevan, 1996). Although cognitive tasks are often short lived, psychological phenomena, such as
motivational status and mood, are often conceptualised as extending over longer time periods (days or
weeks). It may be that average reward signals, computed over various timescales, may be a useful
framework for assessing and modelling these longer lasting phenomena.
Finally, although we did not test the biological basis of opportunity cost coding, as predicted by Niv et
al (2007), empirical work supports the idea that tonic mesolimbic dopamine signalling covaries with
reward rate and motivational vigour (Hamid et al., 2015; Mohebi et al., 2019). Given the consistent
links we find between behavioural apathy and sensitivity to the OCT in young adults, we would predict
that young apathetic participants will show the greatest change in behaviour with the pharmacological
manipulation of dopamine.
Conclusion:
Using a novel task and computational model, we find that OCT is an important determinant in the choice
of free-operant action initiation latencies in healthy participants. We also establish, for the first time, a
link between sensitivity to OCT and severity of behavioural apathy in two independent studies. Apathy
is poorly understood and disabling, and clinical apathy is difficult to treat. Our results suggest that better
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
understanding how the opportunity cost of time is represented in the brain and how it influences action
initiation may allow us to better understand apathy.
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Author contributions:
• A.N. designed and coded the “Fisherman Game” for Exp. (1), consented participants
and collected data for Exp. (1), supervised F.S. in the implementation and data
collection of Exp. (2), contributed to discussion regarding computational model,
performed data analysis for model-free analyses, wrote manuscript. Corresponding
author.
• R.K.N designed, coded and fit the average-reward RL model to the data from Exp. (1)
and Exp. (2), supervised F.S. in the analyses of model-free results, performed data
analysis for model-based analyses, reviewed and amended manuscript.
• F.S. coded Fisherman Game for Exp. (2), collected data for Exp. (2), analysed model-
free results for Exp. (2), contributed to discussion regarding computational model,
reviewed and amended manuscript.
• G.R. contributed to the design of the study, provided analysis guidance, reviewed and
amended manuscript.
• S.J.T. contributed to the design of the study, provided analysis guidance, reviewed
and amended manuscript.
• R.B.R, Principal Investigator for study, contributed to the design of the study,
contributed to discussion regarding computational model, provided analysis guidance,
reviewed and amended manuscript
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Acknowledgments and Funding:
• A.N. is supported by the Leonard Wolfson Experimental Neurology Centre (Award: 525369)
• R.K.N. was funded by Wellcome Trust Sir Henry Wellcome fellowship (107388/A/15/Z)
• G.R. is receives grant funding from the Wellcome Trust.
• S.J.T. receives grant funding for her research from the Medical Research Council UK, the
Wellcome Trust, the Rosetrees Trust, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, NIHR North Thames Local
Clinical Research Network, UK Dementia Research Institute, Wolfson Foundation for
Neurodegeneration and the CHDI Foundation.
• R.B.R. is supported by a Medical Research Council Career Development Award
(MR/N02401X/1) and a NARSAD Young Investigator Grant from the Brain & Behavior
Research Foundation, P&S Fund. The Max Planck UCL Centre is a joint initiative supported
by UCL and the Max Planck Society. The Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging is
supported by core funding from the Wellcome Trust (203147/Z/16/Z).
Conflict of interests:
Authors declare no conflicts of interest
Data availability:
Data and code will be made available on reasonable request
Ethical standards
The authors assert that all procedures contributing to this work comply with the ethical standards of the
relevant national and institutional committees on human experimentation and with the Helsinki
Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2008.
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
References:
Ang, Y.-S., Lockwood, P., Apps, M. A. J., Muhammed, K., & Husain, M. (2017). Distinct Subtypes
of Apathy Revealed by the Apathy Motivation Index. Plos One, 12(1), e0169938.
Ayers, E., Shapiro, M., Holtzer, R., Barzilai, N., Milman, S., & Verghese, J. (2017). Symptoms of
apathy independently predict incident frailty and disability in community-dwelling older adults.
Beierholm, U., Guitart-Masip, M., Economides, M., Chowdhury, R., Düzel, E., Dolan, R., & Dayan,
P. (2013). Dopamine Modulates Reward-Related Vigor. Neuropsychopharmacology, 38(8),
Chowdhury, R., Guitart-Masip, M., Lambert, C., Dayan, P., Huys, Q., Düzel, E., & Dolan, R. J.
(2013). Dopamine restores reward prediction errors in old age. Nature Neuroscience, 16(5),
Desouza, C. V., Padala, P. R., Haynatzki, G., Anzures, P., Demasi, C., & Shivaswamy, V. (2012).
Role of apathy in the effectiveness of weight management programmes. Diabetes, Obesity and
Dickinson, A., & Balleine, B. (2002). The Role of Learning in the Operation of Motivational Systems.
In Stevens’ Handbook of Experimental Psychology. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Garrison, J., Erdeniz, B., & Done, J. (2013). Prediction error in reinforcement learning: A meta-
analysis of neuroimaging studies. In Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews (Vol. 37, Issue 7,
Green, L., Myerson, J., & Ostaszewski, P. (1999). Discounting of delayed rewards across the life
span: Age differences in individual discounting functions. Behavioural Processes, 46(1), 89–96.
Guitart-Masip, M., Beierholm, U. R., Dolan, R., Duzel, E., & Dayan, P. (2011). Vigor in the Face of
Fluctuating Rates of Reward: An Experimental Examination. Journal of Cognitive
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Hamid, A. A., Pettibone, J. R., Mabrouk, O. S., Hetrick, V. L., Schmidt, R., Vander Weele, C. M.,
Kennedy, R. T., Aragona, B. J., & Berke, J. D. (2015). Mesolimbic dopamine signals the value
Hull, C. L. (1943). Principles of behavior: an introduction to behavior theory. In Principles of
behavior: an introduction to behavior theory. Appleton-Century.
Husain, M., & Roiser, J. P. (2017). Neuroscience of apathy and anhedonia : a transdiagnostic
Huys, Q. J. M., Maia, T. V, & Frank, M. J. (2016). Computational psychiatry as a bridge from
neuroscience to clinical applications. Nature Neuroscience, 19(3), 404–413.
Katzell, R. A., & Thompson, D. E. (1990). Work Motivation: Theory and Practice. American
Konstantakopoulos, G., Ploumpidis, D., Oulis, P., Patrikelis, P., Soumani, A., Papadimitriou, G. N., &
Politis, A. M. (2011). Apathy, cognitive deficits and functional impairment in schizophrenia.
Kos, C., Klaasen, N. G., Marsman, J. B. C., Opmeer, E. M., Knegtering, H., Aleman, A., & Van Tol,
M. J. (2017). Neural basis of self-initiative in relation to apathy in a student sample. Scientific
Krishnamoorthy, A., & Craufurd, D. (2011). Treatment of Apathy in Huntington’s Disease and Other
Movement Disorders. Current Treatment Options in Neurology, 13(5), 508–519.
Le Heron, C., Apps., M. A. J., & Husain, M. (2017). The anatomy of apathy: A neurocognitive
framework for amotivated behaviour. Neuropsychologia.
Le Heron, C., Apps., M. A. J., & Husain, M. (2018). The anatomy of apathy: A neurocognitive
framework for amotivated behaviour. Neuropsychologia, 118, 54–67.
Levy, R., & Dubois, B. (2006). Apathy and the functional anatomy of the prefrontal cortex-basal
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Leys, C., Ley, C., Klein, O., Bernard, P., & Licata, L. (2013). Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology Detecting outliers : Do not use standard deviation around the mean , use absolute
deviation around the median. 4–6.
Mahadevan, S. (1996). Average reward reinforcement learning: foundations, algorithms, and
Marin, R. S. (1991). Apathy: A Neuropsychiatric Syndrome. Journal of Neuropsychiatry, 3(3), 243–
Mohebi, A., Pettibone, J. R., Hamid, A. A., Wong, J. M. T., Vinson, L. T., Patriarchi, T., Tian, L.,
Kennedy, R. T., & Berke, J. D. (2019). Dissociable dopamine dynamics for learning and
Niv, Y., Daw, N. D., & Dayan, P. (2005). How fast to work: Response vigor, motivation and tonic
dopamine. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 18 (NIPS 2005), 1019–1026.
Niv, Y., Daw, N. D., Joel, D., & Dayan, P. (2007). Tonic dopamine: Opportunity costs and the control
0502-4
Noonan, M. P., Kolling, N., Walton, M. E., & Rushworth, M. F. S. (2012). Re-evaluating the role of
the orbitofrontal cortex in reward and reinforcement. European Journal of Neuroscience, 35(7),
Pagonabarraga, J., Kulisevsky, J., Strafella, A. P., & Krack, P. (2015). Apathy in Parkinson’s disease:
Clinical features, neural substrates, diagnosis, and treatment. In The Lancet Neurology (Vol. 14,
Pessiglione, M., Seymour, B., Flandin, G., Dolan, R. J., & Frith, C. D. (2006). Dopamine-dependent
prediction errors underpin reward-seeking behaviour in humans. Nature, 442(7106), 1042–1045.
Puterman, M. L. (2005). Markov decision processes : discrete stochastic dynamic programming.
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Wiley-Interscience.
Rutledge, R. B. B., Smittenaar, P., Zeidman, P., Brown, H. R. R., Adams, R. A. A., Lindenberger, U.,
Dayan, P., & Dolan, R. J. J. (2016). Risk Taking for Potential Reward Decreases across the
Rutledge, R. B., Dean, M., Caplin, A., & Glimcher, P. W. (2010). Testing the reward prediction error
hypothesis with an axiomatic model. J Neurosci, 30(40), 13525–13536.
Schultz, W., Dayan, P., Montague, P. R., Deichmann, R., Friston, K., & Dolan, R. J. (1997). A neural
Starkstein, S. E., Jorge, R., Mizrahi, R., & Robinson, R. G. (2006). A prospective longitudinal study
of apathy in Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 77(1), 8–
Starkstein, Sergio E. (2000). Apathy and Withdrawal. International Psychogeriatrics, 12(S1), 135–
Stern, A. F. (2014). The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale. Occupational Medicine, 64(5), 393–
Sutton, R. S., Precup, D., & Singh, S. (1999). Between MDPs and semi-MDPs: A framework for
temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. In Artificial Intelligence (Vol. 112).
Van Duijn, E., Reedeker, N., Giltay, E. J., Roos, R. A. C., & Van Der Mast, R. C. (2010). Correlates
of apathy in Huntington’s disease. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences,
Voon, V., Pessiglione, M., Brezing, C., Gallea, C., Hubert, H., Dolan, R. J., & Hallett, M. (2011).
Mechanisms underlying dopamine-mediated reward bias in compulsive behaviors. Neuron,
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Supplementary Methods:
Changes for online version:
The task online was almost identical to the one described in the Methods however a few differences
The only differences in the design matrix from the in-lab version were that the prices changed every 13
seconds with no jitter, and the number of taps required to fix the rod was increased to 8. At the beginning
of the experiment, online participants read through the same detailed instructions as the in-lab version.
They completed a brief training in which they were instructed to tap for 26 seconds during which the
price changed after 13 seconds. All participants were then asked binary (True/False) questions about
the task to test understanding (for example, “When the water is blue, ¥3000 is worth £4 – True or False).
Finally, all participants underwent a sound check to ensure that they could hear the bell when the price
changed. The sound check involved correctly identifying three animal sounds. Participants who failed
the sounds check (n = 4) were immediately excluded. Aside from the 4 participants who were excluded
for failing the sound check, 4 participants were excluded due to errors with data at rod breaking (missing
data or more than 40 taps recorded rather than the 8 specified suggesting a data storage error for those
participants). A further two participants tapped very slowly (less than 1 tap per second on average) and
were excluded. In total, 90 participants were included in the online sample.
Computational modelling details:
Following Niv et al. (2007) we used an average reward reinforcement learning modelling framework
to link vigour and motivation. The modelling is described in detail here are in Fig. S1. We consider the
task to be a real-time cost-benefit decision-making problem, which repeats over and over again. A
participant must choose how fast to initiate actions, in order to maximize her rate of rewards:
𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑
𝑅 =
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
For simplicity, we assume that each [price of fish, environment] condition is a separate state. A
participant starts off in a state, chooses a latency and returns to the same state, and the process repeats.
The problem is thus recurrent, with 12 distinct states in our task (6 prices and 2 environments). A subject
cannot respond faster than their fastest motor latencies ሺ𝜏 ሻ taken to be the fastest latencies above
𝑚𝑖𝑛
100ms. This excludes spurious responses like slips of the finger. We assume that per response, the
participant gains a reward of subjective value (r ) but incurs two costs (Fig. 5A, B) (i) a
subj
calorific/energetic vigour cost (−C /(𝜏 − 𝜏 )) of responding quickly and (ii) an automatic OCT
v min
(−𝑅ሺ𝜏ሻ). Following Niv et al. (2007), we assume the vigour cost is inversely proportional to the latency
of responses, with its slope determined by the parameter C The vigour cost for a participant is defined
v.
relative to their motor latency, becoming much steeper when the participant responds near their motor
latency. The OCT denotes the average reward foregone by responding at a particular latency: slower
responses in a high reward environment are costlier as several highly rewarding actions could have been
taken in that time. Finally, we assume that for each participant, objective reward (r : reward per action
obj
subj
r = 𝑅𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚 [1 − ]
subj
𝑓൫𝑟 ൯ +
𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑆
where S denotes how sensitive a subject is to changes in objective reward. Low S implies low
R R
sensitivity to objective reward and vice versa (Fig. 5C). Graphically, the parameter S shifts the utility
curve laterally, so that the curve saturates more or less quickly. R is a normalizing constant
norm
calculated as follows:
R = 1 – 1/[f( r ) + 1/S ]
norm obj_max R
This ensures that the subjective reward function saturates at 1 for all subjects, and thereby constrains
the maximum subjective utility. We used the function ƒ(r ) = 0.5*r - 0.5, to obtain the best
objective objective
fits to the data across subjects, although our results are independent of the choice of this function.
Under these assumptions, we can compute the maximum of the net sum of rewards and costs for any
given latency (τ). This maximal expected return Q*(s,τ) depends on three quantities: (i) the subjective
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
value of the currently available reward (r ), (ii) the cost of vigour (−C /(𝜏 − 𝜏 ) ), and (iii) the OCT,
subj v min
in addition to the maximal value of the state to which the process returns. Further, we assume that
latencies are generated according to a softmax choice rule over the optimal Q-values:
𝐶 −
∗ ′
𝑄 ሺ𝑠, 𝜏ሻ = 𝑚𝑎𝑥 ൤𝑟 − + 𝑅ሺ𝜏ሻ + 𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑄ሺ𝑠, 𝜏 ሻ൨
𝜏 𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑗 𝜏
𝜏 − 𝜏min
𝜋ሺ𝑠, 𝜏ሻ ∝ 𝑒𝑥𝑝ሺ 𝑄 ሺ𝑠, 𝜏ሻሻ
∗ ∗
The optimal latency (𝜏 = 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑄 ሺ𝑠, 𝜏ሻሻ is longer when the cost of vigour is higher, and shorter
when the reward rate is high as given by:
∗ 𝑣
𝜏 = + 𝜏min
𝑅∗
Note that the optimal latency decreases hyperbolically with the reward rate. We fix Z = 1/100 to ensure
identifiability of C and S parameters, and Gaussian-like distributions. All Q-values reported are thus,
v R
in effect, percentage Q-values.
We fit the latency distributions for each subject in two stages. We first fit the vigour cost parameter
(C ) to the latency distribution for the highest price and environment condition. This comprises the
condition when the objective reward and the subjective reward are both maximal. Since we assume that
all participants have the same maximal subjective reward, fitting the model to this condition only allows
C to explain variance in this condition across subjects. This ensures that the vigour cost was constrained
per participant. We then assumed the reward sensitivity (S ) parameter to be free and fit the latency
data across price and environment conditions using maximum likelihood, using the fmincon function
in Matlab, initializing our optimization at different parameter values. We restricted reward sensitivity
(S ) to lie between 0 and 1, and vigour cost (C ) between 0.01 and 100.
R v
We also considered a model in which vigour cost was fixed to its median value across participants and
only reward sensitivity was free. We compared models’ performance using Bayesian Information
Criteria (BIC) scores between these two models. The model with parameters fit in 2 stages was preferred
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
by BIC compared to the other model (Fig. S4). Parameters obtained from the model with the two-stage
fit per subject were then correlated with apathy scores.
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Supplementary Figures:
Fig. S1: Average-reward reinforcement learning model captures action latencies - (A,B) Model Mechanics.
Each state s is defined as a [price of fish (in ¥), environment] condition. Upper panels: the net (Q) value of
responding with latency (orange curve) involves trading off two quantities: the vigour cost (assumed to be
inversely proportional to latency; green curve) and the automatic opportunity cost of time (OCT; linearly
increasing with latency; red dashed line). Responding quickly reduces the OCT but incurs greater
energetic/calorific vigour costs. The net (Q)-value curve, which is a summation of these two costs, is highest at
the optimal latency. Lower panels: to generate a distribution of latencies, this Q-value is transformed with a
softmax choice rule. (A) and (B) show the model’s mechanics for a low and high (subjective) reward, respectively.
The OCT is greater when the subjective reward value per action for an individual is higher, shifting the Q-value
curve leftwards and making the Q-value curve less shallow. Consequently, both the mean and variance of the
latency distribution are smaller. (C) We transform each objective price of fish [(in ¥), for each environment] via
a saturating concave subjective reward function. A subject with low sensitivity to reward (S ) should perceive
little difference in subjective rewards between prices or environments. For such a subject, the subjective reward
remains high even when the price or environment is low (solid lines). For a subject with high sensitivity to
rewards, the subjective utility function will gradually increase with the price and environment. We assumed that
the subjective rewards at the highest prices and environments would be the same for all subjects. (D-E) Latency
distributions (left panels: data, right panels: model predictions) for the (D) lowest and (E) highest apathy in-lab
participants, respectively. Top and bottom panels illustrate the response latencies for the lowest price of fish (in
¥) in the low-value environments and the highest price of fish in the high-value environments, respectively. For
participants with low apathy scores, the latency distribution has a low mean and variance for both low and high
rewards. For high apathy participants, the latency distribution shifts from having a large mean and variance to a
small mean and variance. Our model predicts a similar relationship for subjects with low and high reward
sensitivities respectively.
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Fig. S2: Opportunity cost invigorates non-rewarding actions: (A-B) Higher opportunity cost environments are
associated with faster rod-fixing latencies, despite rod fixing being an action with no immediate reward value in
both environments, in both (A) Exp. (1) in-lab (n = 21) and (B) Exp. (2) online experiments (n = 90). Mean
latencies of rod fixing in both environments are shown. Line of no effect is shown as a dashed red line. We
predicted that most dots would lie above this line indicating slower action initiation for non-rewarding actions in
the low value environment due to the lower opportunity cost. t statistic shows difference between mean log
latencies, ** p < 0.01 *** p < 0.001
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Fig. S3: A-B: association between the subjective opportunity cost in the highest reward state from our
computational model and bAMI in Exp. (1) and Exp. (2) respectively. C-D: association between median action
initiation latency and behavioural apathy scores in the highest rewarding state in Exp. (1) and Exp. (2)
respectively. *p < 0.05 ** p < 0.01 *** p < 0.001
Opportunity cost determines action initiation latency and predicts apathy.
Nair & Niyogi et al (2020)
Fig. S4: model comparison showing the BIC for the 2-stage model (on the x-axis, in which Cv is fit in the highest
reward state before S is then fit on the entire data) and a model in which Cv was constrained to the median value
across all participants and then only S was fit (on the y-axis). Lower BICs indicate better model performance.