Corresponding Author:
Andy Habermacher
President Human Brains Foundation
founder leading brains
Certified Master Coach (BCI).
Bleicherstrasse 4, 6003 Luzern Switzerland, T: +41 41 240 63 68, M: +41 78 815 88 37, E:
andy@humanbrainsfoundation.org
Argang Ghadiri, M.Sc.
Ph.D candidate, Bonn-Rhine-Sieg University of Applied Sciences
Prof. Dr. Theo Peters
Organization and Project Management, Bonn-Rhine-Sieg University of Applied Sciences
Describing the elephant: a foundational model of human needs,
motivation, behaviour, and wellbeing
Andy Habermacher, Argang Ghadiri & Theo Peters
Abstract:
Models of basic psychological needs have been present and popular in the academic and lay
literature for more than a century yet reviews of needs models show an astonishing lack of
consensus. This raises the question of what basic human psychological needs are and if this can
be consolidated into a model or framework that can align previous research and empirical study.
The authors argue that the lack of consensus arises from researchers describing parts of the
proverbial elephant correctly but failing to describe the full elephant. Through redefining what
human needs are and matching this to an evolutionary framework we can see broad consensus
across needs models and neatly slot constructs and psychological and behavioural theories into
this framework. This enables a descriptive model of drives, motives, and wellbeing that can be
simply outlined but refined enough to do justice to the complexities of human behaviour. This
also raises some issues of how subjective wellbeing is and should be measured. Further avenues
of research and how to continue building this model and framework are proposed.
Keywords:
Human behaviour, cognition, evolution of behaviour
The Backdrop
Needs and motivation models have aimed, in simplified forms, to give descriptions of how
human beings behave and what we need for optimal functioning and wellbeing – and many
authors, over the centuries, have made attempts at giving simplified models that attempt to cut
through the complexities of human behaviours and desires. This can be seen as the quest to find
the elusive equivalent of E=MC2, a succinctly accurate model for human behaviour. To do this,
different approaches have been taken over the centuries, philosophical musings, models of
previous researchers updated and modified, new models proposed based on the weaknesses or
strengths of others, empirical and statistical approaches, and recently updated with
neuroscientific and evolutionary insights.
One would assume that these, often illustrious, scientific minds would have come at least to
some agreement on general drives of human behaviour. However, when reviewing these models,
it becomes quickly clear that, though some drivers of human behaviour are commonly
acknowledged, there is, according to a review by Aunger and Curtis (Aunger and Curtis, 2013),
and also a review by Pitman and Ziegler (Pittman and Ziegler, 2007), “an astonishing lack of
consensus” between these models. This leaves us in the uncomfortable position, after centuries
of philosophising, research, experimentation, and analysis, of researchers fundamentally
disagreeing on what drives human beings. This is all the more surprising considering the
advances in behavioural and cognitive sciences in recent decades.
Our view is that the problem lies not in the research but in being able to describe true human
behaviour and the analogy that jumps to mind is that of the parable of six blind men and the
elephant: each blind man touches a different part of an elephant and thus describes it according
to what they are touching: thin and leathery if they are describing the ear, wet and soft if they are
touching the end of the nose, etc. We can’t help but feel that this is the case with these models
that have been proposed over the last century or so:
These men of science
Disputed loud and long,
Each in his own opinion
Exceeding stiff and strong,
Though each was partly in the right
And all were in the wrong!
History of Needs Models
Models of human needs have a rich history and numerous models have been proposed over the
last century or so. The first simplistic roots of needs and motivational models lie in formulations
of a need and desire for pleasure over pain. This formulation stretches back millennia: Epicurus,
John Bentham, William James, and as Freud’s Pleasure Principle. This dual model, however,
would obviously fail to encapsulate much of human experience and our refined set of needs.
Needs and motivation models can be dated back to 1815 when Bentham proposed a model of
motives, his “springs of action” (Bentham and Goldworth, 1983). William James proposed his
model of instincts in 1890 (James, 1890) – similarly McDougall saw instincts as motivational
dispositions (McDougall, 1932) and proposed 17 instincts that linked perception, behaviour, and
emotions – this is the instinct school of thought which, however, failed to gain widespread
acceptance.
Murray’s model of needs followed in 1938 (Murray, 1938) one of the first to be labelled a needs
nutrition and sex, and secondary needs such as ambition, and affiliation, broken down into six
groupings.
Murray's Needs Model
Primary/ viscerogenic needs
Desired Outcome Need Directional Force
Air
Water
Intake
Food Positive
Sentience Drive towards an object
Sex
Lactation
Output Expiration
Urination
Defecation
Negative
Noxavoidance
Drive away from an object
Heatavoidance
Retraction
Coldavoidance
Harmavoidance
Secondary/ psychogenic needs
Domain Need Behaviour
Superiority
To seek validation for power (Often split into Achievement and Recognition)
Achievement
To accomplish difficult tasks, overcoming obstacles and becoming expert
Ambition
Recognition
To seek praise and commendation for accomplishments
To impress others through one's actions and words, even if these are shocking. (Often
Exhibition
combined with Recognition)
Acquisition
To gain possession over an object
Conservance
To maintain the condition of an object
Materialism Order
To make things clean, neat and tidy
Retention
To keep possession over an object
Construction
To organize or build an object or objects
Inviolacy
To prevent harm to self-respect or "good-name"
Infavoidance
To avoid failure and humiliation
Status Defendance
To defend oneself against attack or blame, hiding any failure of the self.
Counteraction
To make up for failure by trying again, seeking pridefully to overcome obstacles.
Seclusion
To be isolated from others (opposite from Exhibition)
Dominance
To control one's environment or the people in it through command or persuasion
Deference
To admire a superior person; praising them, yielding to them, following their rules.
Power Autonomy
To resist the influence of others and strive for independence
Contrariance
To act unique, different from the norm
Infavoidance
To avoid being humiliated or embarrassed.
To surrender and submit to others, accept blame and punishment. To enjoy pain and
Abasement
misfortune
Sadomasochism
Aggression
To forcefully overcome, control, punish, or harm someone
Social-Conformance Blame avoidance
To inhibit asocial behavior to avoid blame or ostracism
To be close and loyal to another person, pleasing them and winning their friendship
Affiliation
and attention
To separate oneself from a negatively viewed object or person, excluding or
Rejection
abandoning it.
Affection Nurturance
To help the helpless, feeding them and keeping them from danger
To have one's needs satisfied by someone or something. Includes being loved, nursed,
Succorance
helped, forgiven and consoled
Play
To have fun, laugh and relax, enjoy oneself
Cognizance
To understand, be curious, ask questions, and acquire new knowledge
Information
Exposition
To find and demonstrate relations between facts
This appears to be a solid attempt to think through human needs but also failed to gain
popularity. In the meantime others had latched on to human needs and the drives of human
behaviour for more real-world applications, namely business, and Starch proposed a model of
needs in 1923 for sales and advertising (Starch, 1923). This in itself highlights the real-world
applications of needs not just as grand theories but with applications in all aspects of life.
From this follows Maslow’s famous pyramid (Maslow, 1943) and in response to this, lesser
known, to the layman, at least, is Alderfer’s model (Alderfer, 1969) which aimed to focus on
psychological needs only and to correct some obvious flaws with Maslow’s pyramid such as
people not necessarily moving through the levels of the pyramid. His model therefore only
included three equally important needs of Existence, Relatedness, and Growth. Maslow’s model
it must be noted has remained conspicuously persistent despite the weaknesses of his model
apparent on closer critical review.
Throughout the 1950’s-1970’s there was little focus on needs excepting in bringing these to
more specific contexts such as business with McClelland (McClelland and Burnham, 2003) and
Herzberg (Herzberg, 2003) forming two popular models. Advances were made in what can be
considered related fields namely personality, and values – Dweck would attempt to consolidate
these into a single framework in 2017 (Dweck, 2017), as we also propose in this paper. The
world of psychology was also in the grips of behaviourism seeing little place for innate drives
and motives.
The 1990s saw needs models being applied to various contexts and fields and updated or new
models proposed: conflict resolution, sociology, education, and well-being and this arguably laid
the base for the growth of a variety of needs models, not to mention that the human potential
movement was still gaining momentum.
From 2000 onwards, as research has amassed in different fields, different models have emerged.
Some have focused more on the business context, others in society development, and yet others
have developed with the cognitive and particularly neurosciences, and more recently in cognitive
computing. Some of these have become well-known models such as Deci and Ryan’s Self-
Determination Theory (Deci and Ryan, 2000) which has become the most widely known and
referenced contemporary model and has a large body of research to back it up.
We can therefore see a deep and rich history of needs and motivation models, but a wide variety
of models exist, offering different explanations for human motivation, needs for optimal
psychological functioning, and well-being. Many of these models remain obscure irrespective of
quality, and despite this rich history and multiple lines of research, as we noted in our opening
words, there remains a persistent and “astonishing lack of consensus” on what constitutes human
needs, motivation, and drivers of human well-being.
A number of authors have attempted to overcome this and proposed “grand theories” of
motivation in some form. Notable are Grawe and his Consistency Theory Model (CTM) (Grawe,
2007), Aunger and Curtis and their Behavioural Production Unit (BPU) evolutionary based
model of human motivation and behaviour (Aunger and Curtis, 2013, 2015), Habermacher et al.
have updated Grawe’s CTM and matched this to evolutionarily neuroscience (Habermacher et
al., 2016), and recently Caroline Dweck and her BEATS theory (Dweck, 2017). However, in line
with the astonishing lack of consensus, these four models, well-researched and impressive as
they are, also lack consensus amongst themselves. This leaves us with the conclusion that 1. one
of the models is the most accurate description and the others are lacking/flawed 2. they all miss
the mark, or 3. they are all describing the same thing in different ways, and finally 4. They are all
partly correct and partly wrong. This brings us back to our analogy of the blind men and the
elephant.
With the massive progress in the cognitive, social, and neurosciences in recent years and
alternative methods to measure behaviour (e.g. through online behaviour and large-scale data
mining) it seems that the behavioural scientific community has never before been better
equipped to formulate a clear motivational and needs model – indeed there seem to be nothing in
the way of being able to form this - aside from the apparent fiendish complexity of human
behaviour – maybe.
With this in mind we set out to clarify in more detail what basic human needs are, how they can
be formulated and how we can align the multiple lines of evidence to build a model that
satisfactorily explains motivation, needs for optimal functioning, and human nature
comprehensively enough to do justice as a model of human behaviour and bring consensus
amongst these models.
Literature Review
A review of the literature shows there is general acceptance of the idea of human psychological
and surprisingly Maslow’s model still referenced and taken at face value to be accurate –
Maslow’s model does not withstand critical review.
research, that Maslow is referenced surprisingly often albeit mostly on older work, single needs
are commonly referenced e.g. the need for attachment. What is also noticeable is that basic
human needs are often referenced as if there were a clear understanding of what they are
(“general”). It is also clear is that many researchers propose their own sets of needs.
Academic database searches
PubPsych BASE PsyDok APA Scopus Mendeley Google
Scholar
"Human psycholgical needs" 2297 8880 3293 4818 21725 6559 1520
Abstract 88
"Baisc human needs" 555 21494 2158 443 27978 14233 78400
Abstract 40
"Basic human psycholgical needs" 264 2411 3331 360 28932 29120 441
Abstract 10
Total Abstract 70 138
Accessed 01.05.2020
Break down of search results for “Human Psychological Needs”
Mendeley top 100 PubPsych
Query: "Human Psychological Needs" Query: "Human Psychological Needs" or "Basic Human
Needs" or "Basic Human Psychological Needs"
(In Abstract or Title)
Accessed 17.05.2020 Accessed 01.05.2020
6559 results first 100 analysed 70 total results without duplicates
Models Nr Nr
SDT
Total 65 SDT 60 SDT 5
Maslow &
d erivative Maslow 5 Maslow 4
Kenrick 2 Z-R 1
Total 12 7 5
Other Needs Models
Staub 1 Staub 2
Sheldon 1 Fromm 2
Dweck 1 Tebb 2
Schüler 1 Gibbs 1
Cog/Exp 1 Grawe 1
Gallup 1 Glaser 1
10 needs 1 Kernstock 1
Dweck 1 Bulhan 1
Gaming 1
PSI 1
Total 20 7 13
Single needs
Relatedness 1 Attachment 3
Autonomy 3 Significance 1
Flexibility 1 Disgust 1
Benevolence 1 Truth 1
Social identitiy 1
Morality 1
Belonging 1
Impression 1
Total 16 10 6
Two needs
Two needs 4 Attachment Self-esteem
Total 4 Autonomy Relatedness
Autonomy Affiliation
C ompetence A ccepted member
Multiple needs in peer group
Multiple 6
Total 6
General
General 6 General 27
Total 33 6
Contextual
Flow 2
Crimogenic 1
Total 3 3
Universals
Schwartz 3
Universals 1
Total 4 4
Control Theories
Theory Planned 1
Control Theory 1
Behaviour
Total 2 2
Human & Social
Human rights 1 Social 1
Total 2 development
Physical
Water 1 Physical 1
Total 2
Though needs models have been developed in different academic disciplines the field of
psychology has provided much of the work on needs models. However, on closer review there
have been numerous other fields that have developed needs models, some of which are
comprehensive models.
Psychotherapy has provided a rich field for human psychological needs particularly, obviously,
with a view to dysfunctional behaviours and outcomes. Most of these have developed as single
need theories, Freud’s Pleasure Principle (Freud, 1923), Alder’s Striving for Superiority (Bagby,
1923), Bowlby’s Attachment Theory (Bowlby, 1944). Klaus Grawe more recently proposed, on
writing on neuropsychotherapy, thereby combing the then latest research into the brain and brain
development and his and others previous research, the Consistency Theory Model (Grawe,
2007). This model includes motivational factors, how these are updated, how they include both
approach and avoidance motivation and how these can lead to psychopathology by
understanding the underlying biological mechanisms.
Despite needs models being heavily grounded in the cognitive sciences and hence psychological
research, other fields have also generated models such as Human Scale Development (Max-
Neef, 1989) that was developed in response to global poverty and well-being in developing
nations and contexts, specifically South America. Human Scale Development is a refined model
that outlines needs but also ways of behaving with or without these needs, and their satisfaction
or pseudo satisfaction. On a geopolitical theme Staub (2005), Bulhan (1985), and Burton (Coser
and Burton1991) have all proposed needs models as underlying causes for geopolitical conflict
and resolution thereof.
With the advancement of neuroscience other models, though in the more popular than academic
realm, have been proposed such as those by Rock (2008) and Häusel (2009). Other areas that
have developed models of needs are also in cognitive computing (Dörner and Güss, 2013).
Similarly, there have been models developed from evolutionary sciences by seeing behaviours as
evolutionary adaptations that have developed in an environment and in parallel with the
development of the brain’s structures such as Bernard et al.’s Evolutionary Theory of Motivation
(Bernard et al., 2005) and Aunger and Curtis’ BPU Theory (2013, 2015).
In the background there has also been increasing realisation that human needs are increasingly
refined – basic physical needs have been generally ascribed a quick note on nutrition and water.
The nature of this nutrition is important with an increasing importance shown, for example, of
the microbiome, which in turn has been shown to have influences on our psychological states
and mental health (for review on mental health: Rieder et al., 2017). Similarly, the sheer
importance of sleep has been overlooked and similarly its important influence and interplay with
psychology and psychopathology (for review: Abel et al., 2013). Similarly, the need for physical
exercise or movement has strong influences on all aspects of health but notably also
psychological health. Other factors may also be grouped into these physical needs – the need for
sunlight, the subsequent production of vitamin D but also sunlight’s influence on producing
other feel good chemicals and particularly nitric oxide influencing cardiovascular health – should
this also be categorised as a need? Indeed, should we not also class light in general as a basic
need because of its influence on our diurnal rhythms and hormone production? What is therefore
clear is that basic physical needs are much more refined than once considered and there is also a
strong and clear association with psychological well-being. Therefore, simply grouping physical
needs as simplified group may not be sufficient for researchers and not understanding the
interplay with psychological needs could be an oversight in many needs models.
This leaves us with a complex set of previous research and proposals for human needs. For
previous analysis the authors have reviewed about a dozen different needs models. However, a
literature review managed to uncover multiple other models and we include a total of 54 in this
review (see Supplementary Materials, Full List of Needs Models). In addition to these, there are a
host of needs commonly proposed by authors, independent researchers, and motivational
speakers but many of these lack a clear rationale and/or academic support.
This “astonishing lack of consensus”, already noted, is thus magnified – this quote was used to
describe first six needs models that misaligned, and then 20 models. We now have 54 models –
or 54 authors (and multiple more co-authors) all attempting to describe the elephant in different
ways despite many using valid academic approaches. We will disentangle these as we progress
to give a clearer description of our proverbial elephant.
Why a Needs model?
A valid question to ask at the outset is, why do we need a needs model?
There are two main reasons for a needs model:
1. Needs models serve a purpose of giving a general description of human desires and
therefore of general human motivation, and subsequent behaviour. A need for
sustenance will lead to prioritising search for food over other factors and a desire for
affiliation will lead to human beings in general striving for friendships and protecting
family and clan members. This is the needs as motives principle.
a. These are therefore general models of what will guide human behaviour on
average in various contexts.
b. As a general model of human behaviour to then serve as guides for building
and designing policies, structures, and guidelines, for groups of people. This
may include leadership in business and organisational design; policies by
intergovernmental agencies to influence behaviours; influences on crime and
extremism; educational policies; etc.
2. Needs models serve a purpose of giving a general model of what human beings need
for healthy functioning, for well-being and mental health. Indeed, violation of human
needs has been shown to decrease well-being and been linked to multiple
psychopathologies. This is the needs as requirements principle.
a. Therefore, needs show us how to best increase well-being and avoid
disruption in multiple contexts, for example, education but also in business
contexts and society at large.
b. Needs models serve as guides for optimal human function, or “thriving” as
many propose. In short, they are guides for increasing subjective well-being,
or in short, happiness and fulfilment. Satisfying one’s needs leads to
happiness - or so the hypothesis.
These reasons also go some way to describe this astonishing lack of consensus of needs models;
some are explicitly designed as models of human motivation, and others as models for optimal
functioning, and others for betterment of society at large, and others in specific contexts such as
education, and business.
In summary needs models serve the purposes of:
• Giving a general model of human psychological drives, motivation, and subsequent
behaviour
• Giving key requirements for healthy (optimal) psychological well-being
• Informing others, in simplified terms, how to increase human well-being be that in
organisational contexts, education, or public policy
In short, a needs model should give simple but accurate model of human behaviour and guide
others to enable better functioning of human beings and better health. Optimistically, it should
therefore give concise information to enable the betterment of the human condition in societies.
We add this should be simple enough to be accessible but complex enough to do justice to
complex human behaviours. In our analogy of the elephant and the six blind men we would want
a reasonably simple but accurate description of the elephant.
What do needs models describe
If the needs model is to propose a general model of human behaviour and psychological well-
being, then they must be able to describe general human functioning. This in itself is problematic
for different models describe levels of functioning – the previously noted “astonishing lack of
consensus” also applies at this first level. Pitman and Ziegler in their review of six needs models
(Pittman and Ziegler, 2007) categorized models into their level of analysis:
1. The biological level
2. The individual level
3. The social level
The biological level by Pitman and Ziegler referred to the physiological needs level i.e. nutrition
and water, etc. However, considering the advances in the neurosciences and increased
understanding of psychological impacts on physical systems (and vice versa) we would expand
this now to include understanding biological impacts of violating or fulfilling needs. A fourth
aspect not considered is that of the level of the environment i.e. influence on environment
through factors such as storage (independence from environment), building shelters, clearing
forests, farming and forming rivers, lakes, etc. Therefore, we propose, needs should cover all
four of these levels to be able to reasonably explain human motives and psychological
requirements.
1. The biological level
Biological functioning such as physiological needs but also in biological impacts of
psychological needs fulfilment and violation, and biological mechanisms that drive
behaviour.
2. The individual level
How this impacts individual drives, motivation, and well-being
3. The social level
How needs will be influenced with and for other individuals but also in social groupings
and society.
4. The environmental level
How this impacts the (non-social) environment.
The majority of needs models explicitly focus on the individual but also on their social
interactions. More recent models have made an explicit link to the biological underpinnings,
particularly those rooted in neuroscience such as Grawe’s CTM (2007), Rock’s SCARF model
(2008), and PSI (Dörner and Güss, 2013) in the field of cognitive computing. These link the
underlying neuronal structures to behaviour. Similarly measuring disruption can be quantified at
this level – the case for the attachment need is strengthened when one reviews the research into
(disrupted) neuronal growth of rat pups that have been separated from mothers (for example:
Aguggia et al., 2013). Or alternatively the positive effects of oxytocin when stimulated with
attachment (for example: Adkins-Regan, 2009). With the advances in the neurosciences, aligning
biological process to individual and social needs gives robust support for the needs and how
these manifest. Though many needs models include physiological needs, none explicitly show
how these influence psychological needs despite recent research clearly showing this. For
example, exercise has a significant and well documented impact on brain health, increasing
plasticity and reducing inflammation (for example: Cotman et al., 2014; McDonnell et al., 2013)
and lowers symptoms of depression with a “large and significant effect size” according to one
meta-analysis (Josefsson et al. 2014).
Similarly, few models explicitly focus on environmental factors outside of the social
environment or contexts such as healthcare and business which some models explicitly focus on.
The exception is on one hand Nussbaum’s capabilities (Nussbaum, 2008) which includes
capabilities of control over environment and relationships to other species, and evolutionary
models which are built on the premise of human beings developing to master environmental
challenges at all levels.
A further consideration is how needs models interpret their structures. Maslow famously built his
as a pyramid which seems to sound intuitively correct: physiological needs must be fulfilled to
survive. But this does not necessarily follow evolutionary principles: as a tribal based creature,
human beings are dependent on each other to fulfil their physiological needs. Therefore, the need
of affiliation may be just as important as the psychological need for food because access to food
in enough quantities is dependent on group work. This highlights that needs can and most likely
do operate in parallel and influence each other. Tay and Diener (2011) and their review of the
Gallup World Poll (GWP) data showed that needs follow weak prioritisation but this is
contextually and culturally dependent.
Pitman and Ziegler give four forms:
• Root cause - need as the primary human driver: e.g. Attachment Theory (Bowlby et al.,
1992), Terror Management Theory (Rosenblatt et al., 1989), Adler’s striving for
superiority (Bagby, 1923)
• Hierarchy of needs - needs build on top of other needs: e.g. Maslow (1943)
• Check and balance of needs - needs operate in tandem with each other and influence
one another: e.g. Epstein (Epstein and Weiner,2003), Grawe’s CTM (2007), Alderfer’s
ERG (1969)
• Independent needs - needs operate independently of each other: e.g. Ryan and Deci’s
SDT (2000)
In our view needs can only follow a check and balance concept or rather a multiple
(independent) modulatory system which is supported by Tay and Diener’s review of the GWP
data. This is because this is the normal process in biological systems and particularly in the
neurosciences: variations of this have been proposed based on neural structures and levels of
consciousness by Baars (Baars, 1998), and Dennet (Dennett, 1991) describing cognitive systems
as multiple independent specialists; also described as multiple independent systems when
describing the evolution of motivation by Bernard et al. (2005); and multiple modulatory neural
circuits when describing the neurological underpinnings of emotion and decision-making by
Phelps et al. (2014). We prefer the term independent modulatory system as this is based on the
fact that biological systems are independent modulatory systems. Consider our organs: we have a
heart, lungs, and liver, and brain, each are fundamental to our survival. These operate together by
modulating each other’s behaviour. We could prioritise each over other, but this is only useful in,
for example determining how quickly one may die when one fails to function - if the kidneys
pack up we have a few days, the brain a few seconds, the heart maybe a minute or so, the lungs
similarly. But for our survival all are critical and each modulates and influences the other. So
much so that these have also been called axis – the heart-brain axis (for example: Riching et al.
2020), the gut-brain axis (for example: Allen et al. 2017), the skin-brain axis (for example:
Mueller et al. 2017), to name some of the most commonly referenced and researched.
Therefore, we consider only an independent modulatory system as able to reasonably describe
human motivation and requirements for well-being and being biologically accurate.
The needs as requirements and needs as motives is a further reason for this “astonishing lack of
consensus”. These we can split into four groupings:
• Needs as motives: Maslow (1943)
• Needs as requirements: Tebb (1995), Warr (1994), Gibbs (1998)
• Needs as motives and requirements: SDT (Deci and Ryan, 2000), HSD (Max-Neef, 1989)
• Needs as motives and requirements that are updated and modified: CTM (Grawe, 2007),
Alderfer (1969); PSI (Dörner and Güss, 2013)
As models of human behaviour and well-being they must follow that they follow motivation as
other researchers have also outlined (Sheldon and Gunz, 2009; Prentice et al., 2014; Schüler et
al., 2019). If we take the basic physiological need for nutrition, we can see that this influences
first desire, then motivation, then action orientation, then satisfaction (or frustration) and well-
being. Many argue that satisfying a need is not necessarily fulfilling a need such as Max-Neef
(Max-Neef, 1989). This may be the case but this in itself should be explained by a needs model.
Consider the example of food: we have a natural desire for high calorie food – a healthy natural
adaption in the “wild” - but in our current model world where high calorie food is available with
little effort this causes multiple disorders, and stuffing our faces with chocolate does not lead to
deep fulfilment. The desire for high calorie food sufficiently explains our behaviour whether or
not this leads to fulfilment or leads to better health or not is not relevant at first blush.
However, at second look we can see that we are violating another need, namely the need for
movement, and at third look we can see that we are failing to fulfil, potentially another need of
bonding in, for example a group hunting experience. Therefore, a model of needs can sufficiently
explain the desire for high calorie food, the motivation for high calorie food, but also explain the
imbalances this can cause and what they are. As evolutionary psychologists have long known
“we have a stone age mind in a modern skull” (Cosmides and Tooby, 2006). Modern western
society is a not always conducive to healthy functioning of physical or psychological needs. A
needs model can then help point to effective interventions.
Another aspect that few make explicit is of optimal levels of fulfilment i.e. is more of a need
better, or is there an ideal level, and, if so, what is this? This is what Peter Warr called the
vitamin concept (Warr, 2007): a deficiency will cause disruptions, enough will lead to healthy
functioning, but fulfilment above a certain level may no longer increase well-being. McClelland
in his model saw these as hygiene factors i.e. that a factor can become accepted and then further
fulfilment will not lead to a further increase in fulfilment, but a decrease will lead to disturbances
(McClelland and Burnham, 2003). Needs as requirements models propose that fulfilment of the
needs leads to an increase in well-being and, as an extension of this, therefore, optimal
functioning. Some models are focused on specific contexts such as business and healthcare.
These are therefore concerned with, particularly in healthcare, avoidance of stress, and burnout.
There have been few attempts to match this to biological markers of stress and burnout and
indeed this would strongly support needs models that are explicitly built on biological
underpinnings.
The question of optimal functioning can also be translated to productivity in the business world –
the happy productive worker hypothesis (for review: Wright and Cropanzano, 2000). The
research is not as conclusive as one might expect despite many positive benefits of being a
“happy” worker - other factors can be just as important in business contexts, such as
organisation, structure, and processes. Also the formulation of happy productive work has been
questioned with more recent research focusing on psychological well-being (for example:
Zelenski et al., 2008) Another obvious factor on productivity is that satisfied needs may lower
motivation and drives – if needs are motives to fulfil a need then it follows that drive will
decrease, and resources saved when a need has been fulfilled. This is reflected in research into
dopamine whose levels drop after a reward has been received (for example: Fiorillo et al., 2003).
An interesting aspect of this research is that motivational intensity related to dopamine which
shows that dopamine is increased (as a proxy for motivation in this case) when research animals
do not receive a reward at each successful attempt (for example: De Lafuente and Romo 2011)
and with different probabilities – with the probability of 50% stimulating the highest level of
dopaminergic neuronal activation (interestingly often seen in the sports world in the context of
the final in many competitions).
Another question is that of individual updating of needs models. The working assumption of
most needs models seems to be that, as human needs, all human beings need these for healthy
functioning and high SWB. However, at the level of the individual we can see obvious
discrepancies. Some people have higher desires for certain needs and also some people will
update their motivation and needs models - on failure to achieve a motivational goal some may
redouble their effort and others may give up. Some individuals may be happy with some level of
autonomy, but others may be happy to have clear goals laid out for them with little autonomy.
Needs models that 1. fail to explain individuality and 2. fail to explain how these are updated,
will be missing some obvious aspects of human nature.
Alderfer was probably the first to propose this with his ERG model which explicitly outlined
factors influencing satisfaction (Alderfer, 1969). He named these: satisfaction progression i.e.
building on satisfaction of needs, and frustration regression i.e. compensating or lowering desire
for needs. Considering our biological neuroplasticity particularly in younger years, models that
describe this updating process would be biologically accurate and become a model that can more
accurately describe how human beings operate. Because of its grounding in cognitive computing
the PSI model is one that has a very clear model for this - indeed it is built on this premise. Other
models such as the Consistency Theory Model (Grawe, 2007) also show how motivation is
updated and built into schemas of motivation influencing one’s way of behaving. Dweck’s
BEATS theory (Dweck, 2017) similarly works with this principle, a model of how human beings
develop.
Therefore, we can see that some models clearly aim to explain the biological and psychological
mechanisms of updating motives and potentially needs. But few can explain individual
differences. Obviously human needs are considered human needs because of their universality,
however, disagreements on what are precisely human needs likely also arise from different
interpretations, but also the personal preferences of the researchers themselves as to what
constitutes a human need. We explore the needs themselves in the next section, but the concept
of individuality is clearly missing in needs models. Those models that include updating of needs
will, however, be accounting for individualism as individuals will over time build different
motives depending on their own context. This may assume, however, that the starting point is the
same rather than different, but this does not follow research into newborns which shows
differences in behaviour from the earliest ages well documented over decades by “babylabs” of
many leading universities.
A further motivational aspect that is conspicuously absent is that of avoidance motivation. When
we understand its importance and omnipresence in the biological world, we consider this a
critical and fundamental omission and flaw in the vast majority of needs and motivation theories.
The approach-avoidance distinction is a well-established construct in psychology but also in
multiple biological fields (for review: Elliot and Covington, 2001). Approach is moving towards
positive aspects and avoidance is moving away from, avoiding, or protecting against negative
aspects. An animal may look for new territory, approach, and/or protect its own territory,
avoidance. This behaviour can be seen embedded in behaviours across all living organisms from
a single-celled amoeba, to an earth worm, a mouse, a primate, and in human beings.
Elliot and Covington’s review notes that:
“... it is clear that the distinction between approach and avoidance motivation has deep
and widespread intellectual roots, represents a part of the evolutionary heritage that
humans share with organisms across the phylogenetic spectrum, is instigated immediately
and automatically in response to most if not all stimuli humans encounter, is grounded in
the basic neuroanatomical structures of the brain, and concords with the intuitively based
knowledge of how humans are motivated in their daily lives.”
And go on to state:
“As such it is surprising that in much contemporary empirical and theoretical work on
motivational issues, the approach-avoidance distinction is either overshadowed or
overlooked altogether.”
This in essence means that most needs models through not explicitly formulating avoidance
motivation are missing out on half of human drives, motivations, behaviours, and issues that
have serious impacts on mental health (Grawe, 2007). The majority of needs models do not
sufficiently explain the function of avoidance motivation and its necessity to the human
condition. This in itself seems to be an obvious failing most of the needs models reviewed here.
Models that explicitly state avoidance factors are:
• Murray
• Reiss 16 desires
• McClelland
• Grawe’s CTM
• Bernard et al. Evolution of Motivation
• Aunger and Curtis BPU Theory
• Habermacher et al.’s SCOAP model
• Talevich et al.’s Hierarchical Taxonomy of Human Motives
Therefore, for a needs model to be fully comprehensive and provide a reasonable if simplified
view of the nature of humans it must be able to describe four levels of functions:
1. Biological
2. Individual
3. Social
4. Environmental
Furthermore, though needs should have a degree of independence, which should be reflected in
biological structures and processes, they will operate as:
5. Independent modulatory systems
A full model must also be able to describe:
6. Desires and motives
7. Individuality of desires and motives
8. How desires and motives are updated
9. Show that fulfilment increases well-being
10. Show that non-fulfilment decreases well-being
And describe:
11. Approach motivation
12. Avoidance motivation
The above raises the hurdles for what can truly be considered a comprehensive needs model.
Only six models fulfil these to a satisfactory degree but with numerous discrepancies.
• Bernard et al’s Evolution of Motivation
• Grawe’s CTM
• Dörner and Güss’ PSI
• Aunger and Curtis’ BPU Theory
• Habermacher et al.’s SCOAP model
• Dweck’s BEATS
Habermacher et al. fulfil these criteria well because it is firstly based on Grawe’s CTM, which
involves a clear model of how motives are updated and sees approach and avoidance motivation
as overriding principles of motivation, and secondly the latest iteration includes evolutionary
aspects drawn primarily from Aunger and Curtis. This presupposes that they have identified
suitable and accurate needs. Therefore, the final question is that of which specific needs should a
model describe – what actually are the basic human psychological needs?
How do we know they are basic human needs?
The previous section outlines what a needs model should be able to do and at what level, but this
does not answer the question of what is a basic need itself: are there three, five, or twenty-five?
In the four models we have identified that can fulfil the previous criteria best, they vary from
three to twenty-five needs. The reason for this discrepancy lies in researchers’ interpretations but
also their line of reasoning and whether models have been built on previous models or not. The
experimentation, literature surveys, self-reported questionnaires, lexical analysis, statistical
analysis, cultural universals, physiological stress reactions, cognitive architecture, and
evolutionary theory.
Other potential avenues for research and hypothesising would be:
• Market analysis
Global markets give us an indication of what human beings buy and therefore are willing
to invest their money into. This will give clear indications of the wishes, desires, and
needs of human beings.
• Online behavioural analysis
Online behavioural analysis is a large area of research using vast datasets of how
individuals respond in online contexts. This may be likes on social media platforms,
clicks on websites, eye tracking on web pages, downloads of free resources, etc.
• Artificial intelligence research
Artificial intelligence is widespread and varied and includes many facets of cognition
such as embodied intelligence. This can lead to interesting insights of how cognition in
general operates, how it operates in human beings and how this integrates with our
physiology.
Academic approaches for needs models
Approach Philosophical reasoning
Description Questioning the nature of human nature and combining this with one’s own observation and work
from previous philosophers, and /or researchers. The earliest take these approaches but this is also
present in more modern formulations.
Examples Bentham, James, Maslow, Dweck
Problems Worldviews, current state of scientific knowledge that guides thought, factors that are unknown
and unconscious.
Approach Scientific experimentation
Description Experimentation has led to new insights. For example, Harlow’s famed experiments with primates
lent support to Bowlby’s Attachment Theory and therefore more research followed.
Examples Attachment theory, Deci & Ryan’s SDT, Grawe’s CTM
Problems Science follows paths and trends, the obvious may be tested, the non-obvious ignored. Bias in
interpretation and replication issues.
Approach Literature survey
Description Structured literature reviews give clear insight as to what the state of play is and current state of
the science and research.
Examples SDT, CTM
Problems Only considering one’s own field of research / science follows previous paths / theory-induced
blindness
Approach Self-reported survey
Description Some approaches had used large scale surveys to deduce personalities, motives, and needs. This
gives structured data to support a theory.
Examples Reis’ 16 desires, Chulef’s Motives
Problems You only get the answers to the questions you ask, and not all motivation may have conscious
affect, or this can be interpreted differently.
Approach Lexical analysis
Description Some approaches have analysed language of emotions and motives and from this deduced that
there are different patterns.
Examples Cattel (personality)
Problems Language can represent one concept that could have different underlying cognitive processes.
What about unconscious processes.
Approach Factor analysis
Description This has been used in combination with self-reported surveys and lexical analysis. Famously
giving us the predecessor to the big five theory of personality.
Examples Cattel, Reis, Chulef’s Motives
Problems Different cognitive processes can produce similar outcomes, definitions of how many factors is
dependent on researchers, and interpretations/description of a factor is dependent on the
researcher.
Approach Cultural universals
Description The anthropological approach has aimed to record and define constructs that are universal to all
cultures. This therefore helps to guide what is truly a universal human need.
Examples Schwartz’s Cultural Universals
Problems This gives large lists of universals which are hard to make sense of, for example, Brown lists 369
universals.
Approach Physiological stress reactions
Description More recently measuring of physiological stress responses through skin conductance or cortisol
levels in saliva have lent support to human needs models.
Examples Rock’s SCARF model, Grawe’s CTM
Problems We only get data on topics we research, defining what is stress based on cortisol has limitations.
Lacks definition of what could be considered “natural” stress, positive stress, negative stress, or
toxic stress.
(Continued)
Approach Cognitive architecture
Description With advances in the neurosciences our understanding of cognitive architecture is increasing.
Examples Döner & Güss’ PSI, CTM
Problems Interpretations of functions is dependent on researchers’ viewpoints and labelling is often
inaccurate or contradictory. For example, dopamine and its respective prefrontal circuits as
pleasure, attention, or motivation (or a bit of everything). Despite the launch of multiple grand big
brain projects and massive advances in understanding we still lack a clear model of the human
brain.
Approach Evolutionary theory
Description Evolutionary psychologists state the obvious that the brain and human behaviour has developed to
solve environmental problems for survival. Therefore motivations, needs, and behaviour can be
deduced from evolutionary development. This will be supported be research into other animals and
organisms.
Examples Kenrick’s updating of Maslow’s Model, Aunger and Curtis’s BPU Theory
Problems We don’t actually know how evolution developed in the human brain, modern animal models may
not be earlier developments of human behaviour or the brain.
• Corpus analytics
Corpus analytics developed in the 1990s by collecting large datasets of real language
(written and spoken) with a view to understanding how language is used in the real world
and potentially updating dictionaries, grammar books, and guiding language courses.
This can show us how we are thinking and drives that we are following. For example,
analysis of national anthems could show common themes and constructs such as pride
pointing to the need of Self-Esteem, or freedom for Autonomy or Control - only one
unpublished corpus analytic review could be found (Rahimi, 2015).
Many models “sell” themselves on their approach – but each approach has its drawbacks. In our
collection of 54 models we could review these models and therefore give a non-structured meta-
analysis and we may be able to at least identify patterns across the researchers. Aunger and
Curtis reviewed 20 motivational models (Aunger and Curtis, 2013) and concluded that only five
motivational constructs are common to a majority (affiliation, curiosity, self-assertion, sex, and
nurture) and that a third of constructs are cited by one author only. This highlights once more
this “astonishing lack of consensus”. We both agree and disagree with this conclusion. Our
review of 54 models supports what Aunger and Curtis found but, importantly, we disagree that
there is no consensus because we see strong consensus when we consider the groupings. For
example, there is clear agreement on the need for attachment, relatedness, or affiliation – we will
call this construct Attachment. 49 of the 54 models class a variation of Attachment as a basic
human psychological need - some do not class this because of the nature of the research e.g.
academic motivation – (see Supplementary Materials: Full List of Needs Models). So, there is
clear acknowledgement, almost across the board, of the importance of Attachment. Yet
interpretations of the Attachment need show clear differences. Variations in how this need is
defined in the 54 needs models are:
• Relatedness • Intimacy • Social contact
• Affiliation • Love • Parenting
• Belonging • Romance • Friendship
• Connection • Mate selection / • Positive relations
• Relationships retention • Social
• Nurturance • Family • Social support
• Affection • Rejection (avoidance)
What is striking is that despite broad agreement there is clear misalignment on the form of
attachment. Social support and love are completely different concepts. On closer inspection we
can see that the general concept of attachment or relatedness – the human being as a social being
- is considered by some needs (e.g. relatedness, affiliation, social) whereas specific forms of this
overriding concept are given by others (e.g. affection, intimacy, love, parenting, friendship). This
observation goes some way to consolidating and understanding needs models and can guide us to
forming a comprehensive model of needs. The outline of the elephant becomes clearer.
Therefore, by thinking in terms of large “super groups” of needs we can see some overarching
agreement. Habermacher et al. showed strong alignment with 12 needs models (Habermacher et
al., 2014a, 2014b) and their initial SCOAP (Self-Esteem, Control, Orientation, Attachment,
Pleasure) model, this is an extension of Grawe’s CTM which in turn drew on Epstein’s model
both of which were considered reviews and summaries of extensive literature. This appears to be
a valid approach - these five needs would be uncontentious and match strongly to similar models
such as SDT but with more groupings and also explicitly states the necessity of approach and
avoidance motivation (we review the rationale for these “super groups” below). Indeed, on doing
this mapping we can see that 91.7% of the 519 psychological needs proposed by these 54 models
would fall into this categorisation (see Supplementary Materials: Needs to SCOAP).
This may be a small epiphany but actually only leaves us with messy large “super groups” of
needs without being clearly defined. What is the precise language we should use, how many
groups should we have, and what constructs should fit into these, and how are they related?
Another obvious point we haven’t yet approached is the actual definition of a basic need itself.
Without a clear definition we are still stumbling around like the blind men with the elephant
potentially proposing perfectly valid needs but without understanding how these fit together and
form the full elephant.
The online Psychology Dictionary describes a psychological need as:
“As opposed to a biological need, a psychological need is something that is essential for
the maintenance of mental health. The need itself can be manifested internally or
externally.”
This focuses clearly on needs as requirements principle and subsequent mental health but does
not guide us to what could specifically be a psychological need. The various researchers and
proponents in the field have given their own definitions. For example:
Grawe (2007) said that
“Basic psychological needs, in my view, are needs that are present among all humans,
and their violation or enduring nonfulfillment leads to impairments in mental health and
well-being.”
Grawe here notes the concept of universality “present among all human being” and distinguishes
between violation and non-fulfilment. This again iterates the needs as requirements for mental
health and well-being but leads us no closer to what are actual basic psychological needs.
Sheldon argues, (Sheldon, 2011).
“... a definition of psychological needs as tendencies to seek out certain basic types of
psychosocial experiences, to a somewhat varying extent across individuals, and to feel
good and thrive when those basic experiences are obtained, to the same extent across
individuals”
Sheldon includes the needs as motives aspect “to seek out” but also focuses on individuality of
this “to varying extents across individuals” and then continues with the needs as requirements
aspect “feel good and thrive”. Similarly, this does not guide us as to what could be considered
basic psychological needs.
Deci and Ryan (2000) define them as:
“….innate, organismic necessities rather than acquired motives, and ..., we define needs
at the psychological rather than physiological level. Thus, in SDT, needs specify innate
psychological nutriments that are essential for ongoing psychological growth, integrity,
and well-being.”
This first focuses on contrasting “organismic necessities rather than acquired motives”
suggesting a motivational aspect but differentiating between learnt motives. They then focus on
needs as requirements but again this does not help us distinguish the precise needs.
The descriptions above from Grawe, Sheldon, and Deci & Ryan, therefore, do not help us in
identifying basic needs because many needs could fulfil these criteria.
Aunger and Curtis’ evolutionary definition would give clearer guidelines as to what could
constitute a need (Aunger and Curtis, 2013):
“…a need can be defined as a mechanism to carry out a task related to an evolutionary
significant aspect of an animals’ ecological niche, which requires goal-directed
behavior”
This clearly defines a need as a necessity for fulfilling survival needs in one’s niche which
differs to previous descriptions and would allow a clearer selection of needs. They also go on to
clarify the role of motivation thereby connecting needs as requirements and needs as motives.
“We call motivation an aroused state of goal pursuit, and individual motives
psychological mechanisms designed by evolution to cause animals to seek to meet a need
through behaviour.”
Therefore, of these descriptions only the evolutionary description could give is clear guidance on
what could be considered basic psychological needs. Indeed, an accepted list of requirements
would be necessary to quantify whether a need could be classed as a basic need. Baumeister and
Leary (1995) argued that basic human psychological needs
1. Produce effects readily under all but adverse conditions
2. Have affective qualities
3. Direct cognitive processing
4. Lead to ill effects when thwarted
5. Elicit goal-oriented behaviours
6. Be universal
7. Not be derivative of other needs
8. Affect a broad variety of behaviours
9. Have implications beyond immediate psychological functioning
This seems to lay the case out more clearly but still has flaws:
Consider point 1. “Produce effects under all but adverse conditions” – this seems to be
contradictory – if it is a basic need it should exert influence in all conditions, especially under
adverse conditions.
Consider point 2. “have affective qualities” which seems to make sense but Aunger and Curtis
also note (Aunger and Curtis, 2013) that many of these affective qualities are missing to instigate
action or are only activated post action as a measure of measuring satisfaction or non-satisfaction
of a need. When we are “driven” to do something it comes from an internal drive that actually
seems to lack affective qualities until achieved or frustrated.
Consider 7, “not be derivative of other needs” – this should be controversial because we could
consider basic needs something like basic colours or the lowest common denominator, the
simplest form of higher order needs. But in complex organisms this can quickly become mixed
up: a sense of attachment will produce a positive feeling, a feeling of warmth and maybe joy. Is
this feeling of pleasure also a need? Or, alternatively, is pleasure indeed the primary need that
attachment underlies or is attachment the primary need that pleasure underlies? As we noted
previously most biological systems operate in a multiple modulatory manner so how far can we
actually separate these needs?
Consider number 6. “Universality” should not be contentious but on closer inspection is. For
example, the need for power has been proposed by many as a basic psychological need and
motivation. It is clear that through the history of mankind the need for power has helped shape
the modern world, society, wars, corporate life and virtually all domains of human enterprise.
But it is also clear that not all human beings exhibit a desire for power, in fact many exhibit the
exact opposite. So, this leaves us with the quandary of categorizing power as a human need for
its consistent, persistent and measurable impact on all human societies or not categorizing it as a
need for it is not present in all human beings. Therefore, a model with power as a need would
better be able to explain human functions, societies, and historical development but a model
without power would be better able to describe every human being on average - but not all
human beings.
We outlined previously that if we consider large super groups of needs this can partly resolve
this question, making space for both power and autonomy, for example, but also other constructs
of control that have been proposed by researchers over the years including the constructs of locus
of control as proposed by Rotter (Rotter, 1966), or self-efficacy as proposed by Bandura
(Bandura, 1989). Evolutionary literature can, however, help us to formulate these needs
differently and understand the importance of different needs expressed differently across
different individuals. This variation is not just a variation in individuals, which may be our
intuitive answer, but a prerequisite for the successful development of a species.
One nice, and particularly apt, example is that of the “personality” of ants: research into ants has
shown that ants have different “personalities” (O’Shea-Wheller et al., 2017), which is nice to
know, but that these are not just quaint artefacts of evolution but are considered important for
effectiveness of a colony, their group decision-making, and their survival over time. Firstly, there
are ants that are stable and accepting, when they find a new nest, they get on down to working –
like an ant. And secondly those that are more explorative. Think of a fidgety, I’m getting bored
type of ant - these will quickly get bored of the new nest and look for new nest locations.
Colonies with too many of one type of ant are likely to be less successful. There is therefore a
requirement for some stability, but they also shouldn’t miss out on better nesting opportunities.
This mix of personalities therefore becomes evolutionary balanced. In the language of needs and
motives some ants are driven and motivated to stay put and get to work and others are driven and
motivated to explore. Therefore, ants have, as a species, the need for two types of ants, in this
simplified example, of exploration and stability. To not include these factors as a need for ants
fails to describe how their colonies function over time and so would be fundamentally flawed.
This concept of evolutionary stable balance has important implications for needs theories: how
can needs theories represent this critical evolutionary factor? If they do not, they will be too
simplistic and general to serve any real use and fail to be descriptive of human society. For
example, if we do not or cannot measure the concept of egoism vs. communality, we miss a large
chunk of what has developed human society and needs models will fail to give a general and
simplified view of human endeavour.
This shows the importance in a human descriptive model of including needs that are drivers of
human behaviour in general but that may not be strongly if at all exhibited in all human beings.
Therefore, universality can be seen to describe general human function over society and time and
not for all individuals. Indeed, this is strongly supported by Talevich et al.’s hierarchical
taxonomy of human motives (Talevich et al., 2017), they, at the highest grouping, see three
branches of human motives Meaning, Communion, and Agency but under Communion we can
see the branches of Power, and Security & Belonging, two seemingly contrasting motives. If we
move one level lower on their hierarchical groupings the contrast is magnified with motives of
also that Talevich et al. when updating Chulef’s taxonomy of human goals (Chulef et al., 2001)
“discovered” avoidance motives – lending support to our discussion on approach and avoidance.
Talevich et al.’s (2017) motive of Communion
A further important aspect is that some needs are critical for developmental phases of human
beings. The need for attachment is such a need: universal in the need for healthy development of
children but differently expressed as adults with differing expression of attachment and
affiliation desires, motivations, needs, and behaviours. This also calls into question the aspect of
universality, a need for children may not be a need for adults.
Therefore, we propose a revised version of Baumeister and Leary’s (1995) nine criteria for basic
psychological needs:
Universality:
1. Must match evolutionary theory
2. Considered essential for human survival over time as a species
3. Be present across culture, and context
4. Be present in the majority of human activity and enterprise
Cognition and goal direction
5. Direct cognitive processing
6. Elicit goal-oriented behaviours
7. Affect a broad variety of behaviours
Health
8. Lead to ill effects when violated or unfulfilled
9. Lead to positive effects when fulfilled
Our first point of matching evolutionary theory could therefore massively reduce the field of
needs models that could be considered accurate and relevant. However, a model could match
evolutionary theory without explicitly being focused on evolutionary theory. Psychologists and
evolutionary psychologists will both agree that Attachment is a need and evolutionarily founded.
Indeed, an evolutionary approach has been made explicit by some authors. For example, Kenrick
et al. updating of Maslow’s model with respect to evolutionary principles therefore separating
the attachment need into constructs such as mate acquisition, and mate retention (Kenrick et al.,
2010). However, this presupposed that Maslow’s model is an accurate representation to begin
with - it is not. This leaves us with two models that are based on evolutionary theory: one by
Bernard et al. (Bernard et al., 2005), and Aunger and Curtis (Aunger and Curtis, 2013, 2015),
whose BPU theory gives a detailed outline of behavioural development from the level of the
gene to mammals and human beings. As organisms develop in complexity so the complexity of
behaviours develops, each building on top of another. This model has guided our thinking on
evolutionary development of behaviours and how this relates to human needs and we will further
expand on this below. However, the language and description of motivation seem to differ
starkly between this evolutionary perspective and that of classic needs models. Is this a case of
describing different aspects of the elephant, or a question of semantics, or is it perspective?
As such we can see the picture of the elephant becoming clearer but there still a number
frustrating unclarities. We can see large super groups of needs as being sufficient to categorize
most needs models but having four or five large groups of needs with vastly different
descriptions is unsatisfactory from a descriptive perspective and for parsimony of detail. A needs
model should be able to give a simplified view of human nature – doing justice to its complexity
but be simple enough to be clearly understandable. Similarly, the five models that best fulfil the
criteria so far, all agree on some aspects but also starkly differ on other aspects.
Notable also is that Aunger and Curtis give a scientifically sound description of development of
human needs, motives and behaviours but fail to align with Grawe’s or Dweck’s model. At this
stage we seem to be close to viewing the elephant but risk misrepresenting it severely.
We therefore propose that by rethinking what human needs are and combining this with
evolutionary driving forces, similar to Habermacher et al.’s latest proposal (Habermacher et al.,
2016), we can accurately build a model that satisfies all the five models that best fulfil our
requirements but also the vast majority of other needs models. Similarly, we also propose that we
can neatly place motives, requirements, and also personality, within the same framework.
Redefining Human Needs
As we have already shown the super groups of five needs proposed as SCOAP matches strongly
to 54 needs models outlined not to mention key schools of thought in psychology and
psychotherapy such as Adler and self-esteem, and Bowlby and attachment theory. A
consideration is whether a three needs models such as SDT would be sufficient or not – with the
notable problem that three needs models also differ in their interpretation despite being
academically robust. As we previously noted with Talevich et al.’s hierarchical taxonomy of
motives the highest-level clusters (also three) appear too vague to be practical having contrasting
motives within them. We argue therefore argue that three is not sufficient to explain and match
the majority of human functioning. For example, self-esteem is not included by Deci and Ryan,
but self-esteem behaviours are obvious and preeminent in the world today and throughout history
and with evidence from multiple approaches outlined previously: philosophical, scientific, self-
report, factor analysis, and evolutionary theory. Another approach would be to consider the
worlds’ consumption of self-esteem enhancing products as a proxy for measuring human desire
and motivation. These would include fashion items, jewellery, cosmetics, clothing designed to
form your figures in more attractive ways, beauty parlours, success & motivational books, desire
for sporting greatness, and so the list goes on. With this in mind we can see strong and robust
evidence from multiple streams that self-esteem is a key factor, and not least when we consider
that importance of status in tribal creatures such as human beings.
Furthermore, an evolutionary approach would see self-esteem not as just a status factor but as a
primary life force – the prioritisation of the individual a concept of “self” at the lowest
evolutionary level. Torday and Millar (Torday and Miller, 2016) writing on the evolution of the
mammalian brain note: “That answer lies within physiologic mechanisms that extend forward
from unicellular roots. These are based upon stable principles of evolutionary development that
can be traced from those unicellular origins as thermodynamically effective outcomes for the
maintenance of cellular identities and cellular homeostasis directed by a sustaining ‘self‘”. This
point of seeing “self” as a primary driving force of all biological organisms, of life itself, points
us to another philosophical approach that should be robustly supported by evidence in multiple
disciplines and in evolutionary theory. This would shift the focus on what are basic human
psychological needs to what are requirements for life that will therefore manifest as needs across
all human (animal) behaviours. This thinking of needs as biological driving forces is not
common but has been approached by evolutionary philosopher Ed Gibney (Gibney, 2019) but
also by Karl Friston and his Free Energy principle (Friston, 2012) which aims to explain how life
can for a period seemingly counteract the laws of thermodynamics. This, for example, sees
surprise minimisation as a key driving force for all living things – notably, and insightfully,
Dweck proposed Prediction as a basic need in her BEATS theory but without citing Friston and
his concept of surprise minimisation.
Therefore, if we applied this approach to all living organisms, we see four requirements:
1. A sense of “self”
2. An ability to control aspects of the self, and environment
3. Mechanisms to identify suitable elements for survival i.e. nutrition, toxins, threats,
optimal temperatures, moistures, etc.
4. An ability to reproduce (and protection in numbers).
These are therefore fundamental life requirements which would become ever more refined and
include different facets as an organism develops into a more complex organism. These therefore
translate into four fundamental life requirements of:
1. Self-esteem - a sense of self
2. Control – an ability to control aspects of the self and environment
3. Orientation - mechanisms to identify suitable elements for survival
4. Attachment – an ability to reproduce, protection of kin, and safety in numbers
An addition is that energy generation and cellular homeostasis is essential from external sources
and that there must be a stable (but fluctuating) environment that provides access to energy to be
metabolised. These requirements develop with organisms from the unicellular, to simple
multicellular organisms, and therefore will provide constant themes of behaviour across all
organisms – this is therefore why they have been identified by multitudes of researchers as key
themes for human life, but their description and categorizing has failed to match each other. This
approach points to a clearer understanding of basic psychological needs as higher order
manifestations of basic life requirements that must be present in all human beings as a living
organism. The precise representation of these requirements does, however, need to be clarified
and this can be conceptualised and put into a framework by understanding evolutionary
development of life forms, specifically mammals, and ultimately human beings.
However, first we must also understand a discrepancy to what we had outlined a few paragraphs
earlier namely that SCOAP seemed to encapsulate much of previous work on motivational and
needs theories. With this new perspective we can see that this four-factor model ignores the
simple dual model of all human behaviour: pleasure and pain. This can be easily explained from
an evolutionary perspective: pleasure and pain would then become an overriding model when an
organism has developed to be able to represent pain/discomfort and pleasure with its chemical
triggers and communication. When this is possible pleasure and pain become linked to an
overriding biological communication strategy of an organism. Pleasure can then develop as an
independent need, pleasure for the sake of pleasure, and be a proxy for fulfilling many other
needs. Pleasure is therefore classed as a primary human psychological need without it being a
life requirement – therefore as a small “p”: SCOAp.
Therefore, a five-factor model of needs would be grounded in evolutionary principles, from the
simplest chemical interactions of an amoeba, to our reflexes, instincts and to the most complex
human social behaviours. We have already shown this encapsulates the majority of work on
motivation and needs we have collected but fails to explain how the differing constructs and
concepts are related. If we follow this evolutionary developmental principle, we can, now, also
identify the key constructs in each category. Taking this approach, our elephant suddenly
becomes clearer. For example, the need for Attachment would include in this order:
Level of gene: Genetic replication
Level of organism: Reproduction
Level of sexual reproduction: Lust Sexual desire
Level of mammals: Pair bond Love, affection, loyalty
Level of mammals: Nurture Care, affection, warmth, connection
Level of mammals: Family Care, affection, warmth, belonging, support
Level of tribes: Friendship Care, affection, trust, loyalty, support
Level of nature: Pets Care, affection, warmth
Level of humans: Ultra social Charity, benevolence, greater good
These succinctly places key constructs into the attachment need and includes key desires,
motives, needs, which may also be expressed differently in different individuals. Thus, we can
see concepts and constructs proposed by the different researchers as falling neatly (mostly) into
this framework and our analogy of the blind men and the elephant becoming ever more accurate.
The individual researchers have mostly proposed valid descriptors of parts of the elephant but
have failed to see the elephant – indeed only through relatively recent development in the
neurosciences, evolutionary thinking, and research has this even been possible.
This interpretation of the Attachment need can therefore see Attachment as a single overriding
super construct and include all the terms proposed by the 54 other authors and give this a clear
structure and reasoning as to why it should fit and specifically where it fits in the model. This
satisfies and consolidates all the previous approaches: literature review, market analysis,
philosophical and evolutionary and matches neurological development, structures, and circuits.
We can repeat this process with all needs and come up with a model that can reasonably
incorporate major schools of psychological thought with little contradiction and places these into
a coherent framework that matches evolutionary development of the brain and behaviour.
Constructs to SCOAP in Supplementary Materials lists the language used in the 54 models to
to SCOAP Evolutionary in Supplementary Materials maps constructs proposed by 54 models to
the evolutionary framework outlined below.
For simplicity this can be reasonably grouped into three levels of motives and behaviour
production. MacLean famously proposed a tripartite model of the brain (MacLean, 1990) –
though criticised for being overly simple it still serves as a reasonable simplified model for
human functioning. Similarly, Aunger and Curtis also propose a tripartite model (Aunger and
Curtis, 2015), but their language reflects better the function of motivation and behaviour.
Namely that of 1. reflexes and instincts, 2. motivational (emotional), and 3. planned behaviour
(or executive). This follows structures of the brain and our best understanding of the
evolutionary development of the human brain. This semantic reformulation also neatly aligns the
language from previous researchers such as James’ “Instincts” or Chulef’s “Motives”.
Constructs matched to SCOAP and evolutionary development
Self-Esteem Control Orientation Attachment Pleasure
Survival
Cellular Genetic Identity Chemical Chemical Duplication -
level Control Orientation
Markovian Receptors Receptors Reproduction -
blanket
Separation Movement Genetic Proximity -
Simple Survival Motor control Senses Mating Comfort
organism mechanisms
Prioritising of Hoard / Collect Hunger (desire Fear/Disgust
"self" for nutrients)
Defence / Create Curiosity /
Aggression exploration
Mammal- Health Autonomy Functional Courting Play
ian knowledge
Physical ("honest Self-efficacy Social Nurture Fun
signals") knowledge
Attributes Influence Environmental Pair Bond
knowledge
Status Power Clan / Tribe /
Group
Social value Environmental (Nature)
control
Primacy of (Objects)
humanity
Human Conscious health Restraint Abstract Ultra social Savour
knowledge
Self concept Cognitive Planning Charity Humour
control
Ideal self Planning Theory of mind Nature Games
connection
Fairness Environmental Environmental Awe of nature
control knowledge
Justice Environmental Awe of
research manmade
products
Respect
Another dimension that could be added, similar to that proposed by Aunger and Curtis is the
biological function of the behaviour: Nutrients serve an indivdual purposes; Status serves a
social purpose; Create / Build serves and enironnmental purpose. This may be adding too much
complexity for a simple needs model but would be a more accurate albeit brief taxonomy of
human beahvioural production units as Aunger and Curtis called them. Full mapping of needs
proposed by the 54 models and related to evolutionary levels und functions can be seen in
Constructs + SCOAP + Evolutionary Levels
Self-Esteem Control Orientation Attachment Pleasure
Survival
Chemical
Biological Survival Chemical Control Duplication -
Reflexes Orientation
Complex Complex
Genetic Identity chemical Chemical Reproduction -
interactions Orientations
Markovian
Individual Movement Senses (9-21) -
blanket
Social Genetic Proximity -
Environmental Separation Receptors Receptors -
Physical -
Biological Comfort
Instincts
Survival
Individual Motor control Hunger Lust Fear/Disgust
mechanisms
Prioritising of Curiosity /
"self" Exploration
Defence /
Social Fear/Disgust
Aggression
Environmental Hoard Navigation Fear/Disgust
Create / Build
Biological Health Play
Motivational
Physical ("honest
signals")
Individual Attributes Autonomy Courting
Functional
knowledge
Status Self Efficacy
Social Parental value Influence Social knowledge Nurture Fun
Romantic value Power Pair Bond
Social value Clan
Environmental (Nature)
Primacy of Environmental Environmental
humanity control knowledge
(Objects)
Abstract
Biological Conscious health Restraint
Executive knowledge
Planning
Abstract
Individual Self concept Cognitive control Savour
knowledge
Ideal self Planning Planning Connoisseur
Social Fairness Cognitive control Theory of Mind Ultra social Humour
Justice Planning Planning Charity Games
Environmental Environmental Nature
Environmental Respect Awe of nature
control knowledge connection
Environmental Awe of manmade
research products
This therefore enables a first level of simplicity with just five core needs SCOAP that can be
broken down into single needs at different evolutionary levels. This not only aligns strongly with
the 54 models we have analysed but gives an evolutionary rationale for where previously
proposed “needs” will be positioned and for what reason. Our elephant becomes even clearer:
this satisfies simplicity and also complexity simultaneously – being refined enough to justify
complexity of human drives, motives, and behaviours.
Approach-Avoidance
Approach-avoidance motivation we noted earlier has been notably absent in motivation theories,
not least because of the grounding in positive psychology. This is a major flaw as any model
would fail to explain sufficiently any form of behaviour in the animal and human world.
Defensive behaviours, and aggression are critical factors for survival – evolutionary theories
have tended to list these as separate behaviours. Aunger and Curtis position these as tactics that
serve a motivational goal – aggressiveness or submission could be interpreted as a tactic for
survival. It is clear that avoidance and defence mechanisms are a critical aspect of human nature.
If we took a market-based approach and analysed products sold, we would see a clear focus on
“defensive” products: anti-aging creams, insurance policies, protection for ones’ home, antitheft
devices, security companies, the police force, armies, weapons, anti-virus software, and so the
list goes on. It seems we human beings spend a lot of money and are constantly concerned with
protecting ourselves as much as we are concerned with achieving more.
Eysenck famously ascribed this to personality in the 1960s (Eysenck, 1963), specifically with
relationship to extraversion; the extravert attracted towards stimuli, the introvert avoiding
stimuli. We could argue that approach-avoidance is the most primal of all personality traits as
this is present in all living organisms (see review: Elliot and Covington 2001) and hypothesize
that this is in an evolutionary balanced state in most societies with some cultural variations.
Therefore, we propose the concept of approach and avoidance is built across all needs rather than
classing these as separate needs as Murray did, or tactics as Aunger and Curtis do, or separate
motives as Talevich et al. showed. This would translate into some individuals being generally
more defensive and focused on avoidance and others more forward thinking and focused on
achieving goals. There will, of course, be individual differences in how strong these approach or
achievement and avoidance or protect mechanisms are expressed by individuals and in different
contexts and needs. Some individuals may be well-balanced, others may be more strongly
achievement focused, and yet others will be more strongly protect focused. This would match
personality theory and how we know human beings differ.
Similarly, Aunger and Curtis also see fear and disgust as two separate motives driven by the
need of avoiding personal damage – fear from external physical sources and disgust from
internal i.e. toxic sources. We see these as higher order functions of the basic approach-
avoidance distinction which then becomes a part of a general communication strategy of the
organism hence explaining why fear and aggression can be encountered in multiple contexts.
Importantly we also see this as a component of individual representation i.e. personality, and a
part of evolutionary balanced systems.
Understanding avoidance, or protection, as we have termed it, is also critical for SWB. One can
achieve a motivational goal by fulfilling a need and therefore generating a positive state of
satisfaction but also by protecting a need and avoiding damage to it - think of the relief of
avoiding a negative outcome. Grawe also postulated this as an important factor, and it could be
that this factor is more important than many would think when it comes to disruption of SWB
and also risk of psychopathologies (Grawe, 2007). We review personal SWB and the
implications of failure to protect one’s needs below.
In summary this five-core need model of SCOAp is complemented by a dual model of
motivational direction, approach-avoidance (we have labelled these Achieve and Protect
respectively) present across all five core needs. These core needs we can consider general
overriding themes of human beings but, importantly, these can be expressed to different
intensities in individuals. This would therefore enable a descriptive model that is not only
universal but individualised simultaneously.
Personal representation
We have already drawn attention to some problems with universality vs. individuality and that
most needs models have failed to sufficiently outline and explain these factors.
To recap, the first important issue is that of evolutionary balances – some needs are expressed
differently across population groups in such a way that benefits the population in general over
time. Examples of these are:
• Egoism vs. communality
• Dominance vs. submissiveness
• Exploration vs. desire for stability
One argument would be that these are equally balanced over population groups. There is also an
argument that this is cultural. For example, a piece of research of the serotonin alleles showed
that collectivist cultures and individualistic cultures have different expression and balance of
these alleles (Chiao and Blizinsky, 2010). Whether culture leads to epigenetics changes across a
population group over time or whether the genes drive culture is open to interpretation at this
stage.
The second issue is that of personal representation of needs. Even needs that can be considered
universal to all human beings will have variations between individuals:
1. Through the starting biology which has natural variations:
For example the neuromodulator oxytocin is considered strongly related to the
attachment need. Oxytocin stimulates labor in women during childbirth and also lactation
in pregnancy and this is exchanged between mother and child (for review: Gordon et al.
2010). Attachment behaviour such as caressing the child simulate oxytocin (for example:
Holst et al. 2005). However, research shows that responsiveness to oxytocin is dependent
on receptors on synapses (there are multiple receptors on synapses of neurons for each
transmitter or modulator). The proliferation of these receptors is dependent on genetics
(for example: Insel and Shapiro 1992). Similarly, different networks in the brain grow
with different variations strengthening or weakening different circuits which can be
directly or indirectly related to basic needs. In short different people will have different
biological responses to attachment and hence greater or lesser desire for attachment.
2. Through updating of motives from previous successful or unsuccessful experiences of
fulfilling or protecting motivational goals (related to needs):
This will be modulated by
i. Our biological starting point, and also natural propensity for achieve motivation or
protect motivation
ii. Responsiveness to success or failure, our sensitivity and emotional intensity of the
experience
critical peers or elders. In the worst case this can lead to toxic stress whereby the stress
causes biological disruptions and disrupted neuronal growth (for review: Shonkoff and
Garner 2011).
3. Speed with which one can update motives and “learn” new behaviours:
This will depend on multiple factors such as cognitive abilities but also underlying neural
plasticity which is also influenced by
i. Our biological propensity to plasticity. Though all children have plasticity, research has
shown levels of plasticity and therefore adaptability are higher in some than others–
obviously as this would also underlie natural biological variation (for review: Bouchard
and McGue 2003).
ii. This may have been positively or negatively influenced by point 2 above and toxic
stress (for review: Kolb et al., 2017)
4. Local contexts and environment may focus on certain factors and exclude other factors
making these more important within a context. Individuals will be influenced by this, but
their genetic make-up will influence to what extent. Also, the old adage of “use it or lose
it” applies to the brain across our lifespan.
The above will unlikely surprise most readers but this is rarely clarified and when we review the
biological and neurological with the psychological, the processes become clearer.
What is also striking is that this also explains certain developmental factors from baby to child,
to adulthood. Needs models again have generally failed to explain or approach this subject. The
exceptions are those five models we have already identified as being the most descriptive and
some that are explicitly focused on educational contexts. Klaus Grawe talks about the
socialisation process but fails to explicitly approach the subject of children and development.
Dweck is more explicit in her model being a model of development – not unsurprising
considering her recognition in the field of developmental psychology. Aunger and Curtis
recognise needs such as nurture but do not explicitly focus on how individuals develop. This
process should not be underestimated because needs can and will change over time. The concept
of self-esteem is such a need: we go going though different phases in childhood, teenage years,
early adulthood, parenthood and in older years. The core need of Self-Esteem remains strong, but
its expression will shift over time in predictable patterns. This is conceptualised and taken into
account when we consider personalised subjective well-being in the next section.
Personal representations can also be considered an expression of personality. This is, in our
minds, not a separate domain of personality psychology but mutually integrated in the model we
have built. Personality is after all is a deviation form a norm of behaviour that can be considered
personal. Personality is therefore a description of behaviour and ways of interacting with the
world that have variation.
Therefore, we see personality as a variation of behaviour – we argue, as does Dweck (Dweck,
2017), that personality is an extension of the needs and drives that we express as human beings.
With the SCOAp model however, we can better describe the majority of personality in contrast
to, for example, a three-needs model. This would also allow an evolutionary analysis of
behaviour and personality and for example extraversion which includes a majority of approach,
or achievement, behaviours – therefore rather than thinking of extraversion it may be more
accurate to think of approach behaviour and then aspects of this such as social approach, or
curiosity approach to give more accurate personality descriptions – Jonathon Cheek, for
example, has updated the concept of introversion to include some of these factors (Cheek and
Norem, 2011). Intriguing as this is, personality does, however, not fall within the scope of this
paper.
Personalised SWB
We have now outlined how drives, motives and needs will be expressed differently based on
evolutionary balanced systems, personal biological differences, and environmental and
developmental factors. This personalisation will also necessitate thinking how we consider
subjective well-being and optimal functioning. Similarly, the concepts of approach and
avoidance motivation is also critical for well-being with avoidance having been generally
ignored by well-being models. But first let us revisit Grawe’s CTM which clearly formulated a
model for well-being and mental health, designed two scales for use by therapists (Grosse
Holtforth and Grawe 2003; Grosse Holtforth and Grawe 2000), and has research to back up the
model (Smith and Grawe, 2003; Gassmann and Grawe, 2006; Holtforth et al., 2006; Stein et al.,
2013).
Grawe’s Consistency Theory Model proposed striving for consistency as the general drive for all
human beings. By consistency he meant the satisfaction of basic psychological needs in the four
groups he proposed: Self-Esteem, Control & Orientation, Attachment, Pleasure. If these needs
are violated or unsatisfied this will increase the risk for pathologies. A key insight, and
potentially controversial at the time, was that violation or non-satisfaction increases the chance
of any psychopathology. He in essence proposed a general factor for psychopathology. This has
met with more acceptance recently (Jones, 2020).
Consistency is therefore when the perceived reality is consistent with one’s personal
motivational goals – which are directly related to the psychological needs. This in Grawe’s view
increases SWB and violation, especially severe violation over long periods of time, decreases
well-being and increases risk of mental illness.
Grawe referred to incongruence as the mismatch between a specific goal and reality which leads
to emotional disruption, stress, and risk of psychopathology, if intense and prolonged enough.
We, however, propose that there are four specific levels of congruence/incongruence:
• Achieve Congruence: we fulfil our motivational goals i.e. we achieve what we want to
achieve.
• Achieve Incongruence: we fail to fulfil our motivational goals i.e. we don’t achieve
what we want to achieve.
• Protect Congruence: we protect our needs i.e. we successfully protect our needs from
damage.
• Protect Incongruence: we fail to protect our needs i.e. we are unsuccessful in protecting
our needs from damage.
Each of these will be related to different feelings and, depending on context and how these are
personally valued, will cause more, or less, intense feelings and expressions. Continued
incongruence leads to inconsistency. Grawe only referenced fulfilling needs in general and
matched these to norm groups. In contrast we state that incongruence can only be related to a
personal standard. Some people may have a high desire for status and therefore build strong
motivational patterns around this and therefore also experience great disappointment if this is
unfulfilled. Another person will not. In this way we can clearly propose a method whereby we
match personal motives to general motives and resolve the human universal vs individuality
paradox noted earlier. This will have measurable impact and has dramatic consequences for
SWB research and also for defining motivational factors in individuals. Warr’s analogy of
vitamin is therefore suitable here but personalised rather than generalised for all human beings.
This therefore means that SWB will be dependent on fulfilment of personal needs to a personal
perceived level of importance. Indeed, Ghadiri showed that taking a measure of personalised
congruence and matched to neuroticism (sensitivity of system responses) was a much better
predictor of SWB and vitality than either fulfilment or violation of needs in general in a business
context (Ghadiri, 2017).
An important aspect of the Consistency Theory model and SCOAp model is that of updating
motivational schema. On achieving or not achieving a goal, Grawe argued that the motivational
model will be updated. This we can consider a standard human pattern. One may therefore
increase the energy to achieve a goal or reduce the desire for a goal. Both would be valid
approaches – from an evolutionary perspective both are valid approaches. In the motivational
literature and in positive psychology we may consider redoubling effort as a “better” approach.
However, other research shows that those with more cognitive flexibility have lower stress (for
example: Demirtas and Yildiz 2019). Indeed, cognitive flexibility itself has been proposed as a
fundamental aspect of human health (Kashdan and Rottenberg, 2010). What is clear is that
continual violation of needs causes disruption and Grawe’s research shows clear correlations to
psychopathologies and that reducing these disruptions improves the state of psychotherapy
patients (Smith and Grawe, 2003). Similarly Del Giudice et al. argue that “stress occurs when a
biological control system detects a failure to control a fitness-critical variable, which may be
either internal or external to the organism” (Del Giudice et al., 2018).
Alderfer proposed compensation mechanisms in case of unfulfilled needs – we speculate that this
is valid, but this will also not fall within the scope of this paper.
In summary, subjective well-being is subjective and therefore can only follow personalised
model of needs and not a standardised model of needs. Therefore, needs fulfilment and violation
can only be measured against a personal scale of how these are valued by an individual. This
therefore has serious repercussions for many well-being at workplace questionnaires and scales.
These well-being and workplace satisfaction and “engagement” scales mostly measure against a
general level of fulfilment which is considered an ideal by researchers and not matched to
individuals. This will likely provide inaccurate results not to mention that they may be
imbalanced as they fail to capture all core-needs in equal measure.
From Individuals to Groups
Space will not allow us to review group behaviours in detail, but our hypothesis is that individual
behaviours are closely matched to group behaviours. Groups are after all collections of
individuals, but the real question is can we match the SCOAp model to group behaviours? Do
groups on average exhibit self-esteem enhancing behaviours and self-esteem protection
behaviours, for example? In clear groups, we claim this seems to be the case but would need
further corroboration and analysis. Obvious examples are:
- Sports teams
- Political parties
- Companies
- Interest groups
We provide a preliminary analysis of how their behaviours can be neatly matched to the SCOAp
Detailed mapping of SCOAp Model
SCOAp as a model of the Elephant
We set out at the outset to give a simplified model of human behaviour that would include
desires, motives, and needs that would be able to accurately describe human functioning and be
able to describe the proverbial elephant that so many researchers have tried to describe but with
“astonishing lack of consensus”.
We have outlined how this “astonishing lack of consensus” has come about and how to resolve
this. Apt to our analogy of the blindmen and the elephant, most researchers have proposed valid
needs as basic needs but failed to see the general picture. Indeed, this general picture has
arguably only been possible to be formulated with the masses of research over resent decades but
also the research that this has been built on over the last century. By reconsidering what human
needs are and seeing this as the “super” needs of fundamental life forces and matching this to an
evolutionary framework, we can suddenly see a clear elephant.
Evolutionary requirements giving five core needs, two motivational patterns, and three
add, what Aunger and Curtis called Behavioural Production Units, single needs that drive
motives, behaviour, and influence wellbeing. Personal biology of each individual will express
these needs differently but in similar and generally predictable patterns and this will be updated
by personal experience in the environment in which they develop and operate. This therefore
starts with a relatively simple set of core needs but that can with time develop in multiple
directions and give the wonderful complexity and variations of all human beings.
Furthermore, we can see that these core-needs and needs are present across cultures and
contexts. They are present in all groups of people from sports clubs, religious movements,
nations, races, tribes, and any sort of unifying movement.
When used as model for motives we can see that the SCOAp model explicitly states that there
will be individual variation through natural evolutionary variation which in itself has been
important for the evolution of the human species and the niche it occupies. Within motives that
are universal there will also be some natural genetic variation. This will also apply to models of
approach and avoidance motivation with individuals predisposed to one side or the other side but
on average over the human population this will be balanced (we predict a slight preference for
approach motivation across all human beings). Similarly, the topic not discussed would also be
intensity of motivation which will also be subject to individuality with some people deeply and
passionately driven and others less so. These individual variations are normally expressed as
personality.
When used as a model for requirements or subjective well-being the SCOAp model states that
subjective well-being is, well, subjective. Specifically, that when needs are fulfilled to the level
of one’s expectations, then one experiences well-being, or coherence, subjective current
happiness. If one can control this over time then we label this meta-coherence, the happy life.
This has far reaching implications, for example in measuring and predicting stress and burnout in
the workplace and happiness research.
Outline SCOAp Framework
When used as model for optimal states we enter into trickier territory. The intuitive assumption
would be that optimal states of needs fulfilment will lead to optimal states for performance much
like the flow concept proposed by Csikszentmihalyi (Csikszentmihalyi, 1991). However,
research here is conflicting and this makes evolutionary sense. One would be motivated when
one has failed to meet one’s goals, therefore a certain amount of incongruence can be beneficial
and lead to growth – this is well-known in physiological fields such as sports performance
whereby subjecting the body to stress improves performance – the tricky question in sports
performance as well as in psychological and cognitive performance is what is the optimal
amount of stress? Not too much and to too little – a zone of optimal stress - which is however
individualistic and out of the scope of this paper. What is clear is that not achieving goals is just
as important as achieving goals for models of motivation.
The SCOAp model therefore enables us not only to describe a “generalised elephant” that neatly
aligns needs proposals by researchers over the last century but enables the description of
“different elephants” and where they may be different.
Summary
The SCOAp model human needs can therefore be considered a comprehensive model of human
needs, it covers almost all needs that are presented by 54 other models analysed. It can be
considered an overriding framework and draws strongly on empirical work of Grawe and his
Consistency Theory Model, and Aunger and Curtis’ BPU model. It includes major schools of
thought on human nature, motives, and psychological needs, and can clearly explain how needs
are updated personally but are also universal.
• Giving a simplified but accurate view of human nature
• Giving key psychological drives and motivations
• Giving requirements for healthy (optimal) psychological well-being
• Informing others how to increase human well-being be that in organisational contexts,
education, or public policy
Discussion
The SCOAp Model therefore serves as a simplified and refined model of human nature. We have
explicitly called it a model for there are still too many unanswered questions to justify calling it a
theory. Therefore, we foresee that this can and most likely will be updated in the future. Indeed,
our view is that it should be continually updated, static models and theories may not stand the
changes in knowledge and within research across multiple disciplines.
Some of these unanswered questions include:
• A coherent and detailed mapping of interplay with physiological and psychological
factors such as movement, exercise, nutrition, microbiome, sleep, and stress.
• Matching to cultural universals: one cultural universal model has been included in this
analysis (Schwartz), but cultural universals provide detailed list of constructs and
behaviours that can be considered consistently human. Detailed mapping will lend
strength to the SCOAp model or highlight potential discrepancies.
• Have we accurately captured all needs? For example, the concept of emotional
expression has been proposed by some but is not present in the model as it stands. The
same goes for privacy which is a cultural universal. This may go hand in hand with
categorisation of cultural universals, or could be classed as mixed needs, e.g. privacy
could be seen as an evolutionary development of theory of mind: with the ability to be
aware that other people may be judging oneself, that privacy is the only place one can be
truly oneself and therefore serves to protect self-esteem but also gives a sense of freedom
and control.
• Similarly, the concept of language and communication seems to fulfil multiple needs but
not be explicitly mentioned. Considering that language is one of the defining features of
human beings this seems to be an omission. We do have some personal opinions such as
the fact that language can match multiple levels of the framework e.g. expressions such
as pain, reflecting reflexes, cooing sounds reflecting nurturing instincts, orientation
mechanisms, but also social mechanisms. Nevertheless, this would need to be carefully
laid out and backed up by the research in the respective fields.
• Other aspects could be included for example the concept of gravity – this may at first
glance seem a bit outrageous, but this is precisely one of the obvious facts that becomes
overlooked in evolutionary theories. We develop in an environment with gravity – bone
density, blood circulation (e.g. valves on veins) are designed because of this not to
mention obvious cognitive concepts such as up and down. This in the age of space
exploration is essential not also least because of the proposed long-term space travel to
planets such as Mars.
• We have alluded to how needs change over development and time but have not fully
listed and formulated how this takes place. There are some predictable patterns in
developmental phases such as changes on focus on how we process self-esteem.
However, this must be matched in detail and with accuracy to the model we propose.
Similarly, how this can change in cultures and contexts.
We have already pointed to potential other avenues of research that would help in identifying
and evaluating needs such as big data, social media behaviour, corpus analytics, and market
analysis which are underrepresented in the scientific literature. Our preliminary observations
seem to confirm that these would neatly support the SCOAp model, but this could also give more
quantifiable data to back this up and how they interact but also in how they, for example,
develop over lifespans.
A final point is that as model of human drives, motives, and needs this should be corroborated
across disciplines and in different fields of research. What is noticeable on reviewing these
models is that some models have made honourable attempts at describing human nature,
specifically Grawe’s consistency theory model but also Dweck’s BEATS theory, PSI, Aunger
and Curtis’ BPU theory, and Talevich et al.’s Hierarchical Taxonomy of Human Motives.
Ironically these particular models, that our analysis shows have best been able to describe the
nature of human nature, have also been underrepresented in the literature, for numerous reasons.
For example, Grawe was well-known in the German-speaking world but not in the USA despite
his previous role as Chairman of the International Society for Psychotherapy Research.
Seemingly cognitive scientists also do not give evolutionary models the credit or attention they
deserve with the two evolutionary models, and specifically Aunger and Curtis’ model, being
academically impressive but barely cited in the literature. This may be through lack of exposure,
awareness, or lack of interest by motivational researchers in evolutionary theories.
But the importance of this evolutionary perspective points to the importance of multi-
disciplinary research but also to the masses of research and evidence that has been built and
amassed by thousands of other researchers. Similarly, the danger of theory-induced blindness –
i.e. constantly referring to Maslow - and trends in research that follow a given path or theory
such as SDT, as good as SDT explains many things, it fails to encapsulate the majority of human
experiences and therefore is only a partial view of human motivation despite it being labelled a
macro-model of human motivation. To describe the elephant in detail we need masses of
research from multiple fields – our argument has been that at the current stage of development in
2020, as we write this, we have enough information and data to give a fairly refined view of the
elephant. We hope that further research will help to refine this and build an ever more accurate
picture.
Our analogy of the six blind scientists and the elephant is in no way designed to be derogatory.
Rather closer Plato’s analogy of the cave – in science we are attempting to describe nature with
only the data and observations we can make - to interpret what is representing the shadow is
fiendishly difficult as is trying to describe an elephant through touching it. Our simple claim is
that the current state of science, and cognitive, motivational, and behavioural research is able to
make clear model of human drives, motives, needs and therefore give a model of human
behaviour that can lead to individual and collective well-being and guide those in different fields
to make better decisions for the betterment of society.
Conflict of Interest Statement
The authors are owners and shareholders in a for-profit legal entity that aims to sell assessments
based on the SCOAP Theory.