Running head: EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 1
Efficient estimation of children’s language exposure in two
bilingual communities
1, 2 3 3
Margaret Cychosz , Anele Villanueva , and Adriana Weisleder
Department of Hearing and Speech Sciences, University of Maryland-College Park, College Park, MD
Center for Comparative and Evolutionary Biology of Hearing, College Park, MD
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
Author Note
Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: Margaret Cychosz, 0100 Samuel J.
LeFrak Hall, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA, 20742. Email: mcychosz@umd.edu
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 2
Abstract
Purpose: The language that children hear early in life predicts their later speech-language
outcomes (Hoff 2003; Weisleder & Fernald 2013). This line of research relies on naturalistic
observations of children’s language input, often captured with daylong audio recordings. But the
large quantity of data that daylong recordings generate requires novel analytical tools to feasibly
parse thousands of hours of naturalistic speech. This study outlines a workflow to efficiently
process and sample from daylong audio recordings made in two bilingual communities:
Spanish-English in the United States and Quechua-Spanish in Bolivia.
Method: We employed a general sampling with replacement technique to efficiently
estimate two key elements of children’s early language environments: 1) proportion of
child-directed speech and 2) dual language exposure. Proportions estimated from random
sampling of 30-second segments were compared to those from annotations over the entire daylong
recording (every-other-segment), as well as parental report.
Results: Results showed that approximately 49 minutes from each recording, or just 7% of
the overall recording, were required to reach a stable proportion of child-directed speech and
bilingual exposure. In both speech communities, strong correlations were found between bilingual
language estimates made using random sampling and all-day annotation techniques. A strong
relationship was additionally found for child-directed speech estimates in the United States, but
this was weaker at the Bolivian site, where child-directed speech was less frequent. Furthermore,
dual language estimates from the daylong audio recordings did not correspond to estimates
derived from parental report.
Conclusions: Random sampling is a valid method to estimate ambient characteristics from
daylong recordings. However, caution should be taken when interpreting estimates of
low-frequency categories and practitioners might consider collecting multiple daylong recordings to
accurately estimate characteristics of children’s language exposure .
Keywords: bilingualism; child-directed speech; language acquisition; naturalistic recording;
random sampling; LENA; Spanish
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 3
1 Introduction
In North America, the quantity and quality of language input that children receive can pre-
dict later language outcomes such as vocabulary size and lexical processing speed (Hart & Risley
1995; Hoff 2003; Ramírez-Esparza et al. 2014; Weisleder & Fernald 2013). In particular, studies
have shown that the amount of child-directed speech (CDS) that children are exposed to during
infancy and childhood has meaningful downstream effects on their language development (Hurtado
et al. 2008; Mahr & Edwards 2018; Newman et al. 2016; Ramírez-Esparza et al. 2017; Rowe 2008;
2012; Weisleder & Fernald 2013). Similarly, differences in bilingual language exposure predict differ-
ences in infants’ and children’s speech processing, speech production, and vocabulary development,
suggesting that the amount of bilingual children’s exposure to each of their languages explains
meaningful variability in their language development (Bijeljac-Babic et al. 2012; Byers-Heinlein
2013; Carbajal & Peperkamp 2019; Marchman et al. 2017; Orena et al. 2020; Pearson et al. 1997;
Place & Hoff 2011; 2016; Potter et al. 2019; Unsworth et al. 2018; cf. Carroll 2017).
Traditionally, the methods for estimating children’s bilingual and CDS exposure have differed.
While children’s bilingual language exposure has typically been estimated from parental report
(Byers-Heinlein et al. 2019; DeAnda et al. 2016; de Houwer 2011; Place & Hoff 2011; 2016), CDS
exposure has traditionally been measured from transcribed observations of parent-child interactions
(Bergelson, Casillas, et al. 2019; Hirsh-Pasek et al. 2015; Hoff 2003). More recently, estimates of
exposure to CDS and dual language input have been made using daylong audio recordings (8-
16 hours) of children’s everyday language environments (Marchman et al. 2017; Orena et al. 2019;
Ramírez-Esparza et al. 2017) using the Language ENvironment Analysis system (LENA) (Gilkerson
TM
& Richards 2009). Yet while the LENA system estimates the amount of adult speech near the
child (e.g., the number of adult words), it does not differentiate between child- and adult-directed
speech or between different languages. Previous studies have thus estimated the amount of CDS
or dual language exposure in daylong recordings through human annotation. However, annotating
the entirety of daylong recordings is time- and resource-intensive. This study proposes the use
of random sampling of daylong recordings to more efficiently estimate children’s speech-language
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 4
exposure. We test this random sampling method in recordings collected from bilingual communities
in the United States (Spanish-English) and Bolivia (Quechua-Spanish). This work first shows that
stable proportions of CDS and bilingual exposure can be reached using random sampling after a
modest amount of annotation. Then, the accuracy of estimates derived via random sampling is
evaluated by comparing them to estimates made more traditionally via: 1) annotations of every-
other-segment from the daylong recording and 2) bilingual exposure reported in parental language
use questionnaires.
2 Background
2.1 Daylong recording methods
Recent years have seen an increase in studies that examine children’s language experience
and input based on large-scale, naturalistic observations. Many of these studies use daylong audio
recordings, where children wear small, lightweight recorders over the course of an entire day, typically
8-16 hours. These audio recordings, which capture what the child hears and says over the course
of the day, can additionally be combined with other modalities such as video (Bergelson, Amatuni,
et al. 2019) or photography (Casillas et al. 2019).
There are several advantages to quantifying elements of the child’s environment with these
daylong recordings. Perhaps most importantly, the derived analyses may be less prone to biases
present in language questionnaires, such as recall or social desirability, or to observer effects during
short observations (Bergelson, Amatuni, et al. 2019). The larger the naturalistic observation period,
the more reliable and ecologically-valid a measurement of language use becomes, since it is difficult
for participants to continuously self-monitor their behavior (Cychosz et al. 2020). Due to advances
in technology, daylong recordings are also relatively easy to collect, which facilitates the involvement
of understudied groups in behavioral research. This increased involvement of understudied groups
is apparent in recent work employing daylong recordings in a wide variety of linguistic and cultural
settings (Casillas et al. 2019; Casillas et al. 2020; Cristià et al. 2017; Cychosz 2020; Ganek et al.
2018; Orena et al. 2020; Ramírez-Esparza et al. 2017; Weisleder & Fernald 2013).
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 5
2.2 Estimating exposure to child-directed speech to predict learning outcomes
Because the quantity and quality of CDS in children’s environments explain some individual
variability in language-learning outcomes, an increasing number of studies are using daylong audio
recordings to estimate CDS exposure. The quantity of CDS in children’s environments can be
estimated from daylong recordings 1) algorithmically, 2) manually via transcription and annotation,
or 3) via a combination of these approaches.
A number of recent examples have algorithmically estimated children’s exposure to adult
speech. For example, Mahr & Edwards (2018) used estimates of the number of adult words per
hour in the daylong recordings of children 2;4-3;3 derived from the LENA system’s algorithms.
LENA’s algorithms distinguish between adult speech that is near and clear to the child (what
they call “meaningful speech”) and speech that is farther away or overlapping. Mahr & Edwards
(2018) used LENA’s counts of adult words in meaningful speech as an estimate of CDS, and showed
that children with more adult words in their recordings had larger receptive vocabularies one year
later. However, because the researchers did not manually annotate the recordings, they did not
distinguish between child-directed and adult-directed speech near the child. Romeo et al. (2018)
likewise used LENA’s algorithms to automate CDS estimates, specifically the quantity of adult
words and conversational turns between adults and the target child (aged 4;0-6;0). More conver-
sational turns between adults and children—but not the total number of adult words—predicted
increased language-related (Broca’s area) neural activation during a language-listening task con-
ducted in the lab. This result led the authors to suggest that LENA’s automated conversational
turn count better approximates CDS than the automated adult word count.
Other studies have used a combination of manual and algorithmic tools (Ramírez-Esparza et
al. 2014; Weisleder & Fernald 2013; Marchman et al. 2017). For example, Weisleder & Fernald
(2013) used LENA to process daylong recordings collected from Spanish-speaking infants at 1;7.
Recordings were then divided into five-minute segments, which were manually classified as primarily
containing child-directed or adult-directed speech. Then, the number of LENA-estimated adult
words in each five-minute CDS segment was divided by the length of the recording to estimate each
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 6
child’s average hourly exposure to adult words in CDS. The authors found that more CDS at 1;7
predicted faster lexical processing and larger expressive vocabularies at 2;0. Similarly, Ramírez-
Esparza et al. (2014) annotated 30-second segments from daylong recordings to indicate whether
they contained infant-directed or adult-directed speech. They then used relative time-use estimates
of infant-directed speech by calculating the proportion of intervals coded for each category. Results
showed that infant-directed speech in one-on-one contexts was positively correlated with infant
vocalizations and later vocabulary size.
Given the importance of CDS for learning outcomes in North America, researchers have also
been interested in comparing the quantity of CDS from daylong recordings across distinct socio-
cultural settings. Because LENA’s algorithms were only trained on English, and its estimates have
only been validated for a small number of languages, researchers doing cross-linguistic and cross-
cultural work have turned to manual annotation and transcription. However, the time-intensive
nature of manual transcription means that researchers often use automated estimates to guide deci-
sions about which segments to transcribe. For example, one study used daylong recordings collected
using LENA to estimate North American infants’ (0;3-1;8) CDS exposure (Bergelson, Casillas, et al.
2019). First, 20 conversational blocks that LENA’s algorithm identified as having at least 10 female
and male adult speech tags near the child were selected from each recording. Each female or male
speech tag was then manually annotated for speech register (child-directed or adult-directed). These
annotations were used to measure the ratio of CDS to adult-directed speech over development, as
well as the gender distribution of adult speech in the child’s environment. Elsewhere, Casillas et al.
(2019) employed only manual transcriptions to estimate CDS in recordings of children aged 0;2-3;0
in a Tseltal Mayan community in Mexico. Portions of each recording were selectively sampled and
transcribed to obtain CDS quantities. Though CDS quantities were low—between one and five
minutes per hour—the children met expressive language milestones, such as first word combina-
tions, based on data from Western children. (See also Casillas et al. (2020) for similar work in a
Yélî-Dnye community in Papua New Guinea and Cristià et al. (2017) for the Tsimane’ in Bolivia.)
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 7
2.3 Dual language exposure predicts learning outcomes
Monolingual children contend with variability in the ambient speech stream from multiple
speakers, who may modify their pitch and speaking rate from one production to the next. Bilin-
gual children contend with this variation and more, since the speech stream contains two different
languages (de Bree et al. 2017). Yet bilingual learners’ experiences are far from uniform. Bilingual
language environments vary widely with regards to the amount of input in each language, how the
languages are separated by speaker or context, the amount of mixed input, and other properties
of the ambient language (Byers-Heinlein 2013; Place & Hoff 2011). Importantly, many of bilingual
children’s learning outcomes—notably vocabulary —appear to depend upon the relative amount
of exposure that the child receives in each of their languages. For example, Pearson et al. (1997)
correlated the relative amount of Spanish-English input, measured via a language background ques-
tionnaire, with expressive vocabulary scores in children aged 0;8-2;6. They found strong correlations
between vocabulary sizes in Spanish and English and the relative amount of input that children re-
ceived in each language. In another study of Spanish-English bilinguals, caregivers of two-year-olds
were asked to keep diary records of their children’s language exposure (Place & Hoff 2011). Children
who were reported to hear more Spanish had higher expressive vocabularies and greater grammati-
cal complexity in Spanish, while children who were reported to hear more English performed better
on the corresponding measures in English. (See also Place & Hoff (2016) who quantified language
exposure via number of speakers and language mixing, and Byers-Heinlein (2013) who estimated
the effect of language mixing on vocabulary development.)
Another study found bilingual exposure effects on the receptive vocabularies of bilingual French
infants, aged 0;11 (Carbajal & Peperkamp 2019). Exposure was measured with a language ques-
tionnaire and two daily diaries to note who spoke in what language with the infant every half
hour throughout the day. There was notable variability in the proportion of French in the envi-
ronment, the frequency that French and the second language appeared in each half hour sequence,
and the number of caregivers providing input. This variability was reflected in the infants’ vo-
cabularies: more maternal input in the second language resulted in a larger receptive vocabulary
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 8
in that language. Using a detailed language use background questionnaire, Thordardottir (2011)
also found exposure effects on receptive and expressive vocabulary in bilingual children aged 5;0
acquiring French and English. Children who were exposed to more French had larger expressive
French vocabularies, and vice versa for English.
Similar exposure effects have been found for young children’s speech processing and perception.
In a looking-while-listening task, Potter et al. (2019) measured how bilingual English-Spanish chil-
dren aged 1;6-2;6 processed words in their dominant and non-dominant languages where language
dominance and exposure were quantified via a background questionnaire. During the task, the
children recognized both English and Spanish words embedded in sentences in their non-dominant
language but when the words were embedded in sentences in the dominant language, they only
recognized the dominant language words. Finally, infants aged 0;10 who were bilingual in French
and a second language employing lexical stress could discriminate stress contrasts more quickly if
they were less dominant in French—a language that does not employ lexical stress (Bijeljac-Babic
et al. 2012). Taken together, these studies demonstrate that the quantity of bilingual children’s
exposure to their two languages predicts speech-language outcomes, including speech processing,
perception, and vocabulary size.
2.4 Estimating dual language exposure from daylong recordings
As reviewed above, dual language exposure is typically quantified from parental report in diaries
or via interviews and questionnaires. But this exposure can also be estimated using naturalistic
language samples from daylong audio recordings. One example is Orena et al. (2019) who collected
three different daylong recordings, on separate days, from French-English infants (aged 0;10). Every
other 30-second clip from the recordings was annotated for language (French, English, or Mixed)
and speaker (target child, father, mother, or sibling). In-person bilingual language use interviews
were also conducted with caregivers. Dual language estimates from the daylong recordings and
parental interviews were compared. Estimates from the two techniques were broadly similar, though
comparisons across the three days of recording showed considerable variation in language exposure
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 9
within participants. The authors suggest that both naturalistic and parental self-report estimates
are important for accurate dual language exposure estimation.
Elsewhere, a combination of manual and automated annotation of daylong recordings was em-
ployed to correlate dual language exposure with vocabulary outcomes (Ramírez-Esparza et al. 2017).
In that study, forty 30-second clips were drawn from daylong recordings made of Spanish-English
infants at 0;11. To ensure the presence of adult speech, only clips containing high algorithmically-
derived adult word counts (using LENA software) were selected and manually annotated for lan-
guage and speech register (various types of CDS were coded; see article for details). The naturalistic
estimates of CDS in each language correlated positively with vocabulary scores at 2;0.
Finally, Marchman et al. (2017) also used manual and automated analyses to code 5-minute
samples from daylong recordings of young (aged 3;0) Spanish-English bilinguals for 1) speech reg-
ister (CDS or adult-directed speech) and 2) language, determined by the proportion of Spanish
and English words in the clip. Then, the quantity of LENA-estimated adult words in each CDS
clip was multiplied by the proportion of Spanish or English in each clip, as judged by the human
coders, to determine CDS quantities in Spanish and English. Children’s dual language exposure
was also measured via parental report. CDS estimates from the daylong recordings predicted chil-
dren’s performance better than parental report on measures of Spanish-English vocabulary and
looking-while-listening speech processing tasks, suggesting that naturalistic estimates of dual lan-
guage exposure could be more valid than parental report.
It should be noted that the bilingual populations studied in Marchman et al. (2017) and
Orena et al. (2020) differ in more than just language pairings: English and French are both high-
prestige languages in Montreal, whereas Spanish-English bilingualism does not have the same level
of acceptance in the United States. Given the different findings between these two studies, it is
conceivable that caregiver self-reports may be less reliable when caregivers face discrimination for
their language practices.
Furthermore, researchers and practitioners have rarely considered the difficulty of extending
parental report methods—including questionnaires—to populations who do not frequently partici-
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 10
pate in behavioral research. Caregivers with low levels of literacy, for example, might have difficulty
completing language diaries or other written self-reports that have to be completed over the course
of a child’s day (e.g. Carbajal & Peperkamp 2019; Place & Hoff 2011). Similarly, in-person oral
interviews (e.g. Marchman et al. 2017) may be more difficult for populations that are unfamiliar
with behavioral research methods, or face stigmatization for speaking one of their languages. The
difficulty in carrying out traditional bilingual research methods in under-studied populations may
actually inhibit the inclusion of these groups in behavioral research. Yet including under-studied
bilingual populations is essential to understanding how bilingual and monolingual language learn-
ing experiences differ and how bilingual development differs from one sociolinguistic context to the
next.
3 Current Study
Recognizing the need for ecologically-valid estimates of children’s language exposure, but also
the practical difficulties of annotating the naturalistic data collected in these studies, this study
proposes a dataflow that samples from daylong recordings to efficiently estimate the proportion of
CDS and dual language exposure in a child’s day. Previous research that sampled from daylong
audio recordings to estimate children’s language exposure took conscious samples, for example
high-volubility clips from morning, afternoon, and evening in the recording (Orena et al. 2019,
Ramírez-Esparza et al. 2017). Here, we instead use clips randomly sampled from each recording.
An advantage of this approach is that it does not rely on estimates of volubility and can therefore
be used with longform recordings collected via a variety of methods, not only LENA.
A key question for assessing the utility of a sampling approach is how much annotation is
necessary to obtain reliable estimates of the desired speech and language categories. The amount of
annotation necessary will depend on the overall frequency of the category we want to estimate (e.g.,
how much Spanish a child hears in a day) (Micheletti et al. 2020). Because this is not known in
advance, the current study proposes a data-driven approach. Specifically, we use an application that
enables annotators to monitor how estimates of language/speech register change over the course of
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 11
annotation. We use this to empirically determine the number of randomly sampled clips from which
to base our estimates on a child-by-child basis. Having done that, we then take multiple steps to
validate the estimates derived from this random sampling approach.
The daylong recordings analyzed here come from bilingual communities in the United States
(Spanish-English) and Bolivia (Quechua-Spanish). Examining two different bilingual communities
with different histories and relations to the dominant language and culture (one immigrant commu-
nity and one indigenous community) lends confidence that this workflow may be used across various
cultural, linguistic, and sociopolitical contexts. However, we also acknowledge that the workflow
may look different across socio-cultural settings, and we encourage others to use this application
on samples from diverse communities to evaluate the number of annotated clips necessary to get
reliable CDS and dual language estimates, in addition to other characteristics of children’s language
environments.
We make the following hypotheses:
1. Employing random sampling, we will efficiently estimate the proportion of speech in different
speech registers and languages in children’s environments. Stable estimates between speech-
language categories will be met after limited manual annotation.
Having established that stable estimates of the CDS and language proportions can be achieved
by random sampling, we will validate this approach by comparing random sampling estimates
to more time-intensive, gold standard estimates made by annotating every other clip from the
all-day sampling
recording, or , as in Orena et al. (2019).
2. The random and all-day sampling methods will produce similar estimates of the proportion
of each speech register and language category, suggesting that annotations of relatively small
amounts of data based on random sampling is an efficient way of estimating ambient language
characteristics from daylong recordings.
Research questions 1 and 2 are tested in both bilingual communities, Spanish-English in the
United States and Quechua-Spanish in Bolivia, for all speech registers and languages present in the
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 12
children’s environments. The study predictions are the same across both sites and both speech-
language categories.
A final step to validate this approach is to compare random and all-day sampling estimates
of dual language exposure based on daylong recordings to estimates derived from parental report.
Extensive parental reports of dual language exposure were collected via oral interviews from Spanish-
English families in the United States, but not for the Quechua-Spanish communities in Bolivia.
Thus, only bilingual Spanish-English language exposure in the United States is evaluated in this
way.
3. It is possible that the bilingual language exposure estimates made via random/all-day sam-
pling will be similar to estimates derived from parental report. This result would suggest that
these methods provide compatible estimates of children’s dual language exposure. Alterna-
tively, if the random sampling and parental questionnaire estimates of dual language exposure
differ, this may suggest that 1) naturalistic samples estimate some aspects of children’s daily
dual language exposure better than parental report in some communities, and/or 2) a single
daylong recording does not adequately reflect children’s entire dual language exposure.
4 Method
4.1 Participants
Daylong audio recordings of 10 infants from two bilingual child language corpora were used:
N=5 from an immigrant Spanish-English corpus collected in the United States (Weisleder & Mendel-
sohn 2019) and N=5 from a Quechua-Spanish corpus collected in and around a mid-size town
in southern Bolivia (Cychosz 2018). Infants were age-matched across corpora (Spanish-English:
graphic information. Given differences in educational opportunities for women across the two
sociocultural contexts, participants were not matched for maternal education. However, in both
groups, most mothers had less than a high school education. All caregivers reported normal speech
and hearing development for their infants. Data collection and all secondary analyses conducted
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 13
here were approved by Institutional Review Boards at New York University School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, and the University of California, Berkeley.
Participants’ demographic information
Maternal
Infant age N of Maternal language
Gender
Corpus education
(mos) older siblings dominance
(yrs)
Quechua-Spanish 5.7 F 3 2 Bilingual Quechua-Spanish
6.0 M 12 2 Bilingual Quechua-Spanish
9.5 F 5 3 Quechua-dominant
9.8 M 5 3 Bilingual Quechua-Spanish
12.3 F 6 2 Bilingual Quechua-Spanish
Spanish-English 6.5 M 7 1 Spanish-dominant
7.2 F 9 3 Spanish-dominant
7.9 M 12 1 Spanish-dominant
10.5 F 11 1 Bilingual Spanish-English
12.6 M 13.5 1 Spanish-dominant
4.2 Data collection
To collect the audio recordings, each infant wore a small, lightweight (< 60 g, 5.5 x 8.5 x 1.5
cm) LENA digital language processor (i.e., audio recorder) in the pocket of a specialized shirt or vest
(Greenwood et al. 2011). Parents were instructed to record over the course of a typical day, aiming
for 12-16 hours. All families in the Spanish-English corpus completed 16-hour recordings. The
average recording length in the Quechua-Spanish corpus was 10.47 hours (SD=3.23; range=7.77-
16). The recordings in the Spanish-English corpus typically captured an entire day from morning
to night, while the recordings in the Quechua-Spanish corpus sometimes started later in the day.
The shorter recording lengths in the Quechua-Spanish corpus were due to the distance that the
researcher had to travel each day to deliver recorders to the families and because families were
instructed to pause the recording throughout the day if they wanted.
Each participating family also completed a bilingual language use questionnaire. For the
Quechua-Spanish-speaking families in Bolivia, a researcher carried out a brief oral survey with
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 14
the primary caregiver that included questions about the central caregivers’ and both sets of grand-
parents’ language use, and more specific information about the primary caregiver’s code-switching
habits. The Spanish-English-speaking families in the United States completed an oral survey based
on the Bilingual Background Interview (Marchman & Martinez-Sussmann 2002). Mothers were
first asked about people with whom the child had regular weekly contact. This was followed by
questions asking how many hours per week the child spent with each person and what language(s)
the person spoke with the child (English, Spanish, or both). When both languages were reported,
mothers were asked to estimate the relative proportion of English and Spanish used.
4.3 Data workflow
github.com/megseekosh/Categorize_app_v2). This entire dataflow process is illustrated in Fig-
ure 1. First, each recording was segmented into 30-second clips. The 30-second clip length has been
used in previous work that has sampled and annotated portions of children’s daylong recordings
to estimate dual language (Orena et al. 2019; Ramírez-Esparza et al. 2017) and CDS exposure
(Ramírez-Esparza et al. 2014), among other behavioral variables (Micheletti et al. 2020). There
were, on average, 1257 clips per recording in the Quechua-Spanish corpus (SD=387; range=933-
1920). There were 1920 clips per recording for all recordings in the Spanish-English corpus.
Once the recordings were segmented, a standard vocal activity detector (Usoltsev 2015) was
run over all of the clips and the percentage of the clip containing vocal activity was reported. In
practice, the vocal activity metric served two purposes. First, clips that contained 0% vocal activity
were not drawn for annotation. Second, prior to annotation, the first and second authors listened
to portions of the recordings containing extended stretches of low vocal activity to determine if the
infant was sleeping. The researchers determined if the infant was sleeping by listening for relative
quiet in the background, lack of vocalizations from the target infant, and heavy breathing or snoring.
If the researcher found that a clip contained audio of a sleeping infant, the clip was marked not to
be drawn for annotation.
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 15
Collect daylong recordings in the
United States and Bolivia
Chop each recording into 30 second clips (15882
total clips across 10 children)
Run vocal activity detector over clips
(Usoltsev, 2015) and report activity
Manually identify portions of recording
where child is sleeping
0% vocal activity and sleeping clips not
drawn for annotation
Clips containing vocal Every other clip
activity randomly with vocal activity
selected, with annotated for
replacement, and speaker,
annotated for speaker, addressee, and
addressee, and language language
Annotate 1) minimum of
n=80 clips and 2) until
ratio between categories
asymptotes
(976 total clips annotated
across 10 children)
workflow for random sampling method, orange box indicates workflow for all-day sampling
method, gray boxes indicate workflow for both methods.
4.4 Data annotation
The first and second authors annotated the Spanish-Quechua and Spanish-English recordings,
respectively. The first author is fluent in Spanish and familiar with Quechua, has done fieldwork in
Bolivia, and knows the families who completed the recordings, all of which facilitated annotation.
The second author is a native Spanish-English bilingual and had access to logs from the day of
recording indicating the number of adults and children that interacted with the child throughout
the day. To facilitate annotation of the 30-second clips, a custom Generalized User Interface (GUI)
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 16
tails on GUI application structure and instructions for use.) The GUI application led the annotator
through the steps of clip annotation. First, a 30-second clip was selected from a participant’s record-
ing. To speed up annotation, clips were drawn but not annotated if they had 0% vocal activity
or if the child was determined to be sleeping. Clips that contained speech from a researcher (for
example when the recording was turned on as the researcher was leaving the participant’s home)
were also identified prior to annotation and were likewise drawn but not annotated.
After drawing a clip, the annotator would listen to the clip and first ensure that there was speech
within the clip. If so, the annotator chose between the following options for speaker, addressee
(speech register), and language:
1. Speaker: Adult (Adult Female, Adult Male, Multiple Adults), Other Child, or Unsure
2. Addressee: Target Child, Other Child, Adult or Unsure
3. Language: Quechua/English, Spanish, Mixed, or Unsure
Annotators coded the language of conversation between all combinations of speaker and ad-
dressee present in the clip (e.g. Other Child speaking Spanish to Target Child, Adult speaking
in Quechua to another adult, Adult using Mixed language with another child). For speaker and
addressee annotation, the ‘Target Child’ was the infant wearing the recorder and ‘Other Child’ was
defined as any individual who had not gone through puberty. Annotators could usually determine
whether a speaker was a child or an adult because they had information on the household members
and their ages. However, when an annotator could not recognize a speaker’s voice, the speaker was
labelled as ‘Other Child’ if their voice sounded pre-pubescent.
For language annotation, if only Spanish, Quechua, or English was spoken for a particular
combination of speaker and addressee (regardless of the quantity of speech), the researcher marked
the appropriate language category. If a speaker in the clip used both Quechua and Spanish to a
particular addressee type—either code-switching within a sentence or two separate conversations—
the interaction was marked as ‘Mixed.’ However, for example, if a speaker in a clip used Spanish
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 17
to speak to a child but English to speak to an adult, the annotator would choose ‘Spanish’ for
child-directed speech and ‘English’ for adult-directed speech. Note that this means that a single
clip could have multiple annotations.
For those clips where the speaker, addressee, or language was not clear (e.g., when a speaker
uses a name, expression, or a non-language vocalization such as cooing sounds, hushing sounds, non-
sense syllables, whistling, humming, or laughing), annotators could select ‘Unsure.’ Since speaker,
addressee, and language were coded separately, cases in which the annotator could not determine
one category were still coded for the remaining categories; for example, if the addressee was marked
as ‘Unsure’, speaker and language were still coded. In practice, the ‘Unsure’ annotation was used
most often for clips where a conversation was taking place in the background, far from the child,
making it difficult to determine the language, speaker, or addressee categories. Finally, if a partic-
ular category of speaker and addressee did not occur (e.g., there was no adult speech to children),
this category was left blank.
The proportions of language and speech register categories in each recording were determined
by dividing the number of speech register/language annotations containing each category by the
total number of annotations. We chose total number of annotations as our denominator, instead
of total number of clips, because some clips had multiple conversations between different speakers
using different languages (as described above). Thus, for example, if a clip contained CDS in
Spanish and adult-directed speech in English, that clip would contribute 1 Spanish annotation and
2 total annotations to the estimate of proportion Spanish. The clip would also contribute 1 CDS
annotation and 2 total annotations to the estimate of proportion CDS.
Media presence, including the language of the media (Spanish, Quechua/English, Mixed, Un-
sure, no language) was also annotated. Language exposure estimates in this paper do not factor in
language exposure from media. Finally, annotators made the following binary decisions about the
clip:
1. Is the target child vocalizing?
2. Is the target child sleeping?
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 18
3. Is there personal identifying information in the clip?
ther details on annotation decisions, including a list of frequently asked questions used to stan-
dardize annotation between research personnel.
4.5 Methods of annotation
The 30-second clips from the daylong recordings were drawn in two ways: by sampling randomly
from the recording (random sampling) and by selecting every other clip (all-day sampling). To
sample randomly from the recording, a script randomly drew 30-second clips for annotation, with
replacement. Clips with 0% vocal activity or marked as ‘Child Sleeping’/‘Researcher Present’
were drawn but not annotated. For the all-day sampling annotation method, clips were drawn
chronologically from the beginning of the recording to the end, skipping every other clip. Again,
clips with 0% vocal activity or marked as ‘Child Sleeping’/‘Researcher Present’ were drawn but not
annotated.
Annotation using the random sampling method was always conducted first. After random
sampling annotation had been completed for all participants, and following at least a 2-month
period, the same coders annotated the same recordings using the all-day sampling method. This
order of annotation is important because it ensures that the estimates derived from random sampling
resemble those that would be obtained in real life annotation scenarios, where annotators would not
have the benefit of having listened to the whole recording when annotating via random sampling.
For random sampling, as annotators drew and listened to the 30-second clips, they simulta-
neously ran a Jupyter notebook (included in the Github repository) that quantified progress towards
annotation. Specifically, after each clip was annotated, the proportion of language (Quechua/English,
Spanish, or Mixed) and speech register (Target child-directed speech, Adult-directed speech, Other
child-directed speech) was updated for that recording. For each recording, annotation was cut off
when both a quantitative and a qualitative criterion were met. The quantitative criterion was
that a minimum of n=80 clips from the recording had to be annotated for language and/or speech
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 19
register; the qualitative criterion was that the estimated proportion of each language and speech
register categories had asymptoted (as exemplified in Figures 2 and 3), suggesting that a stable
estimate had been reached. The n=80 criterion was used to ensure that estimates were not made
on the basis of too few clips, even if stability appeared to have been reached earlier. The qualitative
asymptoting criterion was used because the number of samples needed to obtain a reliable estimate
varies as a function of the category’s frequency distribution (Micheletti et al. 2020), which is not
known in advance. By monitoring the cumulative estimates as annotation progressed, annotators
could make data-driven decisions about when to cut off annotation.
#1032 from the Quechua-Spanish corpus). Area plots were used to track progress towards
language estimate stability during daylong recording annotation.
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 20
#1032).
random and all-day sampling, as well as the percentage of those drawn clips that were annotated
for language and/or speech register (those that contained speech from adults or other children).
annotated than drawn because the drawn clips include those without any speech, with only electronic
noise, etc. The percentage of clips requiring annotation for language and speech register in order to
reach category stability for the random sampling method ranged from 4-11% of total clips from the
recording and 8-14% of clips containing speech. Therefore, if the estimates derived from random
sampling are indeed similar to those derived from all-day sampling, random sampling has the
potential to save large amounts of annotation time.
5 Results
Our primary research question asks if random sampling of daylong recordings can accurately
estimate infants’ CDS and dual language exposure. In the following section, we evaluate this ques-
tion by first demonstrating how language and speech register categories stabilized during annotation
of randomly selected segments. Then, we correlate estimates derived from random sampling with
those made from all-day sampling and with parent report. We complement these correlations with
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 21
a series of simulations estimating the proportion of language and speech registers in each recording
from different random samples.
All analyses were conducted in the RStudio computing environment (version: 1.3.1073; RStu-
dio Team 2020). Data visualizations were created with ggplot2 (Wickham 2016). Modeling was
conducted using a combination of the lme4 and lmerTest packages (Bates et al. 2015; Kuznetsova
et al. 2017). All scripts to replicate these analyses are publicly available in the project’s GitHub
repository.
Number of clips drawn and number of clips annotated for language/speech register, by child and
annotation method.
# of clips drawn (% of total clips) # of clips annotated (% of available clips)
Corpus (ID) Random All-day Random All-day
Spanish-English (267) 345 (17.97 %) 960 (50 %) 101 (13.10 %) 274 (35.54 %)
Spanish-English (261) 290 (15.10 %) 960 (50 %) 92 (8.18 %) 294 (26.13 %)
Spanish-English (199) 192 (10.00 %) 960 (50 %) 118 (10.61 %) 467 (42.00 %)
Spanish-English (198) 284 (14.79 %) 960 (50 %) 81 (7.96 %) 302 (29.67 %)
Spanish-English (179) 192 (10 %) 960 (50 %) 120 (8.05 %) 633 (42.48 %)
Quechua-Spanish (1081) 249 (20.31 %) 613 (50 %) 92 (13.83 %) 285 (42.86 %)
Quechua-Spanish (1077) 137 (11.93 %) 574 (50 %) 83 (8.15 %) 355 (34.84 %)
Quechua-Spanish (1075) 267 (28.65 %) 466 (50 %) 81 (14.21 %) 199 (34.91 %)
Quechua-Spanish (1060) 154 (14.58 %) 528 (50 %) 111 (12.01 %) 405 (43.83 %)
Quechua-Spanish (1032) 263 (13.70 %) 960 (50 %) 97 (10.16 %) 372 (38.95 %)
‘Available’ clips refer to those where the child was not sleeping, the researcher was not present, and
speech was detected by the vocal activity detector. The ‘Percentage of available clips’ is the number of
clips that were annotated divided by the total number of available clips. ‘Number of clips annotated’
does not include those clips only containing target child vocalizations and/or media.
5.1 Stabilization of language and speech categories from random sampling
Our first research question asks if random sampling results in stable estimates of the proportion
of CDS and Spanish/Quechua after a modest amount of annotation. (For the remainder of the
results, CDS refers to target child-directed speech, and excludes other child-directed speech such as
that directed to the target child’s siblings.) First, we qualitatively assessed that a stable estimate
was reached by observing 1) stabilization in the mean of the estimate and 2) a reduction in the
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 22
variance of the estimate as a function of the number of annotations made. Since both the language
and speech register outcomes were binary variables (e.g. +/- Spanish, +/- CDS), we use the Wilson
binomial confidence interval as an indicator of variance around the estimate. Figures 4-6 illustrate
how, as more annotations are made, 1) the category estimate stabilizes (gray line) and 2) the
variance surrounding the category estimate decreases and stabilizes (blue ribbon).
corpus. The gray line represents the estimate of the proportion of Spanish in the recording and
the blue ribbon represents a 95% Wilson binomial proportion confidence interval. Note that these
visualized estimates are calculated over all clips containing language, and include ‘unsure’
annotations, so they may differ slightly from estimates reported in Section 5.2.
We next evaluated this approach by fitting a series of linear mixed effects models—for language
and for speech register—to test the extent to which clip number predicted a reduction in the variance
estimates from each recording. The outcome for the language models was variance (confidence
interval range) of the Spanish language estimation and the outcome for the speech register models
was variance of the CDS estimation. The language models were fit to Spanish language estimates
from both corpora, instead of Quechua estimates from the Quechua-Spanish corpus and Spanish
estimates from the Spanish-English corpus, to increase sample size. For each outcome, four models
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 23
corpus. The gray line represents the estimate of the proportion of Quechua in the recording and
the blue ribbon represents a 95% Wilson binomial proportion confidence interval. Note that these
visualized estimates are calculated over all clips containing language, and include ‘unsure’
annotations, so they may differ slightly from estimates reported in Section 5.2.
were fit: over the first, second, and third of random annotations made in each recording, and over
the all-day annotations.
The logic for this analysis is that the effect of annotation number in predicting change in
the estimate’s variance will depend upon the number of annotations that have been factored in.
The slope should be steepest for the first third of randomly-made annotations, where increased
annotation has an outsize effect upon the outcome variable, but should be increasingly shallower
over the second and third third of randomly-made annotations. Finally, the slope fit over the
all-day annotations should be the shallowest, indicating that the additional annotations in all-day
sampling (relative to the subset used in random sampling) have a smaller effect in reducing the
variance around the estimate. The differing slopes across these datasets would suggest that there
are diminishing returns to continued annotation after a certain point.
Each model included a random effect of participant. The predictor Annotation Number
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 24
The gray line represents the estimate of the proportion of CDS in the recording and the blue
ribbon represents a 95% Wilson binomial proportion confidence interval. Note that these
visualized estimates are calculated over all clips containing language, and include ‘unsure’
annotations, so they may differ slightly from estimates reported in Section 5.2.
significantly improved all model fits, always with a negative beta coefficient, suggesting that in-
creased annotation reduced the amount of variability in language/speech register estimation over
all datasets. However, as predicted, the slope in variance reduction of Spanish language estima-
tion was steepest over the first third of annotations made (β=-.00971, t=-33.93, p<.001), followed
by the second third (β=-.00126, t=-32.59, p<.001), third third (β=-.00075, t=-68.96, p<.001),
and finally the all-day annotations (β=-.00034, t=-59.49, p<.001). The same pattern was present
for the slopes for variance in CDS estimation where the steepest slope was over the first third of
annotations (β=-.00958, t=-31.57, p<.001), followed by the second third (β=-.00137, t=-41.45,
p<.001), and third third (β=-.00067, t=-33.04, p<.001). Finally, the slope was shallowest over the
all-day annotations (β=-.00029, t=-51.92, p<.001). Together, these modeling results suggest that
increased predictor units (annotations) are having increasingly smaller effects upon the outcome
variable (running variance in category estimation).
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 25
Overall, this analysis first demonstrated that running variance decreases, and the category
proportion estimate stabilizes, over the course of annotation for both language and speech register
in both corpora. The modeling supported these observations, demonstrating that each additional
annotation predicts a reduction in the variance around the estimate and that this reduction is
progressively shallower as annotation continues. Although these results do not tell us the optimal
point to cease annotation, they suggest that relatively stable estimates can be reached after a
modest amount of annotation. By monitoring this process of stabilization, the current study derived
estimates from random sampling based on an average of 49 minutes per recording, or 11% percent
estimates obtained from all-day sampling.
5.2 Comparing random and all-day annotation
Next we compared estimates for the proportion of each language and speech register category
derived from random and all-day sampling for both corpora. Figures 7 and 8 show the proportion
of each language and speech register per participant as estimated by each method.
variability in the proportion of the minority language heard by children (Quechua for the Bolivia
sample, Spanish for the U.S. sample). To quantify differences in the estimates derived from each
annotation method, we computed the absolute error between minority language proportions made
via random sampling (estimated value) and all-day sampling (true value). Although the average
absolute errors between random and all-day minority language estimates were slightly higher in
the Quechua-Spanish corpus (M =0.05) than the Spanish-English corpus (M =0.04), these relatively
low errors indicates that the estimates derived from random sampling closely approximated those
obtained from the more time-intensive method.
Next, we computed correlations between estimates of the minority language derived from ran-
dom and all-day sampling. These correlations were strong for Spanish in the Spanish-English corpus
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 26
ure 10). The strong correlations indicate that random sampling effectively captured variability in
infants’ exposure to the minority language as captured by the daylong recordings.
Average minority language estimates by corpus and annotation method.
Annotation Method
Corpus (ID) Random All-day Absolute error n=100 simulations of Within-corpus Avg. & Range of
random sampling correlation between within-corpus
Avg. (SD) Range random and all-day correlation between
estimates simulated and all-day
estimates
Spanish-English (179) 0.57 0.57 0.00 0.56 (0.04) 0.49 - 0.68 r=0.96, p=0.01 0.97, 0.87-1
Spanish-English (198) 0.87 0.78 0.09 0.78 (0.04) 0.69 - 0.87
Spanish-English (199) 0.76 0.70 0.06 0.70 (0.04) 0.61 - 0.81
Spanish-English (261) 0.69 0.65 0.04 0.65 (0.04) 0.56 - 0.75
Spanish-English (267) 0.92 0.92 0.00 0.93 (0.02) 0.88 - 0.99
Quechua-Spanish (1032) 0.59 0.64 0.05 0.63 (0.04) 0.51 - 0.74 r=0.90, p=0.04 0.96, 0.68-1
Quechua-Spanish (1060) 0.55 0.61 0.06 0.60 (0.04) 0.51 - 0.69
Quechua-Spanish (1075) 0.51 0.43 0.08 0.44 (0.06) 0.27 - 0.58
Quechua-Spanish (1077) 0.44 0.41 0.03 0.40 (0.04) 0.29 - 0.50
Quechua-Spanish (1081) 0.29 0.32 0.03 0.33 (0.04) 0.25 - 0.45
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 27
of speech directed to the target child (CDS) as derived from random and all-day sampling for
participants across the two corpora. We again compared estimates of CDS for the two annotation
are similar across annotation methods.
Next, we computed correlations between estimates of CDS from random and all-day sampling.
The correlation computed over the two corpora combined was very strong (r(8)=.99, p<.001). The
correlation between random and all-day sampling estimates for just the Spanish-English corpus was
was notably weaker (r(5)=.64; p=.24).
One possible explanation for the weaker correlation in the Quechua-Spanish corpus is that the
range of CDS exposure estimates in that corpus was quite small (0.10-0.19 proportion CDS from
random sampling and 0.05-0.17 proportion CDS from all-day sampling), so the correlation may be
limited by range. Indeed, the range of CDS estimates was much larger in the Spanish-English corpus
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 28
for both random (0.29-0.80 proportion CDS) and all-day sampling (0.31-0.82 proportion CDS), as
was overall much lower than the proportion of CDS in the Spanish-English recordings, leading us
to hypothesize that it may be more difficult to reliably estimate low-frequency events using random
sampling (see also Micheletti et al. 2020).
To address the possibility that low-frequency events may lead to erroneous estimates, we cal-
culated the correlation and absolute error between random and all-day sampling estimates of the
more frequent speech register category in the Quechua-Spanish corpus: adult-directed speech. The
correlation between annotation methods for adult-directed speech in the Quechua-Spanish corpus
was stronger than for CDS, approaching significance (r(5)=.84; p=.08), with an average absolute
error of 0.07 (SD=0.07). This result suggests that estimates of high-frequency events made via
random sampling may be more reliable than estimates of low-frequency events. We return to this
in the Discussion.
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 29
Target child-directed speech estimates by child and annotation method.
Annotation Method
Corpus (ID) Random All-day Absolute error n=100 simulations of Within-corpus Avg. & Range of
random sampling correlation between within-corpus
Avg.(SD) Range
random and all-day correlation between
estimates simulated and all-day
estimates
Spanish-English (179) 0.53 0.47 0.06 0.47 (0.04) 0.38-0.55 r=0.97 , p=0.01 0.98, 0.89-1
Spanish-English (198) 0.65 0.66 0.01 0.66 (0.06) 0.47-0.80
Spanish-English (199) 0.29 0.31 0.02 0.31 (0.04) 0.22-0.42
Spanish-English (261) 0.80 0.82 0.02 0.82 (0.04) 0.73-0.88
Spanish-English (267) 0.40 0.47 0.07 0.47 (0.04) 0.35-0.56
Quechua-Spanish (1032) 0.19 0.17 0.02 0.18 (0.03) 0.10-0.28 r=0.64 , p=0.24 0.91, 0.54-1
Quechua-Spanish (1060) 0.12 0.07 0.04* 0.07 (0.02) 0.03-0.14
Quechua-Spanish (1075) 0.12 0.14 0.02 0.14 (0.03) 0.06-0.21
Quechua-Spanish (1077) 0.10 0.11 0.01 0.11 (0.02) 0.06-0.19
Quechua-Spanish (1081) 0.13 0.05 0.07* 0.05 (0.02) 0.01-0.10
*Calculated before rounding.
Overall, the strong correlations and small absolute differences observed between the two anno-
tation methods suggest that random sampling is an efficient method for obtaining accurate estimates
of children’s exposure to different languages and speech registers.
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 30
5.3 Simulations of random sampling estimates from all-day annotations
In the section above, the random sampling estimates were based on annotations that were
conducted prior to the all-day sampling annotation. This was done intentionally to resemble the
real-world conditions where annotators would not have listened to the entire recording prior to
annotating via random sampling. Since the same coders conducted these annotations at two different
times, first for random sampling and then for all-day sampling, imperfect intra-rater agreement likely
contributed to the different estimates derived from the two methods: differences in the estimates
from random and all-day sampling could be due to differences in the number of clips annotated as
well as differences in the judgments made by the annotators at two different times.
To supplement these analyses, we conducted a series of Monte Carlo simulations where we drew
100 random samples from each child’s all-day annotations. The goal of these simulations is twofold.
First, because the samples were drawn from the all-day annotations, any differences between the
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 31
simulated random sample estimates and the all-day sampling estimates are due only to differences
in the samples themselves (eliminating any differences due to intra-rater agreement). Second, these
simulations allow us to obtain a distribution of estimates based on different random samples. The
distributions tell us how much estimates of dual language and CDS exposure would vary depending
on the random sample we happen to draw. The narrower the distributions, the more likely it is
that we would obtain similar results regardless of the sample, thus giving greater confidence that
random sampling yields reliable estimates.
We conducted 100 drawings to simulate 100 estimates per child. Each random sample contains
the same number of clips used for the original random sampling estimate for that child, as described
in section 4.5 (e.g., if 90 clips were originally annotated for a participant during random sampling, we
drew 90 clips 100 times for the simulation). See Appendix B for figures displaying the distribution of
the simulated estimates of adult-directed and child-directed speech and minority languages. From
these simulations, we calculated the mean, standard deviation, and range of the minority language
of the simulated estimates corresponds well to the estimates based on all-day sampling across all
participants. Most importantly, the standard deviation around this estimate is fairly small (from
0.02-0.06 for the minority language estimates and from 0.02-0.06 for the CDS estimates). This
suggests that most estimates of minority language and CDS exposure based on random samples are
likely to be close to the value based on the entire daylong recording, although they could vary by
as much as 0.16.
Finally, in order to evaluate how well different random samples captured variability in chil-
dren’s dual language/CDS exposure, we computed correlations between the corresponding estimates
derived from each of the simulated random samples and the corresponding estimate derived from
all-day sampling. This yielded 100 correlation coefficients for each measure of interest (% Spanish,
% Quechua, % CDS); the mean and range of these correlation coefficients are shown in Tables 3
and 4. For the Spanish-English corpus, the correlations for % Spanish between the random sample
simulations and the all-day sampling estimates ranged from 0.87-1, with an average of 0.97, suggest-
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 32
ing that the random samples did consistently well in capturing variability in infants’ exposure to
Spanish. The correlations for % Quechua in the Quechua-Spanish corpus ranged from 0.68-1, with
an average of 0.96. Although this range is somewhat wider, it again suggests that in most cases
random sampling captured variability in infants’ exposure to Quechua similar to that obtained from
all-day annotation. Finally, and consistent with the results above, the correlations for exposure to
CDS in the Spanish-English corpus were consistently strong (M =0.98 [0.89-1]), while those for the
Quechua-Spanish corpus were more variable (M =0.91 [0.54-1]).
5.4 Comparisons to parent report
The final research question asked how estimates of bilingual language exposure made via ran-
dom and all-day sampling compared to those in parental language questionnaires. Detailed parental
questionnaires were only collected from the families in the U.S., so this comparison will only be
addressed in that corpus. To estimate percent exposure to each language from the parent ques-
tionnaires, the number of hours each person was reported to spend with the child per week was
multiplied by the relative proportion of Spanish (or English) used by that person. This yielded the
number of hours per language per person. Then, for each language, number of hours were summed
across all people to obtain the number of hours per language per week. Finally, proportion Spanish
was computed as the number of Spanish hours divided by total language hours (see Marchman &
Martinez-Sussmann 2002 and DeAnda et al. 2016).
as both annotation methods (random and all-day). The correlation between Spanish language
exposure estimates made from random sampling and parental questionnaire was weak (r(5)=.004,
(r(5)=.13, p=.84).
Since the parental questionnaire asked caregivers to estimate the amount of Spanish people used
when talking to the infant, we performed an additional analysis comparing the Spanish language
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 33
Spanish language estimates in U.S. corpus, by child, register, and estimation method.
All registers In child-directed speech
Child ID Random All-day Random All-day Parental
Questionnaire
179 0.57 0.57 0.53 0.52 0.74
198 0.87 0.78 0.78 0.64 0.55
199 0.76 0.70 0.64 0.66 0.95
261 0.69 0.65 0.55 0.48 0.73
267 0.92 0.92 0.82 0.87 0.87
Spanish language estimation to CDS resulted in a closer correspondence between recording estimates
and questionnaire estimates for only some participants. The correlation between questionnaire and
all-day sampling estimates was improved but remained relatively weak (r(5)=0.39, p=.51). On the
other hand, the correlation with random sampling estimates was reduced to almost zero (r(5)=-0.07,
p=.91). This suggests that estimates of dual language exposure based on parental questionnaires
and daylong recordings may differ in what they are capturing, a point we return to in the Discussion.
6 Discussion
This study sought to validate a novel approach—random sampling from daylong audio recordings—
to estimate infants’ CDS and dual language exposure. Results showed that 1) estimates of the
proportion of each language and speech register stabilized after a limited amount of annotation
(approximately 7% of the total recording or 11% of all speech clips in the recording), 2) estimates of
language and speech register categories made via random and all-day sampling were overall strongly
correlated, particularly for higher-frequency categories, 3) simulated estimates of random sampling
were consistently correlated with estimates made from all-day sampling, and 4) estimates of lan-
guage exposure made via random and all-day sampling annotations were weakly correlated with
estimates based on parental report. Taken together, these results suggest that random sampling is a
promising approach for estimating the proportion of children’s exposure to different languages and
speech registers as captured in daylong recordings, though caution should be taken when estimating
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 34
methods
infrequent events.
Previous studies that estimated children’s exposure to CDS or dual language input required
time- and resource-intensive transcription or annotation (Orena et al. 2019; 2020; Weisleder &
Fernald 2013) or relied on parental questionnaires (de Houwer 2011; Place & Hoff 2011). Validating
estimates of CDS and dual language exposure based on random sampling from daylong audio
recordings is an important methodological advance, both because it demonstrates that ecologically-
valid estimates of language exposure can be obtained with limited annotation and because relying
on naturalistic recordings—instead of written questionnaires—may facilitate the participation of
under-served communities in behavioral research.
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 35
6.1 Correspondence between CDS and dual language estimates using random and
all-day sampling
We found that language and speech register estimates derived from random annotation of
daylong recordings corresponded well to estimates derived from all-day annotation, both in absolute
value and in capturing variability across children. One exception to this was the relatively weaker,
though still moderate (r(5)=.64; p=.24), correlation between CDS estimates made using random and
all-day annotation methods in the Quechua-Spanish corpus. This weaker correlation could be due
to the limited range of CDS proportions and/or the infrequency of CDS in the Quechua-Spanish
recordings from Bolivia. CDS occurred infrequently in this corpus, accounting for, on average,
10.80% (SD=4.92) of the overall speech from adults and older children (average determined using
all-day sampling). A previous study found that, when the behavior of interest had very low base
rates, most sampling strategies provided biased estimates of the behavior (Micheletti et al. 2020).
In the current study, we found that the most frequent speech register category in the Quechua-
Spanish corpus, adult-directed speech, showed stronger correlations between random and all-day
annotation methods (r(5)=.84; p=.08) than did CDS, lending support to the idea that infrequent
events may be harder to estimate. On the other hand, the absolute error in the CDS estimates
derived from random and all-day sampling for the Quechua-Spanish corpus was fairly low, and
similar to that for the Spanish-English corpus. This suggests that the random sampling and all-day
sampling estimates were similar, but that restricted range in CDS in the Quechua-Spanish corpus
prevented us from observing stronger correlations.
The correspondence observed between the random and all-day sampling estimates is especially
impressive given that random sampling annotation was conducted under realistic conditions in
which annotators had not yet listened to the entire recording. This demonstrates that it is possible
to obtain reliable estimates of CDS and dual language exposure based on samples that are fairly
de-contextualized. On the other hand, results from the random sampling simulations suggest that,
in some cases, estimates derived from the simulated random samples differed from those based
on the original random samples (see Appendix B), suggesting that the additional context gained
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 36
during all-day annotation may have impacted annotators’ judgments. Most importantly, these
simulations also show that the correlations between all-day sampling and estimates derived from
different random samples were consistently strong, suggesting that results from random sampling
would be replicable.
Overall, these results suggest that random sampling is an effective method for estimating the
frequency of speech registers and dual language input in daylong recordings. However, researchers
who suspect that a behavior occurs infrequently in a particular context, or who discover this over
the course of annotation, may need to annotate a larger fraction of the recording in order to ensure
accurate estimation. Alternatively, researchers could consider annotating fewer levels of a category
in order to avoid categories with very low frequencies. For example, the categories target child-
directed speech and other child-directed speech could be combined into one CDS category. Finally,
estimating low frequency categories may require not only sampling a larger number of segments
from a daylong recording, but also collecting a larger number of recordings (e.g., over multiple
days) in order to ensure that sufficient examples are captured.
6.2 Correspondence between dual language exposure estimated from recordings and
parent questionnaires
Estimates of infants’ exposure to Spanish based on recordings from the U.S. corpus did not
correspond well to estimates based on parental report. This could indicate that the parental ques-
tionnaire responses did not accurately reflect the infants’ language exposure or, alternatively, it could
indicate that a single daylong recording was not sufficient to estimate the infants’ dual language
exposure more broadly. The Bilingual Background Interview is intended to capture information
about a child’s dual language exposure during a typical week. Thus, it is possible that the parental
questionnaires captured a wider range of speakers and interactions than did a single daylong record-
ing, offering a better representation of the child’s dual language exposure. Indeed, although all of
the mothers from the U.S. corpus considered themselves the infant’s primary caregiver, several of
them reported differences in infants’ caregiving environments between weekdays and weekends. In
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 37
particular, infants tended to spend more time with fathers on weekends than on weekdays, and
often also spent time with grandparents and extended family. Since the recordings were conducted
on a single day, differences in language exposure between weekends and weekdays were not captured
in estimates derived from the recordings.
On the other hand, there are reasons to believe the parent reports may not have accurately
reflected children’s dual language exposure. When responding to the interviews, mothers often
expressed uncertainty about the degree to which different family members used English and Spanish
with the child. The majority of the mothers in this study were Spanish-dominant, and several had
limited proficiency in English. It may thus have been difficult for them to estimate their infants’
English exposure, especially if they did not participate in those interactions. Indeed, as shown in
the daylong recordings. Asking a single caregiver to report on the language the child hears when they
are spending time with other family members may not always provide an accurate representation of
these interactions. For example, older siblings/children in the U.S. corpus may have more balanced
or English language dominance than their adult caregivers.
Finally, it is important to note that the parent questionnaires and recordings were not collected
concurrently. Four of the parent interviews were conducted when infants were 2 months and one
when the infant was 28 months, while the recordings included in the current analyses were collected
when infants were between 6 and 12 months. Changes in infants’ environments during this time
period may have contributed to weaker associations between the estimates derived from the record-
ings and the parental questionnaires. Indeed, several mothers reported they were not working at
the time of the initial interview, but were expecting to return to work in the near future. This
may have resulted in changes in families’ caregiving arrangements that could have significantly
impacted infants’ dual language exposure between the time of the interview and the recording.
Future work should consider carrying out parental language exposure questionnaires concurrently
with data collection.
Previous work comparing dual language exposure estimates from naturalistic recordings and
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 38
parental questionnaire has been mixed. Orena et al. (2020) found that parental questionnaires
mirrored language exposure estimates from all-day recording annotations; however, that study
estimated language exposure over three daylong recordings, including weekdays and weekends.
Crucially, the study also found variability in proportional exposure to each language by recording
day, suggesting that a single daylong recording may not be representative of a child’s dual language
exposure over longer periods. Elsewhere, dual language estimates from daylong recordings better
predicted 3-year-olds’ speech-language outcomes than estimates from parental report (Marchman
et al. 2017). However, in that study, estimates of dual language exposure based on the daylong
recording included a measure of the number of words in each language, while the estimates based
on parental report included only a measure of the proportion of each language. Consequently, the
naturalistic assessment could be the stronger predictor because, unlike the parental questionnaire,
it included variability in the absolute amount of speech heard in each language, rather than just
the relative amount.
The current study will not definitively conclude which method of estimating infants’ dual
language exposure—parental questionnaire or naturalistic assessment—is most accurate. However,
it is important to note that both Marchman et al. (2017) and the current work studied bilingual
Spanish-English children and infants in the United States (the Bay Area and New York City,
respectively), whereas Orena et al. (2020) studied bilingual French-English infants in Montreal.
The sociolinguistic contexts in the two locations are highly distinct, with likely implications for
dual language self-report. Bilingualism and French language competence are highly valued, and
expected, in Montreal and throughout Quebec. In contrast, Spanish-English bilingualism does not
enjoy the same prestige in the U.S., even in linguistically-diverse areas such as New York City.
Indeed, Orena et al. (2020) note that language and bilingualism are prominent topics in Montreal,
which may have led the caregivers to pay particular attention to the languages that their infants
were exposed to. The authors also suggest that generous parental leave policies in Canada, which
allow caregivers to stay at home with infants for longer, could mean that caregivers are more
aware of their infants’ dual language exposure. In contrast, the participants in the Spanish-English
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 39
corpus were all first-generation immigrants to the U.S., and likely faced obstacles and potentially
discrimination for speaking Spanish. It is conceivable that, in contexts in which minority languages
are routinely devalued, caregivers may not find it easy to report on their child’s exposure to the
minority language.
Future work should evaluate how dual language exposure (and other parameters like speech
register) derived from random sampling vary over multiple recording days to determine if the weak
correlations between parental report estimates and naturalistic estimates are due to the limitations
of a single recording or instead indicate that parental reports do not accurately capture dual lan-
guage exposure in certain contexts. Researchers may also consider that, although these methods
are not interchangeable, each provides useful and complementary information for understanding
children’s dual language exposure. Parental questionnaires may be able to provide a more complete
picture of the different people children interact with and the languages they use, while daylong
recordings may provide more accurate and precise estimates of the language children hear in those
interactions.
6.3 Limitations
The estimates used in this study focused on the proportions of language and speech register
categories in daylong recordings, not the absolute quantities of each measure. Critically, Orena
et al. (2020) demonstrated that the raw amount of language exposure can differ between infants
exposed to similar language proportions, and several works have found that absolute measures of
exposure, like the number of words in each language that bilingual children are exposed to, are
better predictors than proportional measures (de Houwer 2011, Marchman et al. 2017). In the
future, proportional estimates derived from random sampling could be combined with estimates of
absolute quantities of speech to better explain individual differences between children.
Although data samples from daylong recordings are highly naturalistic, and arguably more rep-
resentative than shorter recordings or recordings made in the lab, even a 16-hour at-home recording
does not capture all the complexities of a child’s language learning environment. Here, we computed
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 40
dual language and CDS exposure from a single daylong recording for each infant. It is unclear if or
how these estimates differ from one day of recording to the next. Some work suggests that there is
high variability between daylong recordings collected over multiple days. Anderson & Fausey (2019)
compared environmental language measures taken from multiple days of infants’ (0;6-1;0) daylong
recordings and found that the number of words spoken by adults varied by day. Orena et al. (2020)
came to a similar conclusion for infants’ dual language exposure. Thus, although our results suggest
that estimates based on random sampling provide an accurate representation of the proportion of
CDS/minority language exposure in a single daylong recording, they do not necessarily provide a
representative estimate of exposure in children’s lives. Future research could evaluate the extent
of variability in dual language and CDS exposure over multiple timescales, hour-to-hour (within a
day), day-to-day (within a week), week-to-week (within a month), and month-to-month. Random
sampling from the recordings, which significantly decreases the time required for annotation, should
facilitate transcription of these additional recordings.
Finally, this work studied CDS and dual language exposure in two bilingual communities with
distinct sociolinguistic profiles. For example, most caregivers in the Quechua-Spanish corpus were
balanced bilinguals while the caregivers in the Spanish-English corpus spoke English as a second
language. CDS was also notably less frequent in the Quechua-Spanish corpus than the Spanish-
English corpus. Random sampling appeared to be relatively robust to these differences across
communities. Nevertheless, the results may not apply to all multilingual settings. In communities
with more widespread code-switching, monolingual clips may be less frequent, making it more
difficult to estimate the proportion of languages in the recording. Trilingual exposure would also
decrease the frequency of individual language categories in the recording, possible making it difficult
to reliably estimate exposure on the basis of random sampling due to the reduced frequency of each
language.
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 41
7 Conclusion
The language that children hear in their everyday environments predicts later speech-language
outcomes. Daylong audio recordings are a valuable methodological tool to capture children’s lan-
guage experiences, but detailed annotation is time- and resource-intensive. This study validated a
novel approach—random sampling from daylong recordings—to estimate children’s dual language
and child-directed speech exposure in bilingual communities in Bolivia and the United States. By
sampling randomly from daylong audio recordings, we demonstrated that stable estimates of infants’
exposure to speech register (target child-directed speech, adult-directed speech, other child-directed
speech) and language (Quechua or Spanish) were achieved after annotating approximately 7% of
the entire recording, or 11% of all speech clips in the recording. Estimates from random sampling
were, in general, comparable to those made over the entire recording. This method worked well
in both corpora, despite sociocultural differences such as the frequency of certain language and
speech register categories; however, results were less clear when estimating events that occurred
infrequently and had limited variability across participants. In addition, estimates derived from the
daylong recordings did not coincide with those from parental questionnaires collected in the U.S.
corpus, though it was not clear if this was due to inaccuracies in parents’ report, differences of when
the parental questionnaire was administered to the date of the daylong recording, or to deriving
estimates from a single daylong recording. Going forward, random sampling of daylong recordings
may be an efficient, ecologically-valid method for quantifying children’s naturalistic speech-language
exposure, though researchers may want to collect recordings over multiple days or contexts to obtain
representative estimates of children’s ambient language exposure.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the families who participated in this research program and acknowledge
funding from the following sources: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Dis-
orders grants T32DC000046 (M.C.) and R21DC018357 (A.W.), Oswalt Documenting Endangered
Language Grant (M.C.), Academic Pediatric Association Young Investigator Award (A.W.), and
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 42
International Congress of Infant Studies Summer Fellowship (A.V.). Additional thanks to Jan Ed-
wards for the use of her recording equipment to construct the Bolivia corpus and to Alan Mendelsohn
and the BELLE team for support in creating the U.S. corpus.
Footnotes
See Mehl & Pennebaker (2003) and Mehl (2017) for details on longform recordings in adult populations.
Since one parental questionnaire was completed at 28 months, we calculated an additional correlation, excluding
that participant, between Spanish language estimates derived from from the daylong recordings and those from the
parental questionnaire. The correlation between Spanish language estimates derived from random sampling and the
parental questionnaire remained weak and insignificant (r(5)=-.12, p=.88) as did the correlation between estimates
derived from all-day sampling and the parental questionnaire (r(5)=.08, p=.92).
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 43
8 References
Anderson, H., & Fausey, C. (2019). Modeling non-uniformities in infants’ everyday speech envi-
ronments. Baltimore, MD. (Presentation given at the 2019 Biennial Meeting of the Society for
Research in Child Development)
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Fitting linear mixed-effects models using
lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 67 (1), 1–48.
Bergelson, E., Amatuni, A., Dailey, S., Koorathota, S., & Tor, S. (2019). Day by day, hour
by hour: Naturalistic language input to infants. Developmental Science, 22 (1), e12715. doi:
10.1111/desc.12715
Bergelson, E., Casillas, M., Soderstrom, M., Seidl, A., Warlaumont, A. S., & Amatuni, A. (2019).
What Do North American Babies Hear? A large-scale cross-corpus analysis. Developmental
Science, 22 (1), e12724. doi: 10.1111/desc.12724
Bijeljac-Babic, R., Serres, J., Höhle, B., & Nazzi, T. (2012). Effect of bilingualism on lexical
stress pattern discrimination in French-learning infants. PLoS ONE , 7 (2), e30843. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0030843
Byers-Heinlein, K. (2013). Parental language mixing: Its measurement and the relation of mixed
input to young bilingual children’s vocabulary size. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 16 (1),
32–48. doi: 10.1017/S1366728912000120
Byers-Heinlein, K., Schott, E., Gonzalez-Barrero, A. M., Brouillard, M., Dubé, D., Jardak, A.,
. . . Tamayo, M. P. (2019). MAPLE: A Multilingual Approach to Parent Language Estimates.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 1–7. doi: 10.1017/S1366728919000282
Carbajal, M. J., & Peperkamp, S. (2019). Dual language input and the impact of language
separation on early lexical development. Infancy, 25 (1), 22–45. doi: 10.1111/infa.12315
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 44
Carroll, S. E. (2017). Exposure and input in bilingual development. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 20 (1), 3–16. doi: 10.1017/S1366728915000863
Casillas, M., Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (2019). Early language experience in a Tseltal Mayan
village. Child Development, 0 (0), 1–17.
Casillas, M., Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (2020). Early language experience in a Papuan community.
Journal of Child Language, 0 (0), 1–23.
Cristià, A., Dupoux, E., Gurven, M., & Stieglitz, J. (2017). Child-Directed Speech Is Infrequent
in a Forager-Farmer Population: A Time Allocation Study. Child Development, 90 (3), 759–773.
doi: 10.1111/cdev.12974
Cychosz, M. (2018). Cychosz HomeBank Corpus. doi: 10.21415/YFYW-HE74
Cychosz, M. (2020). Phonetic development in an agglutinating language. Berkeley, CA: University
of California, Berkeley. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation)
Cychosz, M., Romeo, R., Soderstrom, M., Scaff, C., Ganek, H., Cristia, A., . . . Weisleder, A. (2020).
Longform recordings of everyday life: Ethics for best practices. Behavior Research Methods, 1–19.
doi: 10.3758/s13428-020-01365-9
de Bree, E., Verhagen, J., Kerkhoff, A., Doedens, W., & Unsworth, S. (2017). Language learning
from inconsistent input: Bilingual and monolingual toddlers compared: Language learning from
inconsistent input. Infant and Child Development, 26 (4), e1996. doi: 10.1002/icd.1996
de Houwer, A. (2011). Language input environments and language development in bilingual acqui-
sition. In L. Wei (Ed.), Applied Lingusitics Review (pp. 221–240). Berlin/New York: De Gruyter
Mouton.
DeAnda, S., Bosch, L., Poulin-Dubois, D., Zesiger, P., & Friend, M. (2016). The language expo-
sure assessment tool: Quantifying language exposure in infants and children. Journal of Speech
Language and Hearing Research, 59 (6), 1346–1356.
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 45
Ganek, H., Smyth, R., Nixon, S., & Eriks-Brophy, A. (2018, September). Using the Language
ENvironment Analysis (LENA) System to Investigate Cultural Differences in Conversational Turn
Count. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 61 (9), 2246–2258. doi: 10.1044/
2018_JSLHR-L-17-0370
Gilkerson, J., & Richards, J. (2009). Impact of Adult Talk, Conversational Turns, and TV During
the Critical 0-4 Years of Child Development (2nd Edition ed.) (No. ITR-01-2).
Greenwood, C. R., Thiemann-Bourque, K., Walker, D., Buzhardt, J., & Gilkerson, J. (2011). Assess-
ing Children’s Home Language Environments Using Automatic Speech Recognition Technology.
Communication Disorders Quarterly, 32 (2), 83–92. doi: 10.1177/1525740110367826
Hart, B., & Risley, T. (1995). Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young American
children. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing.
Hirsh-Pasek, K., Adamson, L. B., Bakeman, R., Owen, M. T., Golinkoff, R. M., Pace, A., . . .
Suma, K. (2015). The Contribution of Early Communication Quality to Low-Income Children’s
Language Success. Psychological Science, 26 (7), 1071–1083. doi: 10.1177/0956797615581493
Hoff, E. (2003). The Specificity of Environmental Influence: Socioeconomic Status Affects Early
Vocabulary Development Via Maternal Speech. Child Development, 74 (5), 1368–1378. doi:
10.1111/1467-8624.00612
Hurtado, N., Marchman, V. A., & Fernald, A. (2008). Does input influence uptake? Links between
maternal talk, processing speed and vocabulary size in Spanish-learning children. Developmental
Science, 11 (6), F31-F39. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2008.00768.x
Kuznetsova, A., Brockhoff, P., & Christensen, R. (2017). lmerTest Package: Tests in linear mixed-
effects models. Journal of Statistical Software, 82 (13), 1–26.
Mahr, T., & Edwards, J. (2018). Using language input and lexical processing to predict vocabulary
size. Developmental Science, 21 (6), 1–14. doi: 10.1111/desc.12685
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 46
Marchman, V. A., Martínez, L. Z., Hurtado, N., Grüter, T., & Fernald, A. (2017). Caregiver talk
to young Spanish-English bilinguals: Comparing direct observation and parent-report measures
of dual-language exposure. Developmental Science, 20 (1), e12425. doi: 10.1111/desc.12425
Marchman, V. A., & Martinez-Sussmann, C. (2002). Concurrent Validity of Caregiver/Parent
Report Measures of Language for Children Who Are Learning Both English and Spanish. Journal
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 45 , 983–97. doi: 10.1044/1092-4388(2002/080)
Mehl, M. R. (2017). The Electronically Activated Recorder (EAR): A Method for the Naturalistic
Observation of Daily Social Behavior. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 26 (2), 184–
190. doi: 10.1177/0963721416680611
Mehl, M. R., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2003). The sounds of social life: A psychometric analysis of
students’ daily social environments and natural conversations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 84 (4), 857–870. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.84.4.857
Micheletti, M., de Barbaro, K., Fellows, M. D., Hixon, J. G., Slatcher, R. B., & Pennebaker, J. W.
(2020). Optimal sampling strategies for characterizing behavior and affect from ambulatory audio
recordings. Journal of Family Psychology. doi: 10.1037/fam0000654
Newman, R. S., Rowe, M. L., & Bernstein Ratner, N. (2016). Input and uptake at 7 months predicts
toddler vocabulary: The role of child-directed speech and infant processing skills in language
development. Journal of Child Language, 43 (5), 1158–1173. doi: 10.1017/S0305000915000446
Orena, A. J., Byers-Heinlein, K., & Polka, L. (2019). Reliability of the Language Environment
Analysis (LENA) in French-English Bilingual Speech. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing
Research, 67 (2), 2491–2500. doi: 10.31234/osf.io/3xcvu
Orena, A. J., Byers-Heinlein, K., & Polka, L. (2020). What do bilingual infants actually hear? Eval-
uating measures of language input to bilingual-learning 10-month-olds. Developmental Science,
23 (2), 1–14. doi: 10.1111/desc.12901
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 47
Pearson, B. Z., Fernandez, S. C., Lewedeg, V., & Oller, D. (1997). The relation of input factors
to lexical learning by bilingual infants. Applied Psycholinguistics, 18 (1), 41–58. doi: 10.1017/
S0142716400009863
Place, S., & Hoff, E. (2011). Properties of Dual Language Exposure That Influence 2-Year-Olds’
Bilingual Proficiency: Dual Language Exposure and Bilingual Proficiency. Child Development,
82 (6), 1834–1849. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2011.01660.x
Place, S., & Hoff, E. (2016). Effects and noneffects of input in bilingual environments on dual
language skills in 2 -year-olds. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 19 (5), 1023–1041. doi:
10.1017/S1366728915000322
Potter, C. E., Fourakis, E., Morin-Lessard, E., Byers-Heinlein, K., & Lew-Williams, C. (2019).
Bilingual toddlers’ comprehension of mixed sentences is asymmetrical across their two languages.
Developmental Science, 22 (4), e12794. doi: 10.1111/desc.12794
Ramírez-Esparza, N., García-Sierra, A., & Kuhl, P. K. (2014). Look who’s talking: Speech style and
social context in language input to infants are linked to concurrent and future speech development.
Developmental Science, 17 (6), 880–891. doi: 10.1111/desc.12172
Ramírez-Esparza, N., García-Sierra, A., & Kuhl, P. K. (2017). The Impact of Early Social Interac-
tions on Later Language Development in Spanish-English Bilingual Infants. Child Development,
88 (4), 1216–1234. doi: 10.1111/cdev.12648
Romeo, R. R., Leonard, J. A., Robinson, S. T., West, M. R., Mackey, A. P., Rowe, M. L., &
Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2018). Beyond the 30-Million-Word Gap: Children’s Conversational Exposure
Is Associated With Language-Related Brain Function. Psychological Science, 29 (5), 700–710.
doi: 10.1177/0956797617742725
Rowe, M. L. (2008). Child-directed speech: Relation to socioeconomic status, knowledge of child
development, and child vocabulary skill. Journal of Child Language, 35 (1), 185–205.
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 48
Rowe, M. L. (2012). A Longitudinal Investigation of the Role of Quantity and Quality of Child-
Directed Speech in Vocabulary Development: Child-Directed Speech and Vocabulary. Child
Development, 83 (5), 1762–1774. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2012.01805.x
RStudio Team. (2020). RStudio: Integrated Development for R. Boston, MA: RStudio, Inc.
Thordardottir, E. (2011). The relationship between bilingual exposure and vocabulary development.
International Journal of Bilingualism, 15 (4), 426–445. doi: 10.1177/1367006911403202
Unsworth, S., Chondrogianni, V., & Skarabela, B. (2018). Experiential Measures Can Be Used
as a Proxy for Language Dominance in Bilingual Language Acquisition Research. Frontiers in
Psychology, 9 (1809), 1–15. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01809
marsbroshok/VAD-python (GitHub Repository)
Weisleder, A., & Fernald, A. (2013). Talking to Children Matters: Early Language Experience
Strengthens Processing and Builds Vocabulary. Psychological Science, 24 (11), 2143–2152. doi:
10.1177/0956797613488145
Weisleder, A., & Mendelsohn, A. (2019). Daylong recordings of 2-12 month-old infants from spanish-
speaking homes in the u.s.
Wickham, H. (2016). Ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. New York: Springer-Verlag
New York.
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 49
Appendix A
Number of clips annotated by child and annotation method.
# of clips annotated (% of total clips)
Corpus (ID) Random All-day
Spanish-English (267) 101 (5.26 %) 274 (14.27 %)
Spanish-English (261) 92 (4.79 %) 294 (15.31 %)
Spanish-English (199) 118 (6.15 %) 467 (24.32 %)
Spanish-English (198) 81 (4.22 %) 302 (15.73 %)
Spanish-English (179) 120 (6.25 %) 633 (32.97 %)
Quechua-Spanish (1081) 92 (7.5 %) 285 (23.25 %)
Quechua-Spanish (1077) 83 (7.23 %) 355 (30.92 %)
Quechua-Spanish (1075) 81 (8.69 %) 199 (21.35 %)
Quechua-Spanish (1060) 111 (10.51 %) 405 (38.35 %)
Quechua-Spanish (1032) 97 (5.05 %) 372 (19.38 %)
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 50
Appendix B
indicate the distribution from n=100 simulated estimates. Overlapping distributions indicate
similar quantities of adult- and child-directed speech in the child’s environment. Dotted lines
indicate the estimate derived from the original random sampling method.
EFFICIENT ESTIMATION 51
distribution from n=100 simulated estimates. Dotted lines indicate the estimate derived from the
original random sampling method.