Psychological Research
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Covert eye‑tracking: an innovative method to investigate compliance
with instructions
1,2 1,3 1
Anine Riege · Amélie Gourdon‑Kanhukamwe · Gaëlle Vallée‑Tourangeau
Received: 18 January 2020 / Accepted: 19 November 2020
© The Author(s) 2020
Abstract
The present study introduces a covert eye-tracking procedure as an innovative approach to investigate the adequacy of research
paradigms used in psychology. In light of the ongoing debate regarding ego depletion, the frequently used “attention-control
video task” was chosen to illustrate the method. Most participants did not guess that their eyes had been monitored, but
some participants had to be excluded due to poor tracking ratio. The eye-tracking data revealed that the attention-control
instructions had a significant impact on the number of fixations, revisits, fixation durations, and proportion of long fixation
durations on the AOIs (all BF > 18.2). However, number of fixations and proportions of long fixation durations did not
mediate cognitive performance. The results illustrate the promise of covert eye-tracking methodology to assess task compli-
ance, as well as adding to the current discussion regarding whether the difficulties of replicating “ego depletion” may be in
part due to poor task compliance in the video task.
Introduction
2011), and provide information about participants’ acquisi-
tion of information, attention and natural shifts in attention
Psychological science has for the last decade been engaged through fixations and saccades (Schulte-Mecklenbeck, et al.,
in a replication crisis, prompting an increased focus on 2011a, 2011b). Monitoring participants’ fixations within a
combatting questionable research practices and attempts to (pre)defined area of interest (AOI) provides objective infor-
replicate previous results (e.g., the Open Science Collabo- mation about what participants are looking at and the direc-
ration) (for a review see Shrout & Rodgers, 2018). One of tion of fixations can indicate search strategies within a dis-
the important issues that has received some focus in this play of information, as well as repeated inspections (revisits)
debate is the adequacy of the paradigms used in psycho- of the same material. In addition, the length of each fixation
logical research. If tasks and instructions fail to manipulate has been used as an indirect measure of cognitive effort, with
the psychological construct under investigation (and only longer fixations being less common and reflecting a heavier
that construct), findings may vary considerably. The pre- cognitive load than short fixations (Findlay & Kapoula,
sent research introduces a novel method of examining the 1992; Horstmann et al., 2009). As such, eye-tracking meth-
appropriateness of tasks and their instructions by using eye- odology provides information about several different psy-
tracking as a covert measure to evaluate the degree to which chological processes that are otherwise difficult to access.
participants comply with the task instructions. To illustrate the use of covert eye-tracking, we used the
Eye movements are seen as a valid measure of attention sequential task paradigm, which is the most common exper-
and cognitive effort (Glaholt & Reingold, 2011; Russo, imental design used for investigating self-control (Carter,
et al., 2015). In this paradigm, participants in the experi-
mental condition are required to engage in an initial task
Anine Riege
requiring use of self-control, such as controlling one’s atten-
a.c.riege@psykologi.uio.no
tion to a specific part of the screen while watching a video.
Department of Management, Kingston Business School,
A second, unrelated task, also taxing self-control, is then
Kingston University, Kingston Hill Campus, Kingston Hill,
administered. Worse performance in the second task is taken
Kingston upon Thames KT2 7LB, UK
to be an indicator of the ego depletion effect.
Department of Psychology, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Ego depletion has been a much-debated effect, having
Institute for Globally Distributed Open Research
failed to replicate in several large-scale replication attempts
and Education (IGDORE), London, UK
1 3
Vol.:(0123456789)
Psychological Research
(Hagger, et al., 2016; Lurquin, et al., 2016) and showing
weak effect sizes in meta-analyses (Carter, et al., 2015).
There are several reasons why an ego depletion effect may
be difficult to observe (Blazquez, et al., 2017; Cunningham
& Baumeister, 2016), such as the existence of ego deple-
tion effect itself or, if it exists, whether self-control as a
depletable resource is an appropriate theoretical framework
to account for the ego depletion effect (e.g., Baumeister,
et al., 1998, 2007; Inzlicht & Schmeichel, 2012; Kotabe
& Hofmann, 2016). Yet, another possible important issue
is methodological, where the adequacy of the tasks used
to elicit ego depletion has been questioned (Lee, et al.,
Fig. 1
The AOIs used to extract data. The blue area (top, left) is the
2016). Different meta-analyses have suggested that not all
woman-AOI and the green area (bottom, right) is the word-AOI
manipulations or dependent variables used in the literature
may work (Dang, 2018; Lurquin & Miyake, 2017). The
attention-control video, for example, has been shown in a depletion effect. Self-report data suggest that participants in
replication paper (Lurquin, et al., 2016) and a meta-analysis the taxing condition may not fully comply with task instruc-
(Dang, 2018) to potentially be a weak task to manipulate tions as they do remember some words (Henderson, et al.,
depletion of self-control. However, less is known about why 2017; Lurquin, et al., 2016); however, such self-report data
the attention-control video might be a weak task—it might only provide a proxy measure for task compliance. What
not require self-control or participants might not follow the is needed is a more objective measure of behavior during
instructions. the task.
In the attention-control video task, participants watch a The attention-control video can be viewed as a task
six-minute silent video of a woman being interviewed by an where the words appearing at bottom right of the screen
offscreen interviewer. During the video, 36 common one- draw the gaze. Such bottom-up effects can be hard to ignore
syllable words (e.g., play) appear at the bottom of the screen and requires exerting control over one’s eye movements to
for 10-s each. The ego depletion manipulation supposedly avoid looking. Eye movements such as fixations, revisits,
involves taxing self-control resources of one group but not and fixation durations provide such objective measures of
the other, through manipulating the video-watching instruc- the degree to which participants comply with task instruc-
tions. In the taxing condition, participants are instructed to tions and should differ based on the self-control condition
control their visual attention and only concentrate on the participants are randomly allocated to (taxing vs. untax-
woman. In the untaxing condition, participants complete ing). Using (pre)defined AOIs (see Fig. 1) provides objec-
the same task without such instructions and without being tive information about how often participants are looking
informed about the presence of the words. Thus, partici- at either the woman or the words (number of fixations) and
pants in the taxing group are assumed to use self-control how many repeated inspections (revisits) of an AOI do not
resources to avoid looking at the words and, thus, are pre- follow each other in time. In other words, participants in the
dicted to become depleted in self-control compared to those taxing condition who fully comply with the task instructions
in the untaxing group (Lee, et al., 2016). In other words, the should have no fixations and no revisits to the Word-AOI
changing words potentially draw participants’ attention in a because they do not look at the words. However, the present
bottom-up way. However, participants in the taxing condi- paradigm allows for a more fine-grained understanding of
tion must override such bottom-up demands, presumably participants’ compliance as the combination of the number
using top-down control because they are instructed to not of fixations and revisits gives objective data of the extent of
look at the words, which is taxing. compliance.
As such, participants’ compliance with the instructions is In the present paradigm, it is also possible that the task is
a crucial pre-condition for this self-control manipulation to so easy that participants manage to not to look at the words
impact performance. If participants in the taxing condition at all. The length of each single fixation (measured in mil-
look at the words, they may be less depleted than assumed; liseconds) is often used as an indirect measure of cognitive
conversely, if participants in the untaxing condition either effort. Fixation durations vary based on the activity at hand,
try to avoid the words or try to commit the words to memory where fixation durations longer than 500 ms often indicate
they may be more depleted than they are assumed to be. In a heavier cognitive load. For example, for participants cal-
other words, participants who fail to comply with instruc- culating weighted sums in a city-size task (pre-study), the
tions in either condition may diminish the effectiveness of proportion of long fixation durations (> 500 ms) was 18.5%
the self-control manipulation intended to induce the ego compared to 1.4% of all fixations for participants processing
1 3
Psychological Research
simple city-size tasks more intuitively (Study 1) (Horst- responses indicates overall accuracy, and the number of
mann, et al., 2009). As such, using self-control resources attempted tasks is a measure of working speed and effort.
should require more effort, meaning that participants in the H1b and H1c test whether ego depletion occurred as
taxing condition should have longer fixation durations on the measured by the attentional control exerted by partici-
Woman-AOI compared to participants in the untaxing con- pants. Hypotheses H2a and H2b test whether participants
dition. Fixation durations on the woman should also poten- followed the instructions of the attention-control video task
tially be longer than those on the words for both conditions (intended to deplete resources), via the number of fixa-
because the task is to observe the woman’s body language. tions in the Word-AOI (H2a) and number of revisits to the
Taken together, eye-tracking provides several indices of par- Word-AOI (H2b). Finally, H3a tests the effort exerted by
ticipants’ attention processes/behavior, making it a useful participants by comparing the proportion of long fixation
tool to investigate the adequacy of research paradigms in durations (> 500 ms) in the Woman-AOI. We, therefore, set
psychology. out to either support or refute the following pre-registered
While eye-tracking is a useful method, it is not necessar- hypotheses:
ily practical to include eye-tracking in every research study. H1a: participants in the taxing condition will perform
The purpose of the present method is rather to understand worse on the three performance measures of the GRE, com-
whether participants are following instructions when they pared to the untaxing condition.
are not observed, which is how experiments are typically H1b: performance on the GRE will be mediated by the
run. However, the Hawthorne effect suggests that knowing number of fixations in the Word-AOI.
one’s being observed might change participants’ behavior H1c: performance on the GRE will be mediated by effort
(McCambridge, et al., 2014). As eye movements can be con- (measured as proportion of long fixation durations).
trolled and we wanted to investigate if participants followed H2a: participants in the taxing condition will have
the instructions not to look at the words, it was important fewer fixations in the Word-AOI compared to the untaxing
for participants to be unaware that their eye movements are condition.
being tracked during the task completion. Overt eye-tracking H2b: participants in the taxing condition will have
would make it difficult to extrapolate to attention-control fewer revisits to the Word-AOI compared to the untaxing
paradigms in general, thus we used covert eye-tracking. condition.
Next, we report an experiment showcasing a new approach H3a: participants in the taxing condition will have longer
to assess task compliance, using covert recording of eye fixation durations in the Woman-AOI compared to the untax-
movements. ing condition.
The main aim of the paper was, thus, to shed light on Prior to data collection, we pre-registered the hypotheses,
whether the attention-control task failed to produce an method and planned analyses on the Open Science Frame-
ego depletion effect because of non-compliance with task work https: //osf.io/puh6t/ . We report all pre-registered analy-
instructions, using covert eye-tracking. As a second aim, we ses below, except the exploratory pupillometry analyses.
also tested whether the impact of the self-control manipu-
lation on performance was moderated by the extent to
which participants complied with the video-viewing task
instructions. We replicated the method and materials from
Schmeichel et al. (2003, Experiment 1) as closely as possi-
The wording in H1b and H1c is slightly changed from the pre-reg-
ble, adding eye-tracking to investigate whether participants
istered version (omitting “regardless of condition”) to avoid confu-
actually engage in attentional control behavior while com-
sion as the pre-registered analyses included conditions. We found the
pleting the video-viewing task by covertly monitoring gaze syntax more important to follow than the wording in the hypotheses.
patterns. The pre-registration included H3b (During the video-viewing task
participants in the depletion condition will have larger mean pupil
size, compared to the control condition) as an exploratory analysis.
Hypotheses
After having pre-registered the study, we discovered a potential con-
founding issue which is that the luminance in the two AOIs might
Following Schmeichel, et al. (2003), we used different be different (see Fig. 1), and luminance also affects pupil size (see
for example Campbell & Gregory, 1960; Holmqvist, 2011, chap-
instructions to the attention-control video as the independ-
ter 11.5; Laeng & Sulutvedt, 2014; Sulutvedt, et al., 2021). Moreo-
ent variable and tasks from the analytical section of the
ver, we expect the luminance in the Word-AOI to be brighter than in
Graduate Record Exam (GRE) as the dependent variable.
the Woman-AOI which means that participants’ pupils might con-
H1a, thus, tests whether ego depletion from the attention- tract (indicating less effort) when they look at the Word-AOI. If this
is the case, any observed change in pupil size in the predicted direc-
control video task occurred, as measured by Schmeichel,
tion could be caused by either a reduced cognitive effort or by the
et al. (2003), where the main measure of performance is
change in luminance (or both). For this reason, we have not looked at
the number of correct responses, the proportion of correct
the pupil data.
1 3
Psychological Research
Materials and method Design and materials
Sampling plan
Participants were randomly allocated to either a taxing or
untaxing self-control condition, differing only in the instruc-
A sequential Bayesian analysis (Schonbrodt, et al., 2017) tions given for the video-viewing task. All tasks were com-
using the JASP default Cauchy prior ( = 0.707) was con- pleted in a single testing session, lasting ~45 min.
ducted on previously collected data (Henderson, et al., Participants were first given an information sheet and
2017) to determine the stopping rule. A Bayes factor of consent form, and demographic questionnaire. Next, they
~ 5 was reached after 70 participants. We pre-registered were positioned at 65-cm distance to the screen, which
to stop recruiting either when a Bayesian -test on the was fitted with an SMI RED 250 screen-based mobile
dependent variable (GRE) indicated that the data were eye-tracker, and told they were doing a brief concentration
five times more likely under H1 than H0 (i.e., BF = 5) task, adapted from the SAM lab’s instructions (B. Lasset-
or vice versa (i.e., BF = 5), or at 80 participants. Due ter, personal communication) and which served as a covert
to more sign-ups than anticipated, data collection was procedure for calibrating the eye tracker. Participants’ eye
stopped at 85 participants. The experimental procedures movements were recorded at 60 Hz, using a 5-point cali-
were approved by the University of Kingston’s Research bration procedure. Participants were instructed to face their
Ethics Committee. The dataset generated and analyzed monitor comfortably while the experimenter would measure
in the current study is available in the OSF repository, at the distance between their head and the screen. They were
https: //osf.io/chnrm/ . told to keep their head still and maintain the distance while
they looked at the screen. Participants were then told that a
circle would appear, move across the screen, and pause once
Participants
in a while. They were instructed to count in their heads the
number of times the circle paused and to report this number
Eighty-five participants were recruited, each receiving to the experimenter at the end of the concentration task. By
a £10 Amazon voucher for their participation. A total following the circle with their eyes, unbeknownst to them,
of 15 participants were excluded, six for pre-registered participants were actually providing the data required to cali-
reasons (4 participants were aware of eye-tracking, 1 brate the eye-tracker. If the calibration was noisy (that is,
participant had problems with eyesight, and 1 chose to accuracy > 1°), the experimenter would repeat the procedure.
retract data). Two unregistered exclusion criteria were If the calibration failed (i.e., it was not possible to get an
added: receiving incorrect instructions (2 participants), accurate validation) after five attempts, the participant was
and tracking ratio < 70% (7 participants; although we thanked, debriefed, and dismissed (verbatim instructions to
had pre-registered poor quality eye-tracking data, we did participants can be found on OSF, in the protocol document
not register to follow recommendation of Amso, et al., available at https: //osf.io/xxaz6/ ).
2014). Tracking ratio is the proportion of time that the After the best possible validation was obtained (prefer-
eye-tracker records the gaze during the task, and although ably < 1°), the instructions to the video task were given. The
participants were given instructions to not look away from video was displayed on a 22-in. monitor with a resolution
the screen, the covert eye-tracking meant they did not of 1680 × 1050 pixels. Participants viewed the 6-min video
have the same awareness and instruction ordinarily given while the experimenter waited outside. The instructions to
to increase tracking ratio. The mean tracking ratio in the the video-viewing task for participants in the taxing group
excluded group was 45.7% (SD = 21.9), compared to were:
89.9% (SD = 6.6) for the included participants. The accu- “This experiment investigates how people form impres-
racy of the eye-tracking data was on average [°] = 0.39 sions of others and how those impressions influence mem-
(SD = 0.25) and [°] = 0.59 (SD = 0.57). Two participants ory. So, I’m going to have you watch a short film clip that
had rather large -deviations (3.3 and 3.4), but manual shows a woman being interviewed, but I’m going to turn the
inspection of the participants’ gaze videos revealed that sound off so that you can only see the woman. Later I’ll have
the size and the positioning of the AOIs (see Fig. 1) pre- you answer some questions about your impressions of her.
vents the gaze being recorded in the incorrect AOI. Since you won’t be able to hear what she’s saying you’ll have
Thus, 70 par ticipants (52.9% women, mean to base your impressions of her on her nonverbal behavior.
age = 24.2 years, SD = 6.7) with normal or corrected-to- So, in addition to the woman being interviewed, you
normal vision and fluent in English were included in the will also see some words on the bottom of the screen. It is
analyses. very important for the purposes of this experiment that you
keep your attention focused only on the woman’s face and
do not look down at the words that appear at the bottom of
1 3
Psychological Research
Mean (SD) GRE
Self-control condition
scores for participants in each
group, and the Bayes Factor Taxing Untaxing
H t
for for an independent -test
M M t p d
SD SD BF (68) Cohen’s (95% CI)
and a traditional students -test 0+
(hypothesis H1a)
GRE 2.6 (1.4) 2.8 (1.5) 3.68 0.47 0.637 0.113 (− 0.36, 0.58)
correct
GRE 0.5 (0.2) 0.5 (0.3) 4.47 0.26 0.798 0.062 (− 0.44, 0.50)
proportion
GRE 6.3 (2.9) 6.4 (2.91) 4.92 0.14 0.886 0.034 (− 0.41, 0.53)
attempted
GRE = number of GRE questions participants got correct; G RE = proportion of GRE questions
correct proportion
participants got correct; GRE = number of GRE questions participants attempted
attempted
the screen. If you do accidentally look at the words, I want The two offices painted green must be next to each other.
you to re-focus your attention on the woman as quickly as The two offices painted blue cannot be next to each other.
possible. The office painted yellow cannot be next to an office painted
This task may be kind of difficult because the words take white. Office 3 must be painted white. 1) If office 2 is painted
up a decent portion of the screen, but I want you to try hard green, which of the following offices must also be painted
to ignore these words and focus your attention only on the green? (Answer alternatives were: a. 1; b. 3; c. 4; d. 5; e. 6).
woman. Later, you’ll have to answer some questions about After having spent 10 min on the GRE, participants were
your impressions of the woman based on her nonverbal interrupted by the experimenter. Following Lurquin, et al.,
behavior. When the clip ends, let me know. Remember, focus (2016), participants filled out a surprise video memory task
only on the woman and try to ignore the words”. and a video-viewing scale. The memory task asked par-
For the participants in the untaxing group, the instruc- ticipants to state whether or not they remembered seeing
tions to the video-viewing task were: each of 36 words (Yes/No), where half were words that had
“This experiment investigates how people form impres- appeared in the video and the others were decoy words. The
sions of others and how those impressions influence mem- video-viewing scale is an eight-question self-report measure
ory. So, I’m going to have you watch a short film clip that asking participants to rate questions such as “How difficult
shows a woman being interviewed, but I’m going to turn the was it not to look at the words?” and “How hard did you try
sound off so that you can only see the woman. Later I’ll have to remember the words?” on a scale from 1 (Not at all) to
you answer some questions about your impressions of her. 10 (A lot).
Since you won’t be able to hear what she’s saying you’ll have Lastly, participants filled out a post-experiment question-
to base your impression of her on her nonverbal behavior. naire, probing for detection of the eye-tracker. Participants
When the interview clip starts, I want you to watch it just were then debriefed and asked again for consent once the
as if you were sitting at home watching TV, even though the covert eye-tracking had been revealed. All materials can be
sound will be off. I don’t want you to worry about try real found on OSF: https: //osf.io/xxaz6/ .
hard to form an impression or anything. Just watch the clip The size of the Woman-AOI was 845,983 pixels (40.2%
and when it ends, let me know”. of the screen) and the Word-AOI was 492,936 pixels (23.4%
After the participants had watched the attention control of the screen). The AOIs are displayed in Fig. 1.
video, the PANAS mood scale (Watson, et al., 1988) was
administrated for replication purposes, but these data were
Results
not analyzed or reported, as specified in the pre-registration.
Participants were given 13 problems from the Analytical
section of the Graduate Record Exam (GRE). These tasks The pre-registered hypotheses are labeled, and the other
are considered to be a measure of general cognitive ability analyses are included for transparency. We used JASP for all
t r
(Kuncel, et al., 2001) that requires active cognitive control Bayesian -tests, using the default Cauchy prior ( = 0.707).
and self-regulated thinking (Yang & Johnson-Laird, 2001), Following Schmeichel, et al., (2003), we analyzed the per-
for example: formance data from the GRE in three different ways, where
Seven offices in an office building are to be painted. The the number of correct responses is the main measure of
offices, which are on one side of a hallway, are numbered performance, the proportion of correct responses gives an
consecutively, one to seven, from the front of the building to indication of overall accuracy, and the number of attempted
the back. Each office is to be painted one color only accord- tasks is a measure of working speed and effort. As seen in
white; two offices must be painted blue; two offices must 3.7 and 4.9 times more likely under the null hypothesis ( )
be painted green; and one office must be painted yellow. rather than under the alternative hypothesis (H1a), providing
1 3
Psychological Research
Mean (SD) fixations, revisits and fixation durations for the two AOIs by condition, together with results for independent -tests where
the Bayes Factor is in favor of H1 (group 1 ≠ group 2)
Self-control condition
Taxing Untaxing
M M t p d
SD SD BF (68) Cohen’s (95% CI)
Fixations woman 238.1 (109.7) 315.9 (88.8) 18.2 3.2 0.002 0.78 (0.29, 1.26)
Fixations words (hypothesis H2a) 6.5 (10.2) 103.7 (70.9) 8.0e + 8 8.3 < 0.001 1.98 (1.40, 2.55)
Revisits woman 8.4 (10.1) 66.8 (28.6) 4.6e + 14 11.7 < 0.001 2.79 (2.12, 3.45)
Revisits words (hypothesis H2b) 4.1 (6.9) 59.4 (30.1) 2.5e + 13 10.9 < 0.001 2.61 (1.96, 3.24)
Fixation durations woman (ms) 1824.7 (1270.5) 904.9 (381.9) 147.9 − 4.0 < 0.001 − 0.96 (− 1.45, − 0.46)
(hypothesis H3a)
Fixation durations words (ms) 152.0 (140.8) 348.4 (146.4) 45,504.1 5.7 < 0.001 1.37 (0.84, 1.89)
Proportion long fixation durations 0.59 (0.14) 0.40 (0.11) 184,649.6 − 6.1 < 0.001 − 1.46 (− 1.98, − 0.93)
Mean (SD) scores for the memory task and the video-viewing task, and the results of independent -tests
Self-control condition
Taxing Untaxing
M M t p d
SD SD (68) Cohen’s (95% CI)
Q1. How difficult was it not to look at the words? 4.2 (2.7) 6.1 (2.2) − 3.12 0.003 0.75 (0.26, 1.23)
Q2. How difficult was it to form an impression of the interviewee? 5.2 (2.2) 5.3 (2.1) − 0.18 0.860 0.04 ( − 0.43, 0.51)
Q3. How much effort did you put into the task? 7.6 (2.2) 7.4 (1.7) 0.36 0.719 − 0.09 (− 0.56, 0.38)
Q4. Did you think we would ask about the words later? 5.0 (3.4) 8.6 (2.1) − 5.25 < 0.001 1.26 (0.74, 1.77)
Q5. How hard did you try to remember the words? 2.9 (2.4) 6.8 (2.4) − 6.83 < 0.001 1.63 (1.09, 2.17)
Q6. How hard did you try to ignore the words? 7.1 (2.9) 4.3 (2.5) 4.29 < 0.001 − 1.03 (− 1.52, − 0.52)
Q7. How important was it for you to see the words? 3.0 (2.3) 5.5 (2.5) − 4.55 < 0.001 1.09 (0.58, 1.59)
Q8. How important was it to you to follow the instructions? 8.1 (2.3) 5.5 (2.4) 4.61 < 0.001 − 1.10 (− 1.61, − 0.60)
Memory of words in the video 3.5 (3.5) 12.3 (4.2) − 9.64 < 0.001 2.31 (1.69, 2.91)
Memory of decoy words (i.e., words that did not appear in the video) 1.3 (1.8) 2.0 (1.5) − 1.70 0.093 0.41 (− 0.07, 0.88)
’ for memory of words 0.35 (0.4) 1.4 (0.6) − 8.12 < 0.001 − 1.97 (1.40, 2.55)
moderate evidence that participants’ performance on the no significant indirect effect of condition on overall GRE
GRE did not differ as a function of self-control condition. performance through proportions of long fixation durations,
To investigate whether the degree of task compliance ab = − 0.17, 95% CI [- 0.43, 0.06] indicating no media-
mediates the effect of the self-control manipulation on tion occurred. The pre-registration also included checking
PROCESS version 3.5, Model 4 (Hayes, 2018) in SPSS. of condition on the GRE score (also hypothesis H1c).
correct
The first mediation analysis (hypothesis H1b) looked at the Condition did not predict self-reported effort, (68) = 0.36,
effect of condition (taxing vs. untaxing) on the GRE = 0.718, and there was no significant indirect effect of
correct
score, mediated by the number of fixations in the Word-AOI. condition through self-reported effort on overall GRE per-
Condition predicted the number of fixations in the Word- formance, ab = − 0.01, 95% CI [− 0.12, 0.05], meaning no
t p
AOI, (68) = − 8.25, < 0.001, but there was no significant mediation occurred.
indirect effect of condition through number of fixations on We tested hypotheses H2a, H2b, and H3a to investigate if
overall GRE performance, ab = − 0.33, 95% CI [− 0.74, participants followed the instructions of the attention-con-
0.21]. In other words, no mediation occurred. The second trol video task comparing the number of fixations, revisits,
model (hypothesis H1c) looked at the effect of condition on and fixation durations between the two conditions, respec-
correct
durations (> 500 ms). Condition predicted the proportion of dition had substantially fewer fixations and revisits in the
t p
long fixation durations, (68) = 6.09, < 0.001, but there was Word-AOI, with Bayes factors well above the criteria for
1 3
Psychological Research
“extreme evidence” (Lee & Wagenmakers, 2013, adjusted might be because the instructions for this group does not men-
from Jeffreys, 1961) for hypotheses H2a and H2b. Further tion the words at all, making participants in the untaxing con-
inspections of the data revealed that 32.4% of participants dition unsure about the presence of the words. For the question
in the taxing condition had no fixations in the Word-AOI, asking about how hard participants tried to ignore the words
meaning that they completely adhered to the instructions (Q6), participants in the taxing condition reported significantly
and never looked at the words. Less than 20% of the par- higher ratings, which is in line with what one would expect
ticipants in the taxing condition had more than 10 fixations from the instructions. Participants reported experiencing simi-
in the Word-AOI. Revisits are repeated inspections of an lar difficulty in forming an impression of the woman (Q2) and
AOI that do not follow each other in time, while fixations putting similar effort into the task (Q3).
may or may not follow each other in time. Though they are Taken together, our results indicate that participants do
closely related to fixations, revisits show how many times attempt to follow the instructions, yet both groups perform
participants returned to the Word-AOI. Only six participants equally on the GRE, indicating no ego depletion effect.
(16.2%) in the taxing condition had 10 or more revisits to However, the self-report data suggest that participants in
the Word-AOI, where only two had 25 and 30 revisits. In the untaxing condition may have tried to commit the words
comparison, 84.8% of participants in the untaxing condi- to memory, and to investigate whether participants in the
tion had more than 25 revisits, where 9.1% had more than untaxing condition could also be using attentional resources
100 revisits. we decided to do two exploratory analyses of the proportion
Participants’ fixation durations also varied between the of long fixation durations in the Word-AOI. An independ-
t-
Factor ( BF ) above 100 denoting “extreme evidence” in Word-AOI) showed that participants in the untaxing condi-
favor of research hypothesis H3a. Fixation durations in the tion had a significantly higher proportion of long fixation
Word-AOI were notably shorter and in the opposite direc- durations when looking at the Word-AOI ( = 0.042
taxing
M t p
tion, indicating that participants in the taxing condition who vs. = 0.132, (56) = 3.46, = 0.001, BF = 30.3).
untaxing 10
did look at the Word-AOI had more fleeting glances com- The second exploratory analysis looking at the correlations
pared to those in the untaxing condition. The proportion of between the proportion of long fixation durations and the
was also significantly higher in the taxing condition. correlations with Bayes factors indicating strong (10–30)
Finally, the self-report measures for the video-viewing and moderate evidence (3–10) (Lee & Wagenmakers, 2013,
lation of the total memory score follows Lurquin & Miyake’s tions asking whether participants attempted to memorize
d d
(2017) signal detection analysis calculating -prime ( ’). the words all showed positive correlations with proportion
Specifically, ’ represents the ability to distinguish between of long fixation durations, indicating that participants with
decoy words and displayed words, by considering both the more long fixation durations gave higher ratings to the ques-
hit rate (words that are correctly labeled as have seen/have tions. Question 4 (Did you think we would ask about the
not seen) and the false alarm rate (decoy words that are words later?) had a correlation of (58) = 0.37, BF = 7.9;
incorrectly remembered as seen). As such, ’ corrects for Question 5 (How hard did you try to remember the words?)
participants’ guessing on all the words. For example, if the had a correlation of (58) = 0.35, BF = 5.4; and Question
measure of the memory task was the proportion of words 7 (How important was it for you to see the words?) had
correctly remembered, and a participant responded “Yes” to a correlation of (58) = 0.38, BF = 12.0. Conversely, the
all the words, it would seem like they had looked at all the question asking participants how important it was to fol-
words unless the false alarms are also taken into account. low the instructions showed a negative correlation with
The video-viewing task and the memory test revealed some proportion of long fixation durations (Q8. How important
interesting differences. For example, the questions probing was it to you to follow the instructions?) had a correlation
for effortful processing of the words (Questions 4, 5, and the of (58) = − 0.37, BF = 8.4.
ing condition not only thought it more likely that they would
Discussion
be asked about the words and tried to remember the words,
they were also better able to distinguish between words shown
in the video and decoy words (as indicated by ’). This sug- The present study introduces covert eye-tracking as a method
gests that several participants in the untaxing condition may to investigate the adequacy of research paradigms used in
have exerted effort by trying to commit the words to memory. psychology. The frequently used “attention-control video
Participants in the untaxing condition also reported it as more task” was chosen to illustrate the method. Most partici-
1 3
Psychological Research
indicating that covertly tracking participants’ eye movements compliance did not moderate the effect of the self-control
is an unobtrusive way to obtain reliable behavioral data on manipulation on the GRE performance. As such, the lack
participants’ compliance with visual attention instructions. of evidence for an ego depletion effect cannot be attributed
Moreover, this method ensures that participants are not con- to a poor manipulation of participants’ self-control in the
trolling their eye movements as they might be with overt video task.
eye-tracking. Further, the eye-tracking data provided an The results also showed that participants in the taxing
opportunity to investigate whether individual differences in condition had longer fixation durations when looking at the
adherence affects the outcome measure at hand. Woman-AOI. Long fixation durations have been shown to
One possible limitation of this approach, however, is that indicate cognitive effort which is in line with the purpose
it might have resulted in participants having a poorer track- of the task’s manipulation. However, given the results of
ing ratio than normal. A poor tracking ratio means that a the mediation analysis, long fixation durations may not only
lot of data are missing, although some data loss is normal indicate cognitive effort in the present experiment, as studies
(Holmqvist, 2011). Participants blink, they might have eye on eye movements while driving in monotonous landscapes
lids or eye lashes that obscure the pupil or corneal reflection (i.e., not effortful environments) also find long fixation dura-
(which are both used to track the gaze position), and they tions (Chapman & Underwood, 1998).
may on occasion look away from the screen. As it is more The present study aimed to investigate not only if par-
difficult to control for such situations when eye-tracking ticipants in the taxing condition follow instructions, but
is done covertly, this could be a disadvantage with covert also if participants in the untaxing condition might either
eye-tracking. Future operationalizations of the covert eye- try to avoid the words or try to commit the words to mem-
tracking method for attentional tasks may consider including ory leaving them more depleted than expected. There was
instructions to invite participants to limit blinking and keep little evidence that participants in the untaxing condition
We were also able to illustrate the usefulness of the cov- there is a large difference between the two conditions
ert eye-tracking methodology to disentangle methodological regarding fixations in the Word-AOI. A closer inspection
biases from theoretical and statistical biases to explain the of the data revealed that only one participant in the untax-
absence of an effect. Using the ego depletion as an example, ing condition had less than 10 fixations to the Word-AOI
this study illustrates that the absence of an ego depletion and almost half had more than 100 fixations. On the other
effect, following the attention-control video task, seems hand, our self-report data suggest that participants in the
unlikely to be attributed to participants’ failing to comply untaxing condition may have tried to commit the words to
with the “ego-depleting” instructions. On the contrary, par- memory as they reported significantly higher responses to
ticipants in the taxing condition had few fixations and revis- the questions probing for effortful processing of the words.
its to the Word-AOI, indicating that they mostly followed Participants in the untaxing condition also remembered far
the instructions. Further, the length of the few fixations they more words and had a higher d-prime score, indicating that
had on the words were only (on average) 152 ms long, which participants in the untaxing condition were better able to
indicates quite short glances (the recommendation for what distinguish between words shown in the video and decoy
constitutes a fixation is normally fixation durations between words. Taken together, several participants in the untaxing
100 and 200 ms, see Manor & Gordon, 2003). condition may have exerted considerable effort committing
Understanding why and how an experimental task works the words to memory. As seen in our exploratory analyses
is important to move research on self-control forward. We of the proportion of long fixation durations in the Word-
reasoned that if participants in the taxing experimental con- AOI, our results indicate that the problem with the task
dition were not exerting effort to look away from the words, may not be a lack of compliance in the taxing condition,
they would not be ego depleted. Our eye-tracking meas- but participants exerting effort in the untaxing condition
ures revealed that participants in the taxing condition had by inferring additional requirements. A recent study also
significantly fewer fixations and revisits to the Word-AOI proposing to examine the validity of the attention-control
compared to the untaxing condition, and many participants video for the ego depletion effect (Englert, et al., 2019)
had none. These results show that the video-viewing task used the attention-control video task as a dependent meas-
instructions do have an impact on self-control behavior (i.e., ure. The results showed that participants in the taxing con-
the eye-tracking patterns clearly differ in the taxing condi- dition had significantly fewer fixations on the Woman-AOI
tion, compared to the untaxing condition), yet this impact compared to participants in the untaxing condition indicat-
does not result in a change of performance in the outcome ing that they were depleted from the preceding manipu-
task. In fact, the data provided moderate evidence against lation. This is a less common use of the task, as it has
an ego depletion effect on the GRE performance. As antici- generally been used as a means to manipulate attentional
pated, participants varied in their degree of compliance, but
1 3
Psychological Research
Open Access
resources (Carter, et al., 2015), but it indicates the task This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
may indeed be tapping into self-control.
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
One solution might be to change the wording of the
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
instructions, particularly for the untaxing condition. Recall
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
the instructions for both conditions begin with “This were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
experiment investigates how people form impressions of
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
others and how those impressions influence memory.”,
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
because there is no mention of the words in the instruc-
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
tion for the untaxing condition, some participants may need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
think the mention of memory is related to memorizing
the words. This might also be a potential reason for the
finding that participants in the untaxing condition reported