The Administration of Cast Vote Records in U.S. States
Shiro Kuriwaki
December 30, 2020
Abstract
I survey the state of election administration surrounding cast vote records in
U.S. states. To study how states currently collect, preserve, and protect cast
vote records, I made customized inquiries to election officers of all 50 states and
D.C. The investigation shows how the administration of cast vote records is
intricately related to other aspects of election administration: post-election au-
dits, the interpretation of sometimes ambiguous regulations around the preser-
vation of voted ballots and cast vote records, and the debate surrounding open
records requests. I conclude with what the recently matured movement for
common data formats entails for these issues surrounding cast vote records.
Technical report, prepared for presentation at the 2019 Election Sciences, Reform and
Administration Conference. I thank the state election officials who responded to my inquiry, as
well as David Kimball, Michael Morse, Jennifer Morrell for helpful suggestions. These are early
findings; comments are welcome.
Ph.D. Candidate, Department of Government and Institute of Quantitative Social Science,
Harvard University ( , ).
Cast vote records are a byproduct of recent voting technology that has widespread
academic and administrative uses, but the landscape of how states collect, adminis-
ter, and preserve cast vote records (CVRs) remain unclear. In an academic study of
ticket splitting, Kuriwaki (2020) employed cast vote records from the entire state of
South Carolina, while Morse (2021) used cast vote records from Florida to study the
bipartisan support for a constitutional amendment. The data collection involved in
that study was tractable because South Carolina’s state election commission had
been collecting CVRs from each of the 46 counties in the state since 2010. Most
other states, however, do not appear to collect these records and instead collect
tallies (sums) of votes by office. What is the role of cast vote records, if any, in the
administration of modern elections?
1 Collection of CVRs
In 2019 I first sent customized e-mail inquiries to state election directors, public
information officers, and other official contacts in all 50 states and DC, inquiring
a summary of results. As of July 25 2019, I received responses from 41 states.
Seven states – South Carolina, Rhode Island, Maryland, Colorado, Georgia,
New Mexico, and Hawaii, appear to have collected CVRs in the 2018 election cycle.
Maryland has conducted a 100% post-election audit since 2016 aided by scanning
and OCR technology by the company Clear Ballot. As a consequence, the Maryland
Board of Elections retains CVRs from all of its counties in the 2016 and 2018 general
elections (Agadjanian and Robinson 2019). Rhode Island and Colorado use different
voting methods (in-person voting of paper ballots and primarily statewide vote-by-
mail, respectively), but share the common factor of conducting Risk-Limiting Audits
(RLA) or preparing for one. A RLA is a type of post-election audit that samples
vote records for evidence that the outcome is correct. Therefore, one condition
of implementing a RLA is that jurisdictions must have access to all ballots from
the state. Finally, Hawaii and New Mexico seem to be two states (among those
that have responded) that collect cast vote records in a central counting (canvasing)
facility.
Clear Ballot Press Release, 2016. “The Maryland State Administrator of Elections and Clear
Ballot Will Conduct the Nations First Ever 100 Percent Statewide Post-Election Audit.”
For a broad introduction, see ; for the statistical theory behind the RLA,
see Stark (2008).
State collect CVRs from counties? No response No Partial Yes
ME
WI VT NH
WA ID MT ND MN IL MI NY MA
OR NV WY SD IA IN OH PA NJ CT RI
CA UT CO NE MO KY WV VA MD DE
AZ NM KS AR TN NC SC DC
AK OK LA MS AL GA
HI TX FL
Note: Coloring indicates whether cast vote records are sent to the central election center, based on
responses to the author as of July 25, 2019. See main text for details.
Mississippi, Vermont, and Maine are three states that partially collect CVRs, and
their practices are instructive. Mississippi collects audit logs (not as easily accessible
as a CVR is) from a “random sampling of precincts” for their post-election audit.
The Vermont Secretary of State audits the ballot images generated from six towns in
the general elections of 2014, 2016, and 2018 (Hansen 2015). On the other hand, the
Maine Elections Board started collecting CVRs in 2018 only for the offices elected
by Ranked Choice Voting.
Most states that responded to my inquiry reported that cast vote records never
leave the county. These include the states of Alabama, California, Illinois, Indiana,
Florida, Kentucky, Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New York, Oregon,
Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Wisconsin, Wyoming. In fact, some states reported oper-
ating voting machines or vote marking machines that make it impossible to store
the cast vote records all together. In Massachusetts, AutoMARK tabulators that
can take an image are programmed by the state not to do so. Connecticut uses
the Inspire Ballot Marking System, in which cannot store images. In most cases,
counties in a single state use different vendor’s voting machines, which is a technical
impediment for the county to centralize CVRs. In these states, collecting CVRs is
a county by county process.
In these states where cast vote record collection is not centralized, research on
voting behavior becomes more time intensive but by no means impossible. Gerber
and Lewis (2004) collect and re-create CVRs from Los Angeles county in 1992,
Herron and Lewis (2007) collect CVRs from 10 Florida counties in 2000, Bafumi
et al. (2012) collect CVRs from 14 South Carolina counties in the 2010 Democratic
primary, and Morse (2021) has collected CVRs from around 80 percent of Florida
counties in 2018. County and large city governments also post their CVRs, for
example the City and County of San Francisco and Dane County, Wisconsin.
One qualification to these findings is that my inquiry may have been ambiguous
to some officials because it asked about “ballot image logs and cast vote records” at
the same time and state administrators may have had different definitions of these
terms. An officer at the New Mexico Bureau of Elections, for example, initially
responded that electronic records were not centralized by the state. However, upon
further clarification, it was made clear that while scans of ballots (what some people
mean by ballot images) are not taken, counties do upload the electronic record of
each vote at the individual level to the secretary of state, and the state performs a
canvas of the votes in statewide offices. This ambiguity in terminology has several
consequences for administration, which I turn to next.
2 Preservation
If counties retain cast vote records in most states, how are these preserved? The
answer turns out to be fairly variegated, partly because of the ambiguity of state
election codes and whether CVRs qualify as “voted ballots.”
A common rule shared across multiple state legislation is that voted ballots
§ 4
should be preserved for up to 22 months, as styled on 52 USC 20701. New York’s
statute is one of many pieces of such legislation :
“Voted ballots shall be preserved for two years after such election and
The voting machines counties use can be found in .
In some states, even a single county can use different voting methods. See for example the
distribution in Minnesota at .
See .
New York Election Law, Section 3-222. Also see, for example, Iowa Code Section 50.19
the packages thereof may be opened and the contents examined only
upon order of a court or judge of competent jurisdiction, or by direction
of such committee of the senate and assembly if the ballots relate to the
election under investigation by such committee, and at the expiration of
such time, such ballots may be disposed of at the discretion of the officer
or board having charge of them.”
Adding “voted” in references to ballots makes the first-order distinction between
completed ballots and blank ballots that have been printed but not used. This
distinction clears the way for states to dispose of these blank ballots. But whether
electronic CVRs fall under voted ballots is unclear. On the one hand, CVRs are
only copies of the original ballot. If the intent of the preservation law is to prevent
the tampering of ballots, then ultimately only the original ballot is of interest. DRE
machines, however, especially those before the Help America Vote Act (HAVA) with
a paper trail, muddy the distinction. And on the other hand, if the intent of the
preservation laws also include preserving the integrity of the ballot and finality of
election results, CVRs may be effectively equivalent to voted ballots. More precisely,
CVRs under this interpretation could be considered equivalent to the original to the
extent that they can be used as evidence in court to dispute election results.
A few states have grappled with this question and reached explicit conclusions.
The California elections division interprets digital ballot images to be covered under
the 22 month preservation rule. The North Carolina statute on the preservation
of ballots refers explicitly to “[v]oted ballots and paper and electronic records of
individual voted ballots” . The Colorado statute clarifies that “Ballot includes any
digital image or electronic representation of votes cast.” And, unlike the first two
states, Colorado designates the cast vote records as open record. Individual counties,
including Miami-Dade, Florida (from the 2004 election) and also Dane, Wisconsin
(from 2016) share these records publicly.
Yet in most states, the distinction is much less clear. For example the Nevada
statute refers to “the voted ballots and records printed on paper of voted ballots,”
not referencing cast vote records stored digitally on memory drives. In fact, this
matter of interpretation of voted ballots was the subject of discussion in a recent
Personal communication with Assistant Chief of Election Division. Also see California Elections
Code sections 17, 17301-17306, especially 17303 (b)(2) and 17304 (b)(2).
7 §
North Carolina General Statutes 163A - 1105(e).
See Nevada Revised Statues 293.391, subsection 5.
case brought to New York state’s court of last resort (see next section on Kos-
mider v. Whitney for details). And, it appeared that some state officials in my
e-mail correspondence were not immediately clear on whether CVRs were subject
to preservation rules. An expert on RLAs and frequent consultant, also observes
from her experience that unless a state is conducting or considering conducting a
RLA, officials tend to be unfamiliar with what a CVR actually is (Jennifer Morrell,
personal communication).
3 Confidentiality
The variation interpretations of CVRs ultimately affect how confidential they are for
research. The main reason jurisdictions provide when insulating CVRs from public
records requests often come down on the notion that CVRs can be de-anonymized.
Redaction policies are a promising middle-ground that can allow transparency while
guaranteeing anonymity.
On June 13, 2019, the New York Court of Appeals (the highest court in the
state) in Kosmider v. Whitney (N.Y. 2019) ruled in a 4-3 decision that the county
Essex was justified in denying a Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) request to turn
over CVRs from a 2015 election. In so doing, it reversed the decisions of two lower
courts which had originally ruled that the preservation statute did not preclude the
FOIL of CVRs.
Although the ruling largely revolved around the interpretation of the preser-
vation statute as discussed in the previous section, a separate consideration that
animated the oral arguments was the confidentiality of voter’s identity. The rele-
vant parts of the argument are re-produced in the Appendix. Essex county argued
that in some rare cases, the identity of an individual CVR could be revealed in small
electoral districts, giving an example of a handful of voters voting in a primary in a
small electoral district that could then be cross-referenced in the voter file. More-
over, if this voter turned out pivotal in a contest, disclosures may lead the public to
litigate election results long after the election was certified.
Rulings in other state courts are more explicit in their concerns for confiden-
tiality. In 2017, a superior court judge in Pima County, Arizona ruled that ballot
images to be treated the same as physical ballots, a case that led the state legisla-
tures to write in the protection of electronic images into law. In contrast, a district
court in Jefferson County, Colorado found earlier that, unlike the New York deci-
sion, electronic records were subject to Colorado’s Open Request Laws. In sum,
confidentiality concerns affect whether states make CVRs available for researchers.
The Risk-Limiting Audit Representative Group in Colorado has addressed this
question in their recent report (McCarthy et al. 2018). Unlike some litigation, the
group attempted to achieve transparency of the voting tabulation without compro-
mising confidentiality. The report notes that in Colorado there also exist small
pockets of voters who are in rare combinations of electoral districts that would, due
to their rarity, would expose their CVRs to be de-anonymized. The group recom-
mended redaction of the down ballot offices that are at risk of deanonymization.
Because the records considered open record, the local clerk can redact portions of
the CVR that would compromise voter anonymity.
4 The Future of Cast Vote Records
The survey of election administration and controversies surrounding open records
laws are indicative of how jurisdictions are only beginning to reach resolutions on
how to deal with cast vote records. In addition to their contribution to academic
research, CVRs hold large potential to improve the transparency of elections and
are integral to the discussion about post-election audits. That said, the within-
and across-state variation in equipment and administration complicate a systematic
assessment of the situation.
Amidst such confusion, the ongoing movement to provide a common data format
for election data becomes especially important. Since the early 2000s, the National
Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) has devised a set of unifying formats
and languages to refer to and organize all election data that goes in and out of the
election management system. This group has recently published a report on these
standards, and is encouraging states and vendors to make their systems compatible
See “Pima County Judge Rules In Favor Of Voter Privacy, Ballot Images Same As Ballots”,
Arizona Daily Independent, May 31, 2017. . Senate Bill 1094 in the 2017
session was passed to add a section, 16-625, titled “Relating to Tally and Returns” to read: “The
officer in charge of elections shall ensure that electronic data from and electronic or digital images
of ballots are protected from physical and electronic access, including unauthorized copying or
transfer, and that all security measures are at least as protective as those prescribed for paper
ballots.”
Case brought by Marilyn Marks, Case No. 2011-CV-3576, (Jefferson Cnty. Dist. Ct.).
to this language (National Institute of Standards and Technology 2020; Dziurlaj
2020). A common data format allows, for example, voting tabulators from different
vendors to contribute CVRs to a statewide database in a common publicly available
standard. This would reduce the transaction costs for states who want to conduct
more auditing but whose counties currently use multiple machines. I would argue
that the responsible collection and scalable organization of available cast vote records
(through these common data formats, for example) are important considerations for
researchers using cast vote records.