From social contingency to verbal reference: a constructivist hypothesis
Elena Luchkina1
Fei Xu2
1Northwestern University
2University of California, Berkeley
Word count (text): 12081
Abstract
In the first year of life, infants’ word learning is slow, laborious, and requires repeated
exposure to word-referent co-occurrences. In contrast, by 14-18 months, infants learn words
from just a few labeling events, use joint attention and eye-gaze to decipher word meaning, and
begin to use speech to communicate about absent things. We propose that this remarkable
advancement in word learning results from attaining a referential understanding of words – that
words are linked to mental representations and used intentionally to communicate about real-
world entities. We suggest that verbal reference is supported by co-developing conceptual,
social, representational, and statistical learning capacities. We also propose that infants’
recognition of this tri-directional link between words, referents, and mental representations is
enabled by their experience participating in and observing socially contingent interactions.
Understanding verbal reference signals a qualitative shift in infants’ word learning. This shift
enables infants to bootstrap word meanings from syntax and semantics, learn novel words and
facts from non-ostensive communication, and make inferences about speakers’ epistemic
competence based on their language production. In this paper, we review empirical findings
across multiple facets of infant cognition and propose a novel developmental theory of verbal
reference. Finally, we suggest new directions of empirical research that may provide stronger
and more direct evidence for our theory and contribute to our understanding of the development
of verbal reference and language-mediated learning in infancy and beyond.
Key words: verbal reference, social contingency, constructivist theory of development
Human language permits us to call to mind objects, events, and ideas that we cannot
witness directly (Deacon, 1997). We learn about people we have never met, about time that
hasn’t passed (“tomorrow”), and about concepts as abstract as weak subatomic force. We
propose that this communicative power of words is enabled by verbal reference – a link between
words, real-world phenomena, and their mental representations that enables words to refer to
those phenomena even when they are perceptually unavailable. How do infants establish this tri-
directional link and begin to engage in language-mediated learning by extracting information
encoded in language to establish, retrieve, and modify mental representations of absent or
abstract referents?
With the rapid accumulation of empirical evidence on infants’ vocabulary development
in the recent decades (Bloom, 2002; Carey, 2010; Frank et al., 2009; Hidaka & Smith, 2010;
Markman, 1989; Perszyk & Waxman, 2018; Swingley, 2010; Waxman & Lidz, 2007; Yurovsky,
2018), when and how young children understand the referential nature of words has become an
apple of discord in language acquisition (Golinkoff et al., 2000; Sloutsky, 2009; Waxman &
Gelman, 2009). The proponents of perception-driven early word learning theories tend to explain
the emergence of verbal reference through domain-general cognitive mechanisms, such as
associative learning and cross-situational statistics (e.g., Robinson et al., 2005; Samuelson &
Smith, 1999; Smith & Yu, 2013; see Smith et al., 2014 for a review). In contrast, some have
argued that verbal reference may be inherent in human communication, a conceptual primitive
hard-wired in infants’ minds, present in preverbal communication in infancy, and pertaining to
words from the outset of verbal communication (e.g., Burge, 2010; Csibra, 2003, 2010;
Macnamara, 1982). Still others have proposed that the interplay between conceptual knowledge,
social cognition, and language enables the development of verbal reference in infancy, in the
spirit of constructivist theories of cognitive development (Karmiloff-Smith, 1992; Piaget, 1954;
Tomasello, 2010; Waxman, 2003; Xu, 2019).
To address this divergence of views, we integrate insight from multiple accounts of word
learning, draw on findings across several lines of empirical research on cognitive and language
development, and propose a novel constructivist theory of the development of verbal reference in
the first two years of life. We aim to better understand the processes governing this development
by considering its precursor capacities (see Appendix 1) and the mechanisms facilitating its
emergence.
Following L. Bloom (1993), we define verbal reference as a property of words (or other
signals) that are linked to mental representations and are used intentionally by people to
to establish, retrieve, and modify mental representations based on language alone. An important
property of this link is referential specificity, which entails that words do more than just indexing
parts of a scene, like objects, events, or locations (“there is something in this location”). Instead,
they allow us to communicate about specific aspects, states, or changes of state of those entities
(“the car is damaged”, “the car is red”, “there is a Prius in the garage”). This property
distinguishes verbal reference from its non-verbal precursors, like pointing or gaze direction. In
this article we will make the following three claims and discuss the supporting empirical
evidence to date.
1 Abbott (2010) points out a distinction between pragmatic reference and semantic reference. In the case of
pragmatic reference, words cannot refer on their own, they are tools used for speakers to communicate about
something (see Clark & Bangerter, 2004; Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; see also Michaelson & Reimer, 2019, for. a
discussion of the "intentionalist" model). Semantic reference, which, as Abbot remarks, has arisen within formal
logic, relates expressions to things out in the world (e.g., Wittgenstein, 2017). In this latter sense, any expression
reliably linked to a phenomenon or a class of phenomena can be considered referential, so long as it signifies those
phenomena. Our definition emphasizes the pragmatic aspect of reference, while embracing the semantic aspect as
well, i.e., words are linked both to representations and to things in the world.
We propose that (1) the precursor capacities of verbal reference include the ability to
represent absent entities and the understanding that those entities can be communicated about
and that words are the means of such communication. At the same time, infants employ powerful
statistical learning mechanisms that segment speech into words, track their co-occurrences with
objects or events, conduct cross-situational comparisons, and propose and revise word-referent
links as more distributional information becomes available. These capacities must operate in
concert to get word learning off the ground.
We also propose that (2) infants’ experience with socially contingent communicative
exchange enables them to employ these precursor capacities and attain a referential
understanding of words. As infants accumulate observations of people interacting in a contingent
manner via language and as they accumulate first-hand experiences participating in such
interactions (e.g., by vocalizing and being responded to with actions accompanied by language),
they infer that language is the means of such communication and recognize the referential status
of words. Thus, attaining a referential understanding of words is a gradual process scaffolded by
a combination of precursor capacities and experience with socially contingent interactions.
Finally, we propose that (3) attaining a referential understanding of words leads to a
qualitative shift in word learning. Understanding the referential nature of words enables infants
to engage in language-mediated learning, such as learning new word meanings and novel facts
from language alone (directed to them or overheard), integrating multiple cues to meaning from
syntax, semantics, and pragmatics, and making inferences about speakers’ epistemic competence
from their language use.
I. Development of the referential understanding of words in infancy
We begin by summarizing the findings in the literature on the development of verbal
reference from the last two decades and tracing its trajectory over the first two years of life.
Infants’ comprehension of verbal reference has been researched using multiple methods, such as
pitting referential cues (e.g., eye gaze) in a labeling situation against visual salience of an object
(Pruden et al., 2006) or against infants’ intrinsic preference for an object (Baldwin, 1993b).
However, when the referent object is present at the time its label is introduced, there is always
the possibility that infants’ success in learning the label is driven by perceptual association.
We, therefore, focus here on studies that leveraged infants’ ability to comprehend speech
about absent objects2. In such studies, infants either first observe a labeling event (usually a
count noun that refers to an object), after which the referent is hidden, and an experimenter
subsequently enquires about the absent object (“How about the wug? Where is the wug?”), or
they first hear utterances containing object labels (“I have a bike”) and are subsequently
presented with objects corresponding to those labels and distracter objects, displayed in silence.
Infants’ looking direction (suggesting their search for the object in a particular location) and
pointing are typically measured to evaluate their comprehension of the target words. If infants
can map a label to its referent, even if it is perceptually unavailable, it constitutes strong evidence
that they understand that words refer.
Developmental timeline of absent verbal reference
2 For brevity, we refer to both objects that have been recently seen but hidden and objects that exist but have not
been displayed before infants’ word comprehension is probed as “absent”. Importantly, some objects can be absent
and not retrievable (e.g., ones that ceased to exist or are imaginary) or do not have stable physical manifestations
(‘democracy’). The latter kind of permanently absent word referents is beyond the scope of our discussion (but see
Bergelson & Swingley, 2013, for a discussion on infants' acquisition of abstract words).
By 12 months, infants show the first signs of understanding “anchored” absent verbal
reference – reference to recently removed objects primed by perceptually available entities
associated with it (“anchors”), such as their former locations (Gallerani et al., 2009; Ganea,
2005; Osina et al., 2013, 2014). In Osina et al. (2013), for example, infants are first presented
with a toy dog, which is subsequently placed inside an ottoman, so that infants can no longer see
the toy. After a delay, during which the experimenter sang “Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star” and
pointed to decals on the ceiling, the experimenter then asked infants about the hidden toy, first in
a hint-like manner (“What about the dog? Have you seen the dog?”) and then directly (“Where is
the dog? Could you find the dog?”). After being prompted 3-5 times, infants looked, or pointed
to, or approached the ottoman, suggesting that they understood reference to the hidden object.
At 14 months, infants interpret verbal requests for hidden objects using social
information, such as individuals’ history of interacting with an object (e.g., which of the two
balls the experimenter played with; Saylor & Ganea, 2007). At this age infants track properties
of recently removed objects, such as their color or former location, whose labels are mentioned
in utterances (Saylor, 2004) and produce communicative behaviors towards these anchors (e.g.,
pointing to the panel that occludes the absent referent, or searching for an absent person; Ganea
& Saylor, 2013; Saylor & Baldwin, 2004). Around 14 months infants also begin to comprehend
reference to objects hidden from view without “anchoring”, albeit provided with visual exposure
to those objects before they are removed from view (Hendrickson & Sundara, 2017).
Infants begin to retrieve mental representations of objects based on language input alone,
without pre-exposure to those objects within the experiment by 16 months. For example,
Luchkina et al. (2020) showed that 16- but not 13-month-olds look more to familiar objects
previously mentioned in speech unaccompanied by any images when those images become
available. Sixteen-month-olds also use language to update their representations of the locations
By 18-22 months, infants not only retrieve detailed mental representations of familiar
objects based on language alone, but can form representations3 of novel word-referent mappings
even if those referents are perceptually unavailable (Baldwin, 1993a; Ferguson et al., 2014).
Baldwin (1993a), for example, showed that 19-month-olds (but not 15-month-olds) successfully
learn labels for novel objects that are first demonstrated but subsequently removed from infants’
view and labeled while being sealed in an opaque container (e.g., the experimenter looks into the
container and says, “Look, a fep!”). At this age, infants also update mental representations of
states of the absent objects that are being referred to in speech (“Lucy is wet now!”; see Ganea et
al., 2007; Galazka & Ganea, 2014).
Notably, younger infants may have a nascent ability to form a representation of a
perceptually unavailable object based on language input. Xu et al. (2005), for example, showed
that 12-month-olds search longer in an opaque box after retrieving one object, if they previously
saw an experimenter peek into the box and utter two distinct labels than if the experimenter
uttered the same label twice. This finding suggests that these infants appreciate the link between
the number of words and the number of referents (a rudimentary form of mutual exclusivity;
Markman, 1989; see also Pomiechowska et al., 2021). However, it is not until several months
later that infants show the signs of moving beyond this link and establish a specific
representation of a previously unseen object based on language input alone.
3 It is unclear, however, how lasting these representations are outside of the context of the experiment (see Horst &
Samuelson, 2008). To elucidate this matter, an investigation involving a delay (or a longitudinal investigation) is
necessary.
Taken together, this evidence suggests that the ability to extract information encoded in
language to establish, retrieve and update mental representations based on language develops
between 12 and 18 months. This ability allows infants to comprehend speech about absent things
without “anchors” and ultimately engage in language-mediated learning. What are the learning
mechanisms that drive this development?
Existing developmental accounts of verbal reference
From the perception-driven bottom-up view, the explanation lies in the accumulation of
linguistic data via domain-general associative learning mechanisms. The second year of life is
marked by substantial advances in syntactic learning and a rapidly growing cache of associative
information about word-referent co-occurrences (see Smith et al., 2014, for a review). With this
growing body of linguistic data, young learners become better positioned to take advantage of
their semantic and syntactic knowledge to make inferences about the meanings of words that are
uttered in the absence of any referents (e.g., Sloutsky, 2009). These capacities, however, are
insufficient to form or modify mental representations on the basis of language alone: without
having previously experienced a referent of a novel word, one cannot form a new perceptual
association or use that word to access the representation of its referent.
Alternatively, some have argued that reference is a primitive inherent in our conceptual
and linguistic system (e.g., Burge, 2010; Csibra, 2003, 2010; Macnamara, 1982). Six-month-old
infants, for example, exhibit a nascent understanding of the referential nature of gaze by
following an actor’s gaze toward a present object if cues signaling communicative intent – eye
contact or infant-directed speech – were present (Hernik & Broesch, 2019; Senju & Csibra,
2008). By 12 months, infants reliably recognize the referential nature of gaze to a hidden object
and are surprised if the location indicated by an actor’s gaze is revealed to be empty (Csibra &
Volein, 2008). At 12 months infants also reliably comprehend and produce pointing gestures to
refer to not only present and but also absent entities. They begin to point at an object’s empty
location to request that object from an adult or to draw the adult’s attention to it (Behne et al.,
2012; Bohn et al., 2018; Gräfenhain et al., 2009; Liszkowski et al., 2009).
This comprehension of non-verbal reference may serve as a steppingstone to
understanding verbal reference to absent entities. However, non-verbal reference is limited in
two significant ways. First, non-verbal reference, such as pointing or gaze direction, lacks
referential specificity – a fundamental feature of verbal reference that enables us to communicate
about various aspects of objects or events4. For example, pointing can direct attention (e.g., there
is something there; or even “there is a car” if a car had been seen previously), but only words can
refer to specific aspects and properties of an object and communicative about it with precision
(e.g., “there is a car, not a cup”; “the red car” if there are more than one car; “the car is broken”,
etc.). Referential specificity entails that infants not only realize that words can index non-present
entities, but discover that different kinds of words (e.g., nouns, adjectives, verbs) take on
different kinds of meaning, even if these words reference the same object. Further, while
pointing or gaze can reference objects, it is significantly harder to use these referential tools for
events or changes of state. For example, pointing to one’s eye is unlikely to communicate that
one is seeing; pointing to the direction of the wind is unlikely to communicate that it became
windy. Second and relatedly, only verbal reference enables one to create, maintain, and update
detailed mental representations based on language alone, thereby enabling effective language-
4 Great apes, similar to human 12-month-olds, request absent entities (e.g., treats) by pointing to their former
locations (e.g., Bohn et al., 2015). However, they do not seem to move beyond indexical reference and develop
referentially specific links between words (or other symbols) and their present and absent referents. Even great apes
trained to use sign language to request objects do not respond to messages about states or locations of those objects
and appear to be using signs by pairing them with perceptual categories of the corresponding objects (Savage-
Rumbaugh et al., 1993), suggesting that referential specificity does not characterize apes’ verbal communication.
mediated learning and communication. Verbal reference, but not non-verbal referential actions,
allows one to learn about objects, events, or ideas that one has not experienced directly or that do
not have stable perceptual forms and thus cannot be pointed to or looked at (e.g., atoms, viruses,
yesterday, tomorrow, or the 23rd century).
New proposal: a constructivist account of verbal reference development
In our view, infants’ vocabulary in the first year of life and early, nonverbal, reference are
marked by the lack of (or fragile and unstructured) connection between words and reference5.
That is, 6- to 12-month-old infants possess some word knowledge – likely acquired via
associative mechanisms – and possess an understanding that reference is possible, but they have
not yet made the connection between the two. Indeed, although 9- to 12-month-olds show some
understanding of non-verbal reference, their word knowledge appears to be chiefly driven by
perceptual salience and associative mechanisms (e.g., Hollich et al., 2000; Pruden et al., 2006).
For example, Pruden et al. (2006) found that 10-month-olds learn novel words by relying on the
perceptual salience of an object instead of social cues provided by a speaker6.
By 12-14 months, infants begin to treat concurrently present words and deictic gestures
alike, realizing that both can index hidden objects (Gliga & Csibra, 2009; see also Graham &
Kilbreath, 2007). They also use gesture to disambiguate between possible referents of a novel
5An electrophysiological investigation found that even 9-month-olds exhibit mismatch negativity if they hear a word
(e.g., a “duck”) in the absence of an object and then see an object with a different name (e.g., a cookie; Parise &
Csibra, 2012), suggesting a possibility that hearing words activates visual representations of objects. This finding
may reflect 9-month-olds’ referential understanding of words, or alternatively demonstrate a stable link between the
word ‘duck’ and a mental picture of a duck. However, because this evidence is limited, future research is needed to
further test these possibilities.
6 Bergelson and Swingley (2012) showed that 6- to 9-month-olds can recognize a handful of concrete object
referents of highly familiar nouns (e.g., “banana”; see also Jusczyk & Aslin, 1995; Mandel et al., 1995). Yet, infants
of the same age fail to recognize the referents of common verbs (e.g., kiss, drink; Bergelson & Swingley, 2015).
This is likely because verbs take on arguments (events often also contain multiple objects; see Gentner, 2006),
which means that perceptual salience is a poor cue to meaning in the case of verbs. In contrast, by 12-14 months,
when infants’ word knowledge is increasingly driven by conceptual representations (Pomiechowska & Gliga, 2019;
Waxman & Leddon, 2011; Yin & Csibra, 2015), their verb comprehension also becomes more robust.
word (Pomiechowska & Csibra, 2020; c.f. Lucca & Wilbourn, 2018). Furthermore, infants begin
to establish links between different types of words and different types of meaning during this
developmental window, e.g., count nouns map onto object categories, adjectives map onto
properties or attributes, and verbs map onto actions or events (see Perszyk & Waxman, 2018, for
a review). This signals the beginning of referential specificity. Thus, by the beginning of the
second year, infants start to realize that words refer, and this realization qualitatively changes
their word learning strategies, enabling referentially specific use of words to communicate about
both present and absent entities.
Our key question remains: what mechanisms underly this realization and enable the
development of verbal reference? As Hollich et al. (2000, p. 5) put it: “The development of
reference is a mystery”. We propose that first, the co-development of conceptual, social,
representational, and statistical learning precursor capacities is necessary to enable the
emergence of verbal reference, and reference to perceptually unavailable objects or events in
particular, and second, an understanding of socially contingent interactions drives the
the respective contributions of these precursor capacities and the effects of their concurrent
development in the next section (for a more concise discussion, see Luchkina & Waxman, under
review) before turning our attention to discussing the key role of social contingency.
II. Development of precursor capacities
Representing absent entities
The ability to store representations of objects or events and to access those
representations through their names entails that infants form representations of real-world
phenomena, link them with words, and possess sufficient memory capacity to store such links. In
some cases verbal reference can be built on representations of concrete objects or events (e.g.,
persons, their manner of moving or speaking). However, to enable reference to previously
unencountered instances that belong to the same object or event categories, these representations
need to abstract away from concrete instances. Moreover, such abstraction allows for a more
efficient use of the learner’s memory capacity: by focusing on category-defining features, infants
can use fewer resources to store information about objects or events they encounter and extend
relevant properties to those entities by recognizing their category membership. Evidence from
the developmental literature suggests that infants begin to form abstract representations from an
early age.
Infants begin to form visual categories based on perceptual features by about 3-4 months
of age. For example, 3- to 4-month-olds readily categorize dot patterns and create prototypes by
abstracting away from concrete exemplars (Bomba & Siqueland, 1983; Quinn, 1986). At this age
infants also categorize and distinguish pictures of different animal kinds (e.g., Eimas & Quinn,
1994; Quinn et al., 1993). By 9 months, infants form both perceptual and conceptual categories
based on visual features (e.g., they can generalize category information from static images to
dynamic point-light displays; see Arterberry & Bornstein, 2002). In addition to categorizing
visual stimuli, 3- to 4-month-olds create auditory categories, such as the time of voice onset in
consonant-vowel syllables (Eimas et al., 1971). By 6 months, they also categorize speech sounds
(Kuhl, 1979, 1980, 1983) and intonation patterns (Morse, 1972). Between 6 and 12 months,
infants fine-tune their speech sound categories and hone in on the relevant categories for their
native language (Werker & Tees, 1984; Werker, 2018).
This parallel development of visual and auditory categorization enables infants to create
and recognize word-object links and use them to retrieve object representations. At 6 months,
infants preferentially look to familiar object images upon hearing their names (e.g., looking to an
image of a banana when hearing “banana” vs. an image of a sock; Bergelson & Swingley, 2012;
see also Tincoff & Jusczyk, 1999). By 9 months, they begin to treat words as “invitations” to
create visual categories: upon observing several instances of a novel category (e.g., dinosaurs)
consistently paired with the same word (e.g., “blicket”), infants establish a corresponding
category and subsequently recognize its novel instances7 (e.g., Balaban & Waxman, 1997). At
this age, words also guide infants’ flexible category formation: the number of labels influences
the number of discrete categories infants create along a continuum of object stimuli (e.g.,
Althaus & Westermann, 2016; Havy & Waxman, 2016). Further, research on infants’ object
individuation indicates that by 9 months, infants also rely on words to make judgments about
internal properties of object kinds (Dewar & Xu, 2007, 2009) and to keep track of individual
objects that have been recently displaced (Xu, 2002). At least by 12 months, infants not only
expect words to be linked with categories, but also use nonverbal category knowledge to extend
the meanings of newly learned words (Pomiechowska & Gliga, 2019; see also Graham et al.,
2004). This bidirectional link between words and categories positions infants well to begin
accessing mental representations of objects or events when hearing their names.
Finally, infants need accessible and sufficiently durable memory to enable effective
access to representations and thus support the development of verbal reference. Although the
7 Some evidence suggests that this effect might be present as early as 3-4 months of age (e.g., Ferry et al., 2010).
This evidence, however, should be taken with caution, as this facilitative effects appears to be sensitive to the
acoustic properties of the stimuli (Lau et al., under review) and not necessarily represent word-referent links. For
example 3- and 4-month-olds show a categorization effect driven by lemur vocalizations and English utterances, but
not Cantonese utterances or birdsongs (see Woodruff Carr et al., 2021).
earliest evidence of infants’ accessing their declarative (vs. procedural) memory has been
reported in 3.5- to 4-month-olds (see Mandler, 1988, for a reivew), this memory is short-lived (3
– 4 min; see Baillargeon et al., 1989; Baillargeon & Graber, 1988; Luo et al., 2003) and depends
on perceptual availability of features or events that co-occurred with the represented object or
event. By 6 months, however, infants can retain memory of an event for at least 24 hours,
represent the existence and location of recently hidden objects (Baillargeon, 1986), and imitate
demonstrated actions upon encountering the object used in the demonstration (Hayne et al.,
2000). By 9-10 months, infants can remember such sequences of events over the span of months
(Bauer, 2002; Bauer et al., 2000; Carver et al., 2000; Mandler & McDonough, 1995).
Thus, investigations of infants’ categorization and memory development suggest that at
least by 9 months, infants are capable of forming sufficiently abstract representations of objects
or events, store them over extended periods of time, and access them by hearing words linked to
those representations. Albeit crucial for the development of verbal reference, however, these
capacities do not guarantee reference. A link between a representation and a corresponding word
does not automatically confer the understanding that the word encodes that representation for
communication purposes. How and when do infants gain such an understanding?
Using speech to communicate about absent entities
Infants’ ability to understand that speech can communicate about perceptually
unavailable entities emerges around 6 months and is reliably present by the first birthday
(Cheung et al., 2012; Martin et al., 2012; Vouloumanos, 2018; Vouloumanos et al., 2012, 2014).
Vouloumanos et al. (2012), for example, showed that 6-month-olds expect speech to
communicate unobservable intentions. Infants first observed an actor (A1) who looked at two
objects and indicated her preference for one of the objects by grasping it. Subsequently, A1 no
longer had access to the objects and turned to another actor (A2), who had access to the objects
but had not seen A1’s preference demonstration, uttering a nonsensical word. Infants looked
significantly longer when A2 handed A1 the object she did not prefer, suggesting that they
understood that A1’s utterance must have transferred information about her preference to A2. By
12 months, infants can link their inferences about the intended outcome of an attempted but
failed action (by A1; e.g., attempting to reach for an object) with the communicative function of
speech. They expect A2 to achieve A1’s intended outcome upon hearing speech. Crucially, such
an understanding requires that infants (1) appreciate others’ beliefs and intentions and (2)
recognize that language can be used to communicate about such beliefs and intentions.
Consistent with Vouloumanos et al.’s (2012) results, research on infants’ understanding
of intentions suggests that by 6 months they attribute goal-directedness to others’ actions (e.g.,
Woodward, 1998), appreciate the causal role of intentions in such actions (Southgate & Vernetti,
2014), and recognize the role of access to information in interpreting those actions (e.g., Luo &
Johnson, 2009). At 7 months, infants keep track of others’ beliefs and show surprisal, as they
would expect others to show, when an outcome of an occlusion event is inconsistent with others’
beliefs (Kovacs et al., 2010). By 10-15 months, they recognize others’ false beliefs and how
those beliefs guide actions (Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005; Luo, 2011; see Heyes, 2014, for a
review).
Recall that around their first birthdays, in addition to recognizing that others have beliefs
and intentions, infants begin to recognize that these beliefs or intentions can be about absent
objects, which can be referred to, at least in an indexical way. Combined with the advances in
infants’ ability to form abstract representations and access them via associated words, the
understanding that speech can communicate about perceptually unavailable entities prepares
them to make the leap towards verbal reference. Indeed, the first signs of understanding
reference to absent objects appear around 12-14 months (see section I). By 14 months, infants
reliably use verbal cues to retrieve memories of absent objects (Ganea, 2005; Moore & Meltzoff,
2004; Osina et al., 2013, 2014) and past events (Bauer et al., 2000).
Proposing and revising links between words and their meanings
Finally, effective command of verbal reference entails that infants not only recognize that
reference to absent or abstract entities via words is possible in principle, but are able to propose,
or hypothesize, and revise the meanings of words that refer to those entities. To succeed on this
task, infants need to resolve at least two computational problems. First, they need to extract
structure from the language input: because most of the time, infants hear continuous streams of
speech, they need to determine where word boundaries are and what governs word-word co-
occurrences. Second, infants need to resolve instances of referential ambiguity when learning
novel word meanings. Does a word refer to an object, its parts, its properties, or its super-
ordinate category? In order to learn correct word meanings, infants need to consider different
mapping hypotheses and determine the most likely word-referent mappings.
The first problem is addressed by infants’ capacity to discover structure in language input
and segment it based on statistical regularities. This capacity enables 8-month-olds (Aslin et al.,
1998; Jusczyk & Hohne, 1997; Saffran et al., 1996; see Saffran, 2020, for a review on word
segmentation), and even 6-month-olds (Shukla et al., 2011), to extract words from a continuous
stream of speech and visual input (Kirkham, Slemmer, & Johnson, 2002). At this age, infants can
generalize their acoustic representations of words to novel speakers and can also recognize
familiar words, even when they were mispronounced (Bergelson & Swingley, 2018;
interestingly, 11-14-month-olds perform poorly with mispronounced words, suggesting a shift in
infants' understanding of linguistically relevant sources of variation). At least by 7 months,
infants are able to recruit their statistical learning capacity to distill abstract rules from auditory
(Ferguson & Lew-Williams, 2016) and visual input (e.g., Ferguson et al., 2018; Rabagliati et al.,
2012, 2019). By 9-10 months, infants integrate distributional cues both within and between
words and with a combination of prosodic and phonotactic cues to determine the location of
word boundaries (Mattys et al., 1999; see Jusczyk, 1999, for a review). By 12 months, infants
use distributional cues not only to determine word boundaries, but also to infer the rules of
grammar (Gomez & Gerken, 1999; Morgan & Demuth, 1996). In this way, infants can identify
unfamiliar words in a stream of speech and register their pattern of occurrence within utterances.
The second problem may be addressed by cross-situational comparison. By 14 months,
infants become competent statistical learners and use a combination for co-occurrence statistics
and cross-situational comparison to strip away noise in labeling data and learn correct word-
referent associations (Smith et al., 2014; Smith & Yu, 2008). In considering their hypotheses
about the meanings of novel words, infants may rely on a variety of strategies (Yurovsky &
Frank, 2015). Some accounts claim that infants simultaneously acquire information about
multiple candidate referents for the same word (e.g., McMurray et al., 2012; Yu & Smith, 2007;
Yurovsky et al., 2014). Others have argued that word learners maintain a single hypothesis about
the referent of any given word (e.g., Medina et al., 2011; Trueswell et al., 2013; these accounts
however mainly draw on evidence from adults and preschoolers).
In addition, infants need to recognize that when different words regularly co-occur with
the same object, they may pick out different aspects of that object. For example, when someone
mentions a neighbor’s car, they can be talking about its category membership (“car”), its color
(“red”), or its speed (“fast”). By leveraging their ability to register commonalities and differences
among the different situations and utterances in which they encounter a given word, infants may
infer which aspect of an object or an event is the intended referent of that word. Indeed, both
infants and adults rely, at least in part, on cross-situational statistics to establish mappings
between syntactic categories (e.g., nouns, verbs) and kinds of meaning (e.g., objects, actions)
(Monaghan & Mattock, 2009; Rebuschat et al., 2021). This capacity for cross-situational
comparison, combined with the capacity to extract syntactic rules from word co-occurrence
patterns, enables 14-month-olds to map nouns to kinds and adjectives to kind properties (e.g.,
Booth & Waxman, 2009). Infants’ appropriate extensions of novel adjectives to object
properties, and not kinds, illustrate that they recognize that a given entity can be described by
different words depending on communicative intention and context.
Taken together, the reviewed evidence illustrates that by the time the first signs of verbal
reference are observed, infants (1) possess representational capacities to maintain memories of
absent entities and retrieve them upon hearing their names, (2) appreciate others’ mental states
and recognize the communicative function of speech, and (3) are equipped with powerful
statistical learning mechanisms – distributional analysis and cross-situational comparison – that
enable them to detect word boundaries, propose a set of possible word-referent mappings, and
revise their hypotheses about those mappings as they accumulate more linguistic data. A
question that remains open is what brings these precursor capacities together to enable verbal
reference.
III. The role of social contingency in recognizing that words refer
As our review suggests, most precursor capacities of verbal reference are in place
between 6-12 months of age. Yet infants’ early word learning is slow and laborious (Carey,
1978; Fenson et al., 1994; Hollich, Hirsh-Pasek, et al., 2000; Nelson, 1973; Woodward, 2000)
and there has been little evidence of referential understanding of words before age 1 (e.g., Pruden
et al., 2006). In contrast, at 12-18 months, infants demonstrate substantial advances in their rate
of word learning (Goldfield & Reznick, 1990; Nazzi & Bertoncini, 2003; Werker et al., 1998;
but see Ganger & Brent, 2004 for an alternative view), begin integrating multiple cues to
meaning (Beier & Carey, 2014; Pruden et al., 2006), and comprehend reference to absent
entities. What changes in infants’ word learning in this developmental window and what drives
this qualitative shift (see Bergelson & Swingley, 2013, for a discussion)? We propose that infants
gain insight into the words’ referential nature and realize the tri-directional link between words,
the power of words to trigger behaviors and other changes in their surroundings.
This key phenomenon has been described as socially contingent responsivity – a property
of human interactions, in which an action or an utterance of one interlocutor is contingent8 on
actions or utterances of the other (Csibra, 2010). We will refer to this construct as “social
contingency”, for brevity. As infants experience and accumulate observations of language-
mediated socially contingent interactions, they learn that others’ speech and their own
vocalizations and behaviors can elicit targeted responses from other people. Social contingency
plays a critical role in establishing the tri-directional link: (i) By observing specific words (or
vocalizations, if their own) used in socially contingent interactions resulting in fulfilling specific
needs (e.g., getting food or a toy), infants realize that words are connected to real-world entities
in a principled, lawful way. (ii) By observing others produce specific intentional behaviors in
8 While contingency does not guarantee causality, it is likely that contingent behaviors are perceived as causal. From
3 months, infants appreciate causal relations between events (White, 1988) and may understand causal effects of
human actions (Leslie, 1982).
response to specific words uttered in socially contingent interactions, infants realize that words
are also linked to mental states and mental representations in a principled, lawful way. (iii)
Finally, by observing others’ intentional behaviors that are not ostensibly motivated by anything
in their environment other than speech (e.g., wanting a cup of tea and asking for it) resulting in
changes in that environment (e.g., an interlocutor brings a tea), infants may infer that mental
representations are linked to representations of real-world entities, and words may be used to
elicit specific mental representations in others that lead to corresponding changes in the world.
Thus, social contingency may serve as the ‘glue’ that enables an understanding of verbal
reference that includes all three key components: words, mental representations, and the real
world. Moreover, infants’ sensitivity to social contingency undergoes significant development
throughout the first year (see below). This development, along with the development of the
precursor capacities of verbal reference, may explain why the first signs of infants’
comprehension of verbal reference to absent entities are observed by 12-14 months of age.
Notably, this developmental window is marked by a non-linear9 qualitative shift in infants’ word
comprehension (Bergelson, 2020). Infant’s word comprehension becomes substantially more
robust, as measured by the proportion of looking to the target object in looking-while-listening
procedures (Fernald et al., 2008). Bergelson shows that this shift is not explained by changes in
infants’ word input and instead must be driven by changes in infants’ ability to take advantage of
their word input. Our proposal is consistent with this argument and offers a mechanism that
enables infants to take better advantage of word input.
9 Some have proposed that this shift, described geometrically as an inflection point on the graph of infants’ receptive
vocabulary as a function of their age, is best modelled by a logistic function (e.g., Ganger & Brent, 2004).
If our hypotheses are correct and the shift towards appreciating the referential nature of
words is indeed driven by social contingency, then several assertions must be supported by
empirical evidence in developmental research. First, infants must attend to social contingency
and show a preference to observe and participate in socially contingent interactions. Second, we
should be able to show that increased exposure to socially contingent interactions predicts the
quality of infants’ language development, and word learning in particular. And third, infants’
processing and perception of language should be enhanced by social contingency.
Infants’ sensitivity to social contingency
Investigations of parent-child interactions suggest that infants are indeed sensitive to
social contingency and that parents’ responsiveness to infants’ vocalizations shapes infants’
expectations about the power of those vocalizations to trigger others’ behaviors. Among the first
socially contingent interactions experienced by an infant is breast feeding, which is sometimes
described as a proto-conversation between an infant and a mother (see Csibra, 2010). As an
infant ceases to suck, a mother encourages sucking by jiggling him or her. The infant then
resumes sucking after jiggling stops (Kaye, 1977). Soon after, at 3-5 months, when infants begin
to engage in contingent face-to-face interactions with others, they show a preference for more
contingent partners, associate the level of contingency with their personal identities, and retain
this association over time (Bigelow, 1996; Rochat et al., 1998). By 5 months, infants appear to
infer that their own actions evoke responses from others. For example, using a still-face
procedure10, Goldstein et al. (2009) showed that 5-month-olds significantly increased non-cry
10 An infant first interacts with an adult who responds contingently to infant’s actions and vocalizations. The adult
then turns away and turns back, showing a “still face”, or a lack of responsiveness to the infant. The adult later
resumes a contingent interaction with the infant (see Cohn & Tronick, 1983).
vocalizations in response to the experimenter’s ceased contingent responsiveness. These
vocalizations may signal attempts to initiate contingent interactions with the experimenter and
indicate that infants are not only capable of engaging in contingent interactions, but also actively
seek them.
Further, by setting expectations about the level of social contingency and selectively
responding more to some behaviors than others, caregivers help infants clarify the link between
their own behaviors and expected responses. For example, in Bigelow & Rochat (2006) infants
were less responsive to strangers whose level of contingency was either significantly higher or
lower than that of their mothers. Evidence from still-face experiments also shows a strong
predictive effect of caregivers’ responsiveness on infants’ own level of contingency. Mcquaid et
al. (2009) found that maternal contingent smiling predicted infants’ individual differences in
smiling during the still-face phase of the procedure, which indicated that infants had expectations
about social interactions and their own ability to initiate an interaction. Bornstein et al. (2015)
investigated the development of infant-parent contingent interactions in naturalistic settings and
found a strong tendency among mothers of 5.5-month-olds to speak to their infants following
non-distress (not related to hunger or discomfort) vocalizations. Moreover, as parents shift
communicative actions directed at their infants from mood regulation to behavior influence over
time (e.g., from 7 months to 15 months; see Kochanska & Aksan, 2004), infants’ positive
responsiveness to those actions increases. In particular, infants’ social overtures and influence
attempts increased and distress reactions decreased in response to parents’ communicative bids.
In sum, studies of infant-adult interactions strongly suggest that social contingency plays
a significant role in infants’ communicative development, guiding both their social expectations
and communicative behaviors directed at others. What about the effects of social contingency on
spoken language development? Does infants’ sensitivity to social contingency and their strong
association between social contingency, agency, and communicative signals influence their
language acquisition, and word learning in particular?
Looking to establish a link between social contingency and language outcomes, Gros-
Louis et al. (2014) observed 8- to 14-month-olds’ interactions with their mothers in naturalistic
settings over the course of 6 months. Mothers’ responses and imitation of infants’ vocalization
correlated with the increase in infants’ mother-directed vocalizations in the following month and
predicted more mature consonant-vowel vocalizations. Further, infants of more responsive
mothers had larger productive vocabularies at 15 months. These results suggest that social
contingency may indeed facilitate language development, and that this facilitative effect
permeates multiple facets of language acquisition.
A number of correlational and longitudinal studies also found a predictive effect of
parents’ contingent responsiveness on verbal and social competence later in development. For
example, Bornstein and Tamis-LeMonda (1989) observed mother-infant dyads when infants
were 2- to 5-months and assessed their cognitive development at 13 months and 4 years.
Maternal responsiveness predicted language comprehension and pretend play at 13 months and
higher scores on Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence at age 4. Similarly, Olson
et al. (1984) reported a significant relation between maternal responsiveness11 when infants are 6
and 13 months and their receptive vocabulary at 24 months (measured by Bayley MDI and
PPVT). Moreover, when maternal responsiveness was measured specifically in terms of
11 Maternal responsiveness was measured as (a) contact and proximity behaviors (look at infant for at least 2 s,
approach infant, pick up infant, put down infant, affectionate touch, bounce, jiggle, or rock, put to shoulder, leave
infant's view), (b) facial expression (smile, grin at infant, frown/grimace at infant), (c) verbal or vocal
stimulation(distal vocalization to infant, proximal vocalization, "sweet, musical quality"; proximal vocalization,
normal quality; negative vocalization); (d) play stimulation (give toy or object, give toy or object and work it for
infant, return dropped toy, tickle or poke infant), and (e) physical needs caregiving.
mothers’ verbal activity in response to infants’ vocal or exploratory behaviors12, the analyses
revealed that such responsiveness at 9 months predicted infants’ language comprehension at 13
months (Baumwell et al., 1997). Similarly, Rollins (2003) observed parent-infant dyads engaged
in naturalistic interactions and found that words uttered within socially contingent interactions at
9 months, where the mother talked about an object of joint focus of attention or narrated an
ongoing activity, predicted language comprehension at 12 months.
These studies lend support to our hypothesis that increased exposure to and participation
in socially contingent interactions benefits infants’ word learning and broader language
development at later ages. Notably, the reviewed longitudinal studies report language learning
benefits of exposure to social contingency at 12-14 months – the developmental window
associated with the emerging ability to comprehend verbal reference to absent objects and
marked by a non-linear increase in infants’ word comprehension (see Bergelson, 2020). Thus,
the observed effects may indeed reflect the hypothesized facilitative influence of social
contingency on infants’ understanding of the referential nature of words.
It is possible, however, that infants who experience more socially contingent exchanges
simply hear more language from their parents and benefit from the increased exposure to more
types and tokens of words compared to infants who experience fewer such exchanges. To our
knowledge there has been no direct empirical investigations of the relation between social
contingency and the development of verbal reference. However, converging evidence from
several lines of work suggests that the effect of social contingency on the development of verbal
reference cannot be explained by the mere increase in exposure to word input.
12 Responsiveness was defined as a positive and meaningful change in mother’s verbal behavior subsequent to and
dependent on a child exhibiting a vocal or exploratory act. If a child looked at the brush and mother said “brush,”
mother was credited with responsiveness. In order for a maternal verbal activity to be credited as responsive, mother
had to change her ongoing behavior within 5 s of a change in a child visual or vocal activity.
First, findings from the investigations linking children’s exposure to vocabulary and their
language learning outcomes provide evidence that rich vocabulary input alone is not sufficient to
facilitate qualitative shifts in one’s understanding of the referential nature of words. Although
some findings suggest that children who hear a lot of child-directed speech (CDS) and children
whose CDS input is relatively scarce are exposed to comparable total word input, after ambient
speech has been taken into consideration (e.g., Sperry et al., 2019), only child-directed speech
has been consistently linked to vocabulary growth (e.g., Hoff, 2003; Shneidman et al., 2013;
Shneidman & Goldin-Meadow, 2012). Importantly, child-directed speech is more likely to be
socially contingent as caregivers respond to infants’ and children’s vocalizations and word
productions (e.g., Gratier et al., 2015, 2015; Tomasello & Farrar, 1986; Veneziano & Parisse,
2010), suggesting that the effect of social contingency on language development goes above and
beyond mere exposure to words. Indeed, Donnelly and Kidd (2021) examined infants’ natural
language environment (using LENA recordings) between 9 and 24 months, measuring their
language input and participation in socially contingent verbal exchange, operationalized as
conversational turns. They found that conversational turns predicted change in infants’
vocabulary even after word input variables (i.e., types and tokens) were controlled for.
Second, Tamis-LeMonda et al. (1996) showed that maternal verbal responsiveness to
infants’ verbal bids (vocalizations, word production), but not their verbal responsiveness to play
behavior, predicted 13- and 20-month-olds’ language comprehension and production (see also
Tamis-LeMonda et al., 2001). This finding suggests that the rate of mothers’ verbal responses
specifically to verbal behaviors and not mothers’ overall verbal responsiveness predicted infants’
success with language. Further, a study with older slow-to-talk children revealed that maternal
expansions, imitations, interpretations, and responsive questions positively correlated with 24-
month-olds’ language comprehension and production (evaluated on Preschool Language Scale,
Zimmerman et al., 2002), while labeling responses negatively correlated with these measures
(Levickis et al., 2014). This finding provides additional support to the idea that increased
exposure to word input alone is unlikely to explain the effects of social contingency on the
development of verbal reference in infancy.
Third, young children appear to ascribe communicative properties to signals that are
embedded in socially contingent interactions, even if those signals are not typically associated
with human behaviors. Six-month-old infants privilege speech sounds over sine-waves
(Vouloumanos & Werker, 2004) and preferentially treat speech but non sine-waves as invitations
to form categories (Fulkerson & Waxman, 2007), which suggests that at this age they have a
strong bias to treat speech as a communicative signal. Ferguson and Waxman (2016), however,
showed that despite not normally treating sine-wave tones as language, after a period of exposure
to those tones used in a rich communicative exchange between two actors, 6-month-olds
extended word-like properties to them. Infants formed object categories based on a series of
tone-image presentations – an effect normally observed for words but not sine-wave tones at this
age (see Fulkerson & Waxman, 2007). Similarly, hearing 26-month-olds, who have accumulated
substantial experience using speech, and not sign language, to communicate, accepted signs as
object labels after observing sign language embedded in a socially contingent exchange between
two interlocutors (Namy & Waxman, 1998). These results provide a powerful demonstration of
the effects of social contingency on the perceived referential status of new stimuli, which can be
achieved even within a short experimental exposure to those stimuli. In contrast, infants and
children with autism spectrum disorders, who have difficulties detecting and responding to social
contingency, tend to have difficulties attributing communicative properties even to natural
languages (see Northrup, 2017, for a review).
Finally, corroborating evidence comes from investigations comparing infants’ and young
children’s speech processing and word learning in contingent and non-contingent settings. Kuhl
et al. (2003), for example, evaluated 9-month-olds’ sensitivity to a foreign language phonetic
contrast after 5 hours of exposure, split into 12 laboratory sessions. One group of English-
acquiring infants interacted with a native speaker of Mandarin Chinese. The speaker played with
the infants and read books to them. The other two groups were exposed to a video- or an audio-
recording of the same speaker. In the video, the speaker looked to the camera to emulate eye
contact. Only infants in the live interaction condition performed above chance on the phonetic
discrimination test after 12 weeks, at the level comparable to that of Mandarin-acquiring infants.
Consistent with our hypothesis, these results suggest that phonetic learning is facilitated by social
contingency, which may be due to infants’ enhanced processing of linguistic information:
socially contingent interactions may have boosted infants’ understanding of Mandarin Chinese as
a form of communicative signal. Further, although the same word-referent co-occurrence cues
are present in both live and video-recorded speech, infants often fail to learn new word-referent
links from watching video-recordings – a phenomenon known as the “video deficit” (Anderson
& Pempek, 2005). Infants and young children exhibit such a deficit even when watching
television programs that emphasize repetition and emulate infant-directed speech in labeling
events (DeLoache et al., 2010; O’Doherty et al., 2011; Richert et al., 2011; Robb et al., 2009). In
contrast, when offered an opportunity to learn novel words via socially-contingent video chat,
24- to 30-month-old children succeed and show word-learning outcomes comparable to that in a
live in-person interaction (Roseberry et al., 2014). A recent finding also demonstrates that 12-
month-olds infants’ word learning from a digital screen is enhanced by the presence of a
contingent virtual agent who uses referential cues (Tsuji et al., 2020). Critically, a mere co-
presence of a socially contingent interaction does not enhance infants’ word learning outcomes.
DeLoache et al. (2010) found that 12- to-18-month-olds did not learn words presented on video
by an experimenter, if parents contingently interacted with their infants during the video
exposure. They only learned the new words presented by the parents during socially contingent
interactions, suggesting that social contingency enhances infants’ word learning if those words
are taught within a socially contingent interaction, rather than merely co-occurring with it.
Together, cross-sectional and longitudinal investigations suggest that increased exposure
to social contingency early in infancy predicts larger vocabularies in the long term and enhances
phonetic and word learning in the short term. These studies provide highly suggestive evidence
for our hypothesis and illustrate that accumulated exposure to social contingency and infants’
growing sensitivity to socially contingent displays indeed facilitate infants’ realization that words
are used for communication and they refer to mental representations that correspond to the real
world.
Importantly, infants’ attention to social contingency increases with age and becomes
dissociated from morphological properties of interlocutors, which may be the reason why we
begin to observe its effects on the development of verbal reference by 12-14 months and not
earlier. For example (as reviewed in Thiele et al., 2021), at 6 months infants shift visual attention
to a reciprocal social interaction of two people facing each other (Augusti, 2010). By 12 months,
infants look longer at socially contingent over non‐socially contingent events (Bakker et al.,
2011) and engage in gaze following (or orientation) with entities that act in a socially contingent
way, even if they do not have faces (Johnson et al., 1998). Shimizu and Johnson (2004) also
found that 12-month-olds will attribute goal-directedness to morphologically unfamiliar but
socially contingent agents who engage in reciprocal communication. Finally, at 13 months
infants’ preference for socially contingent displays manifests even in associative learning
scenarios: infants are better at learning a predictive relation between a visual cue and a socially
contingent display than a visual cue and a non-contingent display (Thiele et al., 2021).
These findings suggest that at this age infants may not only prefer socially contingent
displays but also recognize socially contingent entities as agents and privilege the value of
information coming from those agents (see Rochat, 2007, for a review). Thus, between 6 and 13
months infants’ developing sensitivity to socially contingent interactions begins to influence
their interpretation of the information presented in the context of such interactions (see Rochat,
2001, for a review). Infants’ growing social competence factors into this development by
informing their inferences about social and non-social type of contingency and selectively
privileging information presented in the context of socially contingent interactions.
In sum, extant research suggests that participating in and observing socially contingent
interactions, and especially language-mediated interactions, affects infants’ communicative
development by providing insight into the referential status of words. Infants are more likely to
learn novel words and phonetic contrasts in socially contingent contexts. They are also willing to
extend word-like communicative properties to non-linguistic signals used in socially contingent
interactions. Infants who participate in and observe socially contingent interactions more often
tend to have larger vocabularies. Although socially contingent interactions are present early,
infants’ gradually increasing attention to such interactions, combined with the development of
other precursor capacities, likely explains why the first signs of understanding that words refer
(measured as absent reference comprehension) emerge at around 12-14 months of age.
V. Developmental advances of attaining a referential understanding of words.
Attaining an understanding of the referential nature of words allows infants to establish
strong bidirectional links between words and mental representations, as well as the links between
mental representations and their real-world counterparts, and to realize how words can affect the
world via mental representations. This implies an appreciation that words are used intentionally
and are meant to cause change in others’ actions or mental states. It also entails the capacity to
propose hypotheses for word meanings and revise these hypotheses as more linguistic (e.g.,
syntactic contexts) and word-referent co-occurrence data are accumulated. In concert, these
capacities constitute verbal reference and enable infants to integrate multiple cues to word
meanings (by 12-14 months; see Luchkina & Waxman, under review) and acquire vocabulary
with high efficiency (see Hollich et al., 2000, for a review).
Gaining the appreciation of the tri-directional link between words, mental
representations, and real-world referents enables infants to recognize that words likely encode
and transmit relevant information and are worth their attention, without needing a socially
contingent context any longer. Knowing that words are linked to the world in a principled, lawful
way, they realize that even speech not addressed to them has that property. This realization
enables them to engage in increasingly decontextualized forms of language-mediated learning
and expand their social knowledge and factual knowledge, rapidly acquire new vocabulary and
syntax. We elaborate on several key advantages of attaining a referential understanding of words
below.
One such advantage is the ability to learn new information in non-ostensive contexts,
such as overhearing a conversation. Floor and Akhtar (2006) compared 18-month-olds’ ability to
learn novel object labels in two contexts – while being directly addressed and while observing an
interaction as a third party. In the Addressed condition, an experimenter interacted with the
infant, made eye contact, and ostensibly labeled a novel object (additional three novel objects
were ostensibly demonstrated but not labeled). In the Overhearing condition, the experimenter
interacted with an adult confederate while the infant was present and had an opportunity to
observe their interaction. The same objects were demonstrated and one labeled, as in the
Addressed condition, in which the interaction was between the experimenter and the infant. The
results revealed that 18-month-olds learned the novel object-labels equivalently well in both
conditions and their test performance was not driven by an intrinsic preference for a specific
object. These findings illustrate that 18-month-olds have the ability to learn word meanings in
non-ostensive scenarios, without being directly addressed.
At this age infants also begin to make sophisticated inferences about word meanings in
non-ostensive contexts based on social cues. For example, Tomasello et al. (1996) found that 18-
month-olds learn novel words equivalently well in a situation in which an experimenter
introduces a novel word and retrieves its referent from a container immediately after (“Now let’s
find the gazzler”; ostensive context), and in a situation, in which she first retrieved an incorrect
object, frowned at it and replaced it with the correct one (non-ostensive context). Despite having
seen a distractor object demonstrated right after the novel word was introduced, infants used
social cues to infer the intended meaning of the word. By 24-30 months, children are able to
learn novel word meanings in non-ostensive contexts from a third-party interaction, even when
they are distracted by an engaging activity (Akhtar, 2005). Finally, at least by age 3, children can
learn object names and facts about those objects from overhearing a seemingly irrelevant cell-
phone conversation, or “halfalogue” (Emberson et al., 2010; Foushee et al., 2021). Critically, this
form of learning cannot be explained from a strictly associationist perspective. Not only is the
linguistic information presented in a non-ostensive manner, but the naming events often happen
in the absence of word referents, which necessarily entails that children map words onto mental
representations and recognize that these word-representation links extend to real-world objects or
events. These advances in learning from overhearing substantially expand the reach of children’s
learning beyond the here-and-now and allows them to benefit from the information exchanged in
their social environments but not directed at them. Such information can include diverse
vocabularies (e.g., used in adult-directed speech), social routines (e.g., greeting, expressions of
sympathy), and facts about the world (“The neighbor’s dog is dangerous”).
Another significant advantage of attaining a referential understanding of words is the
ability to create and update mental representations of objects based on language alone. For
example, by 18-19 months, infants can establish a representation of non-visible novel object,
learn its name, and subsequently use this name to identify the correct referent when it becomes
perceptually available, based on referential cues and mutual exclusivity inferences (Baldwin,
1993b; Tomasello et al., 1996). By 22 months, children update mental representations of
previously seen objects based on language alone. In Ganea et al. (2007), for example, 22-month-
olds were familiarized with a toy frog “Lucy” that was subsequently hidden, and infants heard a
story in which Lucy became wet. When presented with a wet toy frog and an identical-looking
dry toy frog and asked to identify “Lucy”, 22-month-olds selected the wet toy, demonstrating
having successfully extracted novel information and updated existing representations based on
language alone. By 30 months, children can learn names of novel objects and facts about them
from verbal descriptions and subsequently identify the correct objects without having previously
seen them (Saylor et al., 2016). Similar to learning words from overhearing, learning facts from
language alone necessarily requires that a child’s understanding of word-referent link surpasses
the level of perceptual associations. Without being able to link language input with
representations of word referents, a learner should have no basis for identifying a referent of a
word or an utterance they had heard in the absence of any objects or events that can be associated
with it. Thus, these studies illustrate the far-reaching impact of verbal reference on children’s
capacity to extract novel information from language, create and modify mental representations
on its basis, and use this knowledge to identify their real-world counterparts. This capacity is
central to formal and much of informal instruction (as both convey information via language)
and has profound implications for knowledge acquisition and school readiness.
In addition to gaining access to information encoded in language and learning in non-
ostensive contexts, the understanding that words refer may boost children’s ability to take
advantage of linguistic cues to infer the meaning of novel words from language alone. Before
realizing that words are linked to mental representations, infants may notice a pattern in which an
unfamiliar word co-occurs with known words within utterances. However, without anything to
map that word onto, they may not be able to leverage this information. The referential
understanding of words may benefit vocabulary acquisition by allowing infants to create a
representation of a novel referent based on semantic and syntactic bootstrapping. For example, at
19 but not at 15 months infants can establish a mental representation of an object, paired with a
novel label, without seeing that object and just relying on semantic properties of the carrier
phrase (Ferguson, Graf, et al., 2018). Specifically, 19-month-olds inferred the animacy of an
object corresponding to a novel name, presented in the absence of any conceivable referents,
based on the predicate that modifies it, “the dax is crying” vs. “the dax is right here”. When
shown a pair of images and asked to identify the “dax”, infants who encountered “dax” in an
utterance that implied its animacy, were significantly more likely to select the animate referent
than infants who heard a neutral utterance. By age 2, children can use syntactic information, such
as verb transitivity, to create a representation of a novel action (Arunachalam et al., 2013; Yuan
& Fisher, 2009). Arunachalam and Waxman (2010) demonstrated that children who observed
two speakers converse and mention a novel verb in a transitive sentence (“The lady mooped my
brother”) subsequently were significantly more likely to choose a causative video scene than
toddlers who heard that verb in an intransitive sentence (“The lady and my brother mooped”). At
this age, children also generalize animacy-selecting restrictions of novel verbs, learned in the
absence of any visual information, to other nouns within the animate and the inanimate
categories (e.g., first hearing “I stiped the pig” and subsequently selecting an animate object
when asked to identify an object that can be “stiped”; Yuan et al., 2011). Finally, by 27 months,
children can make these inferences even when they hear the novel words in socially-
impoverished contexts: mentioned in adult-directed speech, with no discourse, and with
linguistic information unaccompanied with any visual information (Arunachalam, 2013).
Combined, these studies suggest that from the onset of the referential understanding of words,
infants leverage syntactic and semantic bootstrapping to infer the meanings of novel words in
increasingly decontextualized situations. Being able to infer the properties of a novel referent
from the word’s surrounding linguistic context helps infants narrow the range of possible
candidate meanings of the novel word and increase the likelihood of identifying the correct
referent when it becomes perceptually available.
Yet another advantage of attaining a referential understanding of words is that it changes
infants’ sensitivity to distributional information, such as word-referent co-occurrence statistics.
By realizing that words refer, infants gain additional appreciation of the relevance of this
information: knowing that words refer to mental representations and their real-world
counterparts and encode information intentionally communicated by others, infants may pay
more attention to word input and referential cues in their learning. Combined with targeted
consideration of the most likely word-referent hypotheses, this enables infants to transition from
slow and laborious word learning that results from repeated exposure to co-occurrence statistics,
to learning novel word meanings from witnessing only a few word-referent co-occurrences. For
example, Woodward et al. (1994) show that by 18 months, infants successfully learn novel word
meanings after just 9 mentions of the target word and retain them after 24 hours. Notably, 18-
month-olds in this study responded correctly on test trials 76% of the time, while 13-month-olds’
performance averaged around 62%. In a recent report, LaTourrette and Waxman (2019) show
that by age 2, children learn novel word meanings after observing only two members of a
category labeled as well as when all six members of that category are labeled. By age 4, children
learn novel word meanings from a single labeled example as well as from three examples and
successfully generalize those meanings to other members of the same subordinate, basic-level, or
superordinate category (Xu & Tenenbaum, 2007b). One may argue that this developmental
progression is driven by children’s increasing memory capacity. However, investigations of
infants’ memory development indicate that by 9-10 months, infants successfully remember
sequences of events over the span of months (Bauer, 2002; Carver et al., 2000; Mandler &
McDonough, 1995). Thus, it is unlikely that this rapidly increasing ability to learn novel word
meanings from only a few examples can be entirely explained by the growing memory capacity.
Instead, we suggest that these effects may be a consequence of children’s encoding of labeling
information being enhanced by attaining a referential understanding of words.
Other developmental benefits of attaining a referential understanding of words include
advances in social reasoning, such as the ability to make inferences about others’ knowledge
based on their language production. Recall that we define verbal reference as a tri-directional
link between words, real-world referents, and their mental representations used for intentional
communication between people. This implies that a naming event reflects both their intention to
communicate information about a referent, their knowledge of the word-referent mapping, and
their ability to recognize a given object or event as an instance of a known referent category
paired with a word. Thus, upon attaining a referential understanding of words and aided by
recognizing the conventional nature of words (by at least 14 months; Buresh & Woodward,
2007; Colomer & Sebastian-Galles, 2020; Henderson & Woodward, 2012; Scott & Henderson,
2013) infants begin to make inferences about such states based on the quality of information they
communicate via language. For example, by 18 months, infants track whether others use correct
words to describe familiar objects and only learn novel word meanings from speakers who do
not make mistakes in naming (e.g., Brooker & Poulin-Dubois, 2013; Luchkina et al., 2018).
Luchkina et al. (2018) showed infants a video of two actors, one of which demonstrated familiar
to the infant objects and labeled them accurately and the other demonstrated a different set of
familiar objects and labeled them inaccurately (e.g., “Look, a shoe”, while showing a book). The
infants subsequently saw a video, in which either the accurate or the inaccurate speaker
(between-subject) introduced two novel objects and labeled them. Infants’ word knowledge was
probed in an intermodal preferential looking procedure. While infants in both groups performed
well on control trials and consistently looked to the correct familiar objects, only infants who
learned the novel labels from the accurate speaker looked significantly more to the target novel
object. These findings suggest that 18-month-olds track others’ accuracy in object naming, use
this information to make inferences about others’ knowledge states and selectively learn new
words from speakers they deem epistemically competent. This developing capacity allows
infants to leverage their word knowledge to monitor the quality of the language input they
receive and selectively learn and retain information from reliable sources. In preschoolers,
studies also found that learners can take into account the epistemic state of the speaker and
decide accordingly how best to integrate the language input in learning new words (Harris &
Corriveau, 2011; Koenig & Harris, 2005; Sobel & Kushnir, 2013; Xu & Tenenbaum, 2007; see
Harris, 2012, for a review).
The empirical evidence reviewed above illustrates the profound and far-reaching effects
of understanding the referential nature of words. We propose that this understanding
fundamentally changes the way infants attend to, process, and retain linguistic information and
powers multiple learning capacities that are essential for cognitive development. These proposed
effects invite new empirical investigations, some of which we outline in the final section.
VI. Conclusions and future directions.
In this paper, our goal was to explain the development of verbal reference through
aggregating insights from multiple facets of research on language and cognitive development.
We reviewed empirical evidence on infants’ emerging understanding of the referential nature of
words, argued that conceptual, social, representational, and statistical learning capacities must
operate in concert to enable such an understanding, and hypothesized that infants arrive at the
realization that words refer via engaging in and observing socially contingent interactions. We
also argued that by serving as “cement” that brings together multiple cues to meaning, verbal
reference facilitates a qualitative shift in infants’ word learning, enabling them to acquire novel
words with remarkable efficiency. Finally, we proposed that this shift ultimately enables infants
to engage in language-mediated learning and acquire knowledge about the world and about their
communicative partners via language.
In sum, we reviewed multiple literatures on early cognitive development and proposed a
constructivist account of the origins and mechanisms of the development of verbal reference,
having discussed cross-sectional and longitudinal evidence corroborating our arguments. Our
account represents the constructivist approach to language and cognitive development because it
offers a set of primitives (or building blocks) that in combination drives conceptual advances in
infants’ understanding of word-referent relations, which in turn, lead to shifts and new
constraints in infants’ interpretation of linguistic and social input. These properties are
characteristic of constructivist views of human development and contrast sharply with pure
nativist (which emphasizes innate cognitive architectures) and pure empiricist (which
emphasizes the role of associative mechanisms operating on primitives) approaches (Cohen et
al., 2002; Xu, 2019; Xu & Kushnir, 2013; see also Hollich et al., 2000; Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2004).
In addition to the existing evidence, more direct empirical tests will be necessary to
provide strong evidence for our proposed account. We, therefore, invite such investigations and
suggest several directions of research that will contribute to our understanding of the
development of verbal reference and its role in transforming lexical acquisition and enabling
language-mediated learning.
One direction of empirical investigations is to test whether social contingency indeed
facilitates the referential understanding of words. For example, longitudinal studies can test
whether infants of more socially-contingent parents begin to show signs of comprehending
speech about absent entities earlier and whether changes in infants’ own socially-contingent
vocalizations predict the onset of this comprehension. Cross-sectional laboratory studies can
investigate caregiver-infant interactions and examine whether and how caregivers’ contingent
responsiveness helps infants recognize that words, referents, and others’ behaviors are linked in a
principled, lawful way. Similarly, observations of such interactions can be instrumental in
determining whether infants who observe and participate in socially contingent interactions more
often are more likely to recognize the communicative nature of speech and link it to mental
states. Further, laboratory and longitudinal investigations measuring the properties of parents’
language production will distinguish between the effects of social contingency and the effects of
the quality and quantity of verbal input. The combination of cross-sectional and longitudinal
studies will provide a more complete picture the mechanisms driving the development of verbal
reference. It will also help address the outstanding questions about infants’ ability to learn novel
words without seeing their referents and their ability to retain those mappings.
Another direction of empirical research is to test whether having attained a referential
understanding of words indeed predicts qualitative shifts in infants’ word learning and whether it
marks the onset of language-mediated learning. For example, are infants who display the
comprehension of speech about absent entities more likely to learn novel words from just a few
labeling events than their peers who do not yet display such a comprehension? Similarly, are
infants who demonstrate an ability to learn novel word meanings in the absence of their referents
earlier also more likely to learn novel facts from language alone at earlier ages, and be able to
update their mental representations of objects and events via language alone? To conduct these
investigations, it is critical to establish an experimental procedure that can effectively measure
whether infants have attained a referential understanding of words. One such procedure, which
leverages infants’ ability to learn the meanings of words in the absence of their referents using
infants semantic networks, has been proposed by Luchkina and Waxman (2021). A longitudinal
follow-up that investigates whether differences in this ability at 15 months predict differences in
language-mediated learning at 22 months, is underway.
These and other empirical investigations will help us gain a better understanding of the
mechanisms underlying word learning and the development of verbal reference in the first two
years of life. Combined, these insights will advance our understanding of the development of the
fundamental human capacity to establish, retrieve, and modify knowledge based on information
encoded in and transmitted via language.
Acknowledgements
We thank James Morgan, David Sobel, Sandra Waxman, Athena Vouloumanos, Bertram
Malle, Dima Amso, Mahesh Srinivasan, Kali Woodruff Carr, Alexander LaTourrette, and
Miriam Novack for helpful discussion about this research.

Appendix 1. Developmental timelines of verbal reference and its precursor capacities.
Capacity 3-6 mo 6-9mo 9-12mo 12-14mo 14-18mo 18-24mo
Representin • Form visual • Form Remember
g absent categories superordinate sequences of
entities • Form categories events over the
prototypes • Distinguish span of months
• Form vowel between content
and consonant and function
categories words
• Recognize • Retain
intonation memory of an
patterns event for at least
• Form short- 24 hours
term memories
• Represent the
existence and
location of
hidden objects
Using • Keep track of • Recognize that • Infer information
speech to others’ desires beliefs can transfer based on
communicat and beliefs guide actions verbal exchange
e about • Expect speech • Only admit • Use verbal cues to
absent to communicate words and retrieve memories
entities about objects gestures as ways of absent objects
and desires to communicate
about beliefs
Segmentati Extract words Integrate Use
on from a distributional cues distributional
continuous with prosodic and cues to infer the
stream of speech phonotactic cues to rules of
and remember identify word grammar
them for boundaries
extended
periods of times
Cross- Show evidence Leverage co- Adaptively
situational of being guided occurrence statistics choose different
comparison by word- and cross-situational strategies n
learning comparison to learn considering
constraints correct word- alternative
referent associations word-referent
mappings
Words pick • Map different
out grammatical forms
different to different aspects
aspects of of objects
objects • Words denote
kinds (vs. instances)
Capacity 3-6 mo 6-9mo 9-12mo 12-14mo 14-18mo 18-24mo
Attention • Engage in • Produce • Show • Show enhanced Show enhanced
and contingent parent-directed enhanced word learning from learning of
sensitivity face-to-face vocalizations learning of a digital screen in novel words
to social interactions • Extend word- phonetic the presence of a first introduced
contingency with others like properties contrasts contingent virtual in a socially
• Expect one’s to non-speech embedded in agent who uses contingent
own actions signals used in socially referential cues context
evoke communicative contingent • Attribute goal-
responses from exchange interactions directedness to
others • Shift visual • Look longer at morphologically
attention to a socially unfamiliar but
reciprocal social contingent over socially contingent
interaction of non‐socially agents who engage
two people contingent in reciprocal
facing each events communication
other • Show enhanced
associative learning
in a socially
contingent display
than a visual cue
and a non-
contingent display
Referential • Understand that • Recognize • Update
understandi pointing can refer to properties of mental
ng of words recently hidden recently representation
objects removed objects s of absent
• Use pointing for whose labels are objects based
such reference; mentioned on speech
understand verbal • Comprehend alone
reference to objects reference to • Establish
recently removed absent entities representation
from sight that is not s of novel
• Interpret verbal "anchored", or objects based
requests for hidden primed on speech
objects using social alone
information