Running head: CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 1
From Research to Practice: Clinical Utility of Quantitative Nosology
Sin-Ying Lin and Nicholas R. Eaton
Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University
Author Note
We have no conflict of interest to disclose.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Sin-Ying Lin, Dept. of
Psychology, Stony Brook University, 100 Nicolls Road, Stony Brook, NY, 11794.
E-mail: sin-ying.lin@stonybrook.edu
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 2
Abstract
Despite the rising number of evidence-based practices, many practitioners favor personal clinical
judgment over evidence for treatment selection. Recommendations to resolve this situation have
focused on knowledge translation, a process of moving from what has been learned through
research to the actual applications of that knowledge. Here, we additionally suggest establishing
a framework wherein research directly aims to facilitate clinicians’ decision-making at different
stages of treatment for individual clients. To establish such a framework, we revisit the
foundation that has guided our understanding of mental illness—psychiatric nosology. This
article first compares the conventional categorical nosology (e.g., DSM categories) to two types
of modern quantitative nosology—the dimensional (e.g., HiTOP) and network approach—which
emerged to overcome the shortcomings of categorial nosology. We then review the current state
of these two types of quantitative nosology regarding their clinical utility in assessment,
explanation of functional impairment, prognosis prediction, treatment selection, and outcome
monitoring. Lastly, we suggest future directions for each approach considering their unique
methodological advantages and recommend unifying the dimensional and network approaches to
establish a comprehensive framework that can inform clinicians at different treatment stages.
Keywords: science-practice gap, nosology, classification, diagnostic system, dimensions,
HiTOP, network
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 3
From Research to Practice: Clinical Utility of Quantitative Nosology
There has been growing urgency in bridging the gap between researchers and
practitioners. In 2005, with the hope to better integrate diverse perspectives, the APA appointed
a wide range of scientists and practitioners to serve on the Presidential Task Force on Evidence-
Based Practice and urged for its funding priorities (APA Presidential Task Force on Evidence-
Based Practice, 2006). The task force defined evidence-based practice (EBP) in psychology as
“the integration of the best available research with clinical expertise in the context of patient
characteristics, culture, and preferences (p. 273).”In the past few decades, more than 500
interventions that fall broadly into 86 EBPs have been generated (Williams & Beidas, 2019).
However, mental health services in the community rarely incorporate these practices; instead,
sizeable clinicians hold negative attitudes toward EBPs and favor personal clinical judgment
over evidence for treatment selection (Allen & Armstrong, 2014; Nelson et al., 2006; Rye et al.,
2019).
The EBP movement did not promote communications across roles, but dichotomized
individuals as either “for” or “against” EBPs. Practitioners’ lingering doubts on EBPs may be
due to several factors, such as mischaracterization of EBPs, naïve realism, misconceptions of
human nature, lack of knowledge and training resources (Lilienfeld et al., 2013). However, their
skepticism may also result from valid criticism of EBPs (see Weisz, Ng, & Bearman, 2014). On
the other hand, researchers and EBP advocates often dismiss the negative attitudes against EBP
as either (educable) ignorance or (ineducable) anti-intellectualism (Lilienfeld et al., 2013). In line
with the view of many researchers, health institutes and organizations often assumed the culprit
of low treatment effectiveness lies in a leaking pipeline of information dissemination and
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 4
explicitly called for a focus on translating research findings to practice (Collins et al., 2011;
National Institute of Mental Health, 2000).
Implementation science emerged in response to the call for accelerating knowledge
translation. Implementation studies focus on the implementation process of EBP and examine
strategies at the provider, organization, and policy level to increase the rates and quality of the
use of EBP (see Bauer, Damschroder, Hagedorn, Smith, & Kilbourne, 2015). Hitherto,
researchers have identified abundant clinician-, organization-, and policy-level determinants of
implementation outcomes, and the field aims to advance on integrated, multilevel, causal
theories (Williams & Beidas, 2019). With fruitful outcomes in the past few years,
implementation science has become a priority area for research funders such as the National
Institutes of Health (2019).
Despite the valuable contributions of implementation science, it lies at the end of the
translational spectrum of applied science (Lomas, 1993) and serves as a one-way (i.e.,
researchers to practitioners) bridge. Results from implementation studies may inform how to
educate EBP on clinicians (Bauer et al., 2015; Proctor et al., 2009) but rarely impact the
knowledge and treatment development. For example, clinicians rated the beneficial features of
EBPs, such as their effectiveness and adaptivity for complicated cases, as the least changeable
factor. Further, they viewed it as their (instead of researchers’) responsibilities for EBP
modification and refinement to achieve individual client needs and better clinical utility (Green
& Aarons, 2011). The survey results demonstrate that the current implementation framework has
imposed an unnecessary burden on clinicians without empowering them to express their needs to
researchers.
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 5
A two-way bridge (i.e., researchers to practitioners and vice versa) that allows clinicians’
voice to inform research designs is a requisite, considering the current EBP is nowhere close to
satisfactory (see Weisz et al., 2014 for the implementation cliff). This statement above is not an
innovative thought. In 2014, Goldfried and colleagues proposed the same approach to this vexing
problem. They argued that merely disseminating research findings to practitioners (as has
typically been the case) is a one-way solution insufficient to close the researcher-practitioner
gap. They suggested a two-way bridge with which practitioners can also disseminate their
clinical experiences to researchers for joint consensus. Practice-oriented research, anchored in
clinical routines and based on the collaboration among researchers and clinicians, has been
proposed as the opposite bridge lane (Castonguay et al., 2013). It has been conducted in many
natural clinical settings with different types of partnerships and serves as an excellent
collaboration framework. (Castonguay, Youn, et al., 2015; Castonguay & Muran, 2014).
However, despite its emphasis on equality among different roles, researchers’ knowledge about
research methods may put clinicians at a disadvantage to initiate research ideas.
Therefore, before collaboration, it is crucial to recognize the fundamental distinction
between researchers’ and practitioners’ epistemic needs (Cha & DiVasto, 2017; Lilienfeld et al.,
2013; McFall et al., 2015). Researchers pursue a nomothetic understanding (i.e., relating to the
discovery of general rules) of human behaviors across settings. For example, the core focus of
treatment development in the past 40 years has been “the creation and evaluation of well-
specified treatment manuals focused on well-defined syndromal categories (Hayes, Long, Levin,
& Follette, 2013, p. 871).” On the other hand, practitioners require idiographic comprehension
(i.e., considering individual differences) for personalized treatment, given that differential
treatment responses are the rule, not the exception (e.g., Bagby et al., 2008; Owens, Hinshaw,
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 6
McBurnett, & Pfiffner, 2018; Vittengl, Clark, Thase, & Jarrett, 2013). To solve idiographic
problems with nomothetic EBPs, practitioners can only seek supervisors, colleagues, and case
studies, instead of researchers and empirical outcomes, for further guidance (Allen & Armstrong,
2014; Nelson et al., 2006).
Idiographic research designs are a possible solution to the therapist’s dilemma of treating
individual problems with group-level information and are more executable today than ever.
Dating back to the late 20th century, the desire to evaluate individual treatment processes and
effects has led researchers and practitioners to advocate for an increased idiographic focus in
psychotherapy research (Howard et al., 1996). Idiographic methods have existed for decades (for
a review, see Russell, Jones, & Miller, 2007). However, due to limitations in data collection
(e.g., a lack of large longitudinal and comprehensive study) and complexity of analytic
techniques (e.g., conventional methods has limited ability in processing high-dimensional data),
idiographic methods have not been commonly used within a research or clinical setting in the
past.
Nevertheless, we observed clear signs indicating the increasing accessibility and
feasibility of idiographic methods. The government has launched nationwide longitudinal studies
in the past few years, such as the Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study
Another sign is the increasing availability of dynamic data collection methods via smartphones,
such as the ecological momentary assessment, which enhances our understanding of individual
processes during psychotherapy (Fisher & Boswell, 2016; Myin-Germeys et al., 2009).
Researchers in Penn State University also pioneered the transformation of a graduate training
clinic into a practice research network, where individual treatment outcome data can be collected
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 7
via the Treatment Outcome Package (Kraus, Seligman, & Jordan, 2005) repeatedly within the
course of treatment (Castonguay, Pincus, et al., 2015). Innovative statistical methods (e.g.,
dynamic structural equation modeling, network analysis, autoregressive integrated moving
average models, Bayesian time-series analysis) can better capture complicated individual
processes. We can now conduct these advanced modeling with free and open-source software
programs, such as the R language and environment (R Core Team, 2015), accompanied by R
packages with user-friendly guides (e.g., bsts, Scott, 2014; forecast, Hyndman et al., 2020;
graphicalVAR, Epskamp, 2018; gimme, Lane, 2020; lavaan, Rosseel et al., 2020).
The previous statement often entices scholars to pursue complex analyses; however, the
real question is not what analysis shall we use, but where shall we start with idiographic
research? We cannot grow a garden of Eden by planting random seeds. Moderator studies have
investigated various idiographic factors that result in differential responses to treatment (e.g.,
personalities; Bagby et al., 2008; demographic variables and symptom clusters; Owens et al.,
2018). Mediator studies have investigated individual symptom trajectories and causal chains
within the course of treatment (Bosley et al., 2019). Despite progress in the past few decades, we
lack a concrete framework wherein idiographic research aims directly to facilitate clinicians’
decision-making at different stages of treatment for individual clients. One potential starting
point for establishing such a framework is psychiatric nosology, a foundation that guides our
conceptualization, communication, investigation, and implementation.
Three Overarching Frameworks of Psychiatric Nosology
Categorical Nosology
The categorical view of psychiatric nosology originated from the medical field.
Kraepelin, known as the founder of modern scientific psychiatry, believed that psychiatric
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 8
diseases originated from separate biological processes and advocated for a categorical view of
psychiatric nosology (Kraepelin & Diefendorf, 1915). Although Kraepelin recognized that there
was no concrete evidence to construct a final classification, he classified mental problems into
several syndromic categories based on the common medical assumption that similar disease
processes should result from identical etiology and would produce identical symptom profiles.
Kraepelin’s categorical view and classification system paved the way for the medical disease
model—characterized by distinct pathology that manifests as a series of symptoms that guide the
diagnosis and treatment of the disease (Tinetti & Fried, 2004)—to enter the mental health field.
To treat the “disease,” the field requires an official classification system. Recognizing the
lack of consensus among mental health professionals, the World Health Organization (WHO)
sponsored a comprehensive review of diagnostic issues (Stengel, 1959). Stengel considered
operational definitions as a means to reliable clinical diagnoses and a solution to the lack of
knowledge regarding pathology and etiology. The demand for operational definitions contributed
to the sharp boundaries among diagnoses and between normality and pathology. The WHO and
the American Psychiatric Association (APA) have endorsed Stengel’s suggestion. They worked
closely to compile a series of explicit criteria for each mental disorder as a categorical concept,
published as the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) and Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), respectively and developed assessment instruments
according to their diagnostic algorithms (see APA, 2016; Stein et al., 2020; WHO, 2004 for
reviews on the history).
The ICD and DSM classification systems have shaped our conceptualization of mental
disorders. The ICD and DSM diagnostic algorithms impose sharp cutoffs between normality and
pathology. The public tends to picture “normality” to be qualitatively different from
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 9
“abnormality.” Even many studies on psychopathology abided by the dichotomous labels (i.e.,
with or without a diagnosis) from diagnostic instruments. Although the classification systems
picture each disorder as a distinct category, the DSM workgroup acknowledged that the current
categories are heterogeneous in etiology and symptom profiles (APA, 2013). Due to the arbitrary
cutoffs between disorders, comorbidity is the norm rather than the exception (Widiger & Samuel,
2005). In response to the criticisms on arbitrary cutoffs, the latest revision made the boundaries
between disorders more “fluid (APA, 2013, p. 5)” by loosening exclusion criteria and allowing
more overlapping diagnoses. However, the revision process paid little attention to diagnostic
specificity, with the apparent evidence that multiple diagnoses share the same symptom criteria
(e.g., concentration problems in depression, PTSD, and ADHD). The systems also had a limited
focus on depicting the relationships between disorders. The higher-order classifications in the
current systems are not a direct reflection of comorbidity (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder is
grouped with other anxiety disorders while it has higher comorbidity with depression).
Quantification of inter-disorder relationships was mostly carried out to split or merge existing
disorders (e.g., Grant et al., 2006; Hasin et al., 2013). In sum, the ICD and DSM classification
systems have shaped our understanding of mental disorders as categorical entities with
perplexing intra- and inter-diagnostic features (Clark, Watson, & Reynolds, 1995; Hasler,
Drevets, Manji, & Charney, 2004; Zimmerman, Ellison, Young, Chelminski, & Dalrymple,
2015).
Despite its imperfections, the categorical nosology has been widely accepted through
generations for their perceived utility. Categorical labels fit with human nature in prototypical
thinking (Rosch, 2002) and are thus easy to be used in conversation. Diagnostic labels are
convenient in research design and conventional statistical methods in psychology (e.g.,
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 10
ANOVA). Health, school, and social systems mostly require definitive diagnoses for service
delivery. Most importantly, the ICD and DSM have endeavored to strike a balance between
novel proposals and continuity across versions to ensure the accessibility of prolific
epidemiological data in the past and to maintain health policy coherence (Reed, 2018).
However, researchers and clinicians have repeatedly voiced their dissatisfaction with the
categorical paradigm. There is no empirical evidence supporting the categorical view of mental
disorders or the sharp boundaries between normality and pathology (see Kotov et al., 2017).
Many patients may fall short for diagnostic criteria despite manifesting significant distress and
impairment, while the current health, school, and social systems have limited capability
providing services to subclinical patients. The within-disorder heterogeneity and comorbidity
render the current diagnoses with limited reliability, research progress, and clinical utilities. The
DSM-5 Field Trials found that 40% of diagnoses did not meet a cutoff for acceptable reliability
(Regier et al., 2013). The diagnostic categories are the primary units in clinical research and
treatment development. Heterogenous units may distort research findings, hinder treatment
development, and thus decrease clinicians’ adherence to treatment manuals (Francke et al., 2008;
Goldberg, 2011; Milaneschi et al., 2016; Stewart et al., 2012; Weisz et al., 2014).
In sum, categorical nosology has an important historical position and unique
contributions to the development of modern mental health. The ICD and DSM systems feature
dichotomous cutoffs between normality and pathology, allow comorbidity, and are prone to
within-disorder heterogeneity. These categorical classification systems have been accepted
widely due to its perceived utility in communication, research design, epidemiological data
accessibility, and policymaking. However, within-disorder heterogeneity and comorbidity may
hinder research development and service delivery.
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 11
Quantitative Nosology
Dimensional approach. A potential solution to the shortcomings of traditional
categorical classification emerged with the quantitative movement in the form of a dimensional
approach (see Kotov et al., 2017). The quantitative movement began with the application of
factor analysis on psychiatric patients’ characteristics to identify empirical symptom dimensions
(Eysenck, 1944; McNair & Lorr, 1964; Moore, 1930; Overall & Gorham, 1962; Wittenborn,
1951). Symptom dimensions of children and adolescents remain widely used in child
psychopathology and pediatric clinic (Achenbach, 1985), while the DSM categorical nosology
has dominated the adult mental health field since the 80s. Still, a group of researchers continued
with the dimensional approach to comorbidity among adult mental disorders (Krueger, 1999;
Krueger et al., 1998; Wolf et al., 1988) and maladaptive personality traits (e.g., Clark, 2005;
Saulsman & Page, 2004). Their findings on higher-order dimensions in psychopathology have
inspired a growing and diverse literature and led to the formation of the Hierarchical Taxonomy
of Psychopathology (HiTOP) consortium.
The HiTOP consortium aimed to integrate empirical evidence from psychopathology to
outline a hierarchical system featuring the following characteristics. In contrast to a categorical
view, a dimensional nosology defines psychopathology as dimensions of psychological function
that range from normal to abnormal without arbitrary cutoffs. The identification of dimensions is
based on observed covariations among symptoms, maladaptive behaviors, and personality traits.
Primary dimensions can be further combined into higher-order factors, resulting in a hierarchical
structure (see Fig. 2 in Kotov, Waszczuk, et al., 2017). The HiTOP model consists of six levels,
namely (from lowest to highest): (1) symptoms/signs/maladaptive behaviors, (2) symptom
components (e.g., insomnia) and maladaptive traits (e.g., separation insecurity), (3) dimensional
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 12
syndromes (e.g., separation anxiety disorder), (4) subfactors (e.g., fear dimension), (5) broad
spectra (e.g., internalizing spectra), and (6) super-spectra (e.g., the general factor of
psychopathology).
The HiTOP model has demonstrated great advantages in reliability, validity, and
practicality. The dimensional results are more stable across the lifespan and replicable than a
categorical approach (e.g., Eaton, Krueger, & Oltmanns, 2011; Kotov et al., 2020; Snyder,
Young, & Hankin, 2017). The inclusion of maladaptive behaviors and personality traits broadens
the symptom criteria of psychopathology and better captures the relationships between mental
and personality disorders (Bender, 2019; Bornstein, 2019; James & Taylor, 2008; Kendell,
2002). The hierarchical structure accounts for comorbidity and can be tailored to focus on any
level depending on the desired degree of specificity. The consortium also arranged a list of
evidence-based dimensional measures relevant to the HiTOP model for research and practical
use (Kotov et al., 2017). Importantly, the HiTOP model provides a framework for knowledge
integration with six workgroups focusing on a wide range of topics, ranging from
neurobiological studies to clinical translation
However, the HiTOP model is not exempt from limitations. Factor analysis assumes that
the latent factor (e.g., a higher-order spectrum) is the cause of the observed covariation among
items (e.g., symptoms). Thus, the HiTOP model derived from factor analysis is incapable of
depicting direct relationships among lower-order items. For example, the unidirectional
transition from generalized anxiety to depression (Schoevers, Deeg, van Tilburg, & Beekman,
2005) cannot be captured by the model. Despite a broad inclusion of symptoms, maladaptive
behaviors, and personalities to estimate psychopathological dimensions, idiographic factors that
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 13
are not a direct representation of mental illness (e.g., low social support, stress, SES, family
environment) are excluded from the model. Although higher-order spectra are associated with
impairment and early adversity, the practical meanings of these dimensions are debatable
(Bender, 2019; Caspi et al., 2014). Hierarchical models are often the best model compared to
models with alternative structures based on model indices. However, recent research showed that
model indices are biased toward hierarchical models (particularly, bifactor models) over other
model structures (Greene et al., 2019), leading us to question the evidential meaning of previous
studies on the structure of psychopathology.
In sum, dimensional nosology emerged to address the shortcomings of traditional
categorical nosology. The recent HiTOP model features a hierarchical structure with dimensions
derived from symptoms, maladaptive behaviors, and personalities. The HiTOP model
demonstrates excellent research and practical advantages and serves as a framework for
information integration. However, the HiTOP model falls short of capturing intra-level item
relationships (e.g., symptom relationships) or reflect environmental influences. Additionally, the
meanings of the higher-order dimensions remain unsettled.
Network approach. Clinicians commonly considered mental problems as complex
causal networks of psychological and environmental components. Beck’s (1995) Cognitive
Conceptualization Diagram provided therapists with boxes and arrows displaying the causal
relationships among relevant childhood data, core beliefs, conditional beliefs, compensatory
strategies, and overt difficulties. Contemporary case conceptualization in Cognitive Behavioral
Therapy (CBT) follows a similar framework of Beck’s and incorporates additional links with
behavioral, biological, psychosocial, and environmental factors (Zubernis & Snyder, 2016).
Individuals’ situational reactions can also be universally illustrated as reciprocal links among
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 14
situations, thoughts, affects, intentions, responses, consequences, and self-evaluation (Goldfried,
2010). In addition to CBT, other schools of thoughts, including interpersonal psychotherapy,
psychodynamic approaches, and emotion-focused therapy, also consider mental illness as causal
links among a set of situational, affective, cognitive, and behavioral factors with a stronger
emphasis on interpersonal effectiveness (Jacobson & Mufson, 2012), defensive mechanisms
(Eells & Lombart, 2003), and emotional experiences (Timulak & Pascual-Leone, 2015),
respectively.
Despite the widespread use of causal network diagrams in case conceptualization, only
recently did quantitative models for complex networks enter psychological science. These
models are referred to as “network models” derived from “network analysis.” Network analysis
has been developed and applied in various scientific fields (Barabási, 2012). Borsboom and
Cramer (2013) introduced network analysis to the mental health field as “the new game in town
(p. 93)” with the potential to match the complexity of mental disorders. Network researchers
suggest conceptualizing and studying mental disorders as networks of interacting symptoms. To
portray the interactions of symptoms, researchers formulate psychological networks that consist
of nodes representing observed symptoms, connected by edges representing statistical
relationships among these symptoms (Borsboom & Cramer, 2013; Jones, Heeren, & McNally,
2017; Nuijten, Deserno, Cramer, & Borsboom, 2016; Schmittmann et al., 2013). The network
approach may not be intuitively considered as a branch of nosology because it lacks concrete
boundaries among clusters. However, the relationships among syndromic clusters and the
likelihood of comorbidity can be easily measured with the number and strength of symptom
connections (Cramer, Waldorp, van der Maas, & Borsboom, 2010; Wigman et al., 2015).
Clustering methods can also be applied to network models for cutoffs between disorders (e.g.,
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 15
Saxena et al., 2017), albeit not recommended for clinical research where little evidence supports
mental disorders as distinct categories.
The number of network studies has been exponentially increased (see Fried et al., 2017,
for a review) for apparent reasons. The network framework provides compelling rationales in
line with clinical case formulation. Like a dimensional nosology, the network approach can well
capture comorbidity and explain relationships among clusters. Additionally, network methods
evolve quickly in response to constructive criticism with detailed tutorial papers and user-
friendly statistical tools in the R programming environment (e.g., Epskamp, Borsboom, & Fried,
2017; Epskamp, Cramer, Waldorp, Schmittmann, & Borsboom, 2012; Jones, Mair, & McNally,
2018). Idiographic factors other than symptoms can be easily incorporated into a network model
as nodes. Further, with time-series data, network models can depict complex dynamics among
symptoms (and with other risk factors) at an individual level.
The network approach also has limitations. Despite the rapid improvement in network
methods, models for high-dimensional data (i.e., models consisting of a large number of
variables) are often sensitive to noise and measurement errors (Forbes et al., 2017). Network
researchers must conduct sensitivity and stability analyses in every study, while many
researchers may struggle with the complexity of these analyses. Current network models can
accommodate multiple types of variables (Haslbeck & Waldorp, 2015); however, the robustness
of network estimation with variables skewed from a Poisson or Gaussian distribution is relatively
unclear. The implication of commonly used network indices (e.g., centrality )in psychopathology
requires further investigation (Bringmann et al., 2019). Lastly, studies of network research lack
an overarching framework for knowledge integration.
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 16
The network approach is an emerging framework in clinical psychology. Within this
framework, mental problems are conceptualized as complex interactions among symptoms and
other psychological/risk factors. A network model consists of observed variables (e.g., symptom)
as nodes, connected with edges representing their statistical relationships. The network approach
has attracted substantial attention in the past few years with its compelling rationale, flexibility in
variable selection, and ability to depict individual dynamical changes. However, network
analysis is complicated and requires further attention in its stability/replicability and
investigation in its statistical properties.
Toward Individualized Treatment with Quantitative Nosology
Current State of Quantitative Nosology
Dimensional Approach. The HiTOP consortium has developed a consensual
hierarchical dimensional model that better aligns with the natural organization of
psychopathology. The HiTOP model covers the majority of psychopathology forms, including
transient symptoms and stable maladaptive traits. It addresses comorbidity by identifying higher-
order dimensions that reflect associations among variables (e.g., symptoms) or lower-order
dimensions, allowing researchers to study shared characteristics among mental problems at
different levels. Further, the dimensional approach in psychiatric nosology has been found with
greater reliability and stronger associations with validators (e.g., shared genetic risk factors,
biomarkers, shared environmental risk factors) than the categorical nosology (Andrews et al.,
2009; Keyes et al., 2012; Kotov et al., 2017; Markon et al., 2011).
The HiTOP dimensions outperform categorical diagnoses in accounting for long-term
chronicity and functional impairment. Longitudinal studies have demonstrated long-term
stability of the HiTOP structure in early adolescence, young adults, middle-aged adults, and
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 17
older adults (Eaton et al., 2011; Reitz et al., 2005; Vollebergh et al., 2001). Higher-order
dimensions in the HiTOP model (e.g., the internalizing and externalizing spectra and the general
factor) can better predict future pathology than disorder-specific variance (Kim & Eaton, 2015).
The internalizing spectrum (includes phenomena such as depression, anxiety, and phobias)
predicts future suicide attempts and a set of medical conditions (Eaton et al., 2013) and fully
accounts for functional impairment associated with mood and anxiety symptoms. (Markon,
2010; Waszczuk et al., 2017). The externalizing spectrum (including phenomena such as conduct
problems, substance use, and antisocial personality traits) has excellent validity in capturing
characteristics associated with criminal offenses (Venables & Patrick, 2012) and jointly explains
marital distress with the internalizing spectrum (South et al., 2011). Additionally, in children, the
severity of externalizing spectrum is associated with within-family change of parental warmth
and family conflicts, supporting the family-based treatment approach in child externalizing
problems (Lin et al., 2021).
The thought disorder spectrum (including phenomena such as schizophrenia, schizotypal,
and paranoid personality traits) fully accounts for impairment associated with psychosis (Jonas &
Markon, 2013). The general psychopathology factor is associated with higher levels of life
impairment, childhood adversity, compromised brain integrity (Caspi et al., 2014), and predicts
prospective school functioning (Lahey et al., 2015).
The HiTOP model can also inform and facilitate clinical practice. Available HiTOP-
assessment in an efficient stepwise manner (Krueger et al., 2018). The stepwise assessment
begins with a brief measure of the higher-order spectra, followed by lengthier measures to
characterize lower dimensions within the elevated spectrum. Clinicians can obtain an
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 18
individual’s profile of relevant dimensions that are potentially more informative than categorical
diagnoses in clinical decision-making (e.g., Morey, Skodol, & Oldham, 2014; Verheul, 2005).
Hopwood and colleagues (2019) have demonstrated the procedure of case formulation and
treatment selection based on a HiTOP profile, in which the high-order dimensions can guide
transdiagnostic treatment selection for a comorbid case. Further, HiTOP has demonstrated its
utilities in transdiagnostic treatment development, such as the unified protocol for emotional
disorders (Barlow et al., 2020).
In sum, the dimensional approach with the HiTOP model can better explain and predict
chronic mental health conditions and functional impairment. The HiTOP suggests a stepwise
assessment protocol that returns a dimensional profile with rich personal information. Such a
profile can inform initial case formulation and transdiagnostic treatment selection. Further,
increasing transdiagnostic treatments have been developed accordant with the HiTOP
framework.
Network Approach. Researchers have applied a network approach to various mental
disorders (see Contreras, Nieto, Valiente, Espinosa, & Vazquez, 2019; Fried et al., 2017;
Robinaugh, Hoekstra, Toner, & Borsboom, 2020 for reviews). Most network studies are
exploratory, in which mood disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder, psychosis, and comorbidity
are the most studied areas (Contreras et al., 2019). Network research initially focused on
identifying central (i.e., the most interconnected) symptoms in the network. A prospective study
found that central depressive symptoms (e.g., anhedonia, depressed mood, fatigue, and
concentration problems) could better predict the onset of future MDD than non-central
symptoms. Weighted severity scores based on symptom centrality outperformed the traditional
severity scores based on symptom counts (Boschloo et al., 2016). However, the clinical
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 19
implication of symptom centrality requires further investigation. Central symptoms are
meaningful for intervention only if they are upstream determinants in the causal path. Further,
the meaning of centrality may not be universal across disorders or situations (see Bringmann et
al., 2019).
Another important feature in a network model is the connectivity among symptoms,
which provides an alternative view to disorder boundaries and prognosis. A simulation study
suggests that the boundary between health and pathology varies as a function of network
connectivity (Borsboom et al., 2016). In a weakly connected network, activation within the
network spreads slowly to other nodes, resulting in continuous (i.e., dimensional) states.
Contrarily, in a strongly connected network, any activation within the system rapidly cascades
into a severe pathological state (i.e., all symptoms are activated), yielding a sharp boundary
between normality and pathology. Further, a highly connected network may shift from a trigger-
determinant state to a self-maintained state after the initial activation, resulting in an onset of a
disorder episode or chronic mental illness. For example, an individual with depressive tendencies
may show excessive responses to a stressor (e.g., being criticized for a work mistake) and remain
in a negative state for a prolonged period after the initial trigger disappears. In line with such
conceptualization, empirical studies showed that connectivity of temporal emotional networks in
patients with major depression and psychosis is stronger than those of healthy controls (Pe et al.,
2015; Wigman et al., 2015). Higher levels of connectivity in depressed patients at baseline also
predicted worse prognosis at a 2-year follow-up even after controlling for severity (van Borkulo
et al., 2015).
Network researchers later expanded their focus from inter-symptom relationships to the
complex interplays among symptoms and other risk or environmental factors. For example,
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 20
researchers have studied the role of attentional bias in social anxiety symptom networks (Heeren
& McNally, 2016), biomarkers (Santos et al., 2017) and resilience (Hoorelbeke et al., 2016) in
depressive symptom networks, and screen time behaviors in mood symptom networks (Lin,
Eaton, et al., 2020). Most studies included risk or environmental factors as nodes in the network,
whereas a few studies treated them as categorical (Cramer, Borsboom, Aggen, & Kendler, 2012)
or continuous (Lin, Fried, et al., 2020) variables associated with network connectivity. The
inclusion of risk and environmental factors in network models can improve our understanding of
complex psychopathological phenomena with multiple etiologies or maintaining factors and
facilitate individualized prognosis predictions.
Another emerging research trend is the estimation of individual networks with time-series
data, which offers a promising gateway to the understanding of complex psychological dynamics
at the individual level (Bringmann et al., 2017; Epskamp et al., 2018). Technological advances
permit the collection of intensive time-series measures of symptoms, emotions, and other daily
fluctuating factors with the experience sampling methods or ecological momentary assessment
(Piccirillo, Beck, & Rodebaugh, 2019). With time-series data, researchers can estimate
personalized symptom networks and monitor dynamical changes among clinically relevant
variables in various natural settings. Several single case studies have estimated symptom or
emotion networks of patients with anxiety, depression, or psychosis. Some studies have gathered
more than 1000 measures of a single person. (Bak et al., 2016; Kroeze et al., 2017; Wichers &
Groot, 2016). Fisher and colleagues (2017) expanded their research scale to 40 patients and
presented the study as an exemplar for translating such methods into routine clinical assessment
and psychotherapy. Such personalized knowledge can be used for dynamic treatment selection
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 21
(allowing flexible treatment selection based on a client’s weekly status), progress monitoring,
and detection of early signs for remission or relapse.
In sum, the network approach has been applied to various mental disorders. Network
models allow us to identify central symptoms that are potentially effective treatment targets
(pending for clinical trials). Symptom connectivity provides us an alternative way to think of
continuity versus discrete mental states between normality and pathology. Highly connected
symptom networks may be an indicator of severity and a predictor of worse prognosis. With the
inclusion of risk and environmental factors, we can approach psychopathological phenomena as
complex interactions among multiple etiological and maintaining factors. Lastly, individual
networks based on time-series data provide promising potential to reveal complex interplays
among daily fluctuating variables and psychopathology at the individual level.
A Comparison Between the Dimensional (HiTOP) and Network Approaches
Both approaches aim to overcome shortcomings of the categorical nosology but differ in
theories. To unveil the natural structure of psychopathology, the HiTOP model extracts common
variance from symptoms, maladaptive behaviors, and personality traits as hierarchically arranged
latent psychopathological factors. The network model depicts causal, dynamical relationships
among symptoms with the inclusion of other risk factors. These two approaches seem to endorse
fundamentally different assumptions. The HiTOP model assumes latent causal relationships,
where the relationships among observable variables are explained by a latent causal factor,
whereas the network model emphasizes mutual causal relationships among observable variables.
However, the two models can be compatible if we think outside the methodological terms
(Bringmann & Eronen, 2018). For example, individuals with depression diathesis may endorse a
dysfunctional attributional style. Once exposed to stressors, they tend to exhibit higher levels and
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 22
prolonged periods of depressive mood, accompanied by other cognitive (e.g., difficulties in
concentration) and somatic symptoms (e.g., interrupted sleep and changes in appetites). These
symptoms may be self-sustaining due to a maladaptive attributional style (e.g., blaming self for
functional impairment caused by depressive symptoms). When we extract the shared variance
among depressive symptoms, we may capture their depression diathesis (e.g., attributional
styles) as a latent factor. When we project the depression diathesis to a two-dimensional space,
we see a dynamic causal chain among symptoms. Sometimes the diathesis can be treatable (e.g.,
cognitive treatment on attributional errors), and sometimes the symptoms should be focused first
to break the vicious cycle (e.g., behavioral activation for severe depression).
As reviewed above, these two approaches have differential clinical utility. The HiTOP
approach provides clinicians with individuals’ dimensional profiles that contain rich,
personalized information to guide initial treatment selection. The network approach can
incorporate ideographic risk factors for an integrated conceptualization that facilitates treatment
modification. It can also be applied to monitor dynamical changes along with treatment and
provide instant feedback to clinicians. The marriage of these two approaches may potentially
provide clinicians a holistic framework, where they can obtain different kinds of information that
guides their decision-making at any desired level of focus.
Future Steps toward Better Clinical Utilities
Individualized treatment is required in natural clinical settings. Some clinicians are
against evidence-based practices (EBPs) because many of EBPs are designed for categorical
diagnostic labels with limited flexibility for comorbidity and complicated cases (Lilienfeld et al.,
2013; Weisz et al., 2014). Even for EBP advocates, they need to tailor EBPs for clients’
idiographic needs with limited empirical evidence guiding their decisions. In the following
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 23
paragraphs, we would discuss how we can improve clinical utilities of future research based on
the dimensional and network frameworks to facilitate clinicians’ decision-making at different
treatment stages.
Dimensional Approach. Clinically, we would expect an individual’s assessment scores
to reflect the degree of functional impairment, prognosis, and treatment responses. Functional
impairment is an important clinical index for service allocation. A few studies showed that
higher-order spectra in the HiTOP model could fully explain functional impairment associated
with lower-order diagnoses or symptoms (e.g., Jonas & Markon, 2013; Waszczuk et al., 2017).
However, when taking a closer look, the higher-order spectra only explained half of the
functional impairment variance. Some proposed that functional impairment in self and
interpersonal aspects (i.e., the A criterion for personality disorders) may be captured by the
general psychopathology factor in the HiTOP model (see Bender, 2019; Widiger et al., 2019),
pending for further empirical support.
Additionally, the previous HiTOP studies on functional impairment were conducted at
the population level with cross-sectional data. If we hope to incorporate the HiTOP assessment
into clinical routines, we urgently need to obtain the predictability of HiTOP profiles on
functional impairment at the individual level. Depending on the obtained predictability, we may
want to investigate other risk factors for functional impairment and the interplays among HiTOP
dimensions and these factors. Further, if the predictability cannot reach a clinically meaningful
level, we may want to consider incorporating direct functional impairment assessment into the
HiTOP assessment protocol.
The prognosis is another critical information for clinicians to decide the types, length,
and dosage of services for a particular individual, and for the individual to obtain a realist
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 24
expectation. Although a study showed that the HiTOP dimensions could better predict future
pathology than specific disorder variance (Kim & Eaton, 2015), we are still far from the required
precision in clinical settings. To achieve better clinical utility, we encourage researchers utilizing
longitudinal data to construct predictive models of HiTOP dimensions on prognostic indices
(e.g., length of an episode, probability of remission and relapse) while controlling for treatment
histories.
Undoubtedly, we would hope to predict individuals’ treatment responses based on their
assessment profiles. We currently have a transdiagnostic treatment for mood problems with
substantial support for efficacy (Barlow et al., 2020). However, if we want to move toward
individualized treatment, we need further investigation of the relationships between different
levels of dimensions and treatment responses. We have little evidence on whether higher scores
of a broad spectrum predict worse treatment responses. Previous studies have shown that
symptom severity, but not comorbidity, was the determinant of treatment response (Mennin et
al., 2000). We have no clinical trials investigating if higher scores indicate a need for stronger
dosage, longer length, or different types of treatment for better therapeutic effects. We have
limited knowledge about which level of dimensions is a better indicator of treatment responses
given different symptoms profiles. For example, behavioral activation (targeting anhedonia, a
lower-level symptom) is shown to be more effective than a cognitive approach (targeting general
cognitive distortions shared by clients with depression and anxiety) as an initial step for clients
with severe depression (Dimidjian et al., 2006). Empirical studies of treatment responses based
on HiTOP profiles and can further facilitate initial treatment selection and formulation of
subsequent treatment plans.
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 25
We also need to identify intervenable transdiagnostic factors and link them with relevant
treatment modules. Some, especially trainees, may appreciate having a heavy manual called “an
integrated therapy of X” containing all potentially relevant treatment modules for a set of mental
problems (which is becoming a trend in treatment development; see Hayes et al., 2013) as a tool
book. We certainly value such type of information and agree it comes handy in clinical training.
However, for licensed clinicians with more complicated cases, heavier caseloads, higher
demands in quick decision-making, and limited time in continuous training, such a book may not
provide much help. Imagining if transdiagnostic therapy for the internalizing spectrum means
conducting all treatments that we used to apply on depression and anxiety (which belong to the
internalizing spectrum) to a single client, this certainly does not transcend what we already have
in hands. Thus, it is critical to identify intervenable transdiagnostic factors (e.g., attribution
errors, cognitive fallacies, assertiveness, a fixed mindset) associated with each higher-order
dimension. Then we need to conduct clinical trials to examine specific treatment effects on these
high-order dimensions. Network analysis is an excellent statistical method that can be combined
with latent dimensions (as nodes) to examine an individual’s dynamical treatment effects on
these higher-order dimensions.
As we emphasized previously, HiTOP is an effective framework for information
integration and knowledge translation. Embracing a new framework does not mean to abandon
previous research findings. We have fruitful research results based on categorical labels that can
be easily incorporated with the current HiTOP framework and inform future HiTOP studies (e.g.,
what may be a potential transdiagnostic factor?). We expect the HiTOP measures to become the
first-line clinical assessment and hope the HiTOP field continues research on functional
impairment, prognosis, treatment responses, and the identification of intervenable transdiagnostic
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 26
factors. We hope that with the integration of the current literature and future findings in the same
program, we can automatically output detailed treatment recommendations (and links to relevant
resources) for both transdiagnostic and subfactors.
Network approach. The network approach offers the potential to inform individualized
treatment but is still in an early stage of development and application. The network analysis field
directly borrowed theories and estimation methods from other fields and has minimal insight to
the plausibility of these other fields’ assumptions on modeling psychopathological phenomena
(Bringmann et al., 2019; Robinaugh et al., 2020). For example, we commonly use centrality
measures derived from social network theories to detect central symptoms. However, it is
unclear if symptom relationships share the same characteristics as those of interpersonal
relationships in a social network. Researchers also commonly assume that higher levels of
network connectivity would indicate a worse prognosis. However, the only evidence of this
assumption is from one prospective network study of depression (van Borkulo et al., 2015). We
have no evidence that findings related to depression can be applied to other mental problems
directly. To avoid misinterpretation, we urge network researchers to investigate the implications
and meanings of commonly used network indices in different psychological networks with
longitudinal data. Can initial network connectivity predict later prognosis? How is a central
symptom involved in the development of a disorder? Research on the meanings of longitudinal
prediction in network models can inform the choice of indices and calibrate our interpretations
(e.g., Rodebaugh et al., 2018).
Additionally, problems have emerged along with the shift of focus from symptom
relationships to symptom-risk factor relationships. Most studies are cross-sectional and
exploratory without a precise aim. To ensure our approach matches the research question, we
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 27
will differentiate the two concepts packaged with the same term: risk factor (Schooling & Jones,
2018). The first type of risk factor serves as a predictor for risk stratification and service
allocation. The second type serves as an explainer involved in the process or course of a disease.
We recommend investigating predictors’ predictability on functional impairment, prognosis, and
their interactions with higher-order dimensions (instead of symptoms), to guide general service
allocation and clinical referral. Contrarily, network analysis with time-series data is ideal for
examining causal paths among explainers and symptoms. However, only a handful of labs have
resources for time-series measures, whereas most labs only have access to cross-sectional data. It
is, therefore, critical to develop methods to select candidate explainers with cross-sectional data.
Additionally, we encourage network researchers to expand the use of individual
dynamical networks to treatment process research. Many non-symptom-focused therapeutic
factors are considered critical to positive therapeutic changes, such as bringing a sense of hope,
therapeutic alliance, clients’ awareness of problems and engagement in corrective experiences,
and ongoing reality testing (Goldfried, 1980). With network analysis, we can further investigate
how these factors interact with symptoms and idiographic traits. We encourage clinical centers to
collect weekly data on symptoms and therapy process components, following the framework
proposed by Castonguay and colleagues (2015), and collaborate with research sites to further
understand treatment processes.
Lastly, the exponentially growing number of network studies is pressing us to develop
post-hoc methods and a framework for information integration. Currently, we have no statistical
methods to compare the findings of different network studies. Reviews on network research
remain descriptive and lack of a consistent framework for knowledge management. Although the
network approach aims to address the shortcomings of categorical nosology, network researchers
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 28
still mostly communicate using the DSM framework and selected symptom variables based on
the DSM criteria. Instead of following the DSM system, we recommend uniting with the HiTOP
framework for better knowledge integration (Eaton, 2015).
Summary
1. To bridge the research-practice gap, we suggest establishing a framework in which
research directly aims to facilitate clinicians’ decision-making at different stages of
treatment for individual clients.
2. One potential starting point for establishing such a framework is psychiatric nosology, a
foundation that guides our conceptualization, communication, investigation, and
implementation.
3. Conventional psychiatric nosology has taken a categorical approach (e.g., the ICD and
DSM) with broad acceptance due to its historical legacy and perceived utility.
Criticisms of categorical nosology include arbitrary cutoffs between normality and
pathology, comorbidity, and within-disorder heterogeneity. These limitations may
obscure research findings and impact clinical utility.
4. Two types of quantitative nosology emerged to overcome the shortcomings of categorical
nosology, namely the dimensional approach (e.g., HiTOP) and the network approach.
5. The HiTOP dimensional approach conceptualizes mental disorders as hierarchically-
arranged dimensional latent factors derived from symptoms, maladaptive behaviors, and
personality traits.
6. The network approach conceptualizes mental disorders as complex interplays among
symptoms and other risk factors, focusing on identifying central symptoms and
examining symptom connectivity.
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 29
7. The HiTOP consortium has established a stepwise (i.e., from broad spectra to
subdimensions within the elevated spectrum) assessment that returns an individual’s
dimensional profile. Such a profile can guide clinicians’ initial treatment selection for
transdiagnostic factors.
8. The network approach can examine complex symptom relationships with idiographic risk
factors and estimate individual dynamical changes among symptoms and other daily
fluctuating variables with time-series data.
9. We urge HiTOP research to further focus on
a. the predictability of higher-order dimensions on functional impairment and
prognosis at the individual level
b. differential treatment responses of individuals based on their dimensional profiles
c. identifying intervenable transdiagnostic factors
d. clinical trials investigating individual dynamical changes of therapeutic effects on
transdiagnostic factors using network analysis
e. treatment suggestions for different levels of dimensions
10. We encourage future network research to investigate
a. the meanings of network indices in longitudinal prediction
b. the interaction processes of proximal risk factors and symptoms in individual
dynamical networks
c. the interaction processes of critical therapeutic factors (e.g., alliance) and
symptoms in individual dynamical networks
d. post-hoc methods for network comparisons across studies
e. knowledge management within the HiTOP framework
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 30
11. The unification of the HiTOP and network approach may provide a comprehensive
framework to inform clinicians’ decisions at different treatment stages. HiTOP
dimensions can inform initial service allocation and treatment selection, whereas the
network analysis can be performed within the HiTOP framework for personalized
treatment adjustment considering idiographic risk factors.
CLINICAL UTILITY OF QUANTITATIVE NOSOLOGY 31