The Cognitive, Ecological, and Developmental Origins of
Self-disturbance in Borderline Personality Disorder
a,b,c,d b,e a,f,g
Axel Baptista , David Cohen , Pierre Olivier Jacquet* & Valérian Chambon*
. *equal contribution
Institut Jean Nicod, Département d’études cognitives, ENS, EHESS, CNRS, PSL
University, 75005 Paris, France.
Service de Psychiatrie de l’Enfant et de l’Adolescent, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière Charles
Foix, APHP.6, Paris, France.
Université de Paris, France.
Faculté de Médecine, Sorbonne Université, France.
Institut des Systèmes Intelligents et de Robotique, Sorbonne Université, ISIR CNRS
UMR 7222, Paris, France.
Laboratoire de neurosciences cognitives & computationnelles, Département d’études
cognitives, École normale supérieure, INSERM, PSL University, 75005 Paris, France.
Institut du Psychotraumatisme de l’Enfant et de l’Adolescent, Centre Hospitalier de
Versailles et Conseil départemental des Yvelines et des Hauts de Seine, Versailles,
France.
Correspondence can be directed to Axel Baptista, Institut Jean Nicod, Ecole Normale
Supérieure, 29 rue d’Ulm 75005 Paris, France (email: axel.baptista@gmail.com)
Abstract
Self-disturbance is recognized as a key symptom of Borderline Personality Disorder
(BPD). Although it is the source of significant distress and significant costs to society,
it is still poorly specified. In addition, current research and models on the aetiology of
BPD do not provide sufficient evidence or predictions about who is at risk of developing
BPD and self-disturbance, and why. The aim of this review is to lay the foundations of
a new model inspired by recent developments at the intersection of social cognition,
behavioural ecology and developmental biology. We argue that the sense of agency is
an important dimension to consider when characterizing self-disturbances in BPD.
Second, we address the poorly characterized relation between self-disturbances and
adverse life conditions encountered early in life. We highlight the potential relevance
of Life-History Theory – a major framework in evolutionary developmental biology – to
make sense of this association. We put forward the idea that the effect of early life
adversity on BPD symptomatology depends on the way individuals trade their limited
resources between competing biological functions during development.
Keywords: Borderline Personality Disorder; Self; Agency; Social cognition; Early life
adversity; Life History Theory.
1. Introduction
Clinical observations and experimental data, as well as a number of theoretical
developments and international classifications, support the proposition that
disturbances in self- and interpersonal functioning are fundamental to the
psychopathology of Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD) (Bender & Skodol, 2007;
Gunderson, Herpertz, et al., 2018; Meares et al., 2011). In addition, features of BPD,
such as affective instability, impulsivity and acts of self-harm most often occur in
response to real or imagined interpersonal events.
BPD has a dramatic impact on global health and incurs a significant cost to
society (Chanen et al., 2017; Gunderson, Herpertz, et al., 2018). It is the most common
personality disorder in clinical setting (33-49% in young inpatients) (Chanen et al.,
2017; Skodol et al., 2002), and psychosocial functioning is significantly impaired in
affected individuals (Cailhol et al., 2015). Approximately 75% of BPD patients have a
history of suicide attempt (Goodman et al., 2017), and the risk of death by suicide in
these patients is estimated between 4% and 10% (Cailhol et al., 2015), a rate almost
50 times higher than that of the general population (Skodol et al., 2002). In addition,
BPD remains notoriously difficult to treat. No specific medication has been officially
approved for its treatment (Martín-Blanco et al., 2017), and appropriate
psychotherapeutic treatments are not or hardly available (Gunderson, Herpertz, et al.,
2018).
This general picture is accompanied by a lack of explanatory models of BPD
based on experimental results (Fineberg, 2019). The aim of this review is to lay the
foundations of a new model inspired by recent developments at the intersection of
social cognition and behavioural ecology. Specifically, we argue that the sense of
agency – the experience of controlling one’s own action and through them, the course
of events in the outside world (Haggard, 2017) – is an important dimension to consider
when characterizing self-disturbances in BPD. Second, we address the well-known,
though poorly specified, relation between self-disturbances and adverse conditions
encountered early in life. We then highlight the potential relevance of the phenotypic
plasticity framework in evolutionary biology (i.e., Life History Theory (Stearns, 1992) to
make sense of this association. We hypothesize that the effect of early life adversity
on BPD symptomatology is partly conditional on the way individuals trade their limited
resources between competing biological functions along the life cycle.
1.1. The sense of self in BPD
The DSM 5 mentions disturbance in the sense of Self as being central to BPD
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Kernberg, a prominent clinical theorist of
BPD, proposed the concept of "identity diffusion" (Kernberg, 1985) to refer to difficulties
in establishing and maintaining a stable and coherent sense of Self. Identity diffusion
is signed by the expression of fragmented states of mind about the self, such as "
having great difficulty in answering simple (but psychologically essential) questions
like: Who am I? How can I be differentiated from everybody else? What do I want?
How can my present life and problems be meaningfully related to my past history and
my conceptions of the future?" (Jørgensen, 2006). Other formulations include the
"painful sense of personal incoherence" (Liotti & Farina, 2016). International
classifications from DSM 3 to DSM 5 also refer to a broad phenomenological sense of
discontinuity in BPD.
Consistent with these descriptions, results from qualitative studies (Agnew et
al., 2016; Dammann et al., 2011; Spodenkiewicz et al., 2013) as well as experimental
studies of patients’ subjective experience (see for examples (Adler et al., 2012; Beeney
et al., 2016; Jørgensen, 2009; Jørgensen et al., 2012; Lind et al., 2019; Wilkinson-
Ryan & Westen, 2000) have shown that BPD patients have i) impaired self-image, ii)
difficulty remembering childhood memories, iii) lack of insight (Bourvis et al., 2020) iv)
difficulty projecting themselves into the future, resulting in the subjective experience of
“living from day-to-day” (Spodenkiewicz et al., 2013; Fuchs, 2007). Experimental
results also frequently point to negative subjective self-evaluation in adolescents and
adults patients (e.g., ideas of inner worthlessness and/or badness) (see (Winter et al.,
2017) for a review).
1.1.1. Limitations of the main conceptions of self-disturbance in BPD
Despite many theoretical developments, past approaches to self-disturbance in BPD
patients have encountered several limitations. Firstly, most studies referring to self-
disturbance in BPD describe it as a disruption of the ‘‘sense of Self’’, and use a wide
range of concepts (Kerr et al., 2015). There is little agreement on what the term "sense
of Self" actually refers to (Jørgensen, 2006). This gap is reinforced by the lack of
consensus on the true meaning of Self in cognitive neuroscience and philosophy.
Indeed, the concept of Self is multifaceted, yet it is often used as an umbrella term for
notions that only very partially overlap - e.g., cognitive self, core self, dialogic self,
ecological self, etc. (Strawson, 2000). Secondly, most studies on BDP have explored
high-level cognitive processes related to self (e.g. linguistic representations of the self)
(Hohwy & Michael, 2017).
An alternative notion of the self has been developed as an immediate sense of
ownership of our experiences, that is, a sense of self that exists prior to any reflection.
Contemporary philosophers refer to it as a kind of minimal self (Zahavi, 2007), rooted
in bodily sensorimotor processes. There is now agreement within the literature on a
general dichotomy between (i) this minimal/embodied self, understood as a first-person
pre-reflective experience implemented in bodily sensorimotor processes, and (ii) a
higher-level self, grounded in reflective processes involving beliefs, introspection, and
autobiographical memory (Millière, 2017).
Proponents of the embodied cognition theory have long argued that these two
types of "self" are related. In this view, the body plays an essential role not only in
perception but also in higher cognitive abilities (e.g., language, sociality, abstraction,
intentional action, volition, creativity and innovation) (Gallagher, 2006). In addition,
embodied self has also recently been emphasized in computational models of the self
relying on a predictive coding framework (Seth et al., 2012). In this framework,
representations of the self as well as self/world boundaries are generated through top-
down and bottom-up predictions modulating the multimodal integration of sensory
inputs. Several authors further refer to this type of hierarchical self-model to explain
disrupted self-representation in experimental settings as well as in a range of disorders
including schizophrenia and depersonalization disorder (Hohwy & Michael, 2017;
Chambon et al. 2017).
Some authors suggest that this embodied minimal self, combined with models
developed in the predictive coding framework, hold promise to develop testable
explanations of self-other disturbances in BPD (Fineberg et al., 2014). We review and
critically discuss these recent theoretical developments in the next section.
1.1.2. The minimal self in BPD
BPD patients suffer from disrupted body experiences. These include "dissociative
symptoms" (Laddis et al., 2017). Although dissociation is a broad concept, including
"flashbacks", "identity confusion", and a feeling of “having large gaps” in one’s memory,
it is commonly referred to as the phenomenon of depersonalization and is
characterized by out-of-body feelings. These symptoms are part of the ninth diagnostic
criteria of BPD in DSM V ("transient, stress-related paranoid ideation or severe
dissociative symptoms"). In addition, a majority of BPD patients have negative self-
assessments of their own body (Löffler et al., 2020), higher pain thresholds (Chung et
al., 2020), and non-suicidal self-injurious behaviours (Aouidad et al., 2020; Gunderson,
Herpertz, et al., 2018).
To date, few studies have focused on the minimal self in BPD. According to the
consensual multimodal account of the minimal self, we experience our body through
our internal and external senses. These senses can influence each other, meaning
that "information from one modality can affect information in another modality"
(Vignemont, 2018). This has been demonstrated by several experiments in healthy
subjects, showing for example that specific auditory information alters the feeling of
the texture of our own skin (see also (Vignemont, 2018) for a review of the ways in
which vision affects proprioception and touch).
The Rubber Hand Illusion (RHI) task (Botvinick & Cohen, 1998) is a classic
experiment investigating the multimodal binding account of minimal self. The
experimental set-up is as follows: "One sits with one’s arm hidden behind a screen,
while fixating on a rubber hand presented in one’s bodily alignment; the rubber hand
is then stroked in either synchrony or asynchrony with one’s (hidden) hand (with cotton
swabs for example)" (Vignemont, 2018). This manipulation induces an illusion: (i) at
the phenomenological level, healthy participants report that they experience tactile
sensations as being located on the rubber hand, and that they feel as if the rubber
hand belonged to them (i.e. illusory limb ownership); (ii) at the behavioural level, they
mislocalize the stimulated finger in the direction of the location of the finger of the
rubber hand (i.e. proprioceptive drift) (Vignemont, 2018).
Only three studies have investigated RHI in BPD patients. Two studies report
an increased illusory limb ownership in adult women with BPD compared to healthy
controls (Bekrater-Bodmann et al., 2016; Neustadter et al., 2019). A third study using
a modified version of the RHI did not replicate this finding (Möller et al., 2020).
Interestingly, one of these studies showed that this increased illusion occurred not only
in the synchronous condition, but also in the asynchronous condition (Neustadter et
al., 2019). With respect to proprioceptive drift, both studies report similar drift toward
the rubber hand in the synchronous condition in BPD and healthy controls groups.
Nonetheless, BPD participants also showed a sustained proprioceptive drift during the
asynchronous condition in one study (Neustadter et al., 2019). In addition, state and
trait dissociations were both associated with illusory limb ownership (Bekrater-
Bodmann et al., 2016). Since the sense of body ownership is based on tactile,
proprioceptive and visual body percepts, the authors argue that the sustained illusory
limb ownership and proprioceptive drift in BPD are due to an "overweighting of
exteroceptive input (e.g. seeing the rubber hand)" to the detriment of interoceptive (i.e.
tactile and proprioceptive) cues (Neustadter et al., 2019). Abnormal illusory experience
through RHI have also been shown in schizophrenia, Body Dysmorphic Disorder and
eating disorders as well as during ketamine challenge (Neustadter et al., 2019). As a
result, RHI (Bekrater-Bodmann et al., 2016) as well as broader body ownership
experiences, have been associated with state and trait dissociation (Löffler et al., 2020)
and trait psychoticism (Neustadter et al., 2019) in BPD subjects.
In addition to the notion of bodily illusion, the minimal/embodied self in BPD was
also approached through the prism of interoception (Löffler et al., 2018) or pain
perception (Chung et al., 2020). Despite its potential importance in deficient self-
awareness and psychosocial functioning in BPD (Löffler et al., 2018), only two studies
have investigated the involvement of interoception in BPD: one study found that
interoceptive performance was not altered in BPD (Hart et al., 2013), while another
provided neurophysiological evidence of a deficit in cortical representation of
interoceptive afferences (i.e. heartbeat-evoked potentials) in BPD (Müller et al., 2015)
(see (Löffler et al., 2018) for a review). With respect to pain perception, there is ample
evidence that it is reduced in BPD (Chung et al., 2020). However, BPD patients do not
show alterations in tactile and proprioceptive perception compared to healthy controls
(see (Löffler et al., 2018) for a review).
1.1.3. Does minimal/embodied-self explain self-disturbances in BPD?
The above studies provide converging preliminary evidence that BPD is associated
with perceptual abnormality (i.e. pain perception), altered bodily awareness and
disturbance of self-location (i.e. interoception, illusory limb ownership). Thus, it is
tempting to speculate that BPD is related to the disruption of low-level perceptual and
bodily processes. Indeed, several authors have repeatedly postulated that the general
symptomatology of BPD is influenced by abnormal bodily processes that blur the
boundaries between the inner (the self) and the outer (the environment, other people,
etc.) (Bekrater-Bodmann et al., 2016; Löffler et al., 2018, 2020). Can these alterations
of the minimal self in BPD patients explain impairments in higher-order cognitive
functions? This hypothesis currently faces several limitations.
Firstly, empirical evidence of a direct contribution of the disturbed minimal-self
to BPD symptomatology, including disturbed psychosocial functioning, is scarce.
Moreover, the few studies that address this issue lack statistical power or are gender-
biased (i.e., often only females are included). Women are more likely to report suicidal
or self-mutilation behaviours, affective instability, and chronic feelings of emptiness at
lower levels of BPD severity than men (Hoertel et al., 2014). In contrast to the studies
cited above (Neustadter et al., 2019; Bekrater-Bodmann et al., 2016), another study
failed to show an association between body experiences and childhood trauma, as well
as major symptoms such as engagement in non-suicidal self-injurious (NSSI)
behaviour, and emotion dysregulation (Löffler et al., 2020). Overall, the most robust
finding is the relationship between alteration of the minimal self in BPD and dissociation
(Bekrater-Bodmann et al., 2016; Löffler et al., 2020; Neustadter et al., 2019).
Second, alterations of the minimal self similar to those reported by BPD
subjects, have been associated with other psychiatric disorders (Löffler et al., 2018).
Similarly, increased illusory limb ownership has also been associated with other
psychotic conditions (Neustadter et al., 2019). These findings call into question the
specificity of these alterations.
Third, previous studies of the sense of body ownership in BPD may have missed
an important affective dimension. De Vignemont proposed that the sense of bodily
ownership cannot be reduced to body feelings and bodily attention (Vignemont, 2018).
Indeed, bodily ownership is linked to the mental representation of body boundaries,
which correspond to a safe zone that "requires appropriate actions if it is invaded". This
body map is a response to organism’s evolutionary needs and defines a specific
representation of the "narcissistic" body that must be protected (protective body
schema). This theoretical development shed new light on the experimental results on
illusory bodily ownership in BPD: the more unstable body representation in the mind
revealed by increased RHI in BPD could be interpreted as a precarious protective body
schema. Interestingly, in the stop distance paradigm, adult women with BPD have
twice the preferred social distance compared to healthy subjects, confirming previous
experiments that established a preferred social distance in imagined social
experiences (Fineberg et al., 2018). In the light of de Vignemont's theory, these results
however, that this interpretation seems to be contradicted by the high prevalence of
self-injuries in this disorder, which is most likely related to a disrupted protective body
map (Borah et al., 2016; Klonsky, 2007). This contradiction may be explained by the
lower stability over time of the protective body map in BPD, which is itself linked to the
particularly unstable affective state in these patients (Carpenter & Trull, 2013; Daros &
Williams, 2019).
Boundaries of
peripersonal space
BPD without dissociative symptoms
or self-injuries
BPD with dissociative symptoms
and/or self-injuries
Healthy subjects
(Vignemont, 2018)), in the case where it is disrupted (red dashed line) or enlarged
(blue dashed line).
1.1.4. Preliminary conclusion
To overcome the above limitations, future research in BPD should focus on better
characterizing the relationship between bodily experiences and interpersonal
difficulties, and on the role of affective experiences (particularly those related to the
protective body schema). In order to objectify these associations, future studies could
combine experiments with neurophysiological measures, such as skin conductance, to
capture physiological response to a potential threat.
BPD appears to be best conceptualized as a multifaceted disorder of self-
experience, related to the disruption of narrative and minimal/embodied aspects of the
self. The challenge for future research would be to unravel the interplay of emotional
instability, bodily experiences and impaired interpersonal functioning in BPD.
Specifically, there is a lack of accurate understanding of the disrupted social
relationships in BPD, which are considered a central dimension of the disorder.
1.2. Self and interpersonal functioning impairments in BPD
Consistent with the inclusion of both "perception and understanding of self" and
"perception and understanding of others" in the "social processes" domain of the
National Institute for Mental Health RDoC (Sanislow et al., 2010), most theories of BPD
have linked self-disturbances in BPD to interpersonal problems (Beeney et al., 2016;
Bender & Skodol, 2007; Meares et al., 2011; Gunderson, Herpertz, et al., 2018).
Kernberg proposed that self-disturbance is related to a pattern described as
intrapersonal and interpersonal ”splitting” that involves polarized or extreme
evaluations of self and others (Kernberg, 1985). The notion of "dichotomous thinking"
also describes the tendency of BPD subjects to evaluate their experiences in terms of
exclusive categories (Beck et al., 2004). Empirical studies have supported the view
that BPD involves split evaluations of others (Beeney et al., 2016; Gauthier Mongeon
& Gagnon, 2017; Kanske et al., 2016) and that individuals with BPD perceive close
relationships in "extremes of idealization and devaluation" and alternating between
"overinvolvement and withdrawal" (DSM-V, 2014). Since then, previous research has
provided evidence of impaired ability to recognize and reflect on mental states of self
and others in BPD (Luyten et al., 2020; Lysaker et al., 2017; Semerari et al., 2005).
Similarly, Bateman and Fonagy proposed the concept of ‘alien self’ in BDP individuals
to describe how they experience being controlled by external forces (Bateman, 2006),
while Gunderson proposed the theory of interpersonal hypersensitivity in which "the
BPD person reacts to perceived failures of support from others by feeling either that
this is cruelly unfair (“bad other”) or that he or she is inherently bad (“bad self”)"
(Gunderson, Fruzzetti, et al., 2018). Indeed, mistrust is an important characteristic of
interpersonal problems in BPD. Studies using explicit as well as implicit measures such
as those used in game theory paradigms (King-Casas et al., 2008), evaluative priming
tasks (Gauthier Mongeon & Gagnon, 2017) or live dyadic interactions (Fineberg et al.,
2018), have shown that BPD patients tend to consider ambiguous or neutral faces as
more angry, and interpersonal stimuli as more negative in general (Kaiser et al., 2019;
Lazarus et al., 2014). These tendencies may explain why suicidal behaviors are so
common among BDP individuals (Links, 2015).
In summary, BPD patients appear to struggle with negatively biased and
conflicting mental representations of self and others. According to Gregory (2007), this
is reminiscent of an unstable binary attribution of "values", "agency" and "motivations"
(Gregory, 2007). In other words, in BPD patients, the locus of control – i.e. the degree
to which individuals believe that they, as opposed to external factors such as chance,
fate, or other agents, have control over their lives (Lefcourt, 1976; Rotter, 1966) –
appears to be shifting from a position of no responsibility to full responsibility for an
interpersonal event. To our knowledge, only a few empirical studies have examined
the attributive style of BPD. Two psychometric studies suggest that BPD
characteristics are associated with an external locus of control (Hope et al., 2018; Pinto
et al., 1996). Other studies have shown that patients with BPD appear to consider
themselves to be the predominant cause of adverse events (Schilling et al., 2015;
Winter et al., 2015). These results, combined with recent attention to BPD patients'
mistrust of others (Fonagy et al., 2017), support the hypothesis that BPD is associated
with poor attribution of actions and intentions to agents. These misattributions
participate in the blurring of boundaries between self and others, and may ultimately
result in an abnormal experience of agency in BPD patients.
2. The acting self: why agency is important
It has long been suggested that self-other discrimination requires a functional sense of
agency (SoA), that is the unaltered experience that ‘I am the one who is causing or
generating the action’ (Gallagher, 2012), and through them, the course of events in the
outside world (Haggard, 2017; Haggard & Chambon, 2012). In our daily lives, we most
often experience agency as an experience that is compatible "with a description in
terms of degrees of control over our actions" (Gallagher, 2012) and their subsequent
outcomes. It is important to note that the consequences of the intended action may be
proximal (e.g. turning on the light) or distal (e.g. having provoked a particular emotional
expression in another person). Research on SoA has shown that the agentive
experience is not a unitary construct and relies on a variety of information and
neurocognitive processes.
2.1. Implicit vs explicit Sense of Agency
The distinction between reflective and pre-reflective self-awareness that we mentioned
earlier about the self also applies to the Sense of Agency (SoA). The current cognitive
model distinguishes between i) an implicit SoA, mediated by lower-level pre-reflective
sensorimotor processes underlying the processing of action (Dewey & Knoblich, 2014),
which are highly sensitive to the discrepancy between intended and observed action
effects, and ii) an explicit, declarative or conscious SoA, which is based not only on
pre-reflective processes but also on abstract self-knowledge and autobiographical
memory, generally referred to as belief-like processes (Synofzik et al., 2008). Modern
theoretical frameworks have proposed a taxonomy of the different contributors to SoA,
and emphasize that the SoA results from the integration of information from multiple
motor level, in healthy subjects, recent studies have shown that the SoA depends on
actively monitoring various internal signals related to the different stages of action
control (i.e. prediction, actions selection, efference copy) (Sidarus et al., 2017), as well
as external cues such as sensory inputs from the environment (Chambon et al., 2014).
At a higher cognitive level, SoA depends on monitoring internal signals such as explicit
prior intentions, higher order beliefs, as well as external signals that relate to the
general context of the action, such as social information (Beyer et al., 2018; Sidarus et
al., 2020). Dimaggio and colleagues also coined the concept of existential agency
(Dimaggio et al., 2009) and proposed a distinction between what they called
'instrumental agency' (that is “agency in dealing with the non-personal world”) and
'interpersonal agency' (“which involves affecting how others think and behave”)
(Dimaggio & Lysaker, 2015).
Nevertheless, the broad dichotomy between implicit and explicit SoA should not
be seen as an absolute dichotomy, but rather as a continuum. Thus, implicit or non-
conscious mental representations can influence explicit SoA, as illustrated by a study
showing that an unconsciously preactivated emotion increases the feeling of having
caused the same emotion in another agent (Ruys & Aarts, 2012). Conversely, an
explicit mental representation can influence implicit SoA, as illustrated by another study
showing that recollection of an episode of social exclusion can alter the estimated
interval between action and effect, the latter being a standard measure of implicit SoA
(Malik & Obhi, 2019).
SoA has been shown to be of particular importance for different facets of the
self. In particular, it has been shown to modulate the sense of body-ownership (Tsakiris
et al., 2007). It may also be essential for the constitution of a narrative self, as the self
as a ‘doer’ would be necessary for the construction of the diachronic self as a ‘story
teller’. In the words of Elisabeth Pacherie: “a sense of oneself as an agent apart from
any particular action, i.e. a sense of one's capacity for action over time, and a form of
self-narrative where one's past actions and projected future actions are given a general
coherence and unified through a set of overarching goals, motivations, projects and
general lines of conduct” (Pacherie, 2007). Finally, SoA plays an important role in
social cognition, and in the regulation of interpersonal transactions, insofar as it
indexes our ability to distinguish self-generated events from externally generated
events (Ohata et al., 2020).
Since SoA depends on a wide range of factors and develops throughout lifetime,
it is not surprising that not all people experience it in the same way. Some people have
great difficulty knowing what is self-produced and what is externally produced.
Specifically, SoA can be disrupted in multiple ways. It can be disrupted by problems
with high-order introspective cognition and/or by a failure to integrate sensory and
motor signals (Gallagher, 2012). Using a transnosographic perspective, Dimaggio et
al. proposed that impairments in self-reflection might be an interesting dimension to
better capture and delineate SoA impairments in psychopathology. The authors posit
that these impairments could be related to an altered sense of ownership of one’s own
thoughts and actions, poor emotional awareness, confusion between fantasy and
reality, and poor integration of a range of self-representations and autobiographical
narratives (Dimaggio et al., 2009). Besides, experimental evidence suggests that SoA
disorders in patients with schizophrenia are caused by a primary deficit at the
sensorimotor level (Metcalfe et al., 2012).
With respect to BPD, minimal and narrative self-disturbances as well as social
impairments (especially attribution problems) could be associated with an altered SoA.
A few authors have pointed in this direction (see for example (Adler et al., 2012;
Jørgensen, 2006; Links, 2015; Westen & Cohen, 1993). More recently, Gold &
Kyratsous have speculated that self-disturbances in BPD have both diachronic (i.e.
narrative) and synchronic (i.e. agentive) components (Gold & Kyratsous, 2017). Also,
studies have shown poorer SoA in individuals with vulnerable narcissism (Hascalovitz
& Obhi, 2015; Render & Jansen, 2019). Two recent experiments in BPD show
contrasting results: an experiment using the Sensory Attenuation paradigm suggest
that this implicit measure of SoA is abnormally decreased in a subgroup of BPD
patients without non-suicidal self-injury (Colle et al., 2020). Another experiment using
an intentional binding paradigm incorporated into a modified RHI paradigm provided
evidence for higher self-reported SoA, but no conclusive evidence of an impaired
implicit measure of SoA (Möller et al., 2020). However, these preliminary results should
be interpreted with caution given their methodological limitations and lack of statistical
power.
2.2. Internal vs external sources of information
The optimal cue integration model of SoA could help shed new light on SoA disruptions
in BPD. As mentioned above, this model emphasizes the contribution of various
sources of information to the experience of agency (Synofzik et al., 2013). One way to
categorize these information sources is to distinguish between: (i) internal information
that encompasses various signals related to the different stages of action control
(Sidarus et al., 2017), and (ii) external information that relates to the context of the
Internal cues External cues
Background beliefs
Contextual cues
Thoughts
Social cues
Emotions
Cognitive level
Judgement of Agency
(explicit)
Sensori-motor level
Feeling of Agency
(implicit)
Feed-forward cues Sensory feedback
In the “cue integration” approach, the respective contribution of internal vs
external information to SoA depends on their current reliability. In this approach, an
“optimal” SoA is therefore the product of an “optimal” weighting of each source of
information at a given time. For subjects with BPD, this adaptive weighting may
precisely deviate from optimality. An interesting, though unexplored, possibility is that
of an unbalanced contribution of internal vs external information among BPD subjects:
an underweighting of internal cues could mechanically increase the effect of external
cues on SoA.
The idea that the SoA of BPD individuals may be particularly prone to
modulation by external information is further fuelled by their hypersensitivity to social
information (Gunderson, Herpertz, et al., 2018). It follows that sense of agency (SoA)
in BPD patients could depend excessively on social context (for studies showing that
social interactions modulate SoA in healthy adults, see Beyer et al., 2018; Sidarus et
al., 2020). Patients with BPD may struggle with the feeling that their actions (including
their mental actions) depend on the physical and mental actions of others. In other
terms, the boundary between self and others could be blurred and result in BPD being
constantly overwhelmed by others, being represented alternately as potential satisfiers
of an exacerbated need for care or as potential perpetrators (Smith & South, 2020).
Such a blurring of self-other distinction could trigger occasional misattributions
of agency in BPD patients. It may explain altered bodily experiences, such as
depersonalization, as SoA have been shown to be a key contributor to the sense of
body ownership. Moreover, it could also have major implications for emotional
regulation, a crucial dimension of the disorder (Gunderson, Herpertz, et al., 2018). BPD
patients suffer from an increased physiological reactivity to emotional situations, as
well as a low emotional awareness (an inability to distinguish emotions) and an inability
to implement effective emotion regulation strategies in order to reduce negative affects
(see (Carpenter & Trull, 2013; Daros & Williams, 2019) for reviews). Nonetheless, the
mechanisms underlying emotional distress in BPD are not fully known (Daros &
Williams, 2019). Research has shown that causal attribution of arousing events have
a strong effect on emotional experiences in the general population (Leary & Gohar,
2014). Misattribution of arousing events may bias emotional experiences in BPD,
further hindering the appraisal of these emotional experience and the implementation
of effective emotional regulation strategies. For example, in the context of intense
emotional experiences, which are typical of BPD, an illusory sense that an agent has
caused their own positive affect could induce overly positive "other-agency emotions"
such as excessive gratitude. Conversely, misattributing a negative affect to another
agent could result in inadequate negative "other-agency emotions" such as anger. The
sense of having caused a negative affect in another agent could also result in
inadequate negative emotions such as guilt. Depending on the affective valence,
positive or negative, of BPD patients' current relationships with others, misattribution
of hyperarousing events may further explain why they alternate between extremes of
idealization and devaluation of others and self (Wilkinson-Ryan & Westen, 2000), and
between hostility and submissiveness (Grove et al., 2017). In stressful situations,
misattribution may also explain these patients' paranoid ideations. In turn, the
increased dependence of SoA on such volatile and contradictory representations of
others may explain the difficulty for BPD patients to maintain a "stable and coherent
sense of self".
3. Why ecology matters
Abnormal experience of agency in BPD patients may interact with the context, past
and present, in which the disorder developed. This relationship between contexts – in
the broadest sense: family, emotional, socioeconomic – and self-agency has been
pointed repeatedly, but the question remains as to why this interaction occurs. A large
body of research suggests that representations of agency develop gradually over the
first years of life, as we interact with the environment and learn to recognize ourselves
as an agent among other agents and as a self among other selves (Hamlin & Baron,
2014; Kelso, 2016; van Elk et al., 2015). This complex feedback loop involving both
the infant and their social environment is nonetheless fragile and thus vulnerable to
virtually all forms of external perturbations. Its disruption could – possibly through a
cascade of developmental events – precede the under- or over-estimation of the
degree of control an agent can exert in a particular context, resulting in learned
helplessness and delusions of control later in life (van Elk et al., 2015).
Borderline Personality Disorder can indeed be conceptualized as a particular
outcome of a developmental cascade that originates in an early experience of adversity
– that is, of external events that threaten the individual’s survival (Porter et al., 2020;
for a review, see Stepp et al., 2016). Along with genetic makeup (heritability is
estimated to be approximately 40-60%, see Amad et al., 2014; Skoglund et al., 2019),
some early life environmental factors of adversity have indeed been robustly
associated with BPD (for a review, see Stepp et al., 2016). For instance, low socio-
economic status, poor or inconsistent parenting, physical violence, sexual abuse and
emotional neglect have been precisely targeted as critical risks of expressing BPD at
both the adolescence and adulthood ((Sharp & Fonagy, 2015); for a review see Stepp
et al., 2016).
Even though this issue has not yet been directly studied, some recent findings
suggest that early life adversity may also play a role in the emergence of agency-based
symptoms. For example, there is some evidence to support the hypothesis that early
life adversity promotes the belief of a diminished personal control over one’s life
(Farkas et al., 2021). People of lower social class, in possession of fewer resources,
exposed to greater instabilities, or in a poorer health status, tend to perceive external,
uncontrollable forces and other individuals as the primary causes of events that affect
their lives (for a review, see Kraus et al., 2012). In contrast, people with higher socio-
economic position perceived themselves (their internal states, motivations and
emotions) as the primary causal sources of what happens to them (Kraus et al., 2012).
In addition, some recent works suggest that certain factors of early life adversity (e.g.,
economic scarcity, attachment insecurity) increases mental health problems (e.g.,
depression, anxiety) later in life via an external locus of control (Culpin et al., 2015; Di
Pentima et al., 2019).
Despite these research efforts, however, no existing work has systematically
investigated whether the effect of adverse environments on reduced personal control
(e.g. reduced self-efficacy) can extend more broadly to abnormal sense of agency
(SoA) that, we believe, is a common correlate of BPD. To the best of our knowledge,
only one recent study found an association between a factor of adversity – social
exclusion – and a standard implicit measure of SoA called “intentional binding”, i.e.,
the compression of the perceived time interval between a voluntary action and its effect
(Malik & Obhi, 2019). This compression has been positively associated with the
declarative sense of being the cause of the outcome of an action, and is considered a
key signature of agency (Moore & Obhi, 2012).
4. Why more is needed: life-history trade-offs
Although some associations between early life adversity factors, the expression of
BPD, and the emergence of agency-based symptoms have been independently
reported in the literature, the proximate mechanisms that may underlie these
seemingly distinct associations remain underspecified. An interesting possibility is that
the expression of BDP symptoms might partly result from the negative effect that early
life adversity imprints on individuals’ perceived agency. In this final section, we suggest
that this phenomenon is mediated by a trade-off between present and future goals that
operates at both the physiological and the psychological level of an individual’s biology
developmental biology that studies how organisms organize their life schedule to
optimize their survival and reproduction by allocating their limited stock of energetic
resources among competing biological functions (Stearns, 1992). Individual
differences in these allocation patterns are thought to depend on the differential
susceptibility of organisms to modify their phenotypes in response to environmental
stress through mechanisms of adaptive plasticity (West-Eberhard, 2005; Ellis & Del
Recent empirical evidence and formal models (Pepper & Nettle, 2017) posit that
individuals who report experiencing little or no control over events that affect their lives
perceive the future as uncertain. From a biological fitness perspective, it makes sense
for these individuals not to risk delaying the satisfaction of immediate needs to invest
time and energy in long-term activities whose pay-offs are likely to change
unpredictably. Some empirical data appears to support this hypothesis by showing that
people who have experienced environmental uncertainty or low perceived control are
more likely than others to act on a day-to-day basis in various domains such as health,
reproduction, social or economic decision-making (Adams & White, 2009; Bulley &
Pepper, 2017; de Wit et al., 2007; Farkas et al., 2021; Fenneman & Frankenhuis, 2020;
Griskevicius et al., 2013; Jacquet et al., 2019; Kruger et al., 2008; Lawrance, 1991;
Lettinga et al., 2020, 2021). Interestingly, such a present-future trade-off clearly
appears to be at play in people with BPD (Spodenkiewicz et al., 2013). Several studies
have indeed associated the BPD diagnosis with a domain-general sensitivity for short-
term rewards: more substance abuse (Chen et al., 2007; Kaufman et al., 2020), more
sexual risk-taking (Brüne et al., 2017; Sansone et al., 2008, 2011), less social trust
(Ebert et al., 2013), less cooperation (King-Casas et al., 2008), strategies favouring
short-term reduction in emotional stressors over long-term emotional stability (Daros &
Williams, 2019), and low tolerance for delayed gratification (McHugh &
Balaratnasingam, 2018).
Particularly characteristic of BPD people (Brüne, 2016), this present-oriented
strategy (as well as its putative psychological cause in terms of reduced sense of
control) could represent the behavioural correlate of a trade-off operating at a deeper
physiological level, in the form of a prioritized allocation of energetic resources to the
development of reproductive functions at the expense of somatic maintenance
functions. Prioritizing reproduction can be conceptualized as a present-oriented life
strategy because it carries direct and indirect health costs that could otherwise be
minimized by delaying reproduction for females (Jasienska et al., 2017) or by mitigating
reproductive efforts for males (Bribiescas, 2001; Campbell et al., 2001). Although
debated (see Brown & Sear, 2019), a growing body of human data supports this
prediction. For example, early life adversity accelerates the timing of human
reproduction while decreasing investment in health (Brumbach et al., 2009; Mell et al.,
2018; Nettle et al., 2011). In contrast, safe childhood conditions are associated with
delayed reproduction (Bribiescas & Ellison, 2007; Ellis et al., 2009; Jasienska et al.,
2017; Ryan et al., 2018; Ziomkiewicz et al., 2016) and are negatively associated with
a number of morbidity risks (Hughes et al., 2017). In addition, a recent meta-analysis
of 65 studies has shown that experiencing adverse events (particularly traumatic
events) at an earlier age significantly accelerates the onset of puberty as well as
biological aging (indexed by telomere length and age of DNA methylation) in both
women and men (Colich et al., 2019). Finally, a recent study of large representative
samples of the European population indicated that a decrease in perceived control
over life events, as well as a psychological focus on the present time, were both related
to a life-history trade-off characterized by poorer health status, younger age at first
reproduction, and higher fertility (Farkas et al., 2021).
A review of recent epidemiological data suggests that individuals with BPD may
BPD individuals of both sexes report significantly more short-term sexual partners
(Lazarus et al., 2019; Sansone et al., 2011). Women with BPD are also more likely to
become pregnant during their youth, and have more children compared to other
individuals (De Genna et al., 2012). There is also evidence that earlier pubertal timing
and accelerated biological age are potential moderators of the association between
early life adversity and externalizing-internalizing behaviours (McLaughlin et al., 2020).
In line with these findings, a recent study among female adolescent BPD inpatients
has shown that earlier perceived pubertal timing is associated with higher BPD
symptoms (Penner & Sharp, 2018). Finally, evidence suggests a major reduction in life
expectancy in BPD due to illness, independently of suicide (Gunderson, Herpertz, et
al., 2018).
The reproduction/maintenance trade-off and its behavioural outcomes that
appears to characterize both healthy and BPD populations might be partly determined
in early ontogeny, when the developing organism must ‘decide’ how to optimally
allocate its limited energy budget between brain development and body growth
(Kuzawa et al., 2014). Importantly, the shape of these trade-offs depends, at least in
part, on the environmental cues processed by the organism early in life. This is
because building a biological system is a long and costly process, so a delayed
allocation decision can be detrimental, and a reversal is often impossible. While
economic deprivation, family instability, and physical insecurity can impact
developmental trajectories primarily during early and late childhood (Ellis & Del
Giudice, 2019; Pepper & Nettle, 2017), low or unpredictable energy provisioning could
have a disproportionate impact on developmental programming during the prenatal
and postnatal periods where such a provisioning – and hence survival – is exclusively
conditional on parental care (Kuzawa & Quinn, 2009). From this perspective, investing
a large amount of metabolic resources in brain development is risky if food availability
varies unpredictably, and slowing down neuromaturation to store more fat makes
sense: it compensates for a potential lack of parental energy provisioning by relying on
endogenous energy stores, even if it comes with costs to physical and mental health
later in life, such as overweight, insulin resistance, reduced brain volume, cognitive
impairment, or mental disorders such as ADHD (Blair et al., 2020; Gunstad et al., 2008;
Kuzawa & Blair, 2019; P. A. Porter et al., 2021; Rollins et al., 2021). To our knowledge,
no study has yet investigated whether a rapid increase in body growth between birth
and childhood is a vulnerability factor for developing BPD symptoms later in life.
Breastfeeding is thought to have a positive effect on maternal bonding and later
attachment style (Schwarze et al., 2015). But more critically, it is possible that lack of
breastfeeding, often reported in children who later developed BPD, is involved in
adjusting the brain/body growth trade-off to inconsistent energy supply in the postnatal
period (Bartok & Ventura, 2009).
Overall, much work needs to be done to show how BPD and agency-based
Nevertheless, this new developmental approach offers some preliminary insights into
the developmental pathway by which early experiences lead to alterations in SoA and,
more broadly, to BPD symptoms.
Early environment Change in behavioral strategies Cognition and clinical signs
High susceptibility to the environment
Several markers at multiple levels:
• multilocus genetic variations
Behavioral Dysregulation
• physiological reactivity
Impulsivity, suicidal behavior
• more difficult temperament (e.g.
impulsivity, low inhibitory control,
negative emotionality)
Emotional Dysregulation
Sense of Affective instability
Agency
Life History trade-off: short versus long Present-focused
term investment behavioral strategy
Interpersonal instability
Idealization and devaluation
Reproduction over Health:
• earlier pubertal timing
Attributive
• more short-term sexual partners
style
• adolescent pregnancy Self disturbance
Early • more children
Unstable sense of self,
adversity
• accelerated biological aging dissociative symptoms,
Paranoid ideation
Harshness
Unpredictability
Early
Perinatal Childhood
early environmental adversity and BPD condition.
5. Conclusion
Overall, our perspective on BPD self-disturbances integrates and expands existing
research and theories on BPD. It first suggests that the solipsist frame of reference of
the "self", whether narrative or minimal, cannot fully explain the core intersubjective
dimension of BPD. Self and interpersonal functioning impairments in BPD are closely
related to misattribution problems. These problems may involve attributing erroneous
causes to one’s own actions and emotions, but also to the actions and emotions of
other agents. An approach that focuses on agency may allow researchers to track
down the mechanisms underlying self and interpersonal disturbances in BPD. In
addition, Life History Theory appears a promising framework to explain why, when and
how agency-based symptoms develop, in the form of a biased locus of control or
abnormal self-efficacy. This cross-disciplinary perspective provides the basis for a
comprehensive explanatory model of the core symptomatology of the BPD condition.
Research at the interface of evolutionary developmental biology, social
cognition and psychopathology can accelerate the advancement of empirical
knowledge about BPD, and these advances may have important implications for the
prevention and management of the disorder. It could help patients to gain insight into
the nature of their condition, and help clinicians to refine existing therapies for BPD.
First, several authors have emphasized the importance of targeting altered SoA in
personality disorders, including BPD (Dimaggio, 2011; Knox, 2010; Links, 2015).
Second, the Life History trade-offs framework suggests that current psychosocial
interventions for BPD might be more effective with a focus on global health. Advances
in our knowledge of BPD developmental trajectory could enable the elaboration of
specific intervention programs at each stage of development that would prevent the
further development of BPD at a later age.
Role of Funding Sources
A.B. was supported by a fellowship from the Université de Paris. V.C. was supported
by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche grants ANR-16-CE37-0012-01 (ANR JCJ)
and ANR-19-CE37-0014-01 (ANR PRC). V.C. and P.O.J. were supported by a
department-wide grant from the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-17-EURE-
0017) and by ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02 PSL (program “Investissements d’Avenir”).
Contributors
Conceptualization: A.B., P.O.J., V.C.; Investigation: A.B., P.O.J.; Resources: A.B.,
V.C., D.C.; Writing - Original Draft: A.B., P.O.J.; Writing - Review & Editing: A.B.,
P.O.J., V.C., D.C.; Visualization: A.B., V.C.; Supervision: V.C., D.C.; Project
administration: A.B., V.C., D.C.; Funding acquisition: A.B., V.C., D.C.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This is a preprint of an article published in Frontiers in Psychiatry. The final
6. References
Adams, J., & White, M. (2009). Time perspective in socioeconomic inequalities
in smoking and body mass index. Health Psychology: Official Journal of the Division of
Health Psychology, American Psychological Association, 28(1), 83–90.
Adler, J. M., Chin, E. D., Kolisetty, A. P., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2012). The
distinguishing characteristics of narrative identity in adults with features of borderline
personality disorder: An empirical investigation. Journal of Personality Disorders,
Agnew, G., Shannon, C., Ryan, T., Storey, L., & McDonnell, C. (2016). Self and
identity in women with symptoms of borderline personality: A qualitative study.
International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-Being, 11(1), 30490.
Amad, A., Ramoz, N., Thomas, P., Jardri, R., & Gorwood, P. (2014). Genetics
of borderline personality disorder: Systematic review and proposal of an integrative
model. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 40, 6–19.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). DSM 5. American Psychiatric
Association.
Aouidad, A., Cohen, D., Mirkovic, B., Pellerin, H., de La Rivière, S. G., Consoli,
A., Gérardin, P., & Guilé, J.-M. (2020). Borderline personality disorder and prior suicide
attempts define a severity gradient among hospitalized adolescent suicide attempters.
Bartok, C. J., & Ventura, A. K. (2009). Mechanisms underlying the association
between breastfeeding and obesity. International Journal of Pediatric Obesity, 4(4),
196–204.
Bateman, A. (2006). Mentalization-based treatment for borderline personality
disorder: A practical guide. OUP Oxford.
Beck, A. T., Freeman, A., Davis, D., & others. (2004). Cognitive therapy of
personality disorders (2nd ed.). New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Beeney, J. E., Hallquist, M. N., Ellison, W. D., & Levy, K. N. (2016). Self–other
disturbance in borderline personality disorder: Neural, self-report, and performance-
based evidence. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, 7(1), 28–
Bekrater-Bodmann, R., Chung, B. Y., Foell, J., Gescher, D. M., Bohus, M., &
Flor, H. (2016). Body plasticity in borderline personality disorder: A link to dissociation.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 69, 36–44.
Bender, D. S., & Skodol, A. E. (2007). Borderline personality as a self-other
representational disturbance. Journal of Personality Disorders, 21(5), 500–517.
Beyer, F., Sidarus, N., Fleming, S., & Haggard, P. (2018). Losing Control in
Social Situations: How the Presence of Others Affects Neural Processes Related to
Sense of Agency. Eneuro, 5(1), ENEURO.0336-17.2018.
Blair, C., Kuzawa, C. W., & Willoughby, M. T. (2020). The development of
executive function in early childhood is inversely related to change in body mass index:
Evidence for an energetic tradeoff? Developmental Science, 23(1), e12860.
Borah, S., McConnell, B., Hughes, R., & Kluger, B. (2016). Potential relationship
of self-injurious behavior to right temporo-parietal lesions. Neurocase, 22(3), 269–272.
Botvinick, M., & Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hands ‘feel’touch that eyes see.
Nature, 391(6669), 756–756.
Bourvis, N., Aouidad, A., Spodenkiewicz, M., Palestra, G., Aigrain, J., Baptista,
A., Benoliel, J.-J., Chetouani, M., & Cohen, D. (2020). Adolescents with borderline
personality disorder show a higher response to stress but a lack of self-perception:
Evidence through affective computing. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and
Bribiescas, R. G. (2001). Reproductive ecology and life history of the human
male. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, Suppl 33, 148–176.
Bribiescas, R. G., & Ellison, P. T. (2007). How hormones mediate trade-offs in
human health and disease. In S. C. Stearns & J. C. Koella (Eds.), Evolution in Health
and Disease (pp. 77–94). Oxford University Press.
Brown, L. J., & Sear, R. (2019). Are mothers less likely to breastfeed in harsh
environments? Physical environmental quality and breastfeeding in the Born in
Bradford study. Maternal & Child Nutrition, 15(4), e12851.
Brumbach, B. H., Figueredo, A. J., & Ellis, B. J. (2009). Effects of Harsh and
Unpredictable Environments in Adolescence on Development of Life History
Strategies: A Longitudinal Test of an Evolutionary Model. Human Nature, 20(1), 25–
Brüne, M. (2016). Borderline Personality DisorderWhy ‘fast and furious’?
Evolution, Medicine, and Public Health, 2016(1), 52–66.
Brüne, M., O, J., Schojai, M., Decker, C., & Edel, M.-A. (2017). Mating strategies
and experience of early adversity in female patients with borderline personality
disorder: Insights from life history theory. Personality and Individual Differences, 113,
Bulley, A., & Pepper, G. V. (2017). Cross-country relationships between life
expectancy, intertemporal choice and age at first birth. Evolution and Human Behavior,
Cailhol, L., Gicquel, L., & Raynaud, J.-P. (2015). BORDERLINE PERSONALITY
DISORDER IN ADOLESCENTS. 17.
Campbell, B. C., Lukas, W. D., & Campbell, K. L. (2001). Reproductive ecology
of male immune function and gonadal function. Reproductive Ecology and Human
Evolution, 159–178.
Carpenter, R. W., & Trull, T. J. (2013). Components of emotion dysregulation in
borderline personality disorder: A review. Current Psychiatry Reports, 15(1), 335.
Chambon, V., Sidarus, N., & Haggard, P. (2014). From action intentions to
action effects: How does the sense of agency come about? Frontiers in Human
Chanen, A., Sharp, C., & Hoffman, P. (2017). Prevention and early intervention
for borderline personality disorder: A novel public health priority. World Psychiatry,
Chen, E. Y., Brown, M. Z., Lo, T. T. Y., & Linehan, M. M. (2007). Sexually
Transmitted Disease Rates and High-Risk Sexual Behaviors in Borderline Personality
Disorder Versus Borderline Personality Disorder With Substance Use Disorder. The
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 195(2), 125–129.
Chung, B. Y., Hensel, S., Schmidinger, I., Bekrater-Bodmann, R., & Flor, H.
(2020). Dissociation proneness and pain hyposensitivity in current and remitted
borderline personality disorder. European Journal of Pain.
Colich, N. L., Rosen, M. L., Williams, E. S., & McLaughlin, K. A. (2019).
Biological aging in childhood and adolescence following experiences of threat and
deprivation: A systematic review and meta-analysis. BioRxiv, 642405.
Colle, L., Hilviu, D., Rossi, R., Garbarini, F., & Fossataro, C. (2020). Self-
Harming and Sense of Agency in Patients With Borderline Personality Disorder.
Culpin, I., Stapinski, L., Miles, Ö. B., Araya, R., & Joinson, C. (2015). Exposure
to socioeconomic adversity in early life and risk of depression at 18 years: The
mediating role of locus of control. Journal of Affective Disorders, 183, 269–278.
Dammann, G., Hügli, C., Selinger, J., Gremaud-Heitz, D., Sollberger, D.,
Wiesbeck, G. A., Küchenhoff, J., & Walter, M. (2011). The self-image in borderline
personality disorder: An in-depth qualitative research study. Journal of Personality
Disorders, 25(4), 517–527.
Daros, A. R., & Williams, G. E. (2019). A Meta-analysis and Systematic Review
of Emotion Regulation Strategies in Borderline Personality Disorder: Harvard Review
De Genna, N. M., Feske, U., Larkby, C., Angiolieri, T., & Gold, M. A. (2012).
Pregnancies, Abortions, and Births among Women with and without Borderline
Personality Disorder. Women’s Health Issues, 22(4), e371–e377.
de Wit, H., Flory, J. D., Acheson, A., McCloskey, M., & Manuck, S. B. (2007).
IQ and nonplanning impulsivity are independently associated with delay discounting in
middle-aged adults. Personality and Individual Differences, 42(1), 111–121.
Dewey, J. A., & Knoblich, G. (2014). Do Implicit and Explicit Measures of the
Sense of Agency Measure the Same Thing? PLoS ONE, 9(10).
Di Pentima, L., Toni, A., Schneider, B. H., Tomás, J. M., Oliver, A., & Attili, G.
(2019). Locus of control as a mediator of the association between attachment and
children’s mental health. The Journal of Genetic Psychology, 180(6), 251–265.
Dimaggio, G. (2011). Assessment of dysfunctional interpersonal schemas,
avoidance of intimacy and lack of agency as key issues for treating narcissism: A
commentary on Ronningstam’s narcissistic personality disorder. Personality and
Mental Health, 5(3), 228–234.
Dimaggio, G., & Lysaker, P. H. (2015). Commentary: “Personality and
Intentional Binding: An Exploratory Study Using the Narcissistic Personality Inventory.”
Dimaggio, G., Vanheule, S., Lysaker, P. H., Carcione, A., & Nicolò, G. (2009).
Impaired self-reflection in psychiatric disorders among adults: A proposal for the
existence of a network of semi independent functions. Consciousness and Cognition,
18(3), 653–664.
Ebert, A., Kolb, M., Heller, J., Edel, M.-A., Roser, P., & Brüne, M. (2013).
Modulation of interpersonal trust in borderline personality disorder by intranasal
oxytocin and childhood trauma. Social Neuroscience, 8(4), 305–313.
Ellis, B. J., & Del Giudice, M. (2019). Developmental Adaptation to Stress: An
Evolutionary Perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 70(1), 111–139.
Ellis, B. J., Figueredo, A. J., Brumbach, B. H., & Schlomer, G. L. (2009).
Fundamental Dimensions of Environmental Risk: The Impact of Harsh versus
Unpredictable Environments on the Evolution and Development of Life History
Farkas, B. C., Chambon, V., & Jacquet, P. O. (2021). Do perceived control and
time orientation mediate the effect of early life adversity on reproductive behaviour and
health status? Insights from the European Value Study and the European Social
Survey.
Fenneman, J., & Frankenhuis, W. E. (2020). Is impulsive behavior adaptive in
harsh and unpredictable environments? A formal model. Evolution and Human
Behavior.
Fineberg, S. K. (2019). Keep the Change: Embracing Variability as a Path to
Richer Theoretical Models of Borderline Personality Disorder. Biological Psychiatry,
Fineberg, S. K., Leavitt, J., Landry, C. D., Neustadter, E. S., Lesser, R. E., Stahl,
D. S., Deutsch-Link, S., & Corlett, P. R. (2018). Individuals with Borderline Personality
Disorder show larger preferred social distance in live dyadic interactions. Psychiatry
Fineberg, S. K., Steinfeld, M., Brewer, J. A., & Corlett, P. R. (2014). A
Computational Account of Borderline Personality Disorder: Impaired Predictive
Learning about Self and Others Through Bodily Simulation. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 5.
Fonagy, P., Luyten, P., Allison, E., & Campbell, C. (2017). What we have
changed our minds about: Part 2. Borderline personality disorder, epistemic trust and
the developmental significance of social communication. Borderline Personality
Fuchs, T. (2007). Fragmented Selves: Temporality and Identity in Borderline
Personality Disorder. Psychopathology, 40(6), 379–387.
Gallagher, S. (2006). How the body shapes the mind. Clarendon Press.
Gallagher, S. (2012). Multiple aspects in the sense of agency. New Ideas in
Gauthier Mongeon, F., & Gagnon, J. (2017). Negativity bias and instability in
spontaneous and deliberate evaluations of others: The role of borderline personality
Gold, N., & Kyratsous, M. (2017). Self and identity in borderline personality
disorder: Agency and mental time travel. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice,
Goodman, M., Tomas, I. A., Temes, C. M., Fitzmaurice, G. M., Aguirre, B. A., &
Zanarini, M. C. (2017). Suicide attempts and self-injurious behaviours in adolescent
and adult patients with borderline personality disorder: Suicide attempts and self-
injurious behaviours. Personality and Mental Health, 11(3), 157–163.
Gregory, R. J. (2007). Borderline attributions. American Journal of
Psychotherapy, 61(2), 131.
Griskevicius, V., Ackerman, J. M., Cantú, S. M., Delton, A. W., Robertson, T. E.,
Simpson, J. A., Thompson, M. E., & Tybur, J. M. (2013). When the Economy Falters,
Do People Spend or Save? Responses to Resource Scarcity Depend on Childhood
Environments. Psychological Science, 24(2), 197–205.
Grove, J. L., Smith, T. W., Crowell, S. E., Williams, P. G., & Jordan, K. D. (2017).
Borderline personality features, interpersonal correlates, and blood pressure response
to social stressors: Implications for cardiovascular risk. Personality and Individual
Gunderson, J. G., Fruzzetti, A., Unruh, B., & Choi-Kain, L. (2018). Competing
Theories of Borderline Personality Disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders, 32(2),
Gunderson, J. G., Herpertz, S. C., Skodol, A. E., Torgersen, S., & Zanarini, M.
C. (2018). Borderline personality disorder. Nature Reviews Disease Primers, 4, 18029.
Gunstad, J., Paul, R. H., Cohen, R. A., Tate, D. F., Spitznagel, M. B., Grieve,
S., & Gordon, E. (2008). Relationship Between Body Mass Index and Brain Volume in
Healthy Adults. International Journal of Neuroscience, 118(11), 1582–1593.
Haggard, P. (2017). Sense of agency in the human brain. Nature Reviews
Haggard, P., & Chambon, V. (2012). Sense of agency. Current Biology, 22(10),
Hamlin, J. K., & Baron, A. S. (2014). Agency Attribution in Infancy: Evidence for
Hart, N., McGowan, J., Minati, L., & Critchley, H. D. (2013). Emotional regulation
and bodily sensation: Interoceptive awareness is intact in borderline personality
disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders, 27(4), 506–518.
Hascalovitz, A. C., & Obhi, S. S. (2015). Personality and intentional binding: An
exploratory study using the narcissistic personality inventory. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 9, 13.
Hoertel, N., Peyre, H., Wall, M. M., Limosin, F., & Blanco, C. (2014). Examining
sex differences in DSM-IV borderline personality disorder symptom expression using
Item Response Theory (IRT). Journal of Psychiatric Research, 59, 213–219.
Hohwy, J., & Michael, J. (2017). Why should any body have a self?
Hope, N. H., Wakefield, M. A., Northey, L., & Chapman, A. L. (2018). The
association between locus of control, emotion regulation and borderline personality
disorder features. Personality and Mental Health, 12(3), 241–251.
Hughes, K., Bellis, M. A., Hardcastle, K. A., Sethi, D., Butchart, A., Mikton, C.,
Jones, L., & Dunne, M. P. (2017). The effect of multiple adverse childhood experiences
on health: A systematic review and meta-analysis. The Lancet Public Health, 2(8),
Jacquet, P. O., Safra, L., Wyart, V., Baumard, N., & Chevallier, C. (2019). The
ecological roots of human susceptibility to social influence: A pre-registered study
investigating the impact of early-life adversity. Royal Society Open Science, 6(1),
Jasienska, G., Bribiescas, R. G., Furberg, A.-S., Helle, S., & Núñez-de la Mora,
A. (2017). Human reproduction and health: An evolutionary perspective. The Lancet,
Jørgensen, C. R. (2006). Disturbed sense of identity in borderline personality
disorder. Journal of Personality Disorders, 20(6), 618–644.
Jørgensen, C. R. (2009). Identity style in patients with borderline personality
disorder and normal controls. Journal of Personality Disorders, 23(2), 101–112.
Jørgensen, C. R., Berntsen, D., Bech, M., Kjølbye, M., Bennedsen, B. E., &
Ramsgaard, S. B. (2012). Identity-related autobiographical memories and cultural life
scripts in patients with Borderline Personality Disorder. Consciousness and Cognition,
Kaiser, D., Jacob, G. A., van Zutphen, L., Siep, N., Sprenger, A., Tuschen-
Caffier, B., Senft, A., Arntz, A., & Domes, G. (2019). Biased Attention to Facial
Expressions of Ambiguous Emotions in Borderline Personality Disorder: An Eye-
Tracking Study. Journal of Personality Disorders, 1–28.
Kanske, P., Schulze, L., Dziobek, I., Scheibner, H., Roepke, S., & Singer, T.
(2016). The wandering mind in borderline personality disorder: Instability in self- and
other-related thoughts. Psychiatry Research, 242, 302–310.
Kaufman, E. A., Perez, J., Lazarus, S., Stepp, S. D., & Pedersen, S. L. (2020).
Understanding the association between borderline personality disorder and alcohol-
related problems: An examination of drinking motives, impulsivity, and affective
Kelso, J. A. S. (2016). On the Self-Organizing Origins of Agency. Trends in
Kernberg, O. F. (1985). Borderline conditions and pathological narcissism.
Rowman & Littlefield.
orderline+conditions+and+pathological+narcissism+kernberg&ots=8L6ZSnwa73&sig
=WyyC50B9HU0ihgsWynW1QE8kBcg
Kerr, I. B., Finlayson-Short, L., McCutcheon, L. K., Beard, H., & Chanen, A. M.
(2015). The ?Self’ and Borderline Personality Disorder: Conceptual and Clinical
King-Casas, B., Sharp, C., Lomax-Bream, L., Lohrenz, T., Fonagy, P., &
Montague, P. R. (2008). The Rupture and Repair of Cooperation in Borderline
Personality Disorder. Science, 321(5890), 806–810.
Klonsky, E. D. (2007). The functions of deliberate self-injury: A review of the
evidence. Clinical Psychology Review, 27(2), 226–239.
Knox, J. (2010). Self-Agency in Psychotherapy: Attachment, Autonomy, and
Intimacy (Norton Series on Interpersonal Neurobiology). WW Norton & Company.
Kraus, M. W., Piff, P. K., Mendoza-Denton, R., Rheinschmidt, M. L., & Keltner,
D. (2012). Social class, solipsism, and contextualism: How the rich are different from
Kruger, D. J., Reischl, T., & Zimmerman, M. A. (2008). Time perspective as a
mechanism for functional developmental adaptation. Journal of Social, Evolutionary,
and Cultural Psychology, 2(1), 1.
Kuzawa, C. W., & Blair, C. (2019). A hypothesis linking the energy demand of
the brain to obesity risk. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(27),
Kuzawa, C. W., Chugani, H. T., Grossman, L. I., Lipovich, L., Muzik, O., Hof, P.
R., Wildman, D. E., Sherwood, C. C., Leonard, W. R., & Lange, N. (2014). Metabolic
costs and evolutionary implications of human brain development. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 111(36), 13010–
Kuzawa, C. W., & Quinn, E. A. (2009). Developmental origins of adult function
and health: Evolutionary hypotheses. Annual Review of Anthropology, 38, 131–147.
Laddis, A., Dell, P. F., & Korzekwa, M. (2017). Comparing the symptoms and
mechanisms of ?dissociation? In dissociative identity disorder and borderline
personality disorder. Journal of Trauma & Dissociation, 18(2), 139–173.
Lawrance, E. C. (1991). Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence
from Panel Data. Journal of Political Economy, 99(1), 54–77.
Lazarus, S. A., Cheavens, J. S., Festa, F., & Zachary Rosenthal, M. (2014).
Interpersonal functioning in borderline personality disorder: A systematic review of
behavioral and laboratory-based assessments. Clinical Psychology Review, 34(3),
Lazarus, S. A., Choukas-Bradley, S., Beeney, J. E., Byrd, A. L., Vine, V., &
Stepp, S. D. (2019). Too Much Too Soon?: Borderline Personality Disorder Symptoms
and Romantic Relationships in Adolescent Girls. Journal of Abnormal Child
Leary, M. R., & Gohar, D. (2014). Self-awareness and self-relevant thought in
the experience and regulation of emotion. In Handbook of emotion regulation, 2nd ed
(pp. 376–389). Guilford Press.
Lefcourt, H. M. (1976). Locus of control: Current trends in theory and research.
Lettinga, N., Jacquet, P. O., André, J.-B., Baumand, N., & Chevallier, C. (2020).
Environmental adversity is associated with lower investment in collective actions. PloS
One, 15(7), e0236715.
Lettinga, N., Mell, H., Algan, Y., Jacquet, P. O., & Chevallier, C. (2021).
Childhood environmental adversity is not linked to lower levels of cooperative
behaviour in economic games. Evolutionary Human Sciences, 3.
Lind, M., Vanwoerden, S., Penner, F., & Sharp, C. (2019). Inpatient adolescents
with borderline personality disorder features: Identity diffusion and narrative
incoherence. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, 10(4), 389–
Links, P. (2015). Commentary: Advancing psychotherapy integration for
treatment of personality disorders. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 25, 45–48.
Liotti, G., & Farina, B. (2016). Painful incoherence: The self in borderline
personality disorder. In M. Kyrios, R. Moulding, G. Doron, S. S. Bhar, M. Nedeljkovic,
& M. Mikulincer (Eds.), The Self in Understanding and Treating Psychological
Disorders (1st ed., pp. 169–178). Cambridge University Press.
Löffler, A., Foell, J., & Bekrater-Bodmann, R. (2018). Interoception and Its
Interaction with Self, Other, and Emotion Processing: Implications for the
Understanding of Psychosocial Deficits in Borderline Personality Disorder. Current
Löffler, A., Kleindienst, N., Cackowski, S., Schmidinger, I., & Bekrater-
Bodmann, R. (2020). Reductions in Whole-body Ownership in Borderline Personality
Disorder – A Phenomenological Manifestation of Dissociation. Journal of Trauma &
Luyten, P., Campbell, C., Allison, E., & Fonagy, P. (2020). The Mentalizing
Approach to Psychopathology: State of the Art and Future Directions. Annual Review
071919-015355
Lysaker, P. H., George, S., Chaudoin–Patzoldt, K. A., Pec, O., Bob, P.,
Leonhardt, B. L., Vohs, J. L., James, A. V., Wickett, A., Buck, K. D., & Dimaggio, G.
(2017). Contrasting metacognitive, social cognitive and alexithymia profiles in adults
with borderline personality disorder, schizophrenia and substance use disorder.
Malik, R. A., & Obhi, S. S. (2019). Social exclusion reduces the sense of agency:
Evidence from intentional binding. Consciousness and Cognition, 71, 30–38.
Martín-Blanco, A., Ancochea, A., Soler, J., Elices, M., Carmona, C., & Pascual,
J. C. (2017). Changes over the last 15 years in the psychopharmacological
management of persons with borderline personality disorder. Acta Psychiatrica
McHugh, C., & Balaratnasingam, S. (2018). Impulsivity in personality disorders:
Current views and future directions. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 31(1), 63–68.
McLaughlin, K. A., Colich, N. L., Rodman, A. M., & Weissman, D. G. (2020).
Mechanisms linking childhood trauma exposure and psychopathology: A
transdiagnostic model of risk and resilience. BMC Medicine, 18, 1–11.
Meares, R., Gerull, F., Stevenson, J., & Korner, A. (2011). Is self disturbance
the core of borderline personality disorder? An outcome study of borderline personality
factors. The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 45(3), 214–222.
Mell, H., Safra, L., Algan, Y., Baumard, N., & Chevallier, C. (2018). Childhood
environmental harshness predicts coordinated health and reproductive strategies: A
cross-sectional study of a nationally representative sample from France. Evolution and
Metcalfe, J., Van Snellenberg, J. X., DeRosse, P., Balsam, P., & Malhotra, A.
K. (2012). Judgements of agency in schizophrenia: An impairment in autonoetic
metacognition. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
Millière, R. (2017). Looking for the Self: Phenomenology, Neurophysiology and
Philosophical Significance of Drug-induced Ego Dissolution. Frontiers in Human
Möller, T. J., Braun, N., Thöne, A.-K., Herrmann, C. S., & Philipsen, A. (2020).
The Senses of Agency and Ownership in Patients With Borderline Personality
Moore, J. W., & Obhi, S. S. (2012). Intentional binding and the sense of agency:
A review. Consciousness and Cognition, 21(1), 546–561.
Müller, L. E., Schulz, A., Andermann, M., Gäbel, A., Gescher, D. M., Spohn, A.,
Herpertz, S. C., & Bertsch, K. (2015). Cortical Representation of Afferent Bodily Signals
in Borderline Personality Disorder: Neural Correlates and Relationship to Emotional
Dysregulation. JAMA Psychiatry, 72(11), 1077–1086.
Nettle, D., Coall, D. A., & Dickins, T. E. (2011). Early-life conditions and age at
first pregnancy in British women. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 278(1712), 1721–1727.
Neustadter, E. S., Fineberg, S. K., Leavitt, J., Carr, M. M., & Corlett, P. R.
(2019). Induced illusory body ownership in borderline personality disorder.
Ohata, R., Asai, T., Kadota, H., Shigemasu, H., Ogawa, K., & Imamizu, H.
(2020). Sense of Agency Beyond Sensorimotor Process: Decoding Self-Other Action
Attribution in the Human Brain. Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y.: 1991).
Pacherie, E. (2007). The Sense of Control and the Sense of Agency. 13(1), 30.
Penner, F., & Sharp, C. (2018). Perceived pubertal timing and borderline
personality pathology in female adolescent inpatients. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic,
Pepper, G. V., & Nettle, D. (2017). The behavioural constellation of deprivation:
Causes and consequences. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 40, 1–72.
Pinto, A., Grapentine, W. L., Francis, G., & Picariello, C. M. (1996). Borderline
Personality Disorder in Adolescents: Affective and Cognitive Features. Journal of the
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 35(10), 1338–1343.
Porter, C., Palmier-Claus, J., Branitsky, A., Mansell, W., Warwick, H., & Varese,
F. (2020). Childhood adversity and borderline personality disorder: A meta-analysis.
Porter, P. A., Henry, L. N., Halkett, A., & Hinshaw, S. P. (2021). Body Mass
Indices of Girls with and without ADHD: Developmental Trajectories from Childhood to
Adulthood. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 0(0), 1–13.
Render, A., & Jansen, P. (2019). Dopamine and sense of agency: Determinants
in personality and substance use. PloS One, 14(3), e0214069.
Rollins, B. Y., Riggs, N. R., Francis, L. A., & Blair, C. B. (2021). Executive
Function and BMI Trajectories Among Rural, Poor Youth at High Risk for Obesity.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external
control of reinforcement. Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 80(1), 1–
Ruys, K. I., & Aarts, H. (2012). I didn’t mean to hurt you! Unconscious origins of
experienced self-agency over others’ emotions. Emotion (Washington, D.C.), 12(1),
Ryan, C. P., Hayes, M. G., Lee, N. R., McDade, T. W., Jones, M. J., Kobor, M.
S., Kuzawa, C. W., & Eisenberg, D. T. (2018). Reproduction predicts shorter telomeres
and epigenetic age acceleration among young adult women. Scientific Reports, 8(1),
1–9.
Sanislow, C. A., Pine, D. S., Quinn, K. J., Kozak, M. J., Garvey, M. A., Heinssen,
R. K., Wang, P. S.-E., & Cuthbert, B. N. (2010). Developing constructs for
psychopathology research: Research domain criteria. Journal of Abnormal
Sansone, R. A., Barnes, J., Muennich, E., & Wiederman, M. W. (2008).
Borderline Personality Symptomatology and Sexual Impulsivity. The International
Sansone, R. A., Lam, C., & Wiederman, M. W. (2011). The Relationship
between Borderline Personality Disorder and Number of Sexual Partners. Journal of
Schilling, L., Moritz, S., Schneider, B., Bierbrodt, J., & Nagel, M. (2015).
Attributional “tunnel vision” in patients with borderline personality disorder. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 29(6), 839–846.
Schwarze, C. E., Hellhammer, D. H., Stroehle, V., Lieb, K., & Mobascher, A.
(2015). Lack of Breastfeeding: A Potential Risk Factor in the Multifactorial Genesis of
Borderline Personality Disorder and Impaired Maternal Bonding. Journal of Personality
Semerari, A., Carcione, A., Dimaggio, G., Nicolo, G., Pedone, R., & Procacci,
M. (2005). Metarepresentative functions in borderline personality disorder. Journal of
Personality Disorders, 19(6), 690–710.
Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K., & Critchley, H. D. (2012). An Interoceptive Predictive
Coding Model of Conscious Presence. Frontiers in Psychology, 2.
Sharp, C., & Fonagy, P. (2015). Practitioner Review: Borderline personality
disorder in adolescence - recent conceptualization, intervention, and implications for
clinical practice. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 56(12), 1266–1288.
Sidarus, N., Travers, E., Haggard, P., & Beyer, F. (2020). How social contexts
affect cognition: Mentalizing interferes with sense of agency during voluntary action.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 89, 103994.
Sidarus, N., Vuorre, M., & Haggard, P. (2017). Integrating prospective and
retrospective cues to the sense of agency: A multi-study investigation†. Neuroscience
Skodol, A. E., Gunderson, J. G., Pfohl, B., Widiger, T. A., Livesley, W. J., &
Siever, L. J. (2002). The borderline diagnosis I: Psychopathology, comorbidity, and
personaltity structure. Biological Psychiatry, 51(12), 936–950.
Skoglund, C., Tiger, A., Rück, C., Petrovic, P., Asherson, P., Hellner, C., Mataix-
Cols, D., & Kuja-Halkola, R. (2019). Familial risk and heritability of diagnosed
borderline personality disorder: A register study of the Swedish population. Molecular
Smith, M., & South, S. (2020). Romantic attachment style and borderline
personality pathology: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 75, 101781.
Spodenkiewicz, M., Speranza, M., Taïeb, O., Pham-Scottez, A., Corcos, M., &
Révah-Levy, A. (2013). Living from day to day—Qualitative study on borderline
personality disorder in adolescence. Journal of the Canadian Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry = Journal De l’Academie Canadienne De Psychiatrie De
L’enfant Et De L’adolescent, 22(4), 282–289.
Stearns, S. C. (1992). The Evolution of Life Histories. OUP Oxford.
Stepp, S. D., Lazarus, S. A., & Byrd, A. L. (2016). A systematic review of risk
factors prospectively associated with borderline personality disorder: Taking stock and
moving forward. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment, 7(4), 316–
Strawson, G. (2000). The phenomenology and ontology of the self. Exploring
the Self: Philosophical and Psychopathological Perspectives on Self-Experience, 23,
39–54.
Synofzik, M., Vosgerau, G., & Newen, A. (2008). Beyond the comparator model:
A multifactorial two-step account of agency. Consciousness and Cognition, 17(1), 219–
Synofzik, M., Vosgerau, G., & Voss, M. (2013). The experience of agency: An
interplay between prediction and postdiction. Frontiers in Psychology, 4.
Tsakiris, M., Schütz-Bosbach, S., & Gallagher, S. (2007). On agency and body-
ownership: Phenomenological and neurocognitive reflections. Consciousness and
van Elk, M., Rutjens, B. T., & van der Pligt, J. (2015). The development of the
illusion of control and sense of agency in 7- to-12-year old children and adults.
Vignemont, F. de. (2018). Mind the body: An exploration of bodily self-
awareness (First edition). Oxford University Press.
Westen, D., & Cohen, R. P. (1993). The self in borderline personality disorder:
A psychodynamic perspective. In The self in emotional distress: Cognitive and
psychodynamic perspectives (pp. 334–368). Guilford Press.
Wilkinson-Ryan, T., & Westen, D. (2000). Identity disturbance in borderline
personality disorder: An empirical investigation. American Journal of Psychiatry,
157(4), 528–541.
Winter, D., Bohus, M., & Lis, S. (2017). Understanding Negative Self-
Evaluations in Borderline Personality Disorder?a Review of Self-Related Cognitions,
Emotions, and Motives. Current Psychiatry Reports, 19(3).
Winter, D., Herbert, C., Koplin, K., Schmahl, C., Bohus, M., & Lis, S. (2015).
Negative Evaluation Bias for Positive Self-Referential Information in Borderline
Personality Disorder. PLOS ONE, 10(1), e0117083.
Zahavi, D. (2007). Self and other: The limits of narrative understanding. Royal
Institute of Philosophy Supplements, 60, 179–202.
Ziomkiewicz, A., Sancilio, A., Galbarczyk, A., Klimek, M., Jasienska, G., &
Bribiescas, R. G. (2016). Evidence for the cost of reproduction in humans: High lifetime
reproductive effort is associated with greater oxidative stress in post-menopausal
women. PloS One, 11(1), e0145753.