The road to rebellion: a qualitative study of social identity in climate change activism.
Andrew K. Palmer
akp218@exeter.ac.uk
Supervisor: Louisa Evans.
College of life and environmental sciences
A thesis submitted for the degree of Master of research (MRes) August 2020.
Abstract:
Collective action is incumbent to avert the worst effects of climate change. This study takes a
qualitative approach to investigate the motivations for engagement in climate change activism.
Focusing on group dynamics and affective responses to climate change, interviews with eighteen
participants reveal that anticipated guilt, sadness and anger are all salient emotions in the chosen
context. Important factors eliciting these responses were the threat to future generations and the
destruction of nature. These findings all appear to be underpinned by a moral obligation or personal
responsibility to act. Moreover, distrust and anger regarding government inaction appear to propel
individuals to take contentious forms of politics to achieve social change. It is argued that the
personal goals and motivations of individuals may be the most crucial factors concerning
engagement with collective climate change action.
1 of 35
1.0 Introduction ............................................................................................................................................3
2.0 Literature Review...................................................................................................................................4
2.1 The four main social psychological explanations of collective action ...............................................4
2.2 Towards a more complete understanding of collective action ...........................................................7
3.0 Methodology ........................................................................................................................................10
3.1 Survey and sampling ........................................................................................................................10
3.2 Interviews .........................................................................................................................................11
3.3 Analysis ............................................................................................................................................11
4.0 Findings................................................................................................................................................13
4.1 Survey ...............................................................................................................................................13
4.2 Themes .............................................................................................................................................14
5.0 Discussion ............................................................................................................................................19
6.0 References ............................................................................................................................................24
7.0 Appendix ..............................................................................................................................................33
2 of 35
1.0 Introduction
Disadvantaged groups have challenged the status quo through political action to achieve social change
(Taylor et al., 1987; Weldon, 2011; Wright et al., 1990). The tactics employed in these collective actions
range from normative political processes to contentious, disruptive techniques (McAdam et al., 2001).
Today, the foremost social issue that faces humanity is anthropocentric climate change (IPCC, 2018;
Ripple et al., 2019). Scholars have called for more investigation to understand how solutions to climate
change may be achieved through collective action (Bamberg et al., 2018). The collective action literature
has become well developed, yet less is known about the explanations around why individuals will decide
to engage in collective efforts to address climate change. So far, there are four typical explanations
provided through interdisciplinary research in the social sciences (e.g. van Zomeren, 2013). Individuals
must identify with a social group, sense that the group may have success, experience negative affective
responses to injustice, and feel that some moral principle has been violated. The predicament for scholars
is to discover how these explanations fit with the unique challenge of climate change. The impacts of
climate change are not uniformly distributed throughout society (Tvinnereim and Ivarsflaten, 2016), the
perceived threat is often seen as temporally and spatially distal (Schuldt et al., 2018), and its scale and
complexity make it appear unsolvable (van Zomeren et al., 2010).
The present study addresses a lacuna in the literature by taking a qualitative, more interpretive approach
to most research in the field. The study focuses on individuals who have engaged in high/risk or high/cost
climate change activism as members of climate change activist group Extinction Rebellion (XR). These
individuals are a valuable group to study because they have dedicated time, effort and resources or
engaged in contentious forms of politics. This study aims to understand the main social-psychological
explanations for engagement in climate change activism. The research questions ask (1) which emotional
responses to climate change are most associated with participation in climate change activism? (2) how
have group dynamics influenced participation in climate change activism? The social identity approach
is used as a platform on which to undertake this investigation because it is the most widely used and robust
theoretical framework for understanding the main explanations of collective action (Thomas et al., 2009;
van Zomeren et al., 2008).
3 of 35
2.0 Literature Review
Collective action refers to participation in any activity that intends to improve the conditions of the group
(Wright et al., 1990). Strategies include mass political actions and contentious, high-risk activism to
individual-level actions such as petitioning and voting (Brady et al., 1995; Klandermans, 1997). Many
individuals dedicate time, effort and resources in social movements (high-cost activism). These actions
manifest to achieve social change, which is incumbent in the context of climate change. This review
focuses on collective action in response to calls that individualistic approaches to behaviour change are
not fit to achieve the societal transformations needed to combat climate change (Bamberg et al., 2018).
There is a growing consensus between disciplines that there are four main explanations of how collective
action will occur: efficacy, identification, emotions and moral motivations (van Zomeren, 2013). This is
has led to an "integrative phase" of research, whereby testable models of collective action have
incorporated all these concepts. Nevertheless, there are calls for more qualitative (Livingstone, 2014)
research innovation to compliment them (van Zomeren and Iyer, 2009). The purpose of this review is to
give a broad depiction of collective action so that the present study may be understood in context. This
chapter will first outline the main explanations of collective action before familiarising the reader with the
most contemporary advances within the literature. The review will end by briefly addressing the gaps in
the research. Where necessary, the collective action research will be contextualised with relevant theory
regarding climate change.
2.1 The four main social psychological explanations of collective action
Efficacy
Despite early theories claiming crowds were irrational (Blumer, 1939; Le Bon, 1895), it has been found
that individuals are likely to pursue collective action due to instrumental motives (Mummendey et al.,
1999; Olson, 1965; Simon et al., 1998). Olson (1965) suggested that people will not engage if they will
receive the rewards of collective efforts without their participation. In this vein, Klandermans (1984)
outlines how the dilemma of collective action presents itself as a product of value-expectancy. He explains
that the willingness to participate "is a function of the perceived costs and benefits for participants of
involvement in that activity or action" (p.1). These developments suggested that belief increases
confidence and mobilisation (Klandermans, 1997). This idea is now conceptualised as collective efficacy
which is defined as "a group's shared belief in its conjoint capability to organize and execute the courses
of action required to produce given levels of attainment" (Bandura, 1997: 477). This assumption is
supported by findings that collective efficacy is a strong predictor of collective action (Corcoran et al.,
2011; Hornsey et al., 2006; Mummendey et al., 1999). Therefore, a sense that "we can do this!" has been
adopted by movement scholars as a solid foundation of collective action participation. Efficacy also relates
to the type of collective action that people participate in. Contentious or high-risk forms of protest attract
low efficacious people, while others may undertake more normative forms of protest (Tausch et al., 2008;
2011). Importantly, individuals avoid problems perceived as beyond their control (Ozer and Bandura,
1990). In the case of climate change, scholars suggest that because it is a complex system of problems,
4 of 35
individuals may avoid addressing it (van Zomeren et al., 2010). Similarly, science communication that
frames climate change as unsolvable decrease efficacy and willingness to address it (Dickinson et al.,
2013).
Identification
The efficacy component indicated that groups are pursuing a value expectation. Therefore motivations are
group-based, and the likelihood of participation relies on the extent that the individual identifies with a
group (Blackwood and Louis, 2012). Identification has been most studied through the theoretical
framework of the social identity approach (Tajfel and Turner, 1979) which postulates that once an
individual self-categorises themself as a member of a social group, they assimilate the values, norms and
beliefs of that group (Fielding and Hornsey, 2016; Hornsey and Hogg, 2000). Their psychological self-
concept turns from thinking in terms of "I" and "me" to "we" and "us" (Turner et al., 1987). Collective
action studies demonstrated that the more one identifies with a group involved in a struggle to address an
issue, the more likely they are to participate in collective action (Simon et al., 1998; van Zomeren et al.,
2008). Research has also demonstrated that strong identifiers will be more motivated by the superordinate
goals of the group, while weaker identifiers may focus on individual-level costs and benefits (Louis et al.,
2004). Importantly, for action to occur, groups must become "politicised". Simon & Klandermans (2001)
define politicised collective identity through the following process: "they engage as self-conscious group
members in a power struggle on behalf of their group knowing that it is the more inclusive societal context
in which this struggle has to be fought out" (p. 319). However, in the case of climate change activism,
Saunders (2008) points out that activist groups within environmental movements cannot share an overall
meaningful collective identity. In this sense, collective identity should be understood at the group level,
not movement level.
Emotions
Initially, it was proposed that structural inequality between groups would lead to low-status groups
challenging the status-quo (Blumer, 1939; Davies, 1962; Gurr, 1968; Olson, 1965). This notion led to the
construct of relative deprivation (Crosby, 1976; Runciman and Runciman, 1966). These theorists
demonstrated that collective action will only occur when individuals perceive a group-based injustice and
that the injustice is deemed to be illegitimate or unfair (Kelly and Breinlinger, 1995). They also claimed
that affective responses to injustice play a decisive role in rousing collective action. Initially, emotions
were conflated with the notion that crowds were fuelled by primitive impulses (Le Bon, 1895; Smelser,
1962). Now they are understood as nuanced, adaptive strategies that are deployed to help an individual
cope with their environment (Lazarus, 1991). The most pervasive emotion that prepares individuals for
action is anger (van Zomeren et al., 2004). Anger is an 'approach' emotion aimed at addressing a problem.
It has been found that group-based anger systematically predicts willingness to participate in collective
action and is attributed to those keeping them collectively disadvantaged (Miller et al., 2009; Tausch,
Nicole and Becker, 2013). Borders and Wiley (2019) found that those who blame others for their collective
disadvantage are more likely to seek ways to address their situation collectively. Less is known about fear,
but it is associated with avoidance tendencies (Devos et al., 2002; Mackie et al., 2000; Roseman, 1984).
5 of 35
However, fear may also be an emotional trigger that instigates actors to identify courses of action to rectify
their circumstances (Barbalet, 1998). This response may be especially relevant in the context of climate
change because the threat may initiate a response.
Sadness is related to withdrawal and avoidance (Crisp et al., 2007; Lazarus, 1991; Miller et al., 2009),
and is associated with harm and loss (Abramson et al., 1989; Clark and Beck, 2010). Surprisingly, there
is scant attention to its role in collective action, although it has been attributed to a motivation to give up
and withdraw (Smith, H. J., Conin, et al., 2008). These adaptive strategies are intrinsically linked with
efficacy; approach emotions usually correspond with high efficacy, while avoidance emotions can
commonly be assigned to avoidance (Rudolph et al., 2000). In a recent study that takes a qualitative
approach to the feelings of climate change activists, Kleres and Wettergren (2017) reveal a complex mix
of emotions. Fear of the threat climate change appeared to activate awareness, while hope seemed to
override these fears and propel activists into action. Activists in the northern hemisphere rejected guilt
and blame, while those from the south showed more anger towards power. This study demonstrates that
emotions are both complex and tied to the cultural context. Guilt has also been associated with reparative
behaviours (Schmitt et al., 2008) and consequently is a crucial emotion in respect to climate change
because of the need to right past endeavours (Bamberg et al., 2015; Rees and Bamberg, 2014). Relatedly
is the finding that individuals who anticipate guilt for future transgressions of their in-group may be moved
to engage in political behaviour (Shepherd et al., 2013).
Morals
Klandermans (1997) argued that violated moral principles result in moral outrage. Moreover, the strength
of moral convictions seems to predict the likelihood of engagement (Mullen and Skitka, 2006). Much of
the research on morals suggests that they are group-based. Therefore, certain groups are said to be defined
by particular moral principles (e.g., anti-abortion) so must defend or attempt to reinstate them
(Stekelenburg et al., 2009). Turner et al. (1987) argue that a group’s moral standards are informed by the
group's ideology, whereas individual morals are based on personal values. The assumption here is that
morals operate distinctly at the individual and group level. The moral motivation can be broken into moral
norms, convictions or obligation (Sabucedo et al., 2018). The norm is traced to Schwartz's (1973) personal
norm (a belief about whether a particular action should be performed), while moral conviction is
underpinned by core beliefs about what is right or wrong (Skitka et al., 2005). Moral obligation is defined
as "a personal decision to participate in a specific collective action based on the belief that this is what
should be done" (Vilas and Sabucedo, 2012, p. 371). The point here is that moral obligation is a personal
motivation. The assertion being that the course of action must be followed regardless of the consequences
(Johnson and Cureton, 2019). In reference to identity motivations, Leach et al. (2007) find that
identification with an in-group is most strongly predicted by ascriptions of morality beside other factors.
They argue that morality is the most critical characteristic that underpins positive evaluations of one's in-
group.
6 of 35
2.2 Towards a more complete understanding of collective action
More than status
Most research on advantaged groups demonstrates that they are motivated to maintain or strengthen their
position (Simon and Klandermans, 2001; Tajfel and Turner, 1979; Wright et al., 1990). Leach et al. (2007)
investigated the motivations behind Australian opposition to the government's plan to remedy Aboriginal
disadvantage. In this case, the high-status group were driven to political action by racism, group-based
anger and perceived relative deprivation. The findings demonstrate that affective injustice, identity and
morality are all salient. Similarly, Postmes and Smith (2009) found that privileged groups may act to
maintain oppression. Their study demonstrated that the disparity between structurally unequal groups
becomes an in-group norm. The in-group is, therefore motivated to uphold and defend the status quo. It
has been shown that these groups may act if they come to see their own group's advantage as unfair or
illegitimate (Iyer et al., 2007). Moreover, the willingness to take political action is more likely if in-group
members experience sympathy or guilt. Individuals desire to recompense or help the disadvantaged (Harth
et al., 2008). These ideas of justice relate back to morals which have led to van Zomeren (2013) suggesting
that moral motivations may have the potential to unite the disadvantaged and advantaged in a collective
struggle. It may be then that climate change activism may have universal attraction if specific moral codes
are broken.
More than pre-existing social boundaries, collective action may be based on superordinate groups that are
united by their shared opinion. Opinion-based groups are social groups whose stances of issues are a
defining part of their social identity and therefore are a better predictor than other models of political
action (Bliuc et al., 2007). The work on opinion-based groups draws from Lewins (1947) research that
shows that interaction and consensualising influence attitudes and behaviour. The interaction of group
members brings consensus on an issue, aligns their norms and strengthens the groups' identification and
action potential. Emotions are inherent within opinion-based groups because it is often anger at
oppositional forces that define and enhance group identities. A salient example is the finding that climate
change "believers" and "sceptics" likelihood to take political actions is substantially influenced by their
anger towards each other (Bliuc et al., 2015).
Another useful area to the current topic is the idea that an individual's connectedness to nature will impact
upon their pro-environmental behaviour (e.g. Restall and Conrad, 2015). This phenomenon has been
explored in individual contexts relating to pro-environmental behaviour (Fielding and Hornsey, 2016;
Fritsche et al., 2018) but has only recently gained the attention of scholarly work on environmental
activism. This area seems important considering environmental identification may increase people's sense
of moral obligation and increase how seriously they consider environmental threats (Frantz and Mayer,
2014). Schmitt et al. (2008) address this "under-theorized and under-researched" area by applying these
principles to collective action. They find more robust support for activists becoming members due to a
politicised collective environmental identity rather than identification with nature. They argue that a more
substantial explanation for activism in the context of climate change is the extent to which they identify
with human categories promoting systemic change and not how much they identify with nature.
7 of 35
Integration
Previous models (e.g. Klandermans, 1997; Mummendy et al., 1999; Sturmer and Simon, 2004) have
moved forward the understanding of collective action. Most have focused on identification and efficacy
as the main routes. Sturmer and Simon (2004) found a high predictive value of their dual-pathway model,
which conceptualises instrumentality and identity as separately operating routes. However, it was not until
van Zomeren et al. (2008) introduced their social identity of collective action (SIMCA) that a more
cohesive understanding was achieved. SIMCA is the fruit of a meta-analysis of protest studies and
outperforms former models. It contains affective injustice, efficacy and identity variables. Importantly,
shared identification leads to shared anger and efficacy beliefs. Thomas et al. (2012) used SIMCA as a
basis to test their model, which is based on the theory behind opinion-based groups. While they include
the same variables, they reason that there is a different causal order. In presenting their model
(encapsulation model of social identity in collective action), they argue that identification is the product
of group-based emotions and collective efficacy. Therefore, identification strengthens and encapsulates
affect and efficacy, which readies individuals for action. Further iterations of the SIMCA include moral
motivations and politicised identification as a "joint core" whereby moral convictions and group morality
initiate group anger (van Zomeren et al., 2018). The identity component becomes more nuanced by
referring to identity content, which relates to what the identity means and "what matters most". Notably,
individuals who see a fit between their personal identity (idiosyncratic attributes and values) and a specific
social identity will be more likely to engage in a collective struggle. The point of interest here is that
identification with a movement or group may come second to more personal variables. van Zomeren et
al. (2008) states that "it may not necessarily be social identity or identification per se that prepares people
for collective action, but rather the content of social identity." (p.552). Again, it is apparent that the
importance of morals and personal attributes have been somewhat overlooked. Similarly, Sabucedo et al.
(2019) focus on morality in their axiological-identitary model. They place moral obligation at the core,
which they show to have stronger effect sizes than SIMCA (especially in the case of non-normative
protest). These developments further demonstrate that value orientations are intrinsic to identity processes.
What's missing?
In this literature review, it has become clear that the primary modus operandi of scholars within the social
identity approach lies in quantitative methodologies. These approaches have contributed a great deal. Still,
scholars suggest that more innovative, interdisciplinary approaches will complement our understanding
further and that we should not just test the same models in different contexts (van Zomeren, 2013).
Livingstone makes the call for "qualitative transformations as well as quantitative change" (2014: 1),
arguing that quantitative variables do not explain the when and why collective action occurs. He states that
qualitative research is needed to understand the points of change within and between individuals and
interacting groups. The few relevant studies have focused on the psychological transformations that occur
from activism (Drury and Reicher, 1999, 2005, 2009). These studies demonstrate how individuals become
empowered through the course of action, which drives further participation. Similarly, Stott and Reicher
(2011) make a case for more study of psychological factors such as illegitimacy, threat and anger.
8 of 35
However, their focus is upon localised events, such as how the inter-group context between police and
protestors will impact upon crowd behaviour. Perhaps what is more surprising is the lack of qualitative
research on emotions in the current context. Kleres and Wetten argue that qualitative methods are more
suited to the study of emotion because "the articulation of emotion words in interviews is often
accompanied by reflection on their accurateness/meaning and possible relation to other emotions" (2017:
511). Indeed, if the aim is to understand how affective responses to climate change fit with the other
intertwined components of collective action, qualitative research has its place.
Climate change activism is surprisingly uncommon, considering the threat that is posed (McAdam, 2017).
Unsurprisingly then, it has attracted little attention from scholars. Roser-Renouf's et al. (2014) addresses
this in their social-cognitive study. They find that opinion leaders (people with social influence) can
encourage climate activism engagement through communication and awareness-raising. While opinion
leaders are not a prominent component of the social identity approach, it is related to the idea that
prototypical group leaders are influential (van Knippenberg and Hogg, 2003). Similarly, studies focusing
on the identity motives around appraisals of climate change information have found that messages from
in-group elites are positively associated with acceptance of climate change and its related policy (e.g.,
Druckman and McGrath, 2019).
In sum, this literature review has painted the underpinnings of collective action in broad strokes to provide
a theoretical platform to understand climate change activism. It appears that efficacy, identity, emotions,
and morals are entwined and pose an exciting prospect concerning climate change. The next chapter will
outline the methodology employed in this study.
9 of 35
3.0 Methodology
Research design and approach
Consistent with the assertions of Patton (2014), a qualitative research design was select on the basis that
was most appropriated for the research questions. The methodological perspective following a post-
positivist approach, where the participant’s experience is the reference point to understand their socially
constructed realities (Schwartz, H. and Jacobs, 1979). The data collection for the study comprised of two
phases, a survey instrument to recruit an appropriate sample followed by semi-structured interviews. The
focus of the investigation centred on members of Extinction Rebellion (XR). These individuals were
deemed suitable due to their history of engagement in mass non-violent civil disobedience direct actions,
thus exhibiting a high threshold of commitment to address climate change. Data collection ran from late
April to June 2020 throughout the Peak of COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown in the UK. The pandemic
limited how data could be collected because XR group meetings were in hiatus, and face-to-face
interviews were not safe or practically possible.
3.1Survey and sampling
Four XR groups in South West England were identified to be approached for sampling recruitment on the
grounds of local convenience and available contacts. Multiple groups were chosen to maximise the
potential range of behaviours and to ensure an adequate sample size was achieved. A participant
information sheet was disseminated through the e-mailing lists of all groups. A snowball method was
employed midway through the sampling stage, whereby interview participants were asked to recruit other
suitable participants. This method was convenient for recruiting additional participants when it appeared
that a sufficient sample would not be reached (Bryman, 2016).
Recruitment criteria
The following criteria had to be met for participants to be included in the second stage of the study.
• Affiliate themselves as members of XR and a town group.
• Had engaged in high-risk (HR) or high-cost (HC) activism.
The survey functioned as a generic purposive sampling device. All participants completed the survey
before being invited to the second phase of the study. The survey included a self-report questionnaire
inspired by Corning and Myers' (2013) activism orientation scale to ascertain engagement in HR/HC
activism. The underpinnings of classifications of type of behaviour were drawn from the literature (e.g.,
Klandermans, 1997). The purpose of this questionnaire was to exclude participants who had not engaged
in a high threshold of activist behaviour such as petitioning.
The questionnaire consisted of 14 closed-ended items relating to HR (7) or HC activism (7) in a
randomised order to combat order effects. Questions followed from the heading question "Please answer
the following as they apply to you. During your time as a member of XR, have you...", for example,
"Engaged in a demonstration in which you suspect there would be a confrontation with the police or
possible arrest?" or "Taken up a role or position of responsibility within Extinction Rebellion?". An
additional question asked participants to indicated if they had arrested for any activities undertaken with
XR.
10 of 35
3.2 Interviews
Participants and interview protocol
Nineteen participants completed the survey, of which eighteen (16 female, 2 male) met the criteria. Semi-
structured interviews were chosen as a flexible method of exploring the participants the present
phenomena through the participant's experience (Rabionet, 2011). Following the guidelines of Bryman
(2016), the protocol was designed to facilitate the participants to tell their individual stories regarding their
route to climate change activism. It also allowed for questions that would elicit responses directly relating
to the research questions. The protocol was tested and amended during a pilot phase of four trial interviews
before making minor amendments during the interview phase of the study.
The questions consisted of both bespoke and adapted from relevant literature relating to social identity
and collective action. Questions worded to elicit responses relating to shared identification were
influenced by Drury and Reicher's (2005) study on crowd behaviour, for example, "Are you able to
describe the members of your local group and what you feel you have in common?".
Questions were delivered to elicit responses regarding the topic and then to probe for a more nuanced
understanding of the phenomena. An example being: "In a general sense, do you feel that Extinction
Rebellion will be successful?". This question would be followed by a question regarding their efficacy
beliefs, e.g., "You sound quite pessimistic about the future, why are you still motivated to engage in
activism".
Introductory questions such as "Can you walk me through how you became involved with Extinction
Rebellion?" were designed to build rapport and pave the way for more profound probing questions.
Moreover, these questions allowed participants to explore their own experiences without being inhibited
by more reductive queries. The number of questions ranged from 12-15 main questions depending on the
survey respondents; for example, participants who did not attend regular meetings would not be posed
with questions regarding their experience at meetings.
Procedure & materials
Audio interviews were conducted using either mobile, landline, WhatsApp, or Zoom. All interviews were
recorded using an Olympus dictaphone. The length ranged from 33 to 87 minutes, which totalled 987
minutes of data. The recordings were manually transcribed in "clean verbatim" to remove extraneous filler
words using a transcription foot pedal. The wording of the transcription was kept close to perfect
alignment with the audio recordings. Filler words that were deemed to aid the context of the data were
kept in situ.
3.3 Analysis
Following on from the post-positivist assumption that the research and the analyst cannot be separated, a
reflexive approach was undertaken. The researcher was cognisant that engagement with theoretical social
identity literature may skew the analysis (Hardy et al., 2001; Nightingale and Cromby, 1999). Interviews
were analysed using an inductive approach drawn from techniques based on thematic analysis (Braun and
Clarke, 2006) and interpretative phenomenological analysis (e.g., Willig, 2013). The starting point for the
analysis was Braun and Clarke's (2006) six-stage guide to thematic analysis, which posits the flexibility
11 of 35
of the approach and the appropriateness of identifying both semantic (explicit) and latent (interpretative)
codes. However, the present approach most readily reflects the analytical techniques employed in Drury
and Reicher's (2005) study on collective action and psychological outcomes. The authors describe the
techniques employed within their study as interpretative but approached with certain research question
mind. It is situated between content analysis (top-down) and grounded theory (bottom-up).
Transcripts were analysed using NVivo 12. Several hundred initial codes were generated. Usually, entire
paragraphs were coded so that context was not removed. After that, all codes were reviewed and
categorised into twelve separate categories broadly related to the phenomena of interest, i.e., "groupness",
"emotions", or "who are XR?". From here the codes were continually reviewed and refined and
redistributed into developing themes, before beginning to finalise themes and reviewing the source texts.
Quantitative analysis of the codes was not undertaken. However, the prevalence of codes was influenced
by reviewing how often codes arose and to what extent they were found across the data corpus. In respect
prevalence, the analytic approach follows Braun & Clarke's suggestion that the 'keyness' of a theme is
founded upon the idea that it "captures something important in relation to the research question" (2006:
10) and not necessarily how quantifiable in terms of its occurrence across the data set.
12 of 35
4.0 Findings
The research questions focused on group dynamics and emotions. This chapter presents the most salient
findings concerning these questions in the form of mini themes derived from the data analysis. Each theme
instances that code arose across the data corpus, while '%' indicates the proportion of interviews where
the code appeared. The findings from the survey are briefly presented at the front end of this chapter to
complement the qualitative data.
The following themes will be presented:
From efficacy to pessimism: Early optimism faded into widespread pessimism that climate change
would not be averted.
Nature & sadness: Sadness was a primary emotion experienced by the participants, often related to the
destruction of nature.
Guilt and the next generation: The leading group that motivated action was the next generation due to
the anticipation of guilt.
Moral obligation and stoicism: The desire to participate in climate activism was underpinned by moral
obligation.
Anger, frustration and illegitimacy: Anger was experienced by participants, usually directed toward
governments and power structures.
4.1 Survey
The survey was primarily used as a recruitment device to acquire a varied sample the met the criteria of
the project. Eighteen participants (2 male, 16 female) with a mean age of 57 were acquired. All participants
had engaged in HR and HC climate change activism. Four participants confirmed that they had been
arrested for activities undertaken with XR. Ten were employed, seven were retired, and there was one
Survey results overview
n Male Female Mean age Mean Risk Mean Cost Arrested Employed Retired Student
18 2 16 57 3.5 3.5 4 10 7 1
(23-77)
Note. See appendix for a detailed overview of survey results.
13 of 35
4.2 Themes
From optimism to pessimism
Retrospective accounts revealed their experiences of when they first heard about XR to the point of
interview. The backdrop to this can be captured by XR's perceived success during their initial mass
actions in October 2018 and April 2019 when they occupied major sites in London and gained
widespread media attention. However, the 'rebellion' in October 2019 was deemed less successful and
failed to make major headlines in the UK press.
From optimism to pessimism
Code n %
Initial efficacy 37 78
Opinion leader support 31 61
Reports from participants revealed their sense of efficacy in the early stages of their engagement. This
efficacy appeared to be the result of the contentious tactics employed by XR, which seemed to differentiate
them from other SMOs as "the best option":
…I thought "yeah, we are going to make some impact this way", and then a local group started,
and I immediately thought "thank goodness something has come along, an action that really might
be doing something active and impactful". (P5)
The accounts by P5 and others highlight that collective efficacy was derived from the public nature of the
actions which seem to instil belief through their powerful and symbolic nature. This idea was most
supported by the legitimisation of the movement (and actions) from opinion leaders. Participants most
frequently cited Greta Thunberg, David Attenborough or George Monbiot. The efficacy that was derived
from these figures was usually in terms of climate action broadly (i.e. the need to fight it), or specific
endorsements of what XR was doing. P8 relays how his early caution was superseded by opinion leader
influence:
The fact that it had been picked up by George Monbiot, there seems to be some gravitas, some
intellectual rigour, so at that point I was like "what are they doing in my area?" […] and they seem
to have some science to back it up and it was science that I recognised. (P8)
Despite their retrospective optimism, when the participants described their current outlook, they were less
optimistic. Sixteen participants clearly stated that it was too late for the worst effects of climate change to
be averted. There was a general sense of antipathy which seemed tied to their experiences during the
October Rebellion in 2019, and the failure to force the government to address climate change. Below, P10
articulates how hope faded but how she is still motivated to continue her engagement:
…maybe there was that sense after April that "look what we can do". When I went to rebellion in
October I had very little of that, and I think that I felt that it doesn't really matter how successful
we just have to do this thing anyway. (P10)
These findings add context to the following themes which relate to the factors that seem to sustain
participation.
14 of 35
Nature and Sadness
Several different emotions were described by the participants, including fear, anger, despair, guilt and
hope. However, the emotion that was most reflected responses to climate change was sadness. Many
participants described themselves as 'grieving', 'depressed' or 'devastated' due to the impact that climate
change has had or will have upon the planet.
Nature & sadness
Code n %
Previous ESMO affiliation 28 83
Nature connected 19 61
Sadness & grief 16 56
ACC experience 5 22
Central to this affect was the loss or damage to nature. Participants described the "trashing" or
"destruction" of nature frequently. A participant who described her primary emotion as sadness, explains
why:
…because it's such a damn shame, because it is such a stupid, mindless, waste. [..] I'm not sure
which is the strongest bit of sadness, but it's partly because the sort of beauty of nature is trashed
and partly the effect it has on people, and I'm not sure which is most important, they are both linked
anyway. (P11)
In consideration of these findings, other participant characteristics become relevant. The most shared
characteristics that were identified in the analysis were that most participants had been members of other
environmental organisations or described themselves in terms that related to being connected with nature.
All the participants who had been affiliated with other environmental organisations cited membership with
Friends of the earth or Greenpeace. This finding demonstrates a long-standing commitment to tackling
environmental issues and not just climate change. In terms of nature connectedness, participants often
described "loving nature", or "being a part of nature". P10 elucidates this:
…we know that we are losing it and we are hurting it, and a part of that grief is about going through
that, and that is what I notice in groups is that from feeling that utter love and grief or the pain, and
the possible pain to come there is a huge sense of connection that people have to nature, to the
planet and to each other, because these are things that we all share together. (P10)
These responses were often self-determined. Participants were asked to think about who or what comes
to mind when they consider the impacts of climate change or to describe their groups shared
characteristics. In a succinct response that encapsulates these findings, P18 responds: "plants, trees, the
sea, the air, the people... perhaps in that order". Like others, P11 followed on to personify elements of
nature and empathise with the pain that is caused to nature from climate change.
15 of 35
Guilt and the next generation
Guilt & the next generation
Code n %
Anticipated guilt 18 44
Intergenerational (28) (78)
Children & grandchildren 18 11
The next generation 16 9
A pervasive emotion that seemed to mobilise many activists was anticipated guilt. Rather than ascribing
guilt for past endeavours, the participants feared the psychological consequences of inaction. Below
highlights this phenomenon:
I'll feel guilty about it when I die kind of thing. (P11)
I just didn't want to be guilty of inaction… (P12)
…I think it’s kind of not feeling guilty for not having acted. (P14)
The primary motivator for this action appeared to be related to the next generation. Slightly more
frequently, individuals reported acting in the interests of their family members ahead of the next generation
(children or grandchildren) more broadly. On a few occasions, participants would describe their own
family and the next generation in general terms, however, in the context of interview questions,
participants seemed to prioritise their own family when considering the groups or things that they were
acting in the interests of:
Ultimately my own family firstly, but also all the other children of that age who are going to suffer
[…] so obviously first and foremost it's my own, I don't think that is selfish, but it is going to be
all the other children that age […] because they are gonna be left with a shit planet. (P17)
Moral obligation and stoicism
This theme captures the participants' moral obligation to undertake collective action. It is closely
associated with the previous theme. Anticipated guilt appeared to stem from a need to "do the right thing",
which was most prevalent concerning the next generation.
Moral obligation and stoicism
Code n %
Moral obligation 48 72
Stoicism 21 38
Even when faced with failure, the activists exhibited sentiment that there was no choice. This sentiment
was presented in terms such as "I have to" or "I can't not" do something. Notably, the activists were more
burdened with a personal, rather than a collective responsibility to act. Another contributing factor to
continued participation was the finding that participants exhibited a stoic response to the threat. In several
16 of 35
cases, the activists accepted their perceived fate but managed their emotions by acceptance and engaging
in activism. This morally motivated behaviour resulted in more an accepting and contented existence. P8
captured this sentiment when he described himself going "from outcome goal to process goal". Below, P1
encapsulates several critical aspects of this theme:
It's… at some stage I need to be able to talk to my grandchildren and say "look, we completely
messed this up, I'm really sorry, but I have been trying to put it right". Personally, at my four
o'clock in the morning moments, I think we haven't got a hope in hell of stopping some of the
worst effects of climate change, not a hope in hell, and I'm utterly pessimistic about it. Obviously
I can't be like that in meetings and things, we have to be very positive, so the way I look at it, in
almost a kind of medieval way where we are a castle under siege, we are all going to lose our lives,
so what do I do? Sit in a corner and weep? which is very easy to do, or do I put on a shield and
take my sword and go into battle? (P1)
Anger, frustration and illegitimacy
Anger was identified most in responses following questions about the government. It was closely related
to feelings of distrust and contempt for the government and frustration over inaction. These findings fed
into a narrative of political illegitimacy and cynicism which appeared to be positioned as an antecedent to
pursuing contentious forms of politics.
Anger, frustration and illegitimacy
Code n %
Government 42 83
Banks and corps 17 44
Anger 18 50
The illegitimacy of the government was captured by derogatory remarks such as Boris Johnson being
labelled a "bumbling clown" (P13), or the UK government be presented as a "global villain" or "legal
gangsters" (P4). However, what was most frequent was feelings of distrust:
Well I don't trust them and inch basically, because I think they are very good at kind of dodging
issues [… they] slip more unsavoury projects under the carpet, while no-one is looking… (P3)
P3 not only points to inaction but purposeful neglect. In this vein, the government was not just ignorant
or incompetent. They were perceived to be not acting in the interests of their electorate. Participants
exhibited angry or frustrated sentiment toward the government, for example:
… there's some anger in there, which is a result of frustration that governments and people with
the power are not paying attention to what the need to be paying attention to… (P13)
This sentiment fed into a broader narrative of suspicion about power structures. Banks, corporations and
the media were mentioned. Some participants pointed to unsavoury relationships or collusion between the
government and corporations, which therefore delegitimised the government and the political process.
Most participants explained that in conjunction with being affiliates with environmental movements
previously, they had also pursued normative politics such as petitions or voting. However, many had
17 of 35
become frustrated with these failed approaches. The vast majority had not engaged in contentious politics
previously. However, the exhaustion of normative politics seemed to pave the way for more radical forms
of action:
P9: Having tried democratic processes all my life, I think putting your person on the line is the
only thing…not the only thing, it has to be done in conjunction with all the other, but it has got to
the point… we're all fucked unless we change things, so if a few of us are fucked in the meantime
by being arrested… there's a big cost to being arrested, some of us are older so we're not going to
lose jobs or influence.
P9 points to the necessity for risky action in the face of the threat of climate change. The survey can further
inform these thoughts on the relevant nature of risk and personal circumstances. Many participants were
retired or nearing retirement age, therefore having fewer personal constraints to pursue these actions. The
next chapter will discuss these findings in the context of the research questions and the broader literature.
18 of 35
5.0 Discussion
This study sought to discover how emotional responses to climate change and group dynamics influenced
participation in climate change activism. The primary emotions identified in this study were sadness, guilt,
and anger. In terms of group dynamics, participants were driven to protect future generations from the
impact of climate change, had a shared connectedness to nature, and were influenced by prominent
ingroup elites. There was less evidence that supported the idea that the participants strongly identified
with the organisation (XR). However, the findings appeared to show that collective efficacy was apparent
at the early stages of mobilisation. Therefore, this fits with the idea that individuals will join social
movements to influence society, politics or to elevate their identity through membership of an admired
group (Klandermans, 1984). In this sense, the present study takes the stance that the participants were
using the organisation as the best way to achieve personal goals, i.e. protecting family members and
avoiding guilt. This idea assumes that personal morals and goals primarily drove the activists. It is
acknowledged that this is a simplification in some regards, but in terms of a take-home message, the
personal dimensions appear more relevant. This chapter will discuss some of the critical findings while
placing them in context with the broader literature.
Opinion Leaders
Opinion leaders were found to have some persuasive or legitimising influence on the participants, yet they
only appeared as periphery in the collective action literature. Roser-Renouf et al. (2014) demonstrated
that opinion leadership increased the likelihood to engage in climate change activism. While still relevant,
their study focuses on localised networks, stating that interpersonal communication should be encouraged
to spread climate change awareness. It seems applicable that the activists in the present study frequently
spoke about high-profile individuals. These individuals could be deemed as prototypical group members,
i.e. because they were trustworthy individuals who were environmentally orientated. This notion is
consistent with the idea that messages from high profile ingroup member (elite cues) can spread influence
on climate change issues and increase acceptance of climate change and policy. David Attenborough was
one such opinion leader who was remarked upon many times. This finding may be intertextually related
to the so-called “Attenborough Effect” which was credited for increasing interest in plastic recycling
(Haynes-Worthington, 2018) and decreased plastic pollution (Global Citizen, 2019). It seems that this
effect is compatible with climate change because the individuals who were most remarked upon were
either notable activists or respected media personalities or journalists. Social identity research suggests
that because responses to climate change are heavily linked to identity, it is of paramount interest to
policymakers. Fielding et al. (2020) follow a vast array of political identity research in their study which
shows that both democrats and republicans show stronger inclinations to engage in climate change policy
supportive behaviour when ingroup elites endorse the message. It appears that in the current context, the
work on opinion leadership deserves more attention.
Future generations
A key finding in this study was that the activist’s propensity to address climate change to protect their
children and grandchildren. It was suggested earlier that the activists might sense less direct identification
with the organisation, but share underlying values, These notions would be consistent with the idea that
“low identifiers” pursue activism to achieve individual goals (Louis et al., 2004). Naturally, individuals
19 of 35
will seek to protect their own first, so this is not surprising and should be considered in conjunction that
there was also a prevalence for supporting the next generation broadly. Other research indicates that
focusing on legacies and future generations can promote more environmentally conscious behaviour
(Wade-Benzoni et al., 2012) and reduce future discounting (Jacquet et al., 2013; Sunstein and Rowell,
2007). These studies clearly resonate with the present study because they have shown that increasing
identification between generations may have an impact individual attitude. Therefore, policymakers may
find success in highlighting the impacts to the next generation, with people’s own family members at the
fore. These ideas are supported by the finding that participants acknowledged a sense of anticipated guilt
about the prospect of inaction. This guilt appeared to be intrinsically related to a sense of moral obligation
because it seemed that there was an urgency to behave in a manner in which they felt content. Again, this
feeds back to the idea that the connotations of action or inaction are implicit and are substantially
influenced by personal motivations.
Moral Obligation
In the literature review, Vilas and Sabucedo’s (2012) defined moral obligation as an incumbent personal
decision. The ‘personal’ is salient here because the participants mainly used pronouns referring to self
while referencing obligatory behaviour. This obligation goes some way to explain the continued
participation of activists when efficacy beliefs appeared to be diminishing. This phenomenon would back
up the theoretical underpinnings of moral obligation, which can be traced to Kant’s categorical
imperative; a principle must be followed regardless of the consequences (Johnson and Cureton, 2017). In
the circumstances of diminished hope, therefore, morals seem to sustain participation. The moral
component is also concordant with Sabucedo et al. (2019) axiological-identitary model. Moral obligation
was found to be a fundamental predictor of protest, especially the more contentious forms. Furthermore,
van Zomeren et al. (2018) suggested that morals are an integral component of action and that it may not
be identification with a movement but the content of identity that moves individuals to be mobilised. In
this regard, the present findings are consistent and complementary to emergent identity research that seems
to place moral motivations front and centre of collective action participation.
Guilt
The thematic analysis revealed that guilt was a key emotion that influenced participation. It was shown
that the guilt was not necessarily an emotion that was being experienced, rather the activists were taking
action due to the prospect of experiencing it due to inaction. These findings are both consistent and contrast
with the current research in the field. Previously, guilt has been an emotion related to climate change or a
willingness to act due to an in-group transgression. These findings usually related to need repair past
actions (Rees and Bamberg, 2014), or in the anticipation that one’s in-group’s may behave in a way that
is not favourable to the individual (Shepherd et al., 2013). What is flagged up here is that the activists
were acting out a personal responsibility and individually anticipated guilt. This contrasts with the social
identity literature that is usually founded on group-based emotions. These are emotions that reflect what
the rest of the group feels (Goldenberg et al., 2014), or result from the process of identification or
categorisation with a social group (Mackie and Smith, 2017).
It was shown earlier that some studies posit that the process of group interaction increases the salience of
shared emotions between group members (Thomas et al., 2012). There is little evidence of that here
20 of 35
however, therefore it may be more important to focus on the consequences of these emotions or what
Fridja (2004) labels “predictive cognitions”. In the Shepherd et al. (2013) study, group-based anticipated
shame elicited action. However, they pose that the extent of guilt may pivot on the distance between the
individual and the group-transgression. It seems here that the transgression is based on the idea of not
developing strategies to address the problem. This returns us to the idea that, while an individual and a
movement need to be compatible, it is not necessarily the sharedness of emotions that instigates
mobilisation. Instead, individuals and their personal affective responses to injustice move individuals to
seek mechanisms to fix the problem. This seems especially relevant in the context of climate change
because group status or social boundaries, at least in the UK, might be less critical. However, the literature
may need to pay more attention to the varying versions of guilt. Kleres et al. (2017) found that guilt was
more appropriate in northern rather than southern cultures due to the attribution of responsibility and the
closeness of threat. However, this again relates to ingroup (nation) transgressions, not individually
orientated anticipated emotions. This is being said, focusing more closely on guilt, instead of group-based
anger may be a rewarding avenue to take. Moreover, looking at how guilt and morals are related in the
current context may be salient because the guilt component seemed intrinsically related to ascriptions of
personal responsibility.
Nature
Loss or harm to nature was cited as a cause for sadness and negative affect. In terms of identity processes,
this is relevant to the present study because it relates to an individual’s identification with nature but also
shared values. Studies had investigated how nature identification may be associated with pro-
environmental behaviour (e.g. Restall and Conrad, 2015) and more recently, collective environmental
action (Schmitt et al., 2019). Salient characteristics of the participants in the present study were their
“oneness with nature” or previous commitments to environmental organisations. Schmitt et al. (2019)
found that identification with nature was non-significant concerning environmental activism. However,
strong effects were found between politicised environmental identity and environmental activism. In the
present study, identification with nature may function to predispose individuals to address environmental
threats. This presumption is consistent with the social movement literature that postulates individuals will
be more likely to become engaged if they share the same ideological background (Klandermans, 1997).
This motivation functions simultaneously with the need for politicised collective identification (Simon
and Klandermans, 2001). The activists in the present study relate to both components because nature is an
integral part of their personal identity and they have become politicised through awareness of the struggle
to address the issue.
It was remarked upon earlier that it may be that engagement in collective action is facilitated by XR not
driven by it. Nevertheless, if the findings on morals and connection with nature are situated at the fore,
the overlooked work on identity content becomes apparent. In this case, it may be crucial that there was a
normative fit between the activists' moral beliefs and nature-based identity. van Zomeren et al. (2018)
argues that collective action participants are moralised and politicised. They are motivated to act on “who
they are” and “what they are will not stand for”. As such, many activists in the present study are motivated
by environmental issues who will not stand for the destruction of nature or allowing future generations to
be left unprotected. This argument is perhaps a simplification, other views regarding social justice and
21 of 35
equity were observed. In several cases, climate change was not just seen as an environmental problem but
a complex interconnected issue.
Sadness
The damage to nature and wildlife elicited sadness among many of the participants, which is consistent
with the broad understanding of sadness within the literature (Abramson et al., 1989; Clark and Beck,
2010). Sadness has previously been associated as an avoidance emotion (Lazarus, 1991) and is usually a
response to an expectation that the situation will get worse (Smith et al., 2008). These findings pair sadness
with low efficacy beliefs, which fits with the findings in the present study. However, the participants were
not withdrawing from taking action, which contrasts with previous studies (e.g. Crisp et al., 2007; Miller
et al., 2009). These findings present a puzzlement for understanding emotion in the current context.
Interestingly, only four participants recalled events of the first-hand experience of the effects of climate
change (in other countries). A cautious suggestion could be made that distance to the harm and loss of the
object may moderate the experience of a given emotion (as was described with guilt). Therefore, the
intrusion of sadness upon behaviour may be related to its acuteness.
The adaptive strategies that have been described by Lazarus (1991) and others are also relevant here. van
Zomeren et al. (2010) suggested that climate change should be associated with emotional-focused coping
due to its scale, complexity and uncontrollable nature. Specifically, fear of the threat of climate change
results in an unusual response where fear motivates efforts to ameliorate future impacts. In the present
context, this may well be harmonious. However, a weakness of this study is that the interviews spanned
retrospective accounts and so did capture in-depth responses about the time of initial engagement. If
emotional responses are intrinsically related to efficacy, then it is sensible to suggest that fear and efficacy
may have been reduced to sadness and pessimism throughout the life course of their engagement. This
idea is supported by the peripheral finding that fear was related to engagement with science at the point
of the first contact with XR. While this further supports the notion that fear may be a trigger to act
(Barbalet, 1998), it is unfortunate that the data does not allow for a more expansive exploration.
Another proposition is that sadness in this context may indicate a type of acceptance. Negative emotions
have been found to have different effects on unrealistic expectations (Langer, 1975). Studies focusing on
the difference between depressed and non-depressed people find that depressed individuals may be
“sadder but wiser” in the way they are unlikely to overestimate their control (Martin et al., 1984). Here it
may be appropriate to return to the fundaments of appraisal theory (Lazarus, 1991; Smith, 1993). Smith
and Mackie state that “emotions motivate coping processes aimed at regulating the person’s relation to
the social environment” (2015: 352). It may be that sadness signals acceptance of loss and agency over
the problem. This hypothesis is supported by the participants who demonstrated “stoicism”. Marcus
Aurelias (meditations) remarked that “if you are distressed by anything external, the pain is not due to the
thing itself, but to your estimate of it; and this you have the power to revoke at any moment”. In this sense,
the uncertainty and uncontrollability of climate change may lend itself to more stoic adaptive strategies.
Without diverging too far, it also relates to psychological interventions that use acceptance and
mindfulness in conjunction with behaviour change strategies to increase psychological flexibility (e.g.
Hayes et al. 2009). The commitment in the present context is for the activists to pursue behaviour that is
moral and conducive to their wellbeing.
22 of 35
Anger and frustration.
Anger was a salient emotion directed towards government, banks and corporations. However, it was
entangled with frustration and closely associated with distrust. The findings signalled that the government
had become illegitimate to the participants, who then chose to pursue non-normative politics. Anger is an
emotion that usually requires an out-group to blame (Scherer et al., 2001). Interestingly, van Zomeren
(2010) states that in the context of climate change, a clear culprit to attribute responsibility to tends to be
absent. However, there was blame in the present study as a result of inaction. It tends to be seen that
frustration precedes anger. The seminal theory of frustration-aggression puts simply that “frustration
always leads to some form of aggression” (Dollard et al., 1939: 1). In this case, it seems that frustration
with government inaction and distrust of their motives have pushed the participants into radical behaviour.
It appears to have played a role in leading individuals who pursue a more efficacious form of politics. This
dynamic is interesting because anger usually goes together with efficacy (van Zomeren et al., 2008). It
may point to is the notion of political cynicism, whereby individuals no longer feel political actions can
have an impact the political process (e.g., Cappella and Jamieson, 1996; De Vreese, 2005). Political
cynicism is related to distrust and contempt for politicians but has received scant attention in social
psychological collective action studies. In one study, Klandermans et al. (2008) demonstrated that
cynicism reinforces and reduces participation, depending on whether it is accompanied by perceived
unfairness. Interestingly, the authors suggest that politically cynical people who believe they are being
mistreated are the most active members of social movements.
The unfairness in this respect may be governmental inaction in the face of warnings from science.
Therefore, anger and distrust are directed at a government who are illegitimate because of perceived
unfairness. Moreover, it was inferred that contentious forms of politics attract low efficacious people
(Tausch et al., 2008). This research does seem relevant here because there were explicit suggestions that
the non-normative route was the only course left available to them in attempts to persuade governments
to fulfil their duties. This notion is bolstered by the presentation of collective efficacy regarding XR’s
differentiation from other SMOs. Optimism appeared to be instilled by the provision of a new political
route. This idea seems particularly applicable in the case of the riskier actions because participants
demonstrated a “nothing left to lose” attitude, which was the result of beliefs that the threat of climate
change now outweighed the risks of civil disobedience. However, it should be noted that the interviews
and the survey demonstrated that many participants were retired and at an age where they were
unrestrained from responsibilities. These findings support research that indicates that individuals engaging
in risky activities are more “biographically available”, i.e. free of personal restraints (McAdam, 1986;
Saunders et al., 2012). However, it does not necessarily give much insight into how to attract individuals
who are “biographically unavailable” - a group often overlooked in the context of collective action
(Beyerlein and Hipp, 2006).
Concluding remarks and limitations
There are tensions within the findings in the present studies and concerning the literature broadly.
However, this study has achieved its aim in gaining an understanding of the social-psychological
determinants of participants who have engaged in costly or risky behaviour to address climate change.
The key emotions experienced by the participants were guilt, sadness and anger. The objects of motivation
appear to be future generations and the loss of nature. These elements appeared to be underpinned by a
23 of 35
personal moral obligation to behave upon their values. There was a cautious proposal that sadness might
be attributed to a form of emotional coping through acceptance and pursuing moral behaviour. The
influence of group dynamics appeared to come second to the values and identity content of individuals,
which seem to prepare them for action. While the activists were predisposed by their values, they seemed
to be pushed toward activism by growing frustration and anger towards government and politics. Initial
mobilisation appears to be influenced by collective efficacy generated by Extinction Rebellion and
supported by opinion leaders, however after this efficacy faded, other more salient factors became
important for sustaining participation.
There are several weaknesses in this study. The accounts provided a broad view of the activist’s
engagement with climate activism. However, other approaches, such as a longitudinal study from the point
of initial engagement, may have provided a more profound and coherent understanding of the phenomena.
This would also elucidate when activists may become disengaged. Moreover, while many aspects of the
activist’s experience were touched upon, it may have been more appropriate to focus on one aspect. Future
studies may benefit from targeting certain aspects such as morals, values and identity content. In this
sense, the research questions may have been too broad, but still, they have highlighted key areas of interest
for further investigation into collective action and climate change.
Word count:9981
6.0 References
Abramson, L. Y., Metalsky, G. I., and Alloy, L. B. (1989) Hopelessness depression: A theory-based
subtype of depression, Psychological Review, 96(2): 358–372.
Almanzar, N. A. P., and Herring, C. (2004) Sacrificing for the cause: Another look at high-risk/cost
activism, Race and Society, 7(2): 113–129.
Azemi, Y., Ozuem, W., and Howell, K. E. (2020) The effects of online negative word‐of‐mouth on
dissatisfied customers: A frustration–aggression perspective, Psychology & Marketing, 37(4): 564–577.
Bamberg, S., Rees, J. H., and Schulte, M. (2018) Environmental protection through societal change:
What psychology knows about collective climate action—and what it needs to find out, In Clayton, S.
and Manning, C. (eds). Psychology and Climate Change. Elsevier, Amsterdam: 185-208.
Bamberg, S., Rees, J., and Seebauer, S. (2015) Collective climate action: Determinants of participation
intention in community-based pro-environmental initiatives, Journal of Environmental Psychology, 43:
155–165.
Bandura, A. (1997) Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. Freeman: New York.
Barbalet, J. M. (1998) Emotion, Social Theory, and Social Structure: A Macrosociological Approach.
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Beyerlein, K., and Hipp, J. (2006) A Two-Stage Model for a Two-Stage Process: How Biographical
Availability Matters for Social Movement Mobilization, Mobilization: An International Quarterly,
11(3): 299–320.
24 of 35
Blackwood, L. M., and Louis, W. R. (2012) If it matters for the group then it matters to me: Collective
action outcomes for seasoned activists, British Journal of Social Psychology, 51(1):72–92.
Bliuc, A.-M., McGarty, C., Thomas, E. F., Lala, G., Berndsen, M., and Misajon, R. (2015) Public
division about climate change rooted in conflicting socio-political identities, Nature Climate Change,
5(3): 226–229.
Blumer, H. (1939) Collective behaviour, In Park, R., E. (ed.). Principles of Sociology. Barnes & Noble:
New York.
Borders, A., and Wiley, S. (2019) Rumination about discrimination mediates the unique association
between anger and collective action intentions, Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 00(0): 1-17.
Brady, H. E., Verba, S., and Schlozman, K. L. (1995) Beyond Ses: A Resource Model of Political
Participation, The American Political Science Review, 89(2): 271–294.
Braun, V., and Clarke, V. (2006) Using thematic analysis in psychology, Qualitative Research in
Psychology, 3(2): 77–101.
Bryman, A. (2016) Social research methods. Oxford university press: Oxford
Cappella, J. N., and Jamieson, K. H. (1996) News frames, political cynicism, and media cynicism, The
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 546(1): 71–84.
Clark, D. A., and Beck, A. T. (2010) Cognitive theory and therapy of anxiety and depression:
Convergence with neurobiological findings, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(9): 418–424.
Corcoran, K. E., Pettinicchio, D., and Young, J. T. (2011) The context of control: A cross-national
investigation of the link between political institutions, efficacy, and collective action, British journal of
social psychology, 50(4): 575–605.
Corning, A. F., and Myers, D. J. (2013) Activism Orientation Scale (AOS). Measurement Instrument
Database for the Social Science.
Crisp, R. J., Heuston, S., Farr, M. J., and Turner, R. N. (2007) Seeing Red or Feeling Blue:
Differentiated Intergroup Emotions and Ingroup Identification in Soccer Fans, Group Processes &
Intergroup Relations, 10(1): 9–26.
Crosby, F. (1976) A model of egoistical relative deprivation, Psychological review, 83(2): 85-113.
Davies, J. C. (1962) Toward a theory of revolution, American sociological review, 27(1): 5–19.
De Vreese, C. H. (2005) The spiral of cynicism reconsidered, European journal of communication,
20(3): 283–301.
Devos, T., Silver, L., Mackie, D. M., and Smith, E. R. (2002) Experiencing emotion on behalf of a
group: Intergroup anger, fear, and contempt, From prejudice to intergroup emotions: Differentiated
reactions to social groups, 111–134.
25 of 35
Dickinson, J. L., Crain, R., Yalowitz, S., and Cherry, T. M. (2013) How Framing Climate Change
Influences Citizen Scientists’ Intentions to Do Something About It, The Journal of Environmental
Education, 44(3): 145–158.
Dollard, J., Miller, N. E., Doob, L. W., Mowrer, O. H., and Sears, R. R. (1939) Frustration and
aggression. Yale University Press: Yale.
Druckman, J. N., and McGrath, M. C. (2019) The evidence for motivated reasoning in climate change
preference formation, Nature Climate Change, 9(2): 111–119.
Drury, J., and Reicher, S. (1999) The Intergroup Dynamics of Collective Empowerment: Substantiating
the Social Identity Model of Crowd Behavior, Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 2(4): 381–402.
Drury, J., and Reicher, S. (2005) Explaining enduring empowerment: a comparative study of collective
action and psychological outcomes, European Journal of Social Psychology, 35(1): 35–58.
Drury, J., and Reicher, S. (2009) Collective psychological empowerment as a model of social change:
Researching crowds and power, Journal of Social Issues, 65(4): 707–725.
Fielding, K. S., Hornsey, M. J., Thai, H. A., & Toh, L. L. (2020) Using ingroup messengers and ingroup
values to promote climate change policy, Climatic Change, 158(2): 181-199.
Fielding, K. S., and Hornsey, M. J. (2016) A Social Identity Analysis of Climate Change and
Environmental Attitudes and Behaviors: Insights and Opportunities, Frontiers in Psychology 7: 1-12.
Frantz, C. M., and Mayer, F. S. (2014) The importance of connection to nature in assessing
environmental education programs, Studies in Educational Evaluation, 41: 85–89.
Frijda, N. H. (2004) Emotion and action, In A. S. R. Manstead, N. H. Frijda, & A. H. Fischer
(eds.). Feelings and emotions: The Amsterdam symposium, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge:
158–173.
Fritsche, I., Barth, M., Jugert, P., Masson, T., and Reese, G. (2018) A Social Identity Model of Pro-
Environmental Action (SIMPEA), Psychological Review, 125(2): 245–269.
Global Citizen (2019), The ‘Attenborough Effect’ Is Causing Plastic Pollution to Plummet, Global
plastics/ >.
Goldenberg, A., Saguy, T., and Halperin, E. (2014) How group-based emotions are shaped by collective
emotions: Evidence for emotional transfer and emotional burden, Journal of personality and social
psychology, 107(4): 581-586.
Gurr, T. (1968) A causal model of civil strife: A comparative analysis using new indices, American
political science review, 62(4): 1104–1124.
Hardy, C., Phillips, N., and Clegg, S. (2001) Reflexivity in Organization and Management Theory: A
Study of the Production of the Research `Subject’, Human Relations, 54(5): 531–560.
26 of 35
Harth, N. S., Kessler, T., and Leach, C. W. (2008) Advantaged Group’s Emotional Reactions to
Intergroup Inequality: The Dynamics of Pride, Guilt, and Sympathy, Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 34(1): 115–129.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (2009) Acceptance and commitment therapy. American
Psychological Association: Washington.
Haynes-Worthington, S. (2018), The Attenborough effect: searches for plastic recycling rocket after
searches-plastic-recycling-rocket-after-blue-planet-ii-12334>.
Hogg, M. A., and Ridgeway, C. L. (2003) Social Identity: Sociological and Social Psychological
Perspectives, Social Psychology Quarterly, 66(2): 97–100.
Hornsey, M. J., Blackwood, L., Louis, W., Fielding, K., Mavor, K., Morton, T., O’Brien, A., Paasonen,
K.-E., Smith, J., and White, K. M. (2006) Why do people engage in collective action? Revisiting the role
of perceived effectiveness, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 36(7): 1701–1722.
Hornsey, M. J., and Hogg, M. A. (2000) Assimilation and Diversity: An Integrative Model of Subgroup
Relations, Personality and Social Psychology Review, 4(2): 143–156.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2018) Global warming of 1.5°C, Geneva, Switzerland.
Iyer, A., Schmader, T., and Lickel, B. (2007) Why individuals protest the perceived transgressions of
their country: The role of anger, shame, and guilt, Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33(4):
572–587.
Jacobsson, K., and Lindblom, J. (2016) Animal rights activism: a moral-sociological perspective on
social movements. Amsterdam University Press: Amsterdam.
Jacquet, J., Hagel, K., Hauert, C., Marotzke, J., Röhl, T., and Milinski, M. (2013) Intra- and
intergenerational discounting in the climate game, Nature Climate Change, 3(12): 1025–1028.
Johnson, R., and Cureton, A. (2019) Kant’s Moral Philosophy, In Zalta, E. N. (ed.), The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Stanford University: Stanford.
Kelly, C., and Breinlinger, S. (1995) Identity and injustice: Exploring women’s participation in
collective action, Journal of Community & Applied Social Psychology, 5(1): 41–57.
Klandermans, B. (1984) Mobilization and Participation: Social-Psychological Expansisons of Resource
Mobilization Theory, American Sociological Review, 49(5): 583–600.
Klandermans, B. (1997) The social psychology of protest. Blackwell: Oxford.
Klandermans, B., Van der Toorn, J., and Van Stekelenburg, J. (2008) Embeddedness and identity: How
immigrants turn grievances into action, American Sociological Review, 73(6): 992–1012.
Kleres, J., and Wettergren, \AAsa (2017) Fear, hope, anger, and guilt in climate activism, Social
Movement Studies, 16(5): 507–519.
27 of 35
Langer, E. J. (1975) The Illusion of Control, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32(2): 311–
328.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991) Cognition and motivation in emotion, American Psychologist, 46(4): 352-367.
Le Bon, G. (1895) The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind. Transaction: London.
Leach, C. W., Ellemers, N., and Barreto, M. (2007) Group virtue: The importance of morality (vs.
competence and sociability) in the positive evaluation of in-groups, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 93(2): 234–249.
Leach, C. W., Iyer, A., and Pedersen, A. (2007) Angry opposition to government redress: When the
structurally advantaged perceive themselves as relatively deprived, British Journal of Social
Psychology, 46(1): 191–204.
Lewin, K. (1947) Frontiers in group dynamics: II. Channels of group life; social planning and action
research, Human relations, 1(2): 143-153.
Livingstone, A. G. (2014) Why the psychology of collective action requires qualitative transformation as
well as quantitative change, Contemporary Social Science, 9(1): 121–134.
Louis, W. R., Taylor, D. M., and Neil, T. (2004) Cost‐benefit analyses for your group and yourself: the
rationality of decision‐making in conflict, International Journal of Conflict Management, 15(2): 110–
143.
Mackie, D. M., Devos, T., and Smith, E. R. (2000) Intergroup emotions: explaining offensive action
tendencies in an intergroup context, Journal of personality and social psychology, 79(4): 602-616.
Mackie, D. M., and Smith, E. R. (2017) Group-based emotion in group processes and intergroup
relations, Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 20(5): 658–668.
Martin, D. J., Abramson, L. Y., and Alloy, L. B. (1984) Illusion of control for self and others in
depressed and non-depressed college students, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46(1):
125–136.
McAdam, D. (1986) Recruitment to High-Risk Activism: The Case of Freedom Summer, American
Journal of Sociology, 92(1): 64–90.
McAdam, D. (2017) Social Movement Theory and the Prospects for Climate Change Activism in the
United States, Annual Review of Political Science, 20(1): 189–208.
McAdam, D., Tarrow, S., and Tilly, C. (2001) Dynamics of contention. Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge.
McPhail, C. (1971) Civil disorder participation: A critical examination of recent research, American
Sociological Review, 36(6): 1058–1073.
McPhail, C. (2017) The myth of the madding crowd. Routledge: London.
28 of 35
Miller, D. A., Cronin, T., Garcia, A. L., and Branscombe, N. R. (2009) The Relative Impact of Anger
and Efficacy on Collective Action is Affected by Feelings of Fear, Group Processes & Intergroup
Relations, 12(4): 445–462.
Mullen, E., and Skitka, L. J. (2006) Exploring the psychological underpinnings of the moral mandate
effect: Motivated reasoning, group differentiation, or anger?, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 90(4): 629–643.
Mummendey, A., Kessler, T., Klink, A., and Mielke, R. (1999) Strategies to Cope With Negative Social
Identity: Predictions by Social Identity Theory and Relative Deprivation Theory, Journal of personality
and social psychology, 76(2): 229–245.
Nightingale, D., and Cromby, J. (1999) Social Constructionist Psychology: A Critical Analysis of
Theory and Practice. McGraw-Hill Education: Maidenhead.
Olson, M. (1965) The logic of collective action: Public goods and the theory of groups. Harvard
University Press: Cambridge.
Ozer, E. M., and Bandura, A. (1990) Mechanisms Governing Empowerment Effects: A Self-Efficacy
Analysis, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58(3): 472–486.
Patton, M. Q. (2014) Qualitative research & evaluation methods: Integrating theory and practice. Sage:
New York.
Postmes, T., and Smith, L. G. E. (2009) Why Do the Privileged Resort to Oppression? A Look at Some
Intragroup Factors, Journal of Social Issues, 65(4): 769–790.
Rabionet, S. E. (2011) How I Learned to Design and Conduct Semi-structured Interviews: An Ongoing
and Continuous Journey, The Qualitative Report, 16(2): 563–566.
Rees, J. H., and Bamberg, S. (2014) Climate protection needs societal change: Determinants of intention
to participate in collective climate action, European Journal of Social Psychology, 44(5): 466–473.
Restall, B., and Conrad, E. (2015) A literature review of connectedness to nature and its potential for
environmental management, Journal of Environmental Management, 30: 1-15.
Ripple, W. J., Wolf, C., Newsome, T. M., Barnard, P., and Moomaw, W. R. (2019) World scientists’
warning of a climate emergency, BioScience, 70(1): 8-12
Roberts, J. T. (2001) Global Inequality and Climate Change, Society & Natural Resources, 14(6): 501–
509.
Roseman, I. J. (1984) Cognitive determinants of emotion: A structural theory, Review of personality &
social psychology, 5: 11-36
Roser-Renouf, C., Maibach, E. W., Leiserowitz, A., and Zhao, X. (2014) The genesis of climate change
activism: from key beliefs to political action, Climatic Change, 125(2): 163–178.
Rudolph, T. J., Gangl, A., and Stevens, D. (2000) The Effects of Efficacy and Emotions on Campaign
Involvement, The Journal of Politics, 62(4): 1189–1197.
29 of 35
Runciman, W. G., and Runciman, B. (1966) Relative deprivation and social justice: A study of attitudes
to social inequality in twentieth-century England. University of California Press: Berkeley.
Sabucedo, J. M., Dono, M., Grigoryev, D., Gómez-Román, C., and Alzate, M. (2019) Axiological-
Identitary Collective Action Model (AICAM): A new integrative perspective in the analysis of protest,
PLOS ONE, 14(6): 1-17.
Sabucedo, J.-M., Dono, M., Alzate, M., and Seoane, G. (2018) The Importance of Protesters’ Morals:
Moral Obligation as a Key Variable to Understand Collective Action, Frontiers in Psychology, 9: 1-12.
Saunders, C. (2008) Double-edged swords? Collective identity and solidarity in the environment
movement, The British Journal of Sociology, 59(2): 227–253.
Saunders, C., Grasso, M., Olcese, C., Rainsford, E., and Rootes, C. (2012) Explaining Differential
Protest Participation: Novices, Returners, Repeaters, and Stalwarts, Mobilization: An International
Quarterly, 17(3): 263–280.
Scherer, K. R., Schorr, A., and Johnstone, T. (2001) Appraisal processes in emotion: Theory, methods,
research. Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Schmitt, M. T., Miller, D. A., Branscombe, N. R., and Brehm, J. W. (2008) The Difficulty of Making
Reparations Affects the Intensity of Collective Guilt, Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 11(3):
267–279.
Schuldt, J. P., Rickard, L. N., and Yang, Z. J. (2018) Does reduced psychological distance increase
climate engagement? On the limits of localizing climate change, Journal of Environmental Psychology,
55: 147–153.
Schwartz, S. H., and Jacobs, J. (1979) Qualitative sociology. Simon and Schuster: New York.
Schwartz, S. H. (1973) Normative explanations of helping behavior: A critique, proposal, and empirical
test, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 9(4): 349–364.
Shepherd, L., Spears, R., and Manstead, A. S. R. (2013) ‘This will bring shame on our nation’: The role
of anticipated group-based emotions on collective action, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
49(1): 42–57.
Simon, B., and Klandermans, B. (2001) Politicized collective identity: A social psychological analysis,
American psychologist, 56(4): 319.
Simon, B., Loewy, M., Stürmer, S., Weber, U., Freytag, P., Habig, C., Kampmeier, C., and Spahlinger,
P. (1998) Collective Identification and Social Movement Participation, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 74(3): 646–658.
Skitka, L. J., Bauman, C. W., and Sargis, E. G. (2005) Moral Conviction: Another Contributor to
Attitude Strength or Something More?, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88(6): 895–917.
Smelser, N. J. (1962) Theory of Collective Behavior. Simon & Schuster: New York.
30 of 35
Smith, E. R., and Mackie, D. M. (2015) Dynamics of Group-Based Emotions: Insights From Intergroup
Emotions Theory, Emotion Review, 7(4): 349–354.
Smith, H. J., Conin, T., and Kessler, T. (2008) Anger, Fear, or Sadness: Faculty members’ emotional
reactions to collective pay disadvantage, Political Psychology, 29(2): 221–246.
Smith, H. J., Cronin, T., and Kessler, T. (2008) Anger, Fear, or Sadness: Faculty Members’ Emotional
Reactions to Collective Pay Disadvantage, Political Psychology, 29(2): 221–246.
Stekelenburg, J. V., Klandermans, B., and Dijk, W. W. V. (2009) Context Matters: Explaining How and
Why Mobilizing Context Influences Motivational Dynamics, Journal of Social Issues, 65(4): 815–838.
Stott, C., and Reicher, S. (2011) Mad mobs and Englishmen?: Myths and realities of the 2011 riots.
Hachette UK: London.
Sunstein, C. R., and Rowell, A. (2007) On Discounting Regulatory Benefits: Risk, Money, and
Intergenerational Equity, The University of Chicago Law Review, 74(1): 171–208.
Tajfel, H., and Turner, J. (1979) An integrative theory of intergroup conflict, In Worschel, S. and
Austin, W. (eds.). The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations. Nelson-Hall, Chicago: 33-47.
Tausch, N., Becker, J., Spears, R., and Christ, O. (2008) Emotion and efficacy pathways to normative
and non-normative collective action: A study in the context of student protests in Germany, In Intra-and
Intergroup Processes’ Pre-Conference to the 15th General Meeting of the EAESP (Invited Paper),
Opatija, Croatia.
Tausch, Nicole, and Becker, J. C. (2013) Emotional reactions to success and failure of collective action
as predictors of future action intentions: A longitudinal investigation in the context of student protests in
Germany, British Journal of Social Psychology, 52(3): 525–542.
Tausch, Nicole, Becker, J. C., Spears, R., Christ, O., Saab, R., Singh, P., and Siddiqui, R. N. (2011)
Explaining radical group behavior: Developing emotion and efficacy routes to normative and non-
normative collective action, Journal of personality and social psychology, 101(1): 129-148.
Taylor, D. M., Moghaddam, F. M., Gamble, I., and Zellerer, E. (1987) Disadvantaged group response to
perceived inequality: From passive acceptance to collective action, The Journal of social psychology,
127(3): 259–272.
Thomas, E. F., McGarty, C., and Mavor, K. I. (2009) Aligning identities, emotions, and beliefs to create
commitment to sustainable social and political action, Personality and social psychology review, 13(3):
194–218.
Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., Oakes, P. J., Reicher, S. D., and Wetherell, M. S. (1987) Rediscovering the
social group: A self-categorization theory. Basil Blackwell: Oxford.
Tvinnereim, E., and Ivarsflaten, E. (2016) Fossil fuels, employment, and support for climate policies,
Energy Policy, 96: 364–371.
31 of 35
van Knippenberg, D., and Hogg, M. A. (2003) A social identity model of leadership effectiveness in
organisations, Research in Organizational Behavior, 25: 243–295.
van Zomeren, M. (2013) Four Core Social-Psychological Motivations to Undertake Collective Action,
Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 7(6): 378–388.
van Zomeren, M., and Iyer, A. (2009) Introduction to the social and psychological dynamics of
collective action, Journal of Social Issues, 65(4): 645–660.
van Zomeren, M., Kutlaca, M., and Turner-Zwinkels, F. (2018) Integrating who “we” are with what
“we” (will not) stand for: A further extension of the Social Identity Model of Collective Action,
European Review of Social Psychology, 29(1): 122–160.
van Zomeren, M., Postmes, T., and Spears, R. (2008) Toward an integrative social identity model of
collective action: A quantitative research synthesis of three socio-psychological perspectives,
Psychological bulletin, 134(4): 504-535.
van Zomeren, M., Spears, R., Fischer, A. H., and Leach, C. W. (2004) Put your money where your
mouth is! Explaining collective action tendencies through group-based anger and group efficacy,
Journal of personality and social psychology, 87(5): 649-664.
van Zomeren, M., Spears, R., and Leach, C. W. (2008) Exploring psychological mechanisms of
collective action: Does relevance of group identity influence how people cope with collective
disadvantage?, British Journal of Social Psychology, 47(2): 353–372.
van Zomeren, M., Spears, R., and Leach, C. W. (2010) Experimental evidence for a dual pathway model
analysis of coping with the climate crisis, Journal of Environmental Psychology, 30(4): 339–346.
Vilas, X., and Sabucedo, J.-M. (2012) Moral obligation: A forgotten dimension in the analysis of
collective action, Revista de Psicología Social, 27(3): 369–375.
Wade-Benzoni, K. A., Tost, L. P., Hernandez, M., and Larrick, R. P. (2012) It’s Only a Matter of Time:
Death, Legacies, and Intergenerational Decisions, Psychological Science, 23(7): 704–709.
Weldon, L. (2011) When protest makes policy: How social movements represent disadvantaged groups.
University of Michigan Press: Michigan.
Willig, C. (2013) Introducing qualitative research in psychology. McGraw-hill education: Maidenhead.
Wright, S. C., Taylor, D. M., and Moghaddam, F. M. (1990) Responding to membership in a
disadvantaged group: From acceptance to collective protest, Journal of personality and social
psychology, 58(6): 994-1003.
Zaal, M. P., Laar, C. V., Ståhl, T., Ellemers, N., and Derks, B. (2011) By any means necessary: The
effects of regulatory focus and moral conviction on hostile and benevolent forms of collective action,
British Journal of Social Psychology, 50(4): 670–689.
32 of 35
7.0 Appendix.
Supplementary survey data.
Participant Information
Pseudonym HR HC A E TG G
P1 1 6 - R 1 M
P2 2 4 - R 1 F
P3 3 3 - E 1 F
P4 4 3 x R 1 F
P5 4 5 x R 2 F
P6 3 4 - R 1 F
P7 5 2 - E 2 F
P8 5 5 x E 3 M
P9 3 3 - R 2 F
P10 6 6 - E 2 F
P11 3 5 - E 3 F
P12 6 3 x E 3 F
P13 2 1 - R 3 F
P14 4 2 - E 3 F
P15 5 1 - S 4 F
P16 2 4 x E 1 F
P17 3 4 - E 4 F
P18 2 2 - E 4 F
33 of 35
Survey Results
Question (Please answer the following as they apply to you. During your time as a n %
member of XR, have you...)
1. Engaged in a climate action in which you feared for your personal safety? 5 28
2. Engaged in a demonstration in which you suspect there would be a confrontation 16 89
with the police or possible arrest?
3. Taken part in an action in which road traffic was temporarily stopped? 18 100
4. Engaged in a climate action in which you feared that some of your possessions 3 17
would be damaged?
5. Put yourself in a position in which you knew you would be arrested? 8 44
6. Blocked access to a building or public area with your body? 12 33
7. Locked on or glued yourself to a building, structure or vehicle in a public place? 1 6
8. Taken up a role or position of responsibility within Extinction Rebellion? 10 55
9. Dedicated your time to man an XR stand or helped at an event? 14 78
10. Regularly donated money to the organisation? 6 33
11. Attend regular XR planning or other meetings? 17 94
12. Purchased a poster, t-shirt, or such item that endorses a XR’s point of view? 11 61
13. Delivered lectures or training on behalf of Extinction Rebellion? 5 28
14. Dedicated yourself full time to work for Extinction Rebellion? 1 6
Note. 1 – 7 HR, 8-14 HC. n / % = “Yes”.
34 of 35