The Stability of Daily Situation Experiences
By
KATHERINE MARIE FINNIGAN
DISSERTATION
Submitted in partial satisfaction of the requirements for the degree of
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
in
PSYCHOLOGY
in the
OFFICE OF GRADUATE STUDIES
of the
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
DAVIS
Approved:
Simine Vazire, Chair
Mijke Rhemtulla
Richard W. Robins
Committee in Charge
Acknowledgements
It took a village for this dissertation to happen. To try to summarize all the love and
support that made this document is almost too much to bear on this pandemic summer day. But
here goes.
Simine, thank you. Thank you for meeting with me at Mishka’s on Superbowl Sunday
and wearing a soothing pink sweater and gently asking me questions. Thank you for treating me
like a human being, for modeling empathy and brilliance, for being courageous at every turn.
You advocated for me whenever you could, you brought me into every room I wanted to be in. I
can list so many more things you’ve taught me and modeled for me that made me who I am
today, and I love lists, but the tl;dr version is that you made me feel worthy, intelligent, capable,
brave. You made me that way by being yourself and encouraging me to do the same. My
gratitude for you is unbounded and strengthens every day. Thank you for signing all my forms
and reading my words and listening to my thoughts. I’m going to cry trying to end this paragraph
so maybe I should leave it here…
I was so spoiled for great mentoring and advising at Davis. I’m so grateful to Wiebke
Bleidorn, Chris Hopwood, Mijke Rhemtulla, and Rick Robins for their feedback, kindness, and
support. I learned so much from all of you in big and small ways and carry that knowledge with
me wherever I go and in whatever work I do. Thank you so much!
Thank you to the non-Davis faculty who mentored and taught me, including Rich Lucas,
Alexa Tullett, Sanjay Srivastava, and Joanne Chung. You’re all so smart and witty and
wonderful. Shout out to the WashU /SPAN study crew: Tom Oltmanns, Josh Jackson, Betsy
Edershile, Josh Oltmanns, and Merlyn Rodrigues. Thank you for teaching me so much in the
course of just two months.
ii
Katie Corker, I owe you everything! You let me into your office hours and your world
after just a few weeks in your research methods class. You were (and remain) extremely
competent, thoughtful, kind, hilarious, incredibly smart, tough, and the best advisor any
undergraduate/human could ask for at any institution. You set the standard of excellence for
board games, beer, and trivia and that is a fact. I am so thankful that you and Paul for included
me in virtual trivia, that really got me through the last few months of dissertating. And you even
continued to advise me in graduate school! Dang, I’m lucky. Thank you from the bottom of this
almost Dr. Katie’s heart.
To the rest of the PSK Lab past and present, I thank you forever and ever. Robert, thank
you for letting me use your bike when I first got to Davis even though I let it get stolen. You
pushed me into nature and now I like it! Thank you for your support in and out of the lab. Kelci,
thank you for taking care of me when I got food poisoning in St. Louis. That was a really
unfortunate event, but you got me Gatorade and let me watch “Making a Murderer” all day on
your couch. You’re the pop culture maven I aspire to be. Jessie, thank you for bringing
brilliance, fluffy dogs, and hard work to the lab. I’m so grateful to be your lab sibling and I can’t
wait to see what you do next, and what you do after that. Beth, thank you for being a kind and
brilliant lab manager and for making my job easy. And to Kathryn, Erika, Julia, and Sarah,
you’re all lovely, kind, supportive, and smart. What a team! Thanks again, Simine.
Alexia, you were the best roommate and friend this woman could ask for. I miss you and
Lola every day and can’t wait to hang out on the east coast. You inspire me to be bold and funny
and I love you. Ted, you’re my younger brother. You’re wonderfully insane and I love you.
Thank you for letting me cry on you several times. Heather, thank you for making me laugh
always and for bringing Josh into my life. Angela, you’re beautiful and brilliant and I can’t wait
iii
to see what you do. Thank you, Sarah, Forrest, Andre, Linnea, and Orestis for your camaraderie,
your humor, your smarts.
Leigh, Katherine, and Olivia, you are all my gurl group 4evah and I love you all. Thank
you, Olivia, for helping me whenever I needed it, for telling me about “Grey’s Anatomy”, for
sharing in “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend”, and for your ever-present kindness and patience. You’re so
incredibly smart and deserve everything. Katherine, you and Ryan were my lifelines in Davis.
Thank you for hosting me, for including me, for sharing your pizza with me, for letting me go to
NYC with you, for explaining baseball and yoga to me, for showing me “Office Space”. Your
home is an oasis to me, and I miss it all the time. Your kindness, chill, and wit know no bounds.
Leigh, you know you made this happen. All of my energy to do this came from our fabulous
multi-course multi-plate Joseph Leonard meals. You inspire me to be who I am, to make wild
decisions, to listen to my gut and all its bacteria, to pursue what I want no matter what I’ve done
before. I am beyond grateful that you came into my life and I cannot thank you enough for the
love and support you’ve shown me. You make me feel like glitter is exploding inside me (but in
a good way).
Hannah, you are my best friend and always will be. Thank you for sending me earrings
that I always get compliments on and for being such a brilliant, beautiful, joyful light in my life.
Kristen, you’re my brother and always will be. Thank you for being there and hearing me, even
when it was hard. And thank you for the stories and jokes that will never not make me snort with
laughter. I miss you both every day. Thank you, Elyssa and Ian, for encouraging me at the very
end and letting me into a beautiful space to work and breathe in nature.
Mom, Dad, Joe, Emily, Julia, Cinthia, Cats, Dogs, Birds, Lizards, Turtles. I love each and
every one of you so, so much. Granny, I miss you every day, thank you for giving us books and
iv
supporting all of us at every step. Thank you, Joseph and Charlotte and Emilia and Alice, for
being there and lifting me up and teaching me TikTok dances. You’re such an important part of
our family and I’m so grateful for your presence in my life. I’m so proud of my fellow
graduates, Joe and Emily, and my fellow Aggie, Julia. You three make me so proud every single
day. I’m honored to be your sister and grateful that you let me hug you. You three are brilliant,
kind, hilarious, goofy, fun, loud, compassionate, beautiful humans. Thanks for letting me boss
you around and for forgiving me now. Dad, thanks for inspiring me to write, to be funny, to
obsess over pop culture. Mommy, I love you more than I could ever put in words. You made me
who I am, and I can never repay you. I can only send you Jeni’s regularly and call you whenever
you want to talk. You made everything I’ve done possible. Thank you for all of it.
And finally, SHANE. My co-dweller and lover. Thank you for being genuinely so
supportive and proud of me as I finished this. You inspired me to work hard, you assured me that
my ideas are worth hearing, you encouraged me to keep going even when a global pandemic had
me frozen in the fetal position. You and Benjohls are my family, and wow, my luck. Thank you,
I love you, your Docy.
Abstract
How stable are people’s day-to-day lives? It is now well-established that personality traits
and behavior are quite stable over time (Roberts & DelVecchio, 2000). Several theories of
personality suggest that the stability of one’s environment contributes to the stability of
personality. However, little is known about the extent to which features of people’s daily
environments are stable. In this secondary analysis, I examined the rank-order stability of
individual differences in features of daily situations in a 2-year longitudinal study of daily life (N
= 387). I analyzed three waves of two-week Experience Sampling Method (ESM) assessments of
daily situation experiences, personality states, and behavior. ESM open responses were also
coded for the DIAMONDS characteristics in the first two waves of ESM assessment. Personality
states were found to be stable from year-to-year (M Stability = .63). Situated experiences (e.g.,
familiarity) were found to be about as stable as personality states. Activities (e.g., at home) and
the eight DIAMONDS characteristics were found to be less stable than personality and situated
experiences, but still showed moderate stability. These findings suggest that situation experience
may be a viable individual difference and that the stability of environments may contribute to the
stability of behavior, and vice versa.
vi
Acknowledgements .......................................................................................................................ii
Abstract......................................................................................................................................... vi
The Stability of Daily Situation Experiences...............................................................................1
Introduction.........................................................................................................................1
Method ..............................................................................................................................21
Results ...............................................................................................................................34
Discussion .........................................................................................................................51
Appendix A........................................................................................................................61
References.....................................................................................................................................62
vii
The Stability of Daily Situation Experiences
Introduction
How much do people change from one year to the next? After decades of studying
personality over the lifespan, a large body of evidence suggests that people’s personality is quite
stable over time. People who are more talkative than their peers at one point in time are likely to
still be near the top of the distribution in talkativeness years later (Roberts & Mroczek, 2008).
Conversely, we know relatively little about how much people’s daily experiences — the
activities they do and the situations they find themselves in — change from year to year. Given
that personality encapsulates patterns in behavior, it is likely that daily situation experiences are
relatively stable. However, there is little direct empirical evidence of stability in situation
experiences. In the first test of this question, I analyzed an existing dataset that includes three
waves of intensive, naturalistic assessments of situation experiences in college students over two
years.
Understanding the stability (or lack thereof) of people’s situation experiences is
fundamental to understanding human behavior, especially social behavior. Stable situations
could potentially be a source of stability in personality and behavior, and indeed in life. For
example, if some people consistently find themselves interacting with people they know very
well, this could contribute to the stability of their levels of extraversion. It could also reflect the
influence of their extraversion on their tendency to select into particular social environments, as
person-situation transactions are likely bidirectional (Buss, 1987). Conversely, if individual
differences in situation experiences are not stable (i.e., if people find themselves in vastly
different social situations and do different social activities from one year to the next), this would
suggest that situation experiences reflect temporary circumstances rather than a core aspect of a
person’s character. Thus, whether situation experiences are stable or not has implications for
how psychologists should approach behavior change. If situation experiences are generally
stable, interventions aimed at changing behavior should also consider changing the
characteristics of people’s everyday situation experiences.
This study utilizes data collected using the Experience Sampling Methodology (ESM), a
common type of intensive measurement. These data come from a 2-year measurement-burst
study of college students at a large private university in the Midwest region of the United States.
The study was designed to examine the relationship between personality, self-knowledge, and
behavior. Therefore, I am conducting a secondary data analysis to answer the questions I
outlined above; the extent to which this is a limitation of this study will be outlined below.
The process of selecting the term that most accurately describes the variables under
investigation was a difficult one. Some of the variables examined here are subjective, others are
behavioral in nature, others encapsulate more objective environmental characteristics. The
literature on situations is lexically slippery (Rauthmann, Sherman, & Funder, 2015), and the
broader literature on environments, situations, and experiences even more so. Below I review
how psychologists have conceptualized and categorized external, psychologically relevant
characteristics. I will investigate three constructs, note the overlap and differentiation between
them, and link the existing literature to the current study.
Environments
Despite the prolonged debate about the power of the person versus the environment,
psychologists have long understood that both constructs are important for producing behavior
(Lewin, 1936). In the last five decades, personality psychologists have argued that personality
traits are a stable individual difference that can be used to predict life outcomes (Roberts &
Mroczek, 2008) and have developed robust, widely used taxonomies of personality traits (e.g.,
John & Srivastava, 1999; Lee & Ashton, 2010). However, the development of a taxonomy to
encapsulate a person’s environment — the other half of Lewin’s equation (Behavior ~ f(Person,
Environment)) — had, until recently, received little empirical attention in personality psychology
(Baumeister et al., 2007; Reis, 2008). Though social and personality psychology has long
theorized about the contribution of the environment to the stability of behavior (Ross & Nisbett,
2011), the discipline lacks a framework to comprehensively study situations. As a result of this
knowledge gap, it is unclear whether environments, particularly social environments, are a stable
part of an individual’s experience that helps define who they are.
But what is the social environment? The term “social environment” is frequently used
outside of psychology — particularly in public health and sociology — often referring to the
broad characteristics of one’s social life, including: social relationships, living conditions,
neighborhoods, communities, institutions, and broader social and economic policy (Chen &
Schreier, 2008; Kaplan, 1999; Van Wormer & Besthorn, 2017). Within social and personality
psychology, the environment has been defined as “the aggregate of larger physical and
psychological conditions that influence human behaviors” (Yang, Read, & Miller, 2009, p.
1019). Environments are the most general level of external influences on behavior, and the social
environment is often the focus of research in psychology. Due to the breadth of the concept of a
social environment, research on the effects of social environments on behavior is generally
piecemeal, focusing on certain aspects of social relationships or social settings rather than a
holistic approach (Barker, 1965; Yang et al., 2009). However, a consideration of a broader social
environment is critical to understanding how the individual interacts with these external forces.
Despite a general lack of understanding of what the social environment is, social and
personality psychologists mostly use the term casually in literature reviews to refer to the
broadest conceptualization of a topic or research area. In the current literature, social and
personality psychologists have turned to situations as their chief conceptualization of external
factors that influence personality and behavior. In line with recent work in this area, I measured
situations using a bottom-up approach tailored for the current study.
Situations
The process of defining situations has been an arduous one for many social scientific
disciplines, and social and personality psychology are no different in this struggle (Baumeister et
al., 2007; Lucas & Donnellan, 2009; Milgram & Gudehus, 1974). The task of creating a
satisfying taxonomy of situations has haunted the discipline, practically since birth (Hogan,
2009; Swann & Seyle, 2005; Yang et al., 2009). At a broad level, psychologists have defined the
situation as an intermediary between stimuli — “a specific object that gives rise to the
organism’s response” (Yang et al., 2009, p. 1019) — and the environment. Situations therefore
occur within a broader environment. Although situations are theoretically more constrained than
environments, universal consensus has yet to be reached regarding the categorization and
conceptualization of situations (Rauthmann, Sherman, & Funder, 2015). Below, I outline several
relevant frameworks for conceptualizing and categorizing situations, and then discuss how these
frameworks inform the current study.
Conceptualizing situations. Social and personality psychologists have understood the
importance of the situation, but have long debated the extent to which situations are objective or
subjective (Rauthmann, Sherman, & Funder, 2015). Are situations solely outside the perceiver,
or are they psychologically relevant only if they exist in the eye of the beholder? Perspectives
that emphasize the power of the environment or the situation (e.g., ecological psychology, social-
cognitive psychology) have emphasized an objective approach, whereas perspectives that focus
on the person (e.g., personality psychology) have emphasized a subjective approach. However,
as is often the case, it is increasingly evident that both aspects of situations are psychologically
meaningful, in distinct ways. More recent, influential frameworks have acknowledged the
importance of both objective and subjective elements of situations; these frameworks integrate
these sources of information into a single structure, enabling a more comprehensive study of
situations.
Block and Block (1981) proposed one of the earliest comprehensive frameworks for
conceptualizing situations. Block and Block proposed that there are three levels at which we can
analyze situations, which were later renamed by Saucier, Bel-Bahar, and Fernandez (2007): (1)
the environmental level, which refers to the most objective features of the situation (e.g.,
location, time of day); (2) the consensual level, which refers to features of the situation that can
be perceived by all participants in a situation (e.g., that a gathering of people celebrating a
marriage is a wedding, that students sitting in a classroom with a lecturer are in class); and (3)
the functional level, which refers to the most subjective features of the situation that are person-
specific, and are not directly perceived by other people (e.g., “I was stressed around my parents”,
“I felt worried for my friend who went skydiving”). This framework incorporate a range of both
objective and subjective information and provides a basis for future theoretical advancements.
Rauthmann and colleagues (2015) reviewed the literature on situations and proposed their
own answer to the objective-subjective situation debate. In Rauthmann and colleagues’
framework, situational information is organized into three categories: (1) cues, which refer to
directly observable features of situations (e.g., temperature, time of day); (2) characteristics,
which refer to the psychological features of situations (e.g., embarrassment), and (3) classes,
which refer to categories of situations (e.g., a funeral). There are noted similarities between the
framework proposed by Block and Block (1981) and Rauthmann and colleagues’ framework:
Block and Block’s environmental level corresponds to Rauthmann and colleagues’ cues and
Block and Block’s consensual level corresponds to Rauthmann and colleagues’ characteristics.
The functional level of Block and Block’s framework shares some overlap with characteristics in
Rauthmann and colleagues’ framework, but also overlaps with the classes distinction, in that
many contemporary situation taxonomies use more subjective aspects of situations in their
classification of situations (Parrigon et al., 2017; Rauthmann et al., 2014).
Categorizing situations. Despite an understanding that situations are multifaceted and
contain multiple sources of information, psychologists have lamented the lack of an established
taxonomy of situations (Swann & Seyle, 2005). A taxonomy of situations would play a critical
role in unifying the research on situations and providing a clear framework for research that
involves the study of situations, both within and outside psychology.
Two recent taxonomies have stimulated a growth in systematic research on situations.
First, Rauthmann and colleagues (2015) proposed the DIAMONDS taxonomy, developed by
factor analyzing the 80-item Riverside Situational Q-Sort (Sherman et al., 2010; Wagerman &
Funder, 2009), an ipsative measure of the psychological properties of situations. The
DIAMONDS consists of eight classes of situation characteristics: Duty, Intellect, Adversity,
Mating, pOsitivity, Negativity, Deception, and Sociality (Rauthmann et al., 2014; Rauthmann &
Sherman, 2017). Second, the CAPTION taxonomy — proposed by Parrigon and colleagues
(2017) — is the most comprehensive attempt to derive a taxonomy of situations using an English
adjectives lexical approach, similar to the approach used to develop the Big Five personality
traits (John, 1990). The CAPTION taxonomy has seven factors: Complexity, Adversity, Positive
valence, Typicality, Importance, humOr, and Negative valence. In comparing these two
taxonomies Rauthmann and Sherman (2017) found five replicable factors across the two
approaches: external threats or obstacles (Adversity, Negative valence); negative, distressing
events (Negativity, Adversity); important or urgent tasks are involved (Duty, Importance);
deeper and effortful cognitive information processing (Intellect, Complexity); pleasant, fun
events (pOsitivity, Positive valence). Although both taxonomies have been deployed primarily
using self-report methods, both models have been tested using basic validation techniques,
including inter-rater reliability, observer-ratings, and the prediction of behavior and personality.
The development and proliferation of these taxonomies suggests an interesting future for
situation research. Although these situation taxonomies contain important information about
external environments (e.g., cues), they are primarily concerned with situation characteristics, or
the functional level in Block and Block’s (1981) framework. In both the CAPTION and the
DIAMONDS taxonomies, subjective characteristics are deemed to be most important in the
measurement of situations. Indeed, pOsitivity/Positive valence and Negativity/Negative valence
seem to be primarily affective states, given that external environments do not inherently contain
positive or negative valuations.
In line with this focus on the subjective elements of situations, another taxonomy has
emerged to assess situation perception. Ziegler and colleagues (2019) introduced the Situation
Five: Outcome-Expectancy (e.g., “confident”), Briskness (e.g., “lively”), Cognitive Load (e.g.,
“mind-wracking”), Psychological and Physical Load (e.g., “tense”), and Lack of Stimuli (e.g.,
“boring”). These lexically-derived characteristics explain individual differences in how different
people perceive the same external situations. Although this framework has only been applied to
the study of work situations (Ziegler et al., 2019), its emergence is further evidence of the
primacy of subjective elements of situations in social and personality psychology.
Does the reliance on subjectivity limit the scope of situation research? In a commentary
on the CAPTIONS taxonomy, Reis (2018) suggested that bottom-up approaches to situation
categorization are inherently flawed, due to the imperceptibility of the wide range of situation
characteristics by humans. Reis suggests that while the CAPTION taxonomy captures “common
everyday situations” (p. 490) as described by the self, it is less relevant for the study of situations
in psychology, as psychologists are concerned with the unique characteristics of certain (not
necessarily common) situations and how individuals differ in their response to them. In response
to these comments, Parrigon and colleagues (2018) asserted the critical need for a generalizable
taxonomy of situations in psychology, in order to maximize the explanatory power of situations
and more comprehensively represent the range of situations people experience. Though Reis’
assertion that top-down, theory-driven situation taxonomies are superior for the study of
psychology is compelling, the history of situation research tells us that this approach leads to a
fragmented study of situations, with no unifying taxonomy of situation characteristics.
I conducted a bottom-up approach to the study of experienced environments and
situations, using measures that focus on the everyday situation experiences of individuals and
examining their stability. I used a range of variables that encapsulate more subjective experiences
of situations (e.g., how stressful the situation was to the participant) and more objective
characteristics of situation experiences (e.g., was the participant alone or with other people). I
also incorporated the DIAMONDS framework by coding hourly diary entries for the eight
characteristics (e.g., this situation contains communication, interaction, social relationships
[Sociality]). These measures capture both dimensional characteristics of situations and concrete
features of situations, which will illuminate the descriptive differences and differences in
stability between the two approaches. Each measure focuses on the individual’s experience of
situations; in the next section, I review the psychology literature on experience and how it differs
from the study of pure situations or environments.
Experiences
In the objective-subjective situation debate, psychologists tend to come out on the side of
the subjective: the most important characteristics of situations are the ones that are most clearly
perceived and experienced by the individual. What do psychologists mean when they talk about
the experience of situations or environments? The Oxford English Dictionary defines the noun
“experience” in several ways, including “the actual observation of facts or events, considered as
a source of knowledge” and “the fact of being consciously the subject of a state or condition, or
of being consciously affected by an event […]; a state or condition viewed subjectively; an event
by which one is affected” (“Experience,” 2019). These definitions emphasize the relationship of
an event or concrete fact with the perception, memory, and knowledge gained from said event or
fact. These definitions can provide some framing for how psychologists typically deploy the
word in the research literature. Though the word is commonly used in the social and personality
psychology literatures, there is little explicit defining of what the word means in the
psychological realm. In their paper on the validity of the Experience Sampling Methodology
(ESM), Csikszentmihalyi and Larson (1987) outline the phenomena that ESM can measure:
“activities, feelings, thoughts, motivations, and medical symptoms”, in addition to “the common
experience of situations” and “the dynamics of emotions and other subjective states” (p. 533).
Most psychologists would likely agree that experiences are remembered perceptions of one’s
environment and their own physical, affective, and behavioral state (Middleton & Brown, 2005).
Use of ESM has proliferated in social and personality psychology following the advent
and popularization of mobile phones (Harari, Müller, et al., 2017). But when we measure
“experiences,” what exactly are we measuring? Given the wide ranging definition set by
Csikszentmihalyi and Larson (1987), psychologists use ESM as a means to examine daily
experiences of personality states (Fleeson, 2001), affective states (Kahneman et al., 2004),
situation experiences (Rauthmann et al., 2016), relationship satisfaction (Oishi & Sullivan,
2006), symptoms of psychopathology (Trull & Ebner-Priemer, 2009) and organizational
behavior (Beal, 2015). In sum, the limits to what ESM can study have largely been set by
researchers, with little empirical investigation into what variables ESM is best suited to measure.
Some recent research has investigated the parameters of what ESM can do. Earlier
research suggested that the maximum and minimum values of affect (Fredrickson, 2000;
Parkinson et al., 1995) and the maximum values of personality states (Fleeson & Gallagher,
2009) were more closely related to global retrospective reports, but more recent, rigorous
research suggests that the average of momentary reports is the most valid measure of daily
experiences of personality, affect, and relationship satisfaction; though minimum values provide
some incremental validity, this pattern is less robust (Miron-Shatz, 2009; Zygar-Hoffmann &
Schönbrodt, 2020). Further, previous research has demonstrated that ESM assessment periods of
at least two weeks are necessary to obtain enough reports for valid aggregated states (Epstein,
1979; Zygar-Hoffmann & Schönbrodt, 2020). Indeed, Fleeson and Gallagher (2009) found that
the relationship between the average personality states and global traits weakened in strength
with ESM assessment periods longer than two weeks. This study utilizes a two-week long ESM
study and will use the aggregate of situation experiences to examine the stability of these daily
experiences.
Is the study of daily experiences important in and of itself? There seems to be little debate
about the utility of ESM for measuring psychological, affective, and behavioral states — though
some question the predictive validity of daily experiences when aggregated into individual
difference variables (Finnigan & Vazire, 2017). We can, however, look to the debate over the
categorization and conceptualization of situations for clues as to how psychologists consider this
question. As referenced above, Reis (2018) downplayed the importance of a taxonomy
representing common, everyday situations and advocated for the study of exceptional,
psychologically-relevant situations. Parrigon and colleagues (2018) asserted the importance of a
taxonomy of everyday situations for studying the broadest range of situations that are
experienced in daily life. This debate can be simplified this way: should psychologists study
what people can do, or what they usually do?
Though I cannot resolve this debate here, I do assert that (1) psychologists still know
relatively little about people’s everyday psychological and situational experiences and (2) that
understanding the dynamics of daily life is an important bedrock for the study of personality and
social psychology. Though there is some important cross-sectional work in psychology that
describes daily life (Barker & Wright, 1951; Csikszentmihalyi et al., 1977; Kahneman et al.,
2004; Mehl et al., 2006, 2007; Mehl & Pennebaker, 2003), the discipline quickly jumped from
the “what” of behavior and situations to the “how” and the “why” (Baumeister et al., 2007).
Descriptive studies examining the “what” of behavior tend to examine the common-sense
questions that are highly relevant and interesting to laypeople. For example, findings that women
and men talk the same amount on average (Mehl et al., 2007) or that greater income is associated
with less daily sadness (Hudson et al., 2016; Kushlev et al., 2015) may seem simple, but these
are influential, important findings that were informed by studies of daily experiences. The
relative lack of descriptive information about people’s real lives and experiences is a significant
gap in the literature that I attempt to address in this study. I focused on one critical element of
people’s daily lives: their situation experiences, and the extent to which these experiences are
stable. I will next review the existing literature on the frequency and the stability of situation
experiences and some possible results of this study.
Frequency
Understanding the frequency of situation experiences, especially those related to specific
behavior, has been a key question in social and personality psychology from the birth of the
discipline. In order to understand social processes, we must also understand how often and under
what conditions they occur. Methodologies for studying the frequency of situation experiences
include written daily diaries, direct observation, and retrospective reports (e.g., Barker & Wright,
1951; Gosling et al., 1998; Kahneman et al., 2004). Earlier work on this topic yielded important
insight into the dynamics of personality states, affective states, and elements of situation
experiences in daily life. Csikszentmihalyi and colleagues (1977) used ESM to observe
adolescents for a one week period and found that adolescents spent the most time talking with
peers (14.7% ), watching TV (10.6%), and studying (8.8%); the researchers also observed
affective patterns and found that adolescents experienced more negative affect during situations
that they felt obligated to participate in. In an ESM study examining flow in daily life across
different classes of workers, Csikszentmihalyi and LeFevre (1989) found that managers and
blue-collar workers spend about 30 hours a week at work, whereas clerical workers reported
spending 23 hours a week at work; all groups reported similar levels of time spent eating (4-5
hours a week), self-care (3 hours/week), activity (2 hours/week), and daydreaming (1-2
hours/week). Despite the significance of this earlier work, many of these studies had very small
sample sizes and low power to detect any mean-level differences in situation experience between
groups.
Research utilizing newer technologies has enabled the study of the daily behaviors and
situation experiences of a wider range and volume of individuals. Harari and colleagues (2017)
used smartphone sensing data to track the movements of college students across a semester,
finding that participants spent an average of 5 hours a week socializing with others, and an
average of one hour a week doing physical activity. In another set of smartphone sensing studies,
Harari and colleagues (2019) found that on average, young adults spend 5 minutes or less on the
phone and spend 20 minutes on messaging and social media mobile applications. In conjunction
with ESM methodologies, smartphone sensing data can provide unique and important insights
into daily situation experience in the digital age.
Beyond the scope social and personality psychology, time use research has provided
significant insight into the frequency of more external elements of situation experience (Harvey
& Pentland, 2002; Rohrer & Lucas, 2018). In 2018, individuals from a representative sample of
American households spent M = 5.27 hours per day doing sports and leisure activities, M = 8.82
hours/day asleep, and M = 3.57 hours/day doing work or work-related activities, according to the
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2019). Tracking situation frequency has important social,
economic, and political implications, and time use studies have illuminated how cultural trends
impact how people spend their time.
Beyond the descriptive purposes that time use data serves, understanding the base rates of
situation experiences is critical to the study of social dynamics and perception. Previous research
suggests that more commonly experienced situations are perceived similarly by the self and
observers (Gosling et al., 1998). A common approach in social psychology is placing participants
in controlled situations and manipulating features of the situations to examine social dynamics; a
rigorous understanding of how novel a situation is to a certain population is needed to correctly
interpret the results of the study. For example, if a study of stereotype threat uses a math test as
its stimulus, understanding the frequency of how often the population of interest experiences a
classroom situation would have impact on the results (e.g., college students are likely familiar
with classrooms, older adults farther removed from school may be less familiar). In short, a
robust understanding of the normativity and novelty of different situation experiences is critical
to the study of both people and environments. Though there is a substantial literature of time use
and daily situational experiences, this research must be more thoroughly integrated into social
and personality psychology.
Variability in frequency. Research on the frequency of situation experience supplies us
with the Environment element of Lewin's (1936) equation (Behavior ~ f(Person, Environment)).
However, as discussed above, the interaction between the Person and the Environment is
fundamental to social and personality psychology. Indeed, variability in the frequency of
situation experiences is driven by individual differences (e.g., personality traits, race, gender,
class) at both the between-person and within-person levels. In this section, I will discuss past
research and theories regarding both levels of variability.
Large scale time use research has illuminated between-person variability in situation
experience associated with demographic characteristics (e.g., Gennetian & Rodrigues, 2020;
Zannella & De Rose, 2019). The American Time Use Survey in 2018 demonstrated that full-time
employed men worked slightly more (M = 8.2 hours/day) than full-time employed women (M =
7.9 hours/day) on average, and employed women do more domestic work (M = 2.02 hours/day)
and childcare (M = 1.32 hours/day) than men (domestic work: M = 1.20 hours/day; childcare: M
= 0.71 hours/day; Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019). Research in psychology has also shown that
situation experience frequency differs by age group; older adults are more likely to spend time
alone than younger adults (Larson, 1990; Wrzus et al., 2016). Developmental changes in
situation experience will be described further in the Stability section below.
In line with theories of person-environment fit (Roberts & Robins, 2004) and situation
selection (Buss, 1987), global personality traits are also associated with patterns of situation
experience, often in line with folk theories of personality (Mehl et al., 2006). A substantial body
of research has demonstrated that extraversion is linked to increased experience of social
situations and conscientiousness is linked to increased experience of work-related situations
(Emmons & Diener, 1986; Rohrer & Lucas, 2018; Wrzus et al., 2016). Neuroticism is linked to
more time spent alone (Mehl et al., 2006; Wrzus et al., 2016). Agreeableness is less robustly
related to specific activities, but previous research suggests that agreeableness has strong
interpersonal links, such that agreeable people are more likely to spend time with friends (Wrzus
et al., 2016), are less likely to argue with others (Mehl et al., 2006), and are more likely to be
judged as friendly by interaction partners (Back et al., 2009). Finally, openness is negatively
related to situations involving TV watching and positively related to situations involving
computer/internet use, reading, and sports (Rohrer & Lucas, 2018). Indeed, personality traits
map onto average measures of situation experience (Sherman et al., 2015), suggesting that
personality traits predict differences in situation experience frequency.
Examining within-person differences in the frequency of situation experience within a
day or week time frame is a key benefit of studies using experience sampling or other daily diary
methodologies. These environmental factors directly impact situation experience; time of day
cause significant within-person variability in situation experience (Harari et al., 2019) and
individuals are more likely to select into certain situations on weekends and others on weekdays
(Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019). Greater variability in personality states and affective states
also impact the variability of situation experience at a momentary level (Wilson et al., 2016) and
situation experience and personality states each independently predict affect and behavior in
daily life (Sherman et al., 2015). Within-person variability in the frequency of situation
experience over longer time frames is synonymous with lower stability of situation experience.
Although differences in situation frequency at the within-person and between-person levels
across short time scales (e.g., two weeks, one month) have been investigated, there is a dearth of
literature on the long-term stability of situation experiences. Below, I outline some relevant prior
research and possible results of this work.
Stability
As outlined above, research stemming from taxonomies of situations suggests that people
experience situations differently from one another (Parrigon et al., 2017; Rauthmann, Sherman,
Nave, et al., 2015). Although this research suggests that individual differences in situation
experiences are meaningfully related to personality, these cross-sectional results cannot speak
directly to whether differences in situation experiences are stable over time. Some research
suggests that individual differences in situation experiences are stable over short periods of time
(Rauthmann et al., 2016), but no longitudinal, measurement-burst study has been conducted on
this topic. Although recent predictive models of location (relying on GPS data) suggest that
patterns of movement are stable over time (Sadilek & Krumm, 2012), less is known about the
stability of more psychologically-relevant features of situations (e.g., being with friends vs. being
in class). As such, there is currently limited evidence regarding whether features of situations are
stable in daily life.
Why do we know so little about the stability of situation experiences? For one, very few
longitudinal studies of daily life have been conducted (cf. Baird, Le, & Lucas, 2006;
Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 1987; Larson, Moneta, Richards, & Wilson, 2002; Weinstein,
Mermelstein, Hankin, Hedeker, & Flay, 2007), given the intensive nature of such data collection.
Further, research on situations has previously been conducted in piecemeal ways, wherein one
type of situation or construal is examined at a time (Reis, 2008). Though this project lacks a
broadly shared framework for studying situations, it will certainly be the most comprehensive
test of the stability of situation experiences that has yet been conducted.
Evaluating the stability of situation experiences is of great theoretical and practical
importance for psychology. There are several broad potential outcomes of this research, each
with different implications for social and personality research. If situation experiences are as
stable as personality states, then there is good reason to suspect that personality stability is
reinforced by situation stability, and vice versa. We could extrapolate further to say that
personality states and situation experiences are driven by similar psychological mechanisms,
reinforcing the idea that situation selection is driven by the need to express relevant personality
states. Although there are more external constraints on situation experiences, individuals can
adapt to these constraints and find ways to subvert them (e.g., if a highly extraverted individual
is quarantined at home during a pandemic, they might schedule several video chats and calls with
friends and family and spend more time on social media).
Another possible outcome of this research is that situation experiences are relatively
stable, but less stable than situation experiences. This outcome would still suggest that the
stability of personality contributes to the stability of situation experiences, but that the external
constraints on situation experience hinders their stability. For example, although we can select
into situations that are consistent with our personality, we are not always able to so. Particularly
in the present college student sample, participants are encouraged to select into situations outside
of their comfort zone and may even be required to do so to complete their degree (e.g., course
requirements outside of a student’s major).
But what if we find that situation experiences are not stable at all? This result would
suggest that although individuals express personality states consistently over time, the
characteristics of the situations they experience are not stable. In the present college student
sample, students take different classes every term, with different demands on their schedule and
changes in living situations happening potentially multiple times a year. Although there may be
stability in broader situation characteristics (i.e., the DIAMONDS characteristics), there may be
little to no stability in the activities they do. For non-college-age adults, we might imagine that
they have more control over the situations they select into and should show some stability in
situation experiences. However, if personality isn’t expressed through situation selection and
experience (and is instead expressed through affective experience or the cognitive construal of a
situation), then we might expect little to no stability in situation experience. This result would
challenge a great deal of assumptions in social and personality psychology, which contend that
situation selection and experiences are expressions of personality states. If personality cannot
predict what a person does or what situations they experience, what is it for? Though this
research does not investigate this question with a comprehensive range of situation variables,
observing little to no stability in these situation variables would be a surprising result that would
challenge our working definition of personality.
Finally, one possible outcome of this study is that situation experiences are found to be
more stable than personality states. Given the aforementioned external constraints on situation
experiences and the strength of self-report effects, this would be another surprising result. This
result would suggest that people select into and experience situations in very consistent ways but
express a range of personality states in a given situation. For example, an individual might
express a more extroverted personality state in one class in which they are giving a presentation
but might express a less extraverted personality state in a class in which they are watching a
classmate give a presentation. This result could suggest that a person can interact with the same
situation in a variety of ways, and that certain constellations of personality traits might produce a
range of behavior within the same situation.
If individual differences in situation experiences are not at least moderately stable, then it
follows that situation stability does not drive the stability we know exists for personality traits,
and personality is not an important driver of situation selection (Emmons & Diener, 1986;
Roberts & DelVecchio, 2000). Moreover, understanding the stability of people’s situation
experiences would have important implications for applied research aimed at intervening on
stable behavioral patterns. Although interventions typically focus on changing people’s internal
states, such interventions will be less effective to the extent that one’s environment remains
stable.
Variation in stability. Given the demanding nature of situation research, there is little
research on individual differences in situation stability. Theories of lifespan development
suggests that the more constraints there are in an individual’s environment, the more selective
they are of the situations they experience; because more potent constraints (e.g., inhibited
cognitive functioning) and fewer situational possibilities (e.g., living in a remote location) limits
the range of situations that one can select into (Baltes & Baltes, 1990; Heckhausen et al., 2010).
Therefore, individuals with fewer situational experiences available to them (e.g., older adults)
should exhibit more stability in situation experiences than younger adults. Recent research
suggests that within a three-week time period, older adults exhibit slightly less variability in the
individuals around them than middle-age or young adults, but are not significantly different in
the variability of their activities (Wrzus et al., 2016).
The Present Research
What is being studied? There are two points on which the value of this project could be
disputed: (1) this project is a secondary data analysis of data not specifically designed to test this
question and (2) the primary variables of interest do not fit into a pre-established framework or
taxonomy. Specifically, one could debate the extent to which these are measures of situations
rather than behavior, affect, or even personality states. Although it is far from clear-cut what to
label the concepts I am studying here, and reasonable researchers can (and do) disagree about
what to call these constructs, I believe the most appropriate term for the phenomena under
investigation here is: situation experiences. Although these data do not fit neatly into an
established taxonomy or survey of situation experiences1 (Edwards & Templeton, 2005; Parrigon
et al., 2017; Rauthmann et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2006), these data provide an important first step
in tackling the stability of situation experiences and should be supplemented by additional
research, and ultimately confirmed in a pre-registered, confirmatory study.
Overview and research questions. I used two measures of daily experience to examine
the stability of situation characteristics: ESM surveys and ESM open responses. These methods
differ in important ways. The ESM survey questions on situation experiences were developed
1 Three of the six ESM survey items measuring situation experiences used in this study overlap with items used by
Fleeson (2007) to examine variability in personality states relative to variability in situation characteristics. These
situation characteristics were measured via the following items: “In this situation, were you free to behave however
you wanted?”, “How well did you know [your interaction partners]?”, and “Compared to them, how much
power/social status do you have?”. The ESM checklist items were created by the study authors based on their
intuitions about what would be relevant for this sample (college students at a private university).
using researcher’s intuitions of what situations are commonly experienced by college students in
this sample. The ESM open response asks: “In a few words, what were you doing in the last
hour?”. The open responses were coded by independent raters for the situational eight
DIAMONDS characteristics, which provides a wider breadth of situation experience measures
that fit with the current body of situation research.
The central question of this study is examining the stability of situation experiences.
Understanding the stability of psychologically relevant constructs is important for both
theoretical and psychometric purposes and has important implications for personality psychology
and related disciplines. In addition to this central research question, there are several ancillary
questions that I will strive to answer: (1) how frequently do individuals experience a range of
social situations? (2) how much variation in stability exists between characteristics of situation
experience? and (3) are personality states more stable than situation experiences (or vice versa)?
The first question is primarily descriptive, of interest given the richness of the current data. The
second question addresses the possibility that certain characteristics of situation experiences will
be more stable than others. The third question investigates the theoretical implications of
differing levels of stability between personality and situation experiences.
Method
The collection and coding of the data presented here were approved by Institutional
Review Boards at Washington University in St. Louis (IRB ID: 201206090; Study Title:
Personality and Intimate Relationships Study) and University of California, Davis (IRB ID:
669518-15; Study Title: Personality and Interpersonal Roles Study). The PAIRS study (Vazire et
al., 2019) is an intensive, two-year longitudinal study of personality, relationships, and behavior.
Several published papers have utilized this dataset (for a full list of citations,
“interacted with close friend” item at Year 1 (Sun et al., 2019; Wilson et al., 2015), and the
coded DIAMONDS characteristics for Year 1 (Breil et al., 2019), the following analyses have
not been published. This dataset included three intensive waves of measurement: baseline (Year
1), one year later (Year 2), and two years later (Year 3) with smaller waves in between (which
will not be discussed here). At each of these three time points, participants completed two weeks
of Experience Sampling Method (ESM; Csikszentmihalyi & Larson, 1987), among other
Participants
Participants were recruited at a large private university in the Midwest (N = 434). At each
wave, only participants who completed n ≥ 5 ESM surveys were included in our analyses (this
inclusion criterion was determined before data analysis on this project began). The first wave of
the study included N = 434 participants total, and N = 387 met our inclusion criteria. Year 2
contained N = 207 participants total, and N = 166 met our inclusion criteria. In Year 3 N = 134
participated, and N = 89 met our inclusion criteria. A total of N = 71 participants completed n ≥ 5
ESM surveys at all three waves. For the analyses involving DIAMONDS characteristics, N =
166 participants completed ≥ 5 ESM surveys in which they reported interacting with at least one
other person. I report attrition analyses below.
Due to sample attrition, the sample size for this secondary data analysis is too small to
calculate precise estimates of small effects. The models reported below allowed for missing data,
which meant that many of these estimates are based on the larger sample of people who had at
least two waves of data (N = 108). As the power analyses below illustrate, this sample size
provides adequate power to detect typical stability effects found in ESM-based studies of
personality states – the best available basis for estimating the expected effect size for the stability
of situation experiences.
At Year 1, participants ranged in age from 18 to 32 (M = 19.32, SD = 2.03) and 67.8%
were female. The ethnic breakdown of the sample at Year 1 was 55.7% White, 24.1% Asian,
10.6% Black, 7.0% Hispanic, and 9.1% mixed race or other. Of the participants who participated
in all three waves, 76% were female.
Procedure
Year 1 of the study began with a laboratory session lasting around two hours, during
which participants completed several tasks unrelated to the current research questions. Following
the laboratory session, participants consented to receiving ESM surveys for two weeks (among
other tasks). Participants were paid $20 for completing the laboratory session for each wave and
were also entered into a lottery to win $100 each time they completed an ESM survey. The same
procedure, with the same compensation opportunities, was repeated (with small variations in the
unrelated tasks) in Years 2 and 3.
ESM. In all three waves, participants began completing ESM surveys (max. n = 59
surveys at each wave) after the first laboratory session, which was held on a Friday. Participants
were emailed surveys four times per day for 14-15 days. Participants reported on aspects of the
situation they were in, and their behavior, mood, and personality during the hour just before the
survey was sent (e.g., “From 5pm to 6pm, how quiet were you?”).
Participants were sent surveys at 12:00 pm, 3:00 pm, 6:00 pm, and 9:00 pm; with
questions referring to the previous hour (i.e., 11:00 am–12:00 pm, 2:00 pm–3:00 pm, 5:00 pm–
6:00 pm, 8:00 pm–9:00 pm). In addition to the emails containing the survey links, participants
were sent text messages reminding them to complete the surveys. The surveys took 3 to 4
minutes to complete. Participants could complete the surveys on any device with access to the
internet. In Year 1, 71.8% of participants owned a smartphone, but there was no significant
relationship between owning a smartphone and completing ESM surveys (r = -.04, p = .54;
Wilson et al., 2015).
In Year 1, participants completed 15,563 surveys in total (average n = 29.55 surveys per
participant). Participants in Year 2 completed 4,145 surveys (average n = 24.81 surveys per
participant), and participants in Year 3 completed 1,446 surveys (average n = 15.19 surveys per
participant).
Data Exclusions
For ESM survey and open response data, I employed a priori exclusion criteria for data
quality purposes (e.g., Finnigan & Vazire, 2017; Wilson et al., 2015). Surveys were not included
in these analyses if: (1) they were completed more than three hours after the link was sent; (2)
the participant indicated that they were sleeping during the specified hour; (3) less than 75% of
items on the survey were completed; (4) the participant gave the same response for 70% or more
of the items. As noted above, I did not include participants’ responses for a particular wave if
they did not complete at least 5 ESM surveys during that wave. N = 11,460 surveys remained for
Year 1; N = 4,071 surveys remained for Year 2; and N = 1,352 surveys remained for Year 3.
Materials
State situation experience. Participants provided self-reports of situation experiences as
part of the ESM surveys. I report all items that were assessed at all measurement points and
categorize them as activities or situated experiences. Activities and situated experiences were
each measured using a face-valid single item that was developed specifically for this study, but
not specifically for the purpose of assessing the stability of social environments. The phrasing of
each item is listed in Appendix A.
Situated experiences and activities. Situated experiences were measured using a
dimensional approach (e.g., “How stressful was the situation?”, “How much do you like [your
interaction partner(s)]?”) on a 5-point Likert-type scale (1 = Not at all, 3 = Somewhat, 5 = Very).
These items were designed to capture subjective aspects of the situation, including how the
Activities were measured using checklist items (e.g., “Stayed mostly in your
room/house”, “Went to class”). These were mostly situations that the study authors expected to
be relatively common among college students, and more objective that situated experiences.
Participants indicated whether or not they were in that situation during the specified hour by
Descriptive statistics for ESM measures of situated experiences aggregated for each person at
each year
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3
M SD M SD M SD
Knowing 3.61 0.52 3.75 0.59 3.65 0.55
Liking 4.11 0.43 4.20 0.43 4.15 0.44
Stressful 2.03 0.49 2.02 0.51 1.95 0.49
Common/familiar 3.90 0.46 4.01 0.49 4.01 0.53
Free to behave 3.51 0.48 3.48 0.53 3.34 0.59
Note. ESM = experience sampling method. All variables were assessed on a 1 to 5 Likert-type
scale. All ESM reports were collected over two weeks at each wave and were aggregated within-
person to create a mean score for each person at each year. The means and standard deviations
reported here are for these between-person aggregated variables.
Descriptive statistics for ESM measures of activities aggregated for each person at each year
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3
M SD M SD M SD
Interacting 0.75 0.17 0.71 0.18 0.72 0.21
Around others 0.81 0.14 0.80 0.15 0.78 0.18
On phone/Skype 0.06 0.08 0.05 0.07 0.04 0.07
Group vs. 1-on-1 0.71 0.18 0.65 0.21 0.63 0.24
Interacted with
0.36 0.20 0.30 0.20 0.29 0.20
close friend
Stayed in
0.31 0.16 0.32 0.19 0.29 0.21
room/home
Studied/worked 0.41 0.17 0.49 0.22 0.41 0.20
Listened to music 0.23 0.17 0.27 0.19 0.18 0.18
Watched
0.11 0.12 0.14 0.14 0.13 0.14
TV/movie
Went to class 0.17 0.11 0.20 0.14 0.20 0.18
Note. ESM = experience sampling method. All variables were checklist items collected over two
weeks of ESM at each wave. The means here can be interpreted as the percentage of experience
sampling surveys in which the participant reported being in that situation. The “Group vs. 1-on-
1” variable refers to the percentage of group interactions (i.e., the participant interacted with
more than two people) as a percentage of all responses in which the participant reported
interacting with at least one other person, not out of all responses the participant provided. All
ESM reports were aggregated within-person to create a mean score for each person at each wave.
The means and standard deviations reported here are for these between-person aggregated
variables.
Open responses and DIAMONDS coding. At the beginning of each ESM survey,
participants responded to an open response item asking: “In a few words, what were you doing in
the last hour?” followed by a text box. There were no limits on the number of words or sentences
for these responses. Breil and colleagues (2019) coded ESM open responses for Year 1, using
three independent raters for all surveys. A separate team of eight independent raters coded ESM
responses for Year 2; each survey was rated by three independent raters. DIAMONDS
characteristics were coded for using the S8-II (Rauthmann & Sherman, 2016a), a brief eight-item
measure recommended for coding situational stimuli (e.g., text, audio recordings, videos).
A single item was used to measure each DIAMONDS characteristic (i.e., “The situation
contains: “work, tasks, duties” [Duty], “intellectual, aesthetic, profound things” [Intellect],
“threat, criticism, accusation” [Adversity], “romance, sexuality, love” [Mating], “positive,
pleasant, nice things” [pOsitivity], “negative things, unpleasant things, bad feelings”
[Negativity], “deceit, lies, dishonesty” [Deception], “communication, interaction, social
relationships” [Sociality]. For each characteristic, each response was rated on a Likert-type scale
from 1 (does not apply at all) to 7 (applies perfectly). In the Year 1 coding process, raters only
rated responses for surveys in which the participant indicated that they were interacting with
another person; this decision was made because the researchers coordinating the coding in Year
1 were primarily interested in social interactions. In the Year 2 coding process, all open
responses were coded, regardless of whether or not the participant interacted with other people.
However, for consistency, I excluded surveys in Year 2 where the participant did not indicate
that they were interacting with another person. Further, pOsitivity and Negativity were highly
correlated in both Year 1 and Year 2 (Year 1: r = -.93, p < .001; Year 2: r = -.81, p < .001), so I
computed one pOsitivity vs. Negativity score (Negativity ratings subtracted from pOsitivity
ratings) for a more parsimonious and less redundant representation of situational ratings (see
There are some important discrepancies to note between the DIAMONDS open-end
coding processes in Year 1 versus Year 2. In the Year 2 coding process, coders were instructed
to pay strict attention to the distinction between the Duty and Intellect characteristics described
by Rauthmann et al., (2014), where Duty is more closely related to “work/achievement
affordances”, and Intellect is more closely related to “intellectual” and “creative” affordances. As
a result, Year 1 coders were more likely to code situations like “In class” and “Doing stats
homework” as higher on Intellect than Year 2 coders were, leading to lower Intellect ratings in
very rare in both the Year 1 and the Year 2 sample, and do not correlate at all from Year 1 to
Year 2. Despite these irregularities and discrepancies in coding for Intellect, Adversity and
Deception, I will present the results for all eight DIAMONDS characteristics.
Descriptive statistics for coded DIAMONDS characteristics aggregated for each person at each
year
Year 1 Year 2
M SD M SD
Duty 3.99 0.81 4.13 0.91
Intellect 3.63 0.64 1.80 0.35
Adversity 1.45 0.12 2.04 0.32
Mating 1.25 0.29 1.21 0.34
pOsitivity 4.12 0.50 3.69 0.50
Negativity 2.75 0.45 2.64 0.53
Deception 1.14 0.07 1.15 0.13
Sociality 4.15 0.49 3.65 0.76
pOsitivity vs. Negativity 1.37 0.93 1.05 0.98
Note. All variables were coded on a 1 to 7 Likert-type scale. Each experience sampling (ESM)
open response was coded by three independent coders. All ESM reports were collected over two
weeks at each wave and were aggregated within-person to create a mean score for each person at
each wave. The means and standard deviations reported here are for these between-person
aggregated variables. The pOsitivity vs. Negativity variable is the average of the difference
between pOsitivity and Negativity (Negativity subtracted from pOsitivity). As noted above, there
were discrepancies in how Intellect was operationalized between Year 1 and Year 2, so the mean
difference between Years for this variable are not easily interpretable.
State personality. Participants provided self-reports of their state personality as part of
the ESM surveys. State personality was assessed using a subset of items from the Big Five
Inventory (BFI-44; John & Srivastava, 1999). State extraversion, agreeableness,
conscientiousness, and neuroticism were measured at all waves. Prior to beginning data
collection for Year 1, the study authors decided agreeableness should only be assessed when the
participant indicated that they interacted with another person, due to the interpersonal nature of
the trait (Graziano & Eisenberg, 1997). The motivation behind this decision was to reduce the
number of meaningless state self-reports provided (i.e., when the personality construct is not
relevant to the situation). State openness was not assessed in Year 1 or Year 2 because the study
authors believed that openness items on the BFI were more trait-like and would not translate well
to a state measure. After Year 2, the authors’ opinions on this matter changed and state openness
was measured in Year 3. However, given that these analyses focus on the stability of state
personality, I will not report any results for openness.
Every ESM survey included 7 or 9 BFI items (e.g., “From 5pm to 6pm, how …were
you?: “quiet” [Extraversion, reverse coded]; “rude” [Agreeableness, reverse coded]; “reliable”
[Conscientiousness]; “worried” [Neuroticism]). The agreeableness items were only included if
the participant indicated that they interacted with another person. For extraversion,
agreeableness, and conscientiousness, participants rated one positively keyed and one reverse-
keyed item per trait; for neuroticism, participants rated two positively keyed items and one
reverse-keyed item. Participants rated these items on a Likert-type scale (1 = Not at all, 3 =
Descriptive statistics for state ESM measures of personality states aggregated for each person at
each year
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3
M SD M SD M SD
Extraversion 2.80 0.47 2.68 0.50 2.68 0.53
Agreeableness 3.99 0.42 3.96 0.43 3.88 0.47
Conscientiousness 3.60 0.49 3.63 0.51 3.63 0.55
Neuroticism 2.40 0.52 2.21 0.48 2.20 0.45
Note. ESM = experience sampling method. All variables were assessed on a 1 to 5 Likert-type
scale. All ESM reports were collected over two weeks at each wave and were aggregated within-
person to create a mean state score for each person at each wave. The means and standard
deviations reported here are for these between-person aggregated state variables. Openness was
only measured at Year 3, and so is not included in these analyses.
Attrition Analyses
From Year 1 to Year 2, n = 210 total participants dropped out of the ESM portion of the
study (almost all of whom also did not participate in other portions of the study), and n = 73 total
participants dropped out between Year 2 and Year 3. I tested for differences in age, gender, race,
global personality traits, and average personality states at Year 1 between participants who
completed 5 or more ESM surveys at Year 1 but did not participate in any other waves, and
participants who completed 5 or more ESM surveys at Years 2 and 3. I computed all effect sizes
using the compute.es package in R Statistical Software (Del Re, 2013). Note that power and
precision for these analyses is low and so there are likely differences I was not able to detect. In
regard to the demographic variables, I found no differences for racial/ethnic identification and
age but did find that men dropped out a greater rate than did women (χ2 (1) = 5.32, p = .02, d =
0.24, 95% CI = [0.03, 0.44]). Additionally, participants who dropped out after Year 1 completed
fewer surveys in Year 1 (M = 27.61) than those who remained in the study (M = 38.15; t(386) =
-5.47, p < .001, d = -0.72, 95% CI = [-0.98 , -0.46]). In regards to personality differences, I found
that participants who dropped out were significantly lower on both trait conscientiousness (t(383)
= -2.54, p = .01, d = -0.33, 95% CI = [-0.59, -0.08]) and average (ESM-based) state
conscientiousness (t(386) = -2.89, p = .004, d = -0.38, 95% CI = [-0.64, -0.12]) than those who
remained in the study. I also found that participants who dropped out were significantly lower in
their levels of both trait agreeableness (t(383) = -2.25, p = .02, d = -0.30, 95% CI = [-0.55, -
0.04]) and average state agreeableness (t(383) = -2.17 p = .03, d = -0.29, 95% CI = [-0.54, -
0.03]).
Due to these significant differences in personality between those who dropped out of the
study after Year 1 and those who remained for the subsequent waves, I examined if the key
variables of interest — the aggregated situation experiences — differed between the two groups.
I found only one close-to-significant difference between participants who dropped out after Year
1 and participants who remained in the study in these aggregated situation experiences: those
who dropped out had a marginally lower aggregate of liking their interaction partner/s (t(386) = -
1.89, p = .06, d = -0.25, 95% CI = [-0.51 , 0.01]).
These analyses suggest that, like many longitudinal studies, attrition may affect the
generalizability of these analyses. Moreover, this sample was far from representative to begin
with, given that the participants were students at a very selective private university. Thus, these
results should be interpreted as applying to a narrow population. Importantly, the evidence
suggests that attrition was not strongly associated with the variables in the key analyses: the
participants’ situation experiences.
Power Analysis
Due to the lack of longitudinal intensive studies of situations, I did not have an a priori
estimate of the stability of situations. However, I used a previous study of the stability of ESM-
assessed average personality states (Baird et al., 2006) as a benchmark for the anticipated
stability of ESM-assessed aggregated situations. The average 1-year stability for the Big Five
traits, as obtained by Baird and colleagues (2006) was equal to mean β = .76. I performed a
power analysis to estimate power to detect an effect of this magnitude, with a sample of N = 108
(participants who had at least two waves of data) and alpha = .05. I completed this analysis using
the pwr package in R Statistical Software (Champely, 2016). With a sample of N = 108, I have
more than 99% power to detect a β of .76 at p < .05 and at p < .005. I also found that a sample of
N = 108 has 80% power to detect a correlation of r = .27 or larger and 90% power to detect a
correlation of r = .31 or larger at p < .05. At p < .005, a sample of N = 108 has 80% power to
detect a correlation of r = .34 and 90% power to detect a correlation of r = .38. As such, I believe
this sample size is appropriate for detecting stability effects, although it will have limited
precision in effect size estimation.
Results
All analyses were performed in R Statistical Software (Version 3.6.0), and all structural
equation models were performed using the lavaan package in R Statistical Software (Rosseel,
2012). The R script for the analyses and the data file will be available on the OSF following
anonymization of the data.
To examine the rank-order stability of participants’ situation experiences and state
personality from year to year, I first aggregated people’s ESM reports for each construct at each
wave and then used the “average state” variables in subsequent analyses. I then constructed
autoregressive structural equation models for each construct, with the average state at Year 1
predicting the average state at Year 2, and the average state at Year 2 predicting the average state
at Year 3. I also included a direct path between Year 1 to Year 3 to estimate the two-year
indicator represents an aggregate of a portion of ESM surveys.
I specified latent variables for each construct at each wave. For features of situations, I
separated the ESM surveys (max. n = 59 surveys) into three parcels based on time point in the
study (i.e., in Parcel 1, hour blocks 1, 4, 7, […]; in Parcel 2: hour blocks 2, 5, 8, […]; in Parcel 3,
hour blocks 3, 6, 9, […]), and took the average across each group of surveys to get three average
situation experience indicators. The same procedure was completed for personality states, but I
first averaged across the 2-3 personality items and then grouped the surveys together, as in
Finnigan and Vazire (2017). I used full-information maximum likelihood estimation for all
models and constrained the factor loadings for all parcels at within wave to be equal. Most
models met or came close to established thresholds for fit (Schermelleh-Engel, Moosbrugger, &
Müller, 2003: CFI > .95, RMSEA < .06, SRMR < .08), and all models achieved configural
invariance. The correlations among average personality states, situated experiences, activities,
In this section, I will report on two sets of analyses for each set of variables. First, I will
report the results of the autoregressive models. Next, I will report on the stability correlation
coefficients for each variable. Finally, I will compare the average bootstrapped correlation
coefficients for each set of variables.
Stability of Personality States
the stability coefficients and fit statistics for the autoregressive models for average personality
time points. All Big Five constructs examined had similar stability coefficients, ranging from β =
.74 (neuroticism) to β = .80 (conscientiousness) from Year 1 to Year 2, and β = .41
(extraversion) to β = .97 (conscientiousness) from Year 2 to Year 3. Overall, these coefficients
are comparable to existing estimates of the stability of average states over 1 year (Baird et al.,
2006) and global personality traits over 3 years (Costa & McCrae, 1988; Robins et al., 2001).
These results provide an important replication of this effect – to my knowledge it is only the
second study to examine the stability of average personality states over several years (Baird et al.
being the first). For the direct paths between Year 1 and Year 3 coefficients ranged widely from
β = -.06 (conscientiousness) to β = .47 (extraversion). Extraversion and agreeableness showed
3 3
a greater degree of two-year stability than conscientiousness and neuroticism.
Overall, the correlation stability coefficients show similar patterns to the autoregressive
stability coefficients. All personality states were similarly stable over one year (Year 1 to Year 2
Mean r = .63; Year 2 to Year 3 Mean r = .63), and slightly less stable over two years (Year 1 to
Year 3 Mean r = .58).
Autoregressive models for the stability of average personality states
Y1 – Y2 – Y1 –
IE Model fit
Y2 Y3 Y3
χ2 (30,
β β β β β CFI RMSEA SRMR
1 2 3 1* 2
387)
Extraversion .74 .41 .47 .31 47.85 0.955 0.039 0.086
Agreeableness .75 .51 .33 .38 49.95 0.983 0.041 0.080
Conscientiousness .80 .97 -.06 .77 35.74 0.994 0.022 0.073
Neuroticism .72 .73 .13 .53 27.13 1.000 0.000 0.059
Note. β refers to the standardized stability coefficients between Year 1 and Year 2; β refers to
1 2
the slope between Year 2 and Year 3. “Y1 – Y2” = Year 1 to Year 2; “Y2 – Y3” = Year 2 to
Year 3; “CFI” = comparative fit index; “SRMR” = standardized root mean square residual;
“RMSEA” = root mean square error of approximation. All models are structural equation models
with three latent variables with three parcels each. All betas are standardized.
Correlations between ESM measures of personality states from year-to-year
Y1-Y2 Y2-Y3 Y1-Y3
r r r
Extraversion .53 .41 .49
Agreeableness .69 .69 .63
Conscientiousness .70 .75 .61
Neuroticism .62 .71 .54
Note. ESM = experience sampling method. All variables were assessed on a 1 to 5 Likert-type
scale. All ESM reports were collected over two weeks at each wave and were aggregated within-
person to create a mean score for each person at each year. The means and standard deviations
reported here are for these between-person aggregated variables.
Stability of Situation Experiences
Next, I conducted the key analysis of this study: how stable are individual differences in
situation experiences? As stated above, I grouped situations into situated experiences (e.g.,
stressful, familiar), activities (e.g., watching TV, in class), and DIAMONDS characteristics (e.g.,
Duty, Sociality). Tables 7, 8, and 9 present the results of the autoregressive models for situation
experiences, activities, and DIAMONDS characteristics respectively. I also present the simple
correlation coefficients between each time point for situation experiences, activities, and
DIAMONDS characteristics in Tables 10, 11, and 12 respectively. For each construct, I will first
describe the autoregressive modeling findings, then I will describe the simple stability
coefficients.
Autoregressive models for the stability of average state measures of situated experiences
Y1 – Y2 – Y1 –
IE Model fit
Y2 Y3 Y3
χ2 (30,
β β Β β β CFI RMSEA SRMR
1 2 3 1* 2
387)
Knowing .80 .62 .16 .49 39.84 0.959 0.029 0.087
Liking .86 1.00 -.25 .86 41.57 0.975 0.032 0.102
Stressful .89 .34 .38 .30 27.28 1.000 0.000 0.075
Common/familiar .81 .21 .69 .17 52.46 0.951 0.044 0.077
Free to behave .78 .81 .07 .64 30.23 0.999 0.004 0.067
Note. β refers to the slope between Year 1 and Year 2; β refers to the slope between Year 2 and
1 2
Year 3; β refers to the slope between Year 1 and Year 3. “IE” = Indirect Effect; β β refers to
3 1* 2
the product of β and β . “Y1 – Y2” = Year 1 to Year 2; “Y2 – Y3” = Year 2 to Year 3; “Y1 –
1 2
Y3” = Year 2 to Year 3; “CFI” = comparative fit index; “SRMR” = standardized root mean
square residual; “RMSEA” = root mean square error of approximation. All models are structural
equation models with three latent variables with three parcels each. All betas are standardized,
betas greater than 1 indicate the presence of multicollinearity.
Autoregressive models for the stability of average state measures (frequencies) of activities
Y1 – Y2 – Y1 –
IE Model fit
Y2 Y3 Y3
β β β β β χ2 (30, 387) CFI RMSEA SRMR
1 2 3 1* 2
Interacting .75 .33 .69 .25 53.25 0.945 0.045 0.099
Around others .78 1.42 -.29 1.11 51.85 0.934 0.043 0.113
On phone/Skype .50 .09 .86 .05 39.96 0.932 0.029 0.113
Group vs. 1-on-1 .70 .30 .58 .21 26.21 1.000 0.000 0.064
Interacted with
.63 .35 .49 .22 41.58 0.975 0.032 0.075
close friend
Stayed in
.51 .17 .51 .08 43.26 0.942 0.034 0.099
room/home
Studied/worked .51 .58 .04 .29 43.02 0.953 0.033 0.080
Listened to
.79 1.13 -.18 .89 54.47 0.943 0.046 0.125
music
Watched
.68 .84 -.07 .57 47.43 0.957 0.039 0.106
TV/movie
Went to class .44 .29 .06 .13 42.47 0.941 0.033 0.081
Note. β refers to the slope between Year 1 and Year 2; β refers to the slope between Year 2 and
1 2
Year 3; β refers to the slope between Year 1 and Year 3. “IE” = Indirect Effect; β β refers to
3 1* 2
the product of β and β . “Y1 – Y2” = Year 1 to Year 2; “Y2 – Y3” = Year 2 to Year 3; “Y1 –
1 2
Y3” = Year 2 to Year 3; “CFI” = comparative fit index; “SRMR” = standardized root mean
square residual; “RMSEA” = root mean square error of approximation. All models are structural
equation models with three latent variables with three parcels each. All betas are standardized,
betas greater than 1 indicate the presence of multicollinearity.
Autoregressive models for the stability of average state measures (frequencies) of DIAMONDS
situational characteristics
Y1 – Y2 Model fit
β χ2 (12, 387) CFI RMSEA SRMR
Duty .37 8.04 1.000 0.000 0.046
Intellect .08 23.92 0.900 0.051 0.072
Adversity .12 11.05 1.000 0.000 0.043
Mating .19 29.17 0.927 0.061 0.097
pOsitivity .64 18.74 0.925 0.038 0.065
Negativity .56 12.90 0.991 0.014 0.066
Deception .60 34.16 0.312 0.069 0.093
Sociality 1.02 19.63 0.944 0.041 0.071
Positivity vs. Negativity .62 12.81 0.991 0.013 0.060
Note. β refers to the slope between Year 1 and Year 2; “Y1 – Y2” = Year 1 to Year 2; “CFI” =
comparative fit index; “SRMR” = standardized root mean square residual; “RMSEA” = root
mean square error of approximation. All models are structural equation models with two latent
variables with three parcels each. The loadings of all three parcels within each latent variable are
constrained to be equal. All betas are standardized; betas greater than 1 indicate the presence of
multicollinearity. The pOsitivity vs. Negativity variable is the average of the difference between
pOsitivity and Negativity (Negativity subtracted from pOsitivity).
Correlations between ESM measures of situated experiences from year-to-year
Y1-Y2 Y2-Y3 Y1-Y3
r r r
Knowing .43 .37 .31
Liking .59 .39 .38
Stressful .66 .46 .43
Common/familiar .58 .58 .55
Free to behave .52 .58 .53
Note. ESM = experience sampling method. All variables were assessed on a 1 to 5 Likert-type
scale. All ESM reports were collected over two weeks at each wave and were aggregated within-
person to create a mean score for each person at each year. The means and standard deviations
reported here are for these between-person aggregated variables.
Correlations between ESM measures of activities from year-to-year
Y1-Y2 Y2-Y3 Y1-Y3
r r r
Interacting .52 .53 .63
Around others .50 .63 .47
On phone/Skype .21 .14 .29
Group vs. 1-on-1 .44 .37 .39
Interacted with close friend .48 .34 .38
Stayed in room/home .37 .32 .43
Studied/worked .31 .11 .18
Listened to music .53 .63 .47
Watched TV/movie .45 .61 .44
Went to class .30 .24 .13
Note. ESM = experience sampling method. All variables were assessed on a 1 to 5 Likert-type
scale. All ESM reports were collected over two weeks at each wave and were aggregated within-
person to create a mean score for each person at each year. The means and standard deviations
reported here are for these between-person aggregated variables.
Stability coefficients for average state measures (frequencies) of DIAMONDS situational
characteristics
Y1 – Y2
Duty .25
Intellect .03
Adversity .02
Mating .13
pOsitivity .27
Negativity .24
Deception .03
Sociality .44
Positivity vs. Negativity .26
Note. r refers to the correlation between Year 1 and Year 2; “Y1 – Y2” = Year 1 to Year 2. The
pOsitivity vs. Negativity variable is the average of the difference between pOsitivity and
Negativity (Negativity subtracted from pOsitivity).
Situated experiences. For situated experiences, autoregressive stability coefficients
between Year 1 and Year 2 ranged from β = .78 (“did you feel free to behave however you
wanted?”) to β = .89 (“how stressful was the situation?”). Between Year 2 and Year 3,
coefficients ranged from β = .21 (“how common/familiar was the situation?”) to β = 1.00
2 2
(“how much did you like [your interaction partner]?”). The direct effect between Year 1 and
Year 3 ranged widely for situated experiences, from β = -.25 (“how much did you like [your
interaction partner]?”) to β = .69 (“how common/familiar was the situation?).
Correlation coefficients for situated experiences were more similar to each other
compared to the autoregressive coefficients. Similar to personality states, activities were more
stable from year to year (Year 1 to Year 2 Mean r =.56; Year 2 to Year 3 Mean r = .48) than
across two years (Year 1 to Year 3 Mean r = .44).
Activities. Autoregressive stability coefficients for activities between Year 1 and Year 2
ranged from β = .41 (“went to class”) to β = .79 (“listened to music”). Between Year 2 and
1 1
Year 3, autoregressive coefficients ranged from β = .09 (“on phone/Skype”) to β = 1.42
2 2
(around others). Across two years, activities were variable in their stability coefficients ranging
from β = -.29 (around others) to β = .86 (“on phone/Skype”).
3 3
Correlation coefficients for situated experiences were more similar to each other
compared to the autoregressive coefficients. Activities showed similar levels of stability across
one year (Year 1 to Year 2 Mean r =.42; Year 2 to Year 3 Mean r = .41) and two years (Year 1
to Year 3 Mean r = .39).
DIAMONDS. For the DIAMONDS characteristics, I found a wide range of stabilities
across all constructs. Due to coding issues and low base rates, the models for Intellect and
Deception did not converge and are not included in the following analyses. Sociality was by far
the most stable characteristic from Year 1 to Year 2 (β = 1.02), followed by pOsitivity (β = .64),
Positivity vs. Negativity (β = .62), Deception (β = .60), Negativity (β = .56), Duty (β = .37),
Mating (β = .19), Adversity (β = .12), and Intellect (β = .08).
The correlation coefficients for the DIAMONDS characteristics were lower than the
autoregressive coefficients, ranging from r = .44 (Sociality) to r = .02 (Adversity), with a mean r
= .19. Lower frequency situations (e.g., Adversity, Deception) showed low stability across one
year, while higher frequency situations in this sample showed greater stability (e.g., Sociality,
pOsitivity, Duty).
Stability Comparisons
Finally, I also examined whether situated experiences, activities, and DIAMONDS
characteristics differed in their levels of stability. First, I estimated the standardized all
correlation coefficients for B = 50 bootstrapped. Then, I concatenated the bootstrapped estimates
based on construct (e.g., personality states, activities) and time points (i.e., Year 1 to Year 2,
Year 2 to Year 3, Year 1 to Year 3). Descriptive statistics for these combined bootstrapped
using the psych package in R Statistical Software to transform the average correlations into z-
scores using Fisher’s r-to-z transformation, and then conducted a z-test of the difference between
the z-scores (Revelle, 2017).
First, I tested for the any differences between the stability of situation experiences and the
stability of personality states. Situated experiences were less stable on average than personality
states from Year 2 to Year 3 (z = 2.26, p = .02), but no significant differences were observed
from Year 1 to Year 2 (z = 1.16, p = .26) or Year 1 to Year 3 (z = 1.96, p = .05). Activities
were less stable on average than personality states from Year 1 to Year 2 (z = 3.50, p < .001),
Year 2 to Year 3 (z = 3.65, p < .001)., and Year 1 to Year 3 (z = 3.02, p < .003). On average, the
DIAMONDS characteristics were less stable than personality states (z = 6.44, p < .001) from
Year 1 to Year 2.
Second, I compared the average stabilities of each category of situation experience. I
found that the average stability coefficient for activities was weaker than the average stability of
situated experiences from Year 1 to Year 2 (z = 2.36, p = .02). From Year 1 to Year 2, the
DIAMONDS characteristics were less stable than situated experiences (z = 5.55, p < .001), and
activities (z = 3.93, p < .001) on average.
I found no difference between the stability of situated experiences and activities from
Year 2 to Year 3 (z = 1.18, p = .24) and Year 1 to Year 3 (z = 0.87, p = .39), though I refrain
from interpreting these nonsignificant results because the sample size of these analyses hinders
my ability detect small-to-medium differences.
Descriptive statistics for bootstrapped (B = 50 per variable) correlation stability coefficients for
each construct type
B Stability M Stability SD Minimum Maximum
Year 1 – Year 2
Personality 200 .63 0.08 0.31 0.80
Activities 500 .42 0.12 -0.01 0.67
Situated Experiences 250 .56 0.10 0.22 0.75
DIAMONDS 450 .19 0.16 -0.17 0.55
Year 2 – Year 3
Personality 200 .63 0.17 0.11 0.86
Activities 500 .41 0.20 -0.13 0.81
Situated Experiences 250 .48 0.15 -0.07 0.77
Year 1 – Year 3
Personality 200 .58 0.09 0.32 0.76
Activities 500 .39 0.16 -0.08 0.79
Situated Experiences 250 .44 0.13 0.08 0.75
Note. “B” = number of bootstrapped correlation coefficients within each construct type. Year 1 –
Year 2 refers to the bootstrapped coefficients for the stability between Year 1 and Year 2, and
Year 2 – Year 3 refers to the bootstrapped coefficients for the stability between Year 2 and Year
3. “Personality” = personality states; DIAMONDS = average of Duty, Mating, Adversity,
Sociality, and Positivity vs. Negativity.
Discussion
How stable are features of our daily situations? To test this question, I analyzed an
existing dataset from a longitudinal study of personality and behavior in daily life. I categorized
24 situation characteristics into three groups: situated experiences (which described how
participants construed situations), activities (which described the environments and behaviors
contained within situations), and a subset of coded DIAMONDS characteristics (which described
the themes and content of a situation). The stability of situated experiences was quite high for
our college student sample, comparable to the stability of average personality states as measured
in this and previous studies (Baird et al., 2006). Activities and DIAMONDS characteristics were
less stable, but stability was still moderate for most variables examined.
Although I did not have any a priori hypotheses and could not form any due to my
preexisting familiarity with portions of this dataset, these results are reasonable given existing
models of situations and previous estimates of week-to-week stability of situation features
(Rauthmann et al., 2014; Rauthmann & Sherman, 2016b). Situated experiences are conceptually
closer to personality constructs than are external features of situations. Therefore, the stability of
personality traits should contribute to the stability of subjective evaluations of situations, and
vice versa (Ziegler et al., 2019). Conversely, activities and characteristics like Mating are more
constrained by external factors (e.g., others’ availability, work demands); the association
between personality and activities and some DIAMONDS characteristics is likely attenuated by
these practical constraints (Wrzus et al., 2016). Additionally, some characteristics in this study
were shown to have low base rates in this sample, including Deception, Adversity, Mating, and
on phone/Skype. Given that rarer situation experiences may not be captured in a two-week time
period, these variables will demonstrate less stability in an ESM study. Indeed, other researchers
have noted that ESM is well-suited to measuring typical situation experiences, not atypical ones
(Ebner-Priemer & Trull, 2009). Intensive retrospective studies may be necessary to understand
the stability and frequency of these characteristics.
On average, the DIAMONDS characteristics I could examine in this study were the least
stable categories of situation experience. Sociality was very stable in these data. Because the
sample of situations in the DIAMONDS data all involve social interaction of some kind, this
result is somewhat surprising (due to the restriction of range) and difficult to interpret without a
sample of non-social situations. Given that college students are regularly in class and studying,
we should expect Duty to be relatively stable across the college experience or to slightly increase
over time, corresponding with conscientiousness development across the lifespan (Donnellan &
Lucas, 2008).
Adversity and Mating were the least stable DIAMONDS characteristics in these data. We
observed low base rates for both variables at both assessment periods, which likely contributed
to their weak stability estimates. Given that the DIAMONDS characteristics were coded by
observers, a characteristic like Adversity may be harder to judge than a characteristic like
Sociality, suggesting that having both independent coder ratings and self-ratings of situation
variables would be valuable in future research. Additionally, Mating is a situation characteristic
that is more dependent on the individual’s resources and environment (e.g., access to attractive
others) and subject to drastic change from year to year (e.g., the transition from being in a serious
relationship to being single after a breakup). In short, several factors likely contributed to the
differing levels of stability that I observed amongst the DIAMONDS characteristics.
Why might we expect individual differences in situation experiences to be stable over
time? For one, we know that much of the human experience consists of routine behaviors that we
perform on a daily basis. Past research suggests that adults wake up, go to work, socialize, eat,
and sleep at relatively stable times (Csikszentmihalyi et al., 1977; Guillaume et al., 2016). As
discussed above, time use research and intensive measurement methods have shown that the
rhythms of our lives are relatively regular. Longitudinal changes in time use have been observed
— for example, lower income workers have reported increased leisure time compared to higher
income workers since the 1980s (Aguiar & Hurst, 2009) — but these changes typically occur
across several decades. Of course, there is variability around these trends (Larsen & Kasimatis,
1990) and individuals can choose to opt out of these rhythms (e.g., being self-employed, working
overnight shifts), but on average, consistent patterns of activities and situated experiences are
observed across cultures (Guillaume et al., 2016).
Excepting major life transitions (e.g., becoming a parent, starting a new job with different
hours), theories of personality development suggest that our environment contributes to the
stability of personality traits, and vice versa (Bleidorn et al., 2009; Roberts et al., 2008). This
study used a sample of college students at a residential school, where their environment was
relatively stable over three years (e.g., they didn’t move, they didn’t get a full-time job). Indeed,
though college students show slight maturational personality change during college (Robins et
al., 2001), their personality trait levels remain quite stable throughout college. These findings
suggest that within a stable environment, personality traits and situation experiences show
considerable stability from year to year. Similar to findings in behavioral genetics, we see that
both genes (person factors) and the environment contribute to behavioral stability (Bleidorn et
al., 2009). This research is an important first step in examining how personality and situation
experiences influence each other over time.
Another means by which personality and situation experience interact is via person-
situation transactions. Buss (1987) asserts that individuals can control the situations they
experience by selecting into certain situations that reinforce their levels of certain traits (e.g.,
extraverted people select into more social environments). Similarly, the theories of person-
environment fit (Ekehammar, 1974; Roberts & Robins, 2004) posit that individuals experience
more positive affect when experiencing situations congruent with their personality traits (Suls et
al., 1998). Although the evidence supporting this theory in the person-situation domain is mixed
(e.g., some traits show fit effects, others show null or opposite effects), these studies do show
that people select into similar situations at similar rates over time. Therefore, since people often
select into situations that facilitate personality trait expression, both personality and situation
experience should show significant stability.
However, there are also factors that could cause less stability in situation experiences
over time. Self-selection into certain situations may be difficult for several reasons. For example,
many social situations require coordination with other people (e.g., playing team sports), which
can be out of the control of the individual. Likewise, some leisure activities require resources
(e.g., money, means of transportation) that may not be available to the individual. Although
people may perceive situations in a stable way (e.g., an individual can have a stable perception of
interactions with the opposite sex as being threatening), the stability of external features of
situations (e.g., the frequency of opposite sex social interactions) may be attenuated due to
factors that are outside people’s control.
Daily situation experiences showed a range of stability across two years but exhibited
moderate stability on average. Situated experiences (e.g., how well do you know your interaction
partners?) were the most stable situation experience category. Activities and the DIAMONDS
characteristics were less stable than situated experiences but exhibited moderate levels of
stability. These findings suggest that it may be valid to conceptualize situation experiences as a
stable individual difference. Further research in this domain with more diverse samples is
necessary to test this claim, but these findings are an exploratory first step in validating situation
experiences as a stable individual difference. This would suggest that the situations people
experience, and how they experience them, are an enduring part of who they are. Furthermore,
the situations people experience are also part of what makes them different from one another –
some people consistently engage in different activities (e.g., socializing, listening to music,
working) than others, and consistently experience situations differently (e.g., how much they like
the people they interact with, how stressful they find their daily experiences, etc.).
These findings suggest that we can predict what situations people will experience in the
future based on the situations they have experienced in the past, at least for college students. We
should not assume that a tendency to be in group interactions, for example, is entirely fleeting or
contingent on the immediate environment. People who spend a lot (or not a lot) of time in group
interactions, are likely to continue to do so. This finding, should it hold up in future studies, will
have important implications for intervention research. If situations are a source of stability in
people’s lives, then interventions aimed at changing behavior may also need to consider
changing people’s daily situations.
Future Research
Several fruitful avenues of future research follow from this work. First, I believe that a
taxonomy of situation experience that integrates situation perception, activities, and interpersonal
roles is critical for measurement of situations. Although using multiple frameworks and types of
methods could address this point in the interim, issues of interpretation will follow these future
analyses. Although psychologists emphasize the subjective elements of situation experience,
measuring more observable elements of situations is critical to translating our work and applying
our findings in real world contexts.
Second, a large-scale ESM study of personality and situation experience would illuminate
the extent to which aggregated personality states and situation experience correlate with each
other over time. The small sample size of this study restricted my ability to construct these
analyses, but a larger and more programmatic study could investigate these complex, interesting
effects. Understanding how situation experiences and personality influence each other over time
is a fundamental question of personality and social psychology and must be rigorously
investigated.
Third, a multi-year longitudinal study with waves of intensive daily measurement using
at least one situation taxonomy (and other environmental variables) is necessary to understand
how situation experiences change over time. How do situation experiences shift in response to
maturation effects and major life events? Although this study suggests that situation experiences
stay relatively stable within one stage of life (i.e., college), understanding the degree of change
that occurs in response to major life events and shifts in interpersonal roles, in addition to
variability in stability across situation experience characteristics, would enrich our understanding
of how a person changes over their lifetime.
Third, as discussed above, the stability of situation experiences has profound implications
for intervention research. For example, a smoking cessation intervention would encourage both
the reduction of the harmful behavior (i.e., smoking a cigarette) and also changing the social
situations one might experience (e.g., a directive to spend more time around people you know
well or to spend more time in coffee shop and less time in bars). This hypothetical intervention
could also utilize experience sampling or mobile sensing data to nudge the participants away
from triggering situations and towards constructive situations. Indeed, early evidence suggests
that this approach can be effective in the cigarette smoking context. Hébert and colleagues
(2018) utilized a situation-focused ecological momentary assessment (EMA) intervention aimed
at reducing smoking cessation with promising results, and previous research has determined that
there are situational triggers for smoking behavior, including being around other smokers, being
at another person’s home, and drinking around others (Thrul et al., 2014). However, this study
was conducted with a small sample size and no control group. A larger scale version of Hébert
and colleagues (2018) study, including a control group and a group completing EMA surveys
and receiving messages in response to commonly triggering situations, could demonstrate the
value of situation-focused interventions. Further, additional research in this domain has shown
that there are individual differences in which situations trigger smoking behavior based on
factors such as sexual orientation and race (Cerrada et al., 2016; Nguyen et al., 2018). Including
a third group in this hypothetical study with EMA messaging tailored to their most potent
situational triggers could elucidate how individual differences in situational associations impact
the effectiveness of such interventions. In sum, these findings suggest that ecological momentary
interventions can be effective in producing long-term behavior change, since situation
experiences show moderate to high levels of stability year over year.
Limitations
There are several limitations to this study that should be noted outright. First, the sample
of participants who completed ESM assessments at all three time points is far smaller than ideal
and inhibits my power to detect small effects. Therefore, I cannot perform correlated change
models or other more nuanced, complex developmental models with the current data. This is
unfortunate, as correlated change between personality states and situation experiences are of
great interest to social and personality psychologists. Future longitudinal studies of daily life will
hopefully address this question soon.
Second, this sample is composed entirely of students at a large private American
university, the majority of whom were first-year students at the first wave of assessment; as such,
I am not confident that the results of this study would generalize beyond college student
populations in similar cultures. It is not clear whether stability would be higher or lower in non-
student samples. On one hand, none of the students in this sample graduated college, moved, or
changed vocations during the study period, which suggests their lives may have been more stable
than the typical adult. On the other hand, the stability estimates in this sample could be
attenuated by the homogeneity in the participants’ routines (because they are all students at the
same university), and a more diverse sample with greater between-person differences in
situations may show more stable individual differences. Future research should examine diverse
samples and examine stability during life transitions.
Third, these measures of situation experiences have limitations. The study that generated
this data was designed to test several different research questions (the present research questions
not included), and the measures of situation experience were largely inspired by researchers’
intuitions about what situations are regularly experienced by most college students. Despite these
intentions, these measures are not comprehensive. However, given the lack longitudinal studies
of personality and situations in daily life, this study is a critical first investigation into this
important question.
Fourth, due to discrepancies in coding processes for the DIAMONDS characteristics, I
could not analyze all eight characteristics. Given the current sample, it is unlikely that I have the
power to detect stability for the rarer situation characteristics (i.e., Adversity, Deception,
Mating). Moreover, the discrepancy between the Year 1 coders’ and the Year 2 coders’
interpretations of “Intellect” is a clear limitation of this study, given that Intellect is a highly
relevant characteristic for this college student sample. Given that college students’ dutiful work
often comes from the educational sphere, more research differentiating Intellect and Duty from
each other can clarify this distinction for future researchers. Additionally, future research into
daily situations should employ more comprehensive coding procedures and include the
DIAMONDS characteristics in self-report surveys.
Finally, as discussed above, researchers may disagree about how to conceptualize
situations, and an argument could be made that the measures in this study captured activities or
even behaviors rather than characteristics of situation experience. While I am sympathetic to this
argument, my review of the literature on this topic makes me skeptical of the existence of any set
of situation measures that capture psychologically-relevant features of situations and do not have
this interpretational ambiguity. For example, being around others is simultaneously a feature of
the environment/situation and a behavior/activity chosen by the participant. I contend that, on the
continuum from pure measures of personality to pure measures of situations, the present
variables are on the latter side of the continuum, and far enough away from pure personality
measures to provide new insights.
Conclusion
Across two years, I found that daily situation experiences were relatively stable.
Although I circumscribe these conclusions to college students in the United States, these are the
first data to test whether situation experiences are a stable individual difference. The extent to
which we find ourselves in work, social, or leisure situations more or less than our peers seems
to be relatively consistent over time. This suggests that stable situations may be a source of
stability in people’s personality and behavior, and vice versa. Moreover, any attempts at
intervening in people’s lives and changing their patterns of behavior may require changing the
types of situations they experience.
Appendix A
Experience Sampling Survey
Note: For the following questions, please refer to the situation in which you spent the most time.
From 11am-noon (2pm–3pm, 5pm–6pm, 8pm–9pm), were you interacting with other people?
(no, 1 person, 2 people, 3–5 people, 5+ people)
The following was an open response question answered using a text box.
In a few words, what were you doing during the last hour?
The following questions were answered using a Likert-type scale from 1 (Not at all) to 5
(Very much) except where noted.
How stressful was the situation?
How common/familiar was the situation?
In this situation, were you free to behave however you wanted?
Please refer to the people you interacted with from 11am-noon (2pm–3pm, 5pm–6pm, 8pm–
9pm) for the following questions:
How well do you know them?
How much do you like them?
Compared to them, how much power/social status do you have? (1 [Less than them] to 5 [More
than them])
The following questions were checklist items.
From 11am-noon (2pm–3pm, 5pm–6pm, 8pm–9pm), check the items that occurred.
Stayed mostly in your room/house
Studied/worked
Listened to music
In pain/sick
Talked on the phone/Skype
Watched a video/tv/movie
Went to class
From 11am-noon (2pm–3pm, 5pm–6pm, 8pm–9pm), check the items that occurred.
Interacted with local best friend
Interacted with another close friend