A two-lab direct replication attempt of Southgate, Senju, & Csibra (2007)
Kampis, D.*1, Kármán, P.2, Csibra, G.2,3, Southgate, V.1, & Hernik, M.4
1 University of Copenhagen, Denmark
2 Central European University, Budapest, Hungary
3 Birkbeck, University of London
4 UiT The Arctic University of Norway
* corresponding authors: dk@psy.ku.dk, mikolaj.l.hernik@uit.no
Abstract
The study by Southgate, V., Senju, A., and Csibra, G. (Southgate et al., 2007) has been
widely cited as evidence for false-belief attribution in young children. Recent replication
attempts of this paradigm have yielded mixed results: several studies were unable to
replicate the original finding, raising doubts about the suitability of the paradigm to assess
non-verbal action prediction and Theory of Mind. In a preregistered collaborative study
including two of the original authors, we tested 160 24- to 26-month-olds across two
locations using the original stimuli, procedure, and analyses as closely as possible. We
found no evidence for action anticipation: only roughly half of the infants looked in
anticipation to the location of an agent’s impending action when action prediction did not
require taking into account the agent’s beliefs and a similar number when the agent held
a false-belief. These results and other non-replications suggest that the paradigm does
not reliably elicit action prediction and thus cannot assess false belief understanding in 2-
year-old children. While the results of the current study do not support any claim regarding
the presence or absence of Theory of Mind in infants, we conclude that an important piece
of evidence that has to date supported arguments for the existence of this competence,
can no longer serve that function.
Key words: anticipatory looking, action anticipation, false belief attribution, replication,
eyetracking
Introduction
Motivated by the seminal study of Onishi & Baillargeon (Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005),
which reported an understanding of false beliefs in 15-month-old infants using a violation-
of-expectation paradigm, Southgate, Senju & Csibra (Southgate et al., 2007) designed
an eye-tracking study to test whether 25-month-old infants could anticipate actions on the
basis of attributed false beliefs. The paradigm included two conditions which, together,
controlled for the possibility that infants might correctly predict without considering the
other’s belief. Data was reported from 20 infants, 10 in each condition, and the majority
of infants appeared to correctly anticipate the agent’s action in accord with her false-
belief. Since publication, this study has been used as one of several key pieces of
evidence for the existence of cognitive mechanisms that track others ’beliefs in infancy
(Baillargeon et al., 2010; Scott & Baillargeon, 2017)
The design of the study relied on anticipatory looking. It adopted the assumption
that infants would be motivated to spontaneously anticipate through which of two windows
an agent would reach for a ball. To elicit spontaneous anticipation, the study included two
familiarization trials: the first showed an agent watching as a puppet placed a ball in one
of two boxes, each located beneath one of two windows. Then, a light and sound cue was
emitted simultaneously, after which the agent reached through the window above the box
where she had seen the ball. Infants then received a second familiarization trial in which
the agent observed the ball placed in the other box. If infants are motivated to predict
which window the agent would open, the light and sound cues on this second
familiarization trial would prompt them to look to the window above the box containing the
ball before the agent would reach through the window. As the paradigm contained no
‘task’, and different participants may be motivated to attend to different aspects of the
scene, only those infants who made a correct anticipation on this second familiarization
trial were included in the analyses of anticipatory looking in the subsequent test trial. The
reason for this criterion was that in order to interpret the data from the false-belief trial,
evidence was needed for each infant that they were motivated and able to make a correct
action prediction.
Due to the ease of eye-tracking with preverbal children and its ostensible immunity
to factors that might vary across different laboratories, this paradigm has been employed
extensively across different ages, populations and species. In later studies, either the
original stimuli or versions of, have elicited belief-based action prediction in neurotypical
adults and school-aged children, but not in adults and children diagnosed with ASD
(Schuwerk et al., 2016; Senju et al., 2009, 2010). In other reports, anticipatory looking
revealed differences in belief-based action prediction between typically-developing
children and children at-risk for autism (Gliga et al., 2014) and deaf children growing up
with impoverished language exposure (Meristo et al., 2012; Meristo & Strid, 2020).
Versions with even younger infants revealed belief-based action anticipation in 18-month-
olds (Senju et al., 2011; Thoermer et al., 2012). Most recently, new versions of the
paradigm have revealed belief-based action prediction in apes (Kano et al., 2019;
Krupenye et al., 2016) and monkeys (Hayashi et al., 2020).
However, in recent years, there have also been a growing number of papers
reporting non-replications of belief-based action anticipation in toddlers (Schuwerk et al.,
2016), children (Dörrenberg et al., 2018; Grosse Wiesmann et al., 2018; Kulke, Reiß, et
al., 2018) and even adults (Kulke, Reiß, et al., 2018; Kulke, von Duhn, et al., 2018) in
addition to non-replications of other anticipatory looking false-belief tests (Burnside et al.,
2018; Kulke, von Duhn, et al., 2018) as well as non-verbal false-belief paradigms using
other methods (for an overview, see Baillargeon et al., 2018). These reports are troubling,
especially given that the original results were central in contributing to the reassessment
of perspective-taking and mental attribution abilities of young children that challenged the
long-held consensus that these abilities emerge relatively late in development. The non-
replications have also highlighted a more fundamental problem with the paradigm.
Specifically, that the paradigm may not reliably elicit the behavior – action prediction – on
which measuring attributions of false belief depends (Baillargeon et al., 2018).
Nevertheless, only one of the reported non-replications was, strictly speaking, a
direct replication of the original study. Specifically, one of the studies (Experiment 2)
reported in Grosse-Wiesmann et al. (2018) was the only one that used the same number
of familiarization and test trials, employed the original stimuli, tested approximately the
same age group (24-27 months olds, instead of the original 24-26 months age range),
and was not run in conjunction with multiple anticipatory looking paradigms. However, the
main analyses they reported did not include the original criteria of correct anticipation in
the second familiarization trial.
In the current preregistered study, we aimed to carry out a direct replication of the
Southgate, Senju & Csibra (2007) study, following the original methods and analyses as
closely as possible. The study was conducted with 160 25-month-old infants in
collaboration across two locations: Copenhagen and Budapest. The final sample for the
main analysis was approximately 2.5 times the original sample, as recommended for
replication studies (Simonsohn, 2015)
Methods
The study closely followed the design of the original paradigm, with the exception
that (1) more participants were recruited for the sample, (2) the experiment was
performed at two different locations (both different from the original), (3) the first look was
operationalised as fixation on either a window or a box to approximate the original
analyses that were done based on video coding, (4) the sound of a bell was used while
the agent was turning away, (5) areas of interest for all gaze analyses and the periods for
inclusion criteria based on infants attending to the critical events were specified, (6) a
different brand of eye tracker was used, and (7) the data-processing pipeline was
implemented differently (see Dependent measures below and Supplementary
information). The details of the data-processing pipeline and the analyses were
Participants
In the original study 36 infants were tested, and 20 of them were included in the
analysis. In this replication study, we aimed to get at least 40 infants who would provide
data in the test trials after exclusions. As a pilot study indicated a high attrition rate, we
decided to fix the full sample of infants at the number that would produce such a sample
even if the exclusion rate was as high as 75%. All exclusion criteria were preregistered
(see SI).
In the current study 160 two-year-old infants participated (mean age: 24 months
and 24 days; range: 721–808 days; 95 males, 65 females; 124 monolinguals, 35
multilinguals [15% of the time is exposed to at least one other language besides the
primary language – among the participants these were: Danish, Hungarian, Icelandic,
Swedish, English, Faroese, Dutch, Arabic, French, Romanian, Spanish, Russian,
Ukrainian, Portuguese, Italian, German, Chinese, 1 N/A). Eighty infants were tested at
the University of Copenhagen (mean age: 24 months and 22 days; range: 721–808 days;
48 males, 32 females; 58 monolinguals, 21 multilinguals, 1 N/A) and 80 infants were
tested at the Central European University in Budapest (mean age: 24 months and 25
days; range: 728–788 days; 47 males, 33 females; 66 monolinguals, 14 multilinguals).
Of the 80 participants tested in Copenhagen, 25 infants were included in the main
analysis (mean age: 24 months and 20 days, range: 735–784 days; 15 males, 10 females;
16 monolinguals, 8 multilinguals, 1 N/A), and 55 infants were excluded for the following
reasons: procedural errors (6), looking at the scene for less than 2 cumulative seconds
during the key periods in familiarization (7), looking away during the key periods at test
for more than 1.5 consecutive seconds (26), not looking at the scene during the cue in
second familiarization trial (1), or not anticipating correctly on the second familiarization
trial (15).
Of the 80 participants tested in Budapest, 24 infants were included in the main
analysis (mean age: 24 months and 22 days, range: 728–788 days; 10 males, 14 females;
21 monolinguals, 3 multilinguals), and 56 infants were excluded for the following reasons:
procedural errors (5), looking at the scene for less than 2 cumulative seconds during the
key periods in familiarization (1), looking away during the key periods at test for more than
1.5 consecutive seconds (20), no fixation to a window or box within 2750 ms from cue
onset in the test trial (4) or not anticipating correctly on the second familiarization trial (26)
Altogether, 49 participants who passed all the inclusion criteria were included in
the main analyses (mean age: 24 months and 21 days, range: 728–788; 25 males, 24
females; 37 monolinguals, 11 multilinguals, 1 N/A). Out of these 49 participants, 31 infants
remained in the FB1 condition and 18 in the FB2 condition.
Apparatus
Eyelink1000 Plus eye trackers were used to collect gaze data in both locations. In
order for the eye tracker to be able to follow the participants’ gaze, infants wore a target
sticker on their forehead or cheek. The eye tracker tracked the movement of the
participant’s right eye. The stimuli were presented on a 17” monitor (Copenhagen) or on
a 24” monitor (Budapest) via a PC running Eyelink’s Experiment Builder software (SR
Research). In the original study, a Tobii 1750 eye tracker with an integrated 17” monitor
was used, while the stimuli were presented using the Clearview AVI presentation
software.
Procedure
When the child entered the lab, an animation with rotating colourful objects was
played on the screen, accompanied by music. This animation was presented during the
seating and preparation. Infants were seated on their parents’ lap, 60 cm from the screen.
The parents either wore opaque glasses or were asked to close their eyes during the
entire study. The whole experiment was video recorded for each participant. (Videos were
not recorded for 3 participants: 2 from Copenhagen, 1 from Budapest. However, as
exclusions and all analyses were performed on gaze data, these infants were included in
our sample). After the initial animation, Eyelink’s 5-point calibration was carried out for
each infant. After successful calibration, the experiment began.
We used the original stimuli (Southgate et al., 2007) with one modification. In the
test trials, when the agent turned away, instead of the sound of a ringing phone, the sound
of a bell was played. We reasoned that infants in 2019 may not be familiar with the phone
sound used in the 2007 version. As in the original study, there were no attention getters
between trials.
Each infant was presented with three video clips: two familiarization trials and one
test trial. In all three trials, a female agent appeared behind a panel containing two
windows, below which were two opaque boxes. All three trials began with a bear puppet
coming into view from the bottom of the screen with a colourful ball and then placing this
ball into one of the boxes. In the first familiarization trial the puppet hid the ball in the left-
hand box, while in the second familiarization the puppet hid it in the right-hand box. After
hiding the ball, the puppet left the scene. After this, a sound and light cue (the latter on
the windows) were played for 1 s, and following a 1750 ms delay, the agent reached
through the left-hand window. In the first familiarization, she opened the box lid, and
retrieved the ball. In the second familiarization trial she reached through the right window
and the trial ended at the point where she made contact with the box. As in the original
study, infants then saw one of two test trials, depending on condition.
In the False Belief 1 (FB1) condition, infants saw the puppet put the ball first into
the left-hand box, then take it out and place it into the right-hand box. Then the sound of
a bell was played and the agent turned away as if attending to the source of the sound.
While she was turned away, the puppet reappeared, took the ball out of the right-hand
box, and left. The bell stopped ringing when the puppet left and the agent turned back
towards the child.
In the False Belief 2 (FB2) condition, infants saw the puppet put the ball into the
left-hand box and leave. At this point the bell started ringing and the agent turned away.
While she was facing away, the puppet reappeared, took the ball from the left-hand box,
and transferred it into the right-hand box. Then the puppet retrieved the ball from the right-
hand box and left with it. When the puppet left the scene, the bell stopped ringing and the
agent turned back.
In both test trials, after the agent turned back towards the child, the same sound
and light cue were presented as in familiarization, followed by an approximately 5 second
period where the movie froze. Unlike in familiarization trials, the agent remained
stationary and did not reach through either window.
After the lab session, parents filled out a basic demographic questionnaire
well as answers for each participant can be found in the supplementary information.
Dependent measures
We defined two different pairs of areas of interest (AOIs, see SI for details on
AOIs). The window+box AOIs included both the window and the box on one side of the
screen, while the window-only AOIs were defined only around the window on each side.
The time window of interest was defined as the 2750 ms interval starting from the
onset of the acoustic and visual cues that indicated the agent’s impending action. In the
original paper, the time window of analysis is described as 1750 ms from the cue onset
and it was said to correspond to the time-lag between the cue onset and window opening
in familiarization. In fact this time-lag lasts 2750 ms. After inspecting the original stimuli
and data as well as consulting among the authors, we concluded that the length of 1750
ms was reported incorrectly in the original methods and we corrected it to 2750 ms for
the current replication. We do, however, also report analyses for the time window lasting
1750 ms from the cue onset (see SI).
For measurement, we used two dependent variables. The primary dependent
variable was binary: it expressed whether the first window+box AOI that the participant
fixated within the time window of interest was on the correct side. Window+box AOIs were
used in order to approximate the operationalization in the original study, where the first
saccade to a window was coded from movies showing graphic representation of gaze
generated with Tobii’s Clearview software. Given that saccades were coded from video
replay of gaze location, it is possible that the original coding could have included saccades
leading through the window towards the box below. We additionally report first look to a
window-only AOI in the SI.
The secondary dependent variable was a Differential Looking Score (DLS)
calculated for each participant as cumulative fixation time to correct window-only AOI
divided by the sum of cumulative fixation times to the two window-only AOIs during the
time window of interest. For this analysis we analysed fixations to the window only, as
this approximates well the coding of looking times used in the original study. Analysing
the DLS measure is preferred to comparing looking durations to the two AOIs because
looking durations are not independent from each other. Nevertheless, in the
Supplementary Information we also report the same statistical analyses on looking
durations as those reported in the original paper.
Results
From the full sample, 70 infants were excluded for procedural errors, inattention or
lack of anticipatory fixations at test. Of the 90 remaining infants, 49 (54%) anticipated
correctly in the second familiarization trial. This is a somewhat lower proportion than was
reported in the original study (20 of 31, 65%).
Our primary dependent measure was whether infants anticipated correctly (i.e.,
whether after the cue onset, the first window or box on which they fixated was on the side
where the agent should have expected to find the ball, given her false belief). Twenty-two
of the 49 infants anticipated correctly, a proportion that did not differ from chance (p =
.568, two-tailed exact binomial test). Correct anticipations were found in 15 of 31 infants
in the FB1 Condition and in 7 of 18 infants in the FB2 condition. The proportion of correct
responses did not differ significantly between the conditions (p = .565, two-tailed Fisher’s
exact test).
Our secondary dependent variable was the DLS score calculated from the time
infants looked at one or the other window-only AOI. The mean DLS score was .47 (95%CI
[0.36 0.57]; a score above .5 would have indicated longer looking to the correct AOI). A
one-sample t-test on the DLS scores against chance (.5) indicated that infants did not
look longer at the correct AOI then the incorrect AOI (t(47) = -0.63, p = .532). One infant
was not included in this analysis because they fixated first a box but never fixated a
window. An independent-samples t-test with condition (FB1 vs. FB2) as a grouping
variable showed that DLS was higher in the FB1 (M = .54) than in the FB2 (M = .33)
condition (t(35.76) = 2.04, p = .049, 95% CIdiff [0.001 0.41]). This effect is illustrated on
window (which is correct in FB1 and incorrect in FB2, thus leading to a condition effect).
DLS was only numerically higher than chance level (.5) in FB1 (t(30) = 0.64, p = .527),
and numerically lower than chance in FB2 (t(16) = 2.11, p = .051; both tests are one-
sample t-tests on the DLS scores against chance (.5)).
infants who passed all inclusion criteria, and correctly anticipated in the second
familiarization trial. Note that one infant did not provide a DLS score as they did not fixated
on a window. Boxplots show median, first and fourth quartile, minimum and maximum
values. White diamonds indicate conditions means. Individual data points are plotted per
lab: left side of each box plot – Copenhagen, right side – Budapest. Shapes indicate
whether the first fixated window or box was on the correct (triangle) or incorrect side
(disc). The size of individual data points scale with the amount of looking time (LT) to both
windows contributed by each participant.
infants who passed all inclusion criteria, except that they anticipated incorrectly in the
second familiarization trial. Boxplots show median, first and fourth quartile, minimum and
maximum values. White diamonds indicate conditions means. Individual data points are
plotted per lab: left side of each box plot – Copenhagen, right side – Budapest. Shapes
indicate whether the first fixated window or box was on the correct (triangle) or incorrect
side (disc). The size of individual data points scale with the amount of looking time (LT)
to both windows contributed by each participant.
The above analyses only included infants who, on the second familiarization trial,
looked first to the correct window or box. We considered post hoc that the difference in
DLS between the two conditions could be driven either by a general right-side bias
(because it was the location of the ball in the last familiarization trial, or because it was
the last location of the ball in test) or by an individual side bias, i.e., infants looking to the
same side in two consecutive trials (last familiarization, and test trial). The results of the
included infants alone could not differentiate between these alternatives. In a follow-up
analysis performed on all infants who passed all other exclusion criteria and in the second
familiarization trial produced either the ‘correct ’(N = 49, included infants) or the
‘incorrect ’(N = 41, excluded infants) first fixation to window+box AOI, we asked whether
either of these tendencies might be visible. We conducted an ANOVA with DLS as a
dependent variable and condition (FB1 vs. FB2) and inclusion (included vs. excluded) as
between-subjects factors. As a DLS above .5 reflects longer looking to the correct AOI, it
indicates longer looking to the right window in FB1 and to the left window in FB2. An
overall bias to the right side, therefore, in this extended sample would manifest in a main
effect of condition. On the other hand, a potential individual side-bias to look to the same
location in the second familiarization and in test trial should manifest in a main effect of
inclusion (as exclusion and inclusion correspond to looking left or right in second
familiarization, respectively).
This analysis resulted in a significant effect of inclusion (F(1,85) = 4.77, p = .032),
as the included infants had overall higher DLS than the excluded ones. In addition, there
was also a significant interaction between condition and inclusion (F(1,85) = 7.00, p =
as where they fixated in a window+box AOI first in the preceding familiarization trial, and
this pattern was more manifest in the FB2 than in the FB1 condition. This finding indicates
an individual side bias. Since this effect is irrelevant for the purpose of our study, we will
not discuss it further.
As some methodological choices were implemented slightly differently in this study
than in the original, we ran additional pre-registered analyses on the data we collected
(See SI). None of these additional analyses yielded substantially different results.
Discussion
This paradigm was originally intended to serve as a non-verbal means of
assessing whether young children anticipate others' actions in a way that takes into
account their false beliefs. A positive answer to this question would serve as evidence of
false belief attribution. However, having sampled 160 25-month-old infants across two
sites, we found no evidence for either action anticipation, or belief-based action
anticipation. Of the participants who were not excluded for other reasons, only 54% of
infants anticipated the impending action in the second familiarization trial correctly, where
anticipation did not require belief attribution. Furthermore, on the critical test trial, where
an action could be anticipated by considering the agent’s false belief, only 45% of infants
anticipated correctly.
Thus, in the present study, we were unable to replicate the original finding of
Southgate et al. (2007). This replication attempt, unlike most of the earlier ones (for a
discussion see Baillargeon et al., 2018), was very close to a direct replication (see
Methods for the exceptions). Where we did deviate from the procedure as described in
the original paper, the changes aimed at approximating (e.g., when specifying AOIs),
improving (e.g., when pre-defining the critical periods infants should attend to), or
clarifying (e.g., by correcting the description of the anticipatory time window to 2750 ms
from cue onset) the original methods, and we have no reason to suspect that these
differences would systematically account for infants ’failure to anticipate actions in the
present study. Overall, we conclude that this paradigm and stimuli do not reliably elicit
action anticipation. That is, the paradigm does not elicit the behavior upon which it relies
to assess the ability to attribute false beliefs, and therefore it does not provide evidence
for this ability in 2-year-old children.
While some follow-up versions of the original paradigm reported high levels of
correct anticipation on the second familiarization trial when no belief consideration was
required (Low & Watts, 2013; Senju et al., 2009, 2011), several other studies found that
participants anticipated either at or even below chance (see Baillargeon et al., 2018 for a
review). Why do children (and even adults, see Kulke, Reiß, et al., 2018) not make correct
anticipations on familiarization trials? Other paradigms, including those using anticipatory
looking, show that infants can generate the kind of goal-based action predictions required
to look to the correct location on the second familiarization trial (Brandone et al., 2014;
Cannon & Woodward, 2012; Falck-Ytter et al., 2006; Fawcett & Liszkowski, 2012;
Kanakogi & Itakura, 2011; but see Ganglmayer et al., 2019). A possible answer to this
question is that either this task does not motivate infants to predict others ’actions, or that
action prediction in this kind of event does not reliably recruit the kind of eye movements
that the paradigm was designed to elicit. An indication that participants may not produce
saccade and fixation patterns that clearly reveal their predictions comes from a replication
and extension of the original study. Wang & Leslie (2016) included two false belief
conditions; a low-demand condition in which the object is removed from the scene in order
to reduce the so-called ‘pull of the real ’and a high-demand condition in which the object
is transferred from the original location to the other location. While both young children
and adults showed correct action prediction on the low-demand condition, neither group
showed correct action anticipation on the high-demand condition. Assuming that adults
should easily be able to make the correct prediction on the high-demand condition, the
most likely explanation for their apparent failure is simply that actual prediction is not
reflected in their saccade pattern.
A further way in which our findings differed from those of the original study is that
we had a higher exclusion rate due to inattention (34% vs. 6%). However, direct
comparison of exclusion rates may not be appropriate given the differences in
implementation of the exclusion criteria across the two studies. For example, in the
original study, looking was coded from movies showing graphic representation of gaze
generated with Tobii’s Clearview software, whereas in the current study it was measured
by exported fixation data. Given that we used the same stimuli as in the original study, it
is possible that what was sufficient to motivate toddlers to attend to the stimuli in 2006 is
different from what is sufficient to motivate them fourteen years later. Moving forward,
based on such considerations, new projects such as the multi-lab collaborative
ManyBabies2 will present toddlers with more modern, newly devised stimuli that are
designed to be more appealing (Kampis & Schuwerk, 2020).
Besides not providing evidence for goal-based action anticipation, our study also
failed to reproduce the original finding according to which most of the 25-month-olds who
appeared to anticipate during familiarization also did so when action prediction could have
been made from attributed false beliefs. While in the original study, infants were included
based on the assumption that they had shown correct anticipation on the second
familiarization trial, it should be acknowledged that what was interpreted as correct
anticipatory looking may have been randomly distributed exploration or reaction evoked
by the lighting up of the windows (20 of 31 infants appeared to anticipate correctly). Thus,
it is possible that the original criteria did not select children who were genuinely predicting
an action from the goal attributed to the agent. While the majority of those children did
then look correctly again on test, the current failure to replicate this pattern with a larger
sample indicates that they may have done so by chance. We therefore conclude that the
effect reported by Southgate et al. (2007) is not reliable and should not be used as
evidence for false belief attribution in children of this age.
Nevertheless, it is important to note here that this, and other replication failures of
this paradigm, cannot be used as evidence for the opposite conclusion either. Rather than
showing the absence of competence in belief attribution, the fact that infants did not
anticipate actions even when they did not have to think about the other’s belief renders
these current null results uninterpretable. Other paradigms may also support the
conclusion that infants and toddlers track others ’attention and build expectations based
on what others have or have not seen (Scott & Baillargeon, 2017; Southgate, 2020).
Similarly, our failure to replicate the original finding does not nullify the positive results
obtained with versions of this paradigm in different populations, such as non-human
primates. Thus, the current results should be taken as damning of this particular version
of the paradigm with this particular age group, rather than the entire body of evidence for
false belief understanding in infants or in other populations. Nevertheless, we conclude
that an important piece of evidence that has to date supported the existence of early
competence of mental state attribution should no longer serve this function.