EFFECT OF INSIGHT ON COMPLETION OF MASKED SOLUTIONS 1
The Role of Masked Solutions in the Accuracy of
Insight Problem-Solving Task
Elisa Puvia11, Davide Taibi1, and Patrizio Tressoldi2
Institute for Educational Technology, National Research Council of Italy, Palermo, Italy
Science of Consciousness Research Group, Studium Patavinum, Padova University, Italy
[in press in the Journal of Anomalous Experience and Cognition]
Abstract
Objective: The primary aim of the study was to test the allegedly facilitating role of insight-
like strategy in the detection of masked solutions Compound Remote Associates problems (CRA
problems).
Method: A sample of 114 participants solved 19 CRA problems presented online.
Participants were requested to solve the problems in which either the solution to the CRA problems
was randomly presented in a masked condition or no solution was provided. After each trial
participants were requested to report whether they used insight or analytical strategy.
Participants were also required to complete a sensation seeking scale and a measure of creativity.
Results: The results showed a small, but robust correlation between the CRA problems
accuracy and the degree of insight-type strategy used for their solution. The degree of sensation
seeking, the score of creativity and the outcome of the manipulation check did not reveal any
influence on the CRA problems solution.
Conclusion: The use of intuitive strategies may facilitate psi-related creative problem
solving, but confirmatory research is needed.
Keywords: Compound Remote Associate problems; insight; intuition; masked stimuli; extrasensory-
perception; creativity
1 Corresponding author: elisapuvia@gmail.com
EFFECT OF INSIGHT ON COMPLETION OF MASKED SOLUTIONS 2
Introduction
The influence of subliminal information on perceptual and cognitive processes, including
problem-solving, represents a strongly debated topic in the field of psychology that has received
considerable empirical attention (Erdelyi, 2004; Goldstein et al., 2020; Kihlstrom, 2004; Merikle,
2000). A frequently used method for studying subliminal processing is the masked priming
paradigm in which some stimuli are presented for very short time and masked in order to prevent
their overt conscious identification, but can be detected by our visual system (Van den Bussche,
Noortgate & Reynvoet, 2009).
Conversely, little is known about the influence of completely masked (without priming)
information (Carpenter et al. 2012; Carpenter, Simmonds-Moore & Moore, 2009; Wilson, 2002),
that is information that cannot be detected not even unconsciously by our sensory organs.
The reason for this different consideration is quite obvious: how could a completely masked
information affect the solution of whichever problem given that no sensory information can be
transmitted even unconsciously to the agent?
The only plausible hypothesis is that information conveyed by masked information can be
detected only if our mind (cognitive system) can detect it by using a sort of extra-sensory
perception. Whereas this possibility is excluded if we assume that our mind is merely a byproduct
of our neurophysiological system as assumed by different models of mind-brain relationship, e.g.
Identity theory (Smart, 2017), it can be possible if we adopt a model where mind is not constrained
by the neurophysiological limits of the sensory organs, e.g. Idealism (Kastrup, 2018), Advanta-
Vedanta (Sedlmeier & Srinivas, 2016), dual-aspect monism (Walach, 2020).
In the present exploratory study, we aimed at investigating if adopting fast-thinking insight-
intuitive like strategies, that is decisions not based on reasoning, very similar to the System 1
strategies described in the dual-aspect model of reasoning (De Neys & Pennycook, 2019; Stanovich
& West, 2000) make possible to unconsciously detect information useful for the solution of a
problem-solving task.
Among the paradigm used in the study of problem solving, the validated Italian version of
the compound remote associate problems (CRA problems; Salvi, Costantini, Bricolo Perugini &
Beeman, 2015), has been employed. The CRA problems are commonly used for assessing insight
problem solving. Importantly, they belong to a new generation of problems that relative to the
classic ones are easier, so that many of them may be correctly solved in the same session,
generating more data, they do not require domain-specific knowledge to be solved, and they use a
more rule-consistent task. In addition, in line with a recent and more bottom-up approach, problem
solvers were asked to focus on their subjective experience and to self-report how they solved each
problem - relatively more by analysis, or relatively more by insight. In doing so, participants’ self-
reports about solving were used as the discriminative criteria to categorize the solving processes.
In general, solving problems by sudden insight is considered a significant form of creative
cognition. Recently, a positive correlation between creativity and performance on problem solving-
tasks (i.e., CRA problems), has been found (Olson, Nahas, Chmoulevitch, & Webb, 2021). As a
consequence, in the present study we aimed to test the possibility that those participants who
engaged in insight-like process to solve CRA problems more frequently, showed a better
performance in a creativity task, namely Divergent Association Task (DAT, Olson et al., 2021).
Finally, we were interested in assessing individual difference that could be correlated to
such a type of perception. Over the years, a small but reliable correlation emerged between
extraversion and performance on similar tasks (Honorton, Ferrari and Bem 1992). Specifically, the
component of extraversion that underlines this correlation appears to be the susceptibility to
boredom and a tendency to seek out stimulation. To asses stimulus seeking as a possible moderator
on the CRA problems solution, we used the two-statements scale developed by Bem (2011).
EFFECT OF INSIGHT ON COMPLETION OF MASKED SOLUTIONS 3
Objective
We aimed to test if making available the solution of the CRA problems in a masked form,
could improve their solution simply warning the participant of its presence, but without any
possibility to see it neither before nor after the problem solution. An enhanced performance was
also expected when an insight-like strategy was used to solve the masked form of CRA problems.
This experimental paradigm has been rarely used. Usually, participants are requested to
guess or describe the target before its overt presentation and not to use it to solve problems without
any possibility to overtly see it as in our case. However, the possibility that the mere presence of an
information can be used by humans even if at an unconscious level if necessary for them, it is
predicted by James Carpenter’s (2015) “First Sight” model. By using Carpenter’s words “This
model assumes that each organism, by its nature, extends beyond itself into the larger pre-sensory
surround. Psi [extra-sensory-perception] is assumed to be neither knowledge nor action, but to
belong to the outermost temporal edge of those normal pre-experiential mental processes by which
the mind structures all its experiences and commences all its actions. Psi processes are posited to
function normally as the unconscious leading edge of the development of all consciousness and all
intention. This unconscious functioning is normal and continuous, and is a constituent element of
all experience” (Carpenter, 2004, pag.1).
Our specific hypotheses were as follow:
Main hypothesis: We expected that the masked solution of CRA problems can influence their
solution, but only when participants adopt an insight-type approach.
Secondary hypotheses: sensation seeking level and creativity can both act as moderators on
the CRA problems solution. We expected that especially those participants who showed a tendency
to seek stimuli and higher DAT scores, also used insight-like process in the solution of CRA
problems.
Method
Ethical Considerations
The study was approved by Ethical Committee Prot: 2476 of the Dipartimento di Psicologia,
Università degli studi di Padova, Italy.
Participants
One-hundred-thirty-one Italian participants were recruited through social media, 50 of which
through the Prolific platform. In this last condition they received (€ 6.00) for their participation.
Seventeen participants had to be discarded from further analyses because they did not complete the
test or declared to have seen the solution of the CRA problems at least once. The final sample is
composed of 114 participants: males = 55; females = 59. Mean chronological age = 31.2, SD (11.4),
range 16-75.
Materials
Moderators
Two Statements stimulus seeking measure
As a potential moderator of the CRA problems solution, participants were requested to
respond to two items related to the Sensation Seeking Scale (Zuckerman, 1974): “I am easily
bored” and “I often enjoy seeing movies I’ve seen before” (reverse scored), that were found to
moderate some intuitive tasks (Bem, 2011). In the present study, responses were recorded on a
Likert 5-point scales, from 1 (Very Untrue) to 5 (Very True). In our sample, the two scores were
summed into a single score ranging from 2 to 10 (M = 5.7, SD = 1.68). Higher scores indicate
higher levels of stimulus seeking.
EFFECT OF INSIGHT ON COMPLETION OF MASKED SOLUTIONS 4
Divergent Association Task
As a second potential moderator variable, participants were required to complete a measure
of creativity, namely the Divergent Association Task (DAT; Olson, Nahas, Chmoulevitch &Webb,
2021). Participants were asked to name 10 words that are as different from each other as possible, in
all meanings and uses of the words. The words pen and pencil, for example, would be close to each
other, and thus semantically similar, since they are often used in similar context. The words
astronaut and apple wouldn’t be close to each other and thus less semantically similar. According
to the original study, the greater is the semantic distance between the words, the higher participants
score on other creativity and insight problem-solving tasks (e.g., CRA). The original English
version of the task computes the semantic distances using a model based on a corpus called
Common Crawl, which contains the text of billions of web pages. Given that this model is not
readily available in Italian, a different one was used to compute the average semantic distance
between words. Specifically, a pre-trained model was used based on a corpus of text form Italian
web sites (Cimino, De Matte, & Dell’Orletta, 2018). DAT scores can range from 0 to 200, with
higher scores indicating a greater semantic difference between the words.
Compound Remote Associates problems
Twenty CRA problems were selected from the Italian version list validated by Salvi et al
(2016). Given the exploratory nature of the present study, we decided to favor the possibility to
gather a higher amount of information about the preferred strategies of the participant over the
manipulation of the level of difficulty. For this reason, we decided to select them among the first
quartile of difficulty, resulting in the least difficult problems. A similar recommendation is also
reported on the original study (Salvi et al., 2016). All problems and instructions were presented
online using the Qualtrics platform.
Procedure
Participants were tested online through social media and Prolific platform. Qualtrics
software was used to implement the experimental procedure. They were told that the study aimed to
investigate their ability to engage intuition. They were firstly presented with a two-items measure,
assessing their tendency to seek stimulus. Subsequently, participants completed the creativity task
(i.e., Divergent Association Task - DAT). Given that no validated Italian version of the DAT is
available, the instructions and the items used in the present research were translated into Italian by
the first author and back translated by an independent translator before arriving at a final version
that all authors agreed best capture the original meaning (see Appendix). After a 3-minutes
relaxation period, participants were presented with an insight problem-solving task i.e., CRA
problems, in which three cue words were presented and participants were required to try to find a
fourth word that create a compound word with the cues. In half of the conditions, the solution to the
CRA problems were masked presented, while in the other half no solution was presented in random
order.
The instructions were the following ones: “Now you will be presented with some problems.
For each problem you will be shown three words. Your task is to find a fourth that can be combined
with each of the three presented, forming a compound word or sentence. You have 15 seconds to
find the solution. In case you don’t find the solution in time, you will move on to the next problem.
The solution will be presented to you even if disguised. We ask you to ignore this
information and use your pure intuition (i.e. instinctive, without reasoning) to find the solution.
After you have provided your answer, you will be asked to indicate if you have found the
solution using an INSIGHT or ANALYTICAL strategy.
INSIGHT means that the answer came to your mind suddenly (i.e., unexpectedly) while you were
trying to find the solution, without being able to explain how you found it.
EFFECT OF INSIGHT ON COMPLETION OF MASKED SOLUTIONS 5
ANALYTICALLY, it means that you have identified the answer after deliberately and consciously
trying several words until you have found the correct one. In this case, for example, you would be
able to indicate the steps that led you to the solution”.
After two examples and a relax time of three minutes, the 20 problems were randomly
masked condition, the solution was presented under the gray square (“cheese” in this case).
After each response, participants were requested to report whether they used an Insight-type
(i.e. suddenly, without reasoning) or an Analytical strategy (i.e., as a result of deliberate reasoning).
Manipulation Check
At the end of the CRA problems, participants were requested to respond to the following
open question: “In your own words, what is the purpose of the study you have just participated in?”.
The majority of participants (71.1%) named at least the words “insight” and / or “reasoning” in their
responses.
Results
Due to technical reasons, a problem was not presented, consequently, all statistics refer to the
solution of the remaining 19 problems.
All statistical analyses were performed using the freeware software Jamovi (2021) v.1.8.1
the solutions were presented masked (%CRA problems_T) and when they were not presented (%CRA
problems_F).
% CRA problems_T % CRA problems_F
Mean .69 .69
SD .20 .21
Note: CRA problems_T = masked response true; CRA problems_F = masked response false.
EFFECT OF INSIGHT ON COMPLETION OF MASKED SOLUTIONS 6
Comment
The percentage of CRA problems accuracy when their solutions were presented masked and
when they were not presented are almost identical. Their correlation is .58; 95%CI: .44 - .69. Their
mean difference is -.006; SD = .19; one-sample t-test with null hypothesis = 0: t(113)=-.33; p=.74.
Moderators effects
In order to examine whether sensation seeking, creativity, and insight predict masked
problem solving, we carried out a multiple linear regression with the difference score in masked
problem solving (DiffCRA = % CRA problems_T - % CRA problems_F) as the outcome and
SSTot, DAT score, and the number of CRA problems solved using an insight-type strategy as
predictors .
problems solution (DiffCRA problems) when the solution was presented minus when it was not presented.
Black square corresponds to the mean.
2 This way on how to analyze the data was suggested by a reviewer.
EFFECT OF INSIGHT ON COMPLETION OF MASKED SOLUTIONS 7
as dependent variable.
Model Coefficients
95% Confidence Interval
Predictor Estimate SE t p Stand. Estimate Lower Upper
Intercept -0.507 0.400 -1.26 0.208
Insight 0.008 0.004 2.04 0.043 0.194 0.006 0.383
SSTot -0.006 0.011 -0.54 0.589 -0.051 -0.237 0.135
DAT 0.006 0.005 1.173 0.243 0.111 -0.077 0.299
Note: The overall model fit is R = .22; p =.14; N = 114. The model satisfied the assumption of
independence of the residuals, Durbin-Watson Test = -.12; p =.23 and absence of multicollinearity, variance
inflation factors ranged from 1.005 to 1.022.
Comment
The results clearly show that only insight, that is the number of CRA problems solved with
an insight-type strategy influence the CRA problems accuracy even if the effect size is small. This
interpretation is supported by the result of a simple linear regression analysis using only insight as
standardizing all variables as z scores.
Model Coefficients
95% Confidence Interval
Predictor Estimate SE t p SE Lower Upper
Intercept -0.092 0.043 -2.12 0.036
Insight 0.009 0.004 2.18 0.031 0.202 0.018 0.385
Note: The overall model fit is R = .20; p =.027, almost identical to those obtained with all three moderators.
EFFECT OF INSIGHT ON COMPLETION OF MASKED SOLUTIONS 8
using an insight-type strategy) and DiffCRA problems (the difference between the percentage of correct CRA
problems solution when the solution was presented minus when it was not presented).
A further hint about the specificity of the relationship between the Insight score and the
CRA problems when solutions were presented masked (%CRA problems_T) derives from their
correlation: .179; p=.057 whereas when the solutions were not presented (%CRA problems_F), the
correlation is: -.01; p= .91.
Manipulation Check
Participants were divided in two categories according to the detection or not of the aim of the
manipulation check.
Task detection DiffCRA problems
No - 33 .018 (.23)
Yes - 81 -.016 (.17)
Comment
As it appears form the descriptive statistics, there are neither raw nor statistical differences
between the DiffCRA problems between the two categories, t(112)= .86; p=.39.
Discussion
The present study was designed to examined whether completely masked stimulus
presentation could influence creative problem solving, and whether this effect was related to
individual differences in creative ability, the use of insight strategy, and sensation seeking
EFFECT OF INSIGHT ON COMPLETION OF MASKED SOLUTIONS 9
personality. Results showed that there was no main effect of the masked stimulus paradigm,
suggesting that creative problem solving was not generally facilitated by completely masked
stimuli. However, unlike creative ability or sensation seeking, the use of insight strategies did
predict greater performance in the masked stimulus condition. This suggests that masked stimulus
presentation may indeed facilitate creative problem solving, but more so in those using insight
rather than analytic strategies. The specificity of this influence is supported by the lack of influence
of the two further moderators, sensation seeking level and the DAT score that when included in the
regression model, give a p value of .14. The small effect size of the masked solution influence is
expected, considering that participants were in a normal state of consciousness and were requested
to solve a complex cognitive task and not to identify or guess the masked target as it is usually
being used in this research field (Tressoldi and Storm, 2020).
Despite the fact that unconscious perception remains one of the most intriguing and strongly
debated topic of research, the vast majority of the studies have investigated the topic using a
masked priming paradigm, in which the visibility of a prime stimulus is only reduced by a visual
masking (Van de Bussche et al., 2009).
Adding on the existing literature, we explore the possibility that the adoption of an insight
like strategy can positively influence the solution of a problem-solving task; especially when the
solution is completely masked presented and so the information can only be unconsciously detected.
Study limitations
The main limitation is the completely exploratory approach of our study. Consequently, our
results must be considered provisional and their interpretation with caution. Only replication studies
with a confirmatory approach, for example using a Registered Report protocol could support our
findings.
Conclusions
Our results, even if carried out with an exploratory approach, support Carpenter’s first sight
model positing that “pre-sensory” (alias extra-sensory, nonlocal) information can be detected at un
unconscious level, influencing our behavior and cognitive tasks, but only adopting insight/intuitive
like strategies, bypassing those ones based on reasoning that is, those deriving from conscious
cognitive processing of information.
In addition, they also inform and expand our understanding of insight problem solving
procedure and underlaying processes in the Italian language and culture that only recently has been
taken into consideration by researchers (Salvi and colleagues, 2016). Much in the same line, the
present study represents the first attempt to adapt a new measure of creativity (i.e., DAT) to the
Italian context. This limit in the availability of validated experimental material, could in part justify
the lack of influence between participants’ DAT score and CRA problems accuracy.
EFFECT OF INSIGHT ON COMPLETION OF MASKED SOLUTIONS 10
Author’s Contribution
EP: designed the study and was actively involved in revisiting the manuscript. PT: designed the
study, carried out the statistical analyses, and drafted the first version of the manuscript. DT:
organized the data collection.
Declaration of interests
The Authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.
Data availability statement
The dataset presented in this study can be found at:
EFFECT OF INSIGHT ON COMPLETION OF MASKED SOLUTIONS 11
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions which allowed
us to improve the clarity of the paper and to better analyze our data.
We are grateful for the assistance with experimental material of Italian version of CRA problems
from Carola Salvi, and for the computation of DAT score with the Italian language from Jay A.
Olson.
EFFECT OF INSIGHT ON COMPLETION OF MASKED SOLUTIONS 12