MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 1
**MANUSCRIPT ACCEPTED BY INFANCY**
Patterns of Mutual Exclusivity and Retention: A Study of Monolingual and Bilingual 2-Year-Olds
Joscelin Rocha-Hidalgo1, Mary Feller1, Olivia A. Blanchfield1, Sarah C. Kucker2, and Rachel F. Barr1
1Georgetown University, 2Oklahoma State University
Author Note
Correspondence concerning this document should be addressed to Joscelin Rocha-Hidalgo, 3700 P st
NW, White Gravenor 306, Washington D.C. 20007. E-mail: jr1679@georgetown.edu
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to all the families who participated in this research and to our research assistants Grace E.
Lozano, Madeline Lui, Jenna Ryu, and Olivia Mirek, for their invaluable help. This research was funded
by the NSF BCS-1551719. "From memory flexibility to cognitive flexibility: Examining precursors to
bilingual advantages during early childhood" to Barr.
The authors declare no conflicts of interest with regard to the funding source for this study.
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 2
Abstract
When children learn their native language, they tend to treat objects as if they only have one label—a
principle known as mutual exclusivity. However, bilingual children are faced with a different cognitive
challenge—they need to learn to associate two labels with one object. In the present study, we compared
bilingual and monolingual 24-month-olds' performance on a challenging and semi-naturalistic forced-
choice referent selection task and retention test. Overall, both language groups performed similarly on
referent selection but differed on retention. Specifically, while monolingual infants showed some
retention, bilingual infants performed at chance and significantly worse than their monolingual peers.
Keywords: Word learning; Bilingualism; Referent Selection; Novelty; Mutual Exclusivity;
Disambiguation
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 3
Patterns of Mutual Exclusivity and Retention: A Study of Monolingual and Bilingual 2-Year-Olds
By three years of age, children have acquired the major components of their native languages
(Adamson, 2018) facilitated by a vocabulary spurt in their second year of life (Samuelson & McMurray,
2017). For example, U.S. English-speaking children go from comprehending and producing a median of
91 words at 18 months to 423 words by 24 months (Frank et al., 2017). Researchers have partly attributed
this spurt to children's ability to quickly determine what item a new label refers to (Markman & Wachtel,
1988).
Imagine you are interacting with a toddler, and there are two objects: a duck and a novel object.
When asking the toddler to get the zylow (or any novel label), the toddler must disambiguate the familiar
from the novel items to determine the referent for such a novel name. One way to do so would be to
eliminate the familiar toy as a possible referent because it already has a name ("duck"), choosing the
novel object instead. Some have attributed this ability to disambiguate novel from known referents to a
principle known as mutual exclusivity (ME)—a constraint allowing each item to only have one label
(Conboy & Thal, 2006; see Lewis et al. 2020 for a review/meta-analysis). That is because the familiar
object had a duck label, zylow must refer to the novel object. Even though mutual exclusivity is thought to
facilitate real-time word learning and vocabulary extension during infancy and toddlerhood (Markman,
1989), few studies test children's ability to retain these novel word-object mappings after some delay
(Horst & Samuelson, 2008). Retention is critical as mutual exclusivity (in monolinguals and bilinguals) is
only a small part of the word learning process. Furthermore, most of the literature on disambiguation and
mutual exclusivity focuses on monolingual populations. Since bilingual infants' word learning
environment violates the mutual exclusivity assumption by having two basic-level labels for each object,
it is important to understand how bilingual infants solve the disambiguation problem to retain new words
and the role of early multilingual language exposure on lexical acquisition.
Monolingualism and Disambiguation
Forced choice selection tasks are the most popular paradigm for measuring disambiguation in the
developmental literature (Lewis et al., 2020). The paradigm was introduced by Markman and Watchel
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 4
(1988). In their series of studies, children were introduced to a familiar 3D object next to a novel object.
Three to four-year-olds chose the unfamiliar object as a referent for a novel label an average of 8 out of
10 times. Children not only had a bias to assign the novel label to a novel object, but they also tended to
assign the novel label to a salient property of a familiar object when no other object was present.
Markman and Wachtel (1988) interpreted their findings as evidence that children tend to assume that
objects have one sole label. If a new label is given, then it must refer to particular aspects of the object.
Similar patterns have been consistently reported in various studies with children two years and under
(Clark, 1990, Bion et al., 2013; Golinkoff et al., 1992; Markman, 1991; Merriman & Bowman; 1989;
Mervis & Bertrand, 1994; Bion, Borovsky, & Fernald, 2013; Horst & Samuelson, 2008; Spiegel &
Halberda, 2011; Vlach & Sandhofer, 2012). This pattern has also been reported with young infants when
using looking paradigms (for 17- to 18-month-olds see Byers-Heinlein & Werker, 2009, for 17-month-
olds see Halberda, 2003; for 15 to 20-month-olds see Markman et al., 2003). Overall, as children develop,
their mutual exclusivity abilities increase, and they perform better on disambiguation tasks. Bion et al.
(2013), for instance, demonstrated that in a looking paradigm, 18-month-old children struggled with
disambiguation and failed to retain labels; 24-month-old children were largely successful at mutual
exclusivity but generally failed to retain the labels. By 30-months, children were generally good at both
disambiguation and retention trials. Disambiguation and retention performance were also correlated with
vocabulary size in this study - as vocabulary increased, so did performance.
Bilingualism and Disambiguation
Studies with a bilingual population have reported conflicting findings on children’s ability to
disambiguate. Some studies have reported bilinguals performing at the same rate on disambiguation trials
as their monolingual peers (see the following for younger than three years: Frank & Poulin-Dubois, 2002;
Kalashnikova et al., 2018; Repnik et al., 2021; see the following for older than three years: Davidson &
Tell, 2005; Mervis & Bertrand, 1994; Yow et al., 2017) while others have found bilinguals to
disambiguate to a lesser extent (Byers‐Heinlein, & Werker, 2009, Houston‐Price et al., 2010). When
bilingual children are provided with a novel label for a familiar object, they are more likely to use that
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 5
label as a second label for the item, while their monolingual peers tend to assign such label to a salient
property of the item (Kandhadai et al., 2017; see Au & Glusman, 1990 for older children). For example,
Kandhadai and colleagues (2017) tested the mutual exclusivity assumption with 18-month-old
monolingual and bilingual infants. They argued that differences in mutual exclusivity performance might
be due to bilingual infants accepting a second label for a novel object. To test this prediction, infants were
familiarized with an image of a dog, accompanied by the word “dog.” Infants were then familiarized with
a different-colored (aqua) version of a dog, labeled as a “zabe.” Finally, infants were familiarized with an
image of a purple cat, accompanied by the word “cat.” Infants were subsequently tested with an image of
an aqua-colored cat and a purple-colored dog, accompanied by the word “zabe.” Monolinguals used the
mutual exclusivity hypothesis, looking longer at the aqua-colored cat, but bilinguals instead looking
longer at the novel dog. Bilinguals interpreted a novel label for a familiar object as a second label,
whereas monolinguals interpreted the novel label as a property of the object: an adjective. That is, the
application of the label differed as a function of children's prior word learning experience. Therefore, the
authors concluded that there are qualitative differences in bilinguals’ adoption of the mutual exclusivity
assumption during early childhood, which changes how bilinguals interpret novel labels (Kandhadai et al.,
2017; see also Weatherhead et al., 2021). Such differences in word learning strategies may mean that
monolingual and bilingual infants will apply labels differently in other learning contexts.
In another study, Byers-Heinlein and Werker (2009) compared 17- to 18-month-old monolingual,
bilingual, and trilinguals, recording their preferential looking time to a novel and a familiar referent
presented on a screen. When given a familiar name, all groups looked longer at the familiar object
(replicating previous findings with monolingual infants; de Marchena et al., 2011; Golinkoff et al., 1992).
However, during the novel target disambiguation trials, monolingual children disambiguated strongly
(looked longer at the novel object) while bilinguals only showed marginal disambiguation, and trilinguals
showed no evidence of disambiguation. This study was one of the first to demonstrate disambiguation
ability differs as a function of early language exposure. Replicating Byers-Heinlein and Werker (2009),
Houston-Price et al. (2010) found that 17- and 22-month-old infants in both language groups looked
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 6
longer at the familiar objects when the familiar label was used. Contrary to previous findings, the
bilingual group did not show evidence of disambiguation abilities (Houston‐Price et al., 2010). They
suggested the lack of such an ability may be due to bilinguals having smaller English vocabularies than
monolingual infants.
In addition to a more language diverse background, another factor that may be affecting the
ability to disambiguate is the extensive exposure to lexical overlap (multiple labels referring to one
object) that bilingual children are exposed to from an early age (Kandadhai et al., 2017). For example,
contrary to their original hypothesis, Kandadhai and colleagues (2017) found that 1.5-year-old bilinguals
were more likely than their monolingual peers to accept a second label for a referent. The authors
attributed this finding to bilinguals' more extensive experience accepting more than one label for the same
object. In contrast, neither Frank and Poulin-Dubois (2002) nor Kalashnikova and colleagues (2019) were
able to find any significant differences between monolingual and bilingual two-and-a-half-year-olds on
lexical overlap tasks. It seems that in the presence of an ambiguous situation (as in the task from
Kandadhai et al., 2017), bilinguals are more likely to accept a second label while monolinguals are not.
On the other hand, when the task introduces a non-ambiguous scenario, both groups perform similarly.
Additionally, Kalashnikova et al. (2019) found that vocabulary size predicted performance on the lexical
overlap task for the monolingual group only. Taken together, these findings suggest that further inquiry
into the role of vocabulary in bilingual and monolingual children’s word-learning abilities is warranted.
As suggested by Houston-Price and colleagues (2010), it has been proposed that the lexicon
structure may play a role in children's ability to use mutual exclusivity and may be driving the different
findings reported in the field. For example, among monolinguals, toddlers who had a larger vocabulary
size performed better in disambiguation tasks (Bion et al., 2013; Graham, Poulin-Dubois, & Baker, 1998;
Lewis et al., 2020). For a bilingual population, some researchers like Byers-Heinlein and Werker (2013)
have looked at the relationship between vocabulary size and disambiguation and the role of children's
translation equivalents (TEs; the number of words infants know in both languages) may have on this
process. The work on the influence of TE’s on word learning is mixed (Byers-Heinlein & Werker, 2013;
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 7
Frank & Poulin-Dubois, 2002; Houston-Price et al., 2010). In Byers-Heinlein and Werker (2013),
children's disambiguation practices varied by the proportion of TEs reported. When children's vocabulary
was closer to a one-to-one lexical structure (few TEs), they exhibited a higher use of disambiguation. On
the other hand, when children had a lexicon structure closer to a many-to-one model (i.e., vocabulary
containing mostly TEs), they failed to practice disambiguation. However, Houston-Price et al. (2010)
found no relation between looking behavior in a similar task and a child’s translation equivalents (see also
Frank & Poulin-Dubois, 2002). Thus, one aim of the current study is to examine the role of TEs on
disambiguation. In addition, the present study also examines their impact on retention.
Retention of Novel Labels after Disambiguation
Although disambiguation is a critical step in the word learning process, it is not the same as
retention (Kucker et al., 2015). In many cases, disambiguation has been shown to facilitate monolingual
children's abilities to retain novel label-object pairings (e.g., Golinkoff et al., 1992; Horst & Samuelson,
2008; Kucker et al., 2018; Bion et al., 2013; Spiegel & Halberda, 2011; Goodman et al., 1998; Mervis &
Bertrand, 1994; Spiegel & Halberda, 2001; Wilkinson & Mazzitelli, 2003). Even though some of these
studies (Golinkoff et al., 1992; Spiegel & Halberda, 2001; Bion et al., 2013; Spiegel & Halberda, 2011)
demonstrate that children can retain novel word-object pairings after a small delay, other ones have found
opposite findings when the population is younger than 30 months of age (see Bion et al., 2013; Horst &
Samuelson, 2008; Kucker et al., 2018). For example, Horst and Samuelson (2008) demonstrated that 24-
month-old monolinguals could not retain words after a five-minute delay even when they successfully
disambiguated in a forced-choice task with three objects present (two familiar and one novel). Retention
skills of children 30 months or older vary whenever the number of foils is changed (Horst, Scott, &
Pollard, 2010; Zosh, Brinster, & Halberda, 2013) or even when 24-month-old children's familiarity with
the novel items is manipulated (Kucker & Samuelson, 2012). It is evident that studies with monolingual
populations have been able to investigate how solving disambiguation problems are related to children's
retention skills. Still, little attention has been given to bilingual populations.
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 8
Recent studies with 24-month-old monolingual and bilingual children have found no significant
differences in disambiguation performance (Byers-Heinlein et al., 2014; Kalashnikova et al., 2018). In
fact, both studies showed evidence that children at this age disambiguate regardless of their language
background. To date, only two studies have examined bilingual children's abilities to retain novel labels
after acquiring the labels through disambiguation (Kalashnikova et al., 2018; Repnik et al., 2021).
Kalashnikova et al. (2018) utilized preferential looking‐while‐listening paradigms to measure the use of
disambiguation and tested immediate retention skills. Even though monolinguals could retain the novel
words at both 18 and 24 months, bilinguals could only do so at 18 months (Kalashnikova et al., 2018).
The authors suggested that by their second year, bilingual children recognize the inefficiency of mutual
exclusivity for word learning; therefore, stop using it for language acquisition and use it instead solely for
disambiguation. This may explain why bilinguals disambiguated at both 18 and 24 months old but failed
to retain the words at 24 months.
In a second, preferential looking-while-listening study, Repnik and colleagues (2021) examined
disambiguation in 18- to 30-month old monolingual and multilingual children. In this study, Repnik and
colleagues included trials where children were trained on novel items and novel disambiguation trials
(i.e., a familiar item vs. a novel item). In the novel training trials, a novel object was presented alone, and
the novel label was repeated (novel trained). There were two types of disambiguation trials, familiar
disambiguation (e.g., a car vs. a ball) and novel disambiguation trials--a novel item and a familiar item
were presented accompanied by a novel label (e.g., dax). During retention trials, children were presented
with two novel objects. The object label was either a trained label or a disambiguation label.
Monolinguals disambiguated at an earlier age than bilinguals. For the trained item, retention was above
chance for both monolingual and multilingual children. For the disambiguated item, retention was above
chance for monolinguals but at chance for multilinguals. Although disambiguation was related to
retention for monolinguals, this was not the case for bilinguals. Vocabulary size was related to bilingual
performance. They found that as vocabulary size increased in bilinguals, both disambiguation and
retention increased. Repnik and colleagues (2021) concluded that the difference in prior learning
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 9
experiences of monolingual and multilingual children shapes the associative network and in-the-moment
learning via disambiguation, and it is the combination of these factors that predicts retention. There were,
however, some limitations to the study. Repnik and colleagues included both bilingual and trilingual
children in the multilingual group. Due to counterbalancing of trial types, some retention trials occurred
before the disambiguation trials. Several open empirical questions remain regarding bilingual exposure
disambiguation and retention.
Current Study
The current study aims to replicate prior work on mutual exclusivity in bilingual children,
expanding past research to include retention trials using a forced-choice paradigm with physical objects.
The study was conducted in the home. According to a reanalysis of a dataset used for a meta-analysis on
the study of mutual exclusivity, including both monolingual and bilingual samples in the developmental
literature (Lewis et al., 2020; visit OSF-link-here for reanalysis scripts), revealed that out of 146 studies
identified, 121 of them (83%) measured children's behaviors in a forced-choice paradigm, and 25 used
eye-tracking. From these 121 studies, 62% of the studies reported using real 3D objects as their stimulus
(see metalab.stanford.edu). That is, the use of forced-choice methods with real objects is common in the
literature (see also Horst et al., 2010; Wilkinson et al., 2003). In addition, the use of this paradigm for the
present study was practical to facilitate participation by children tested in their homes. We examined
bilinguals' mutual exclusivity and retention skills utilizing Kucker and colleagues' (2018) forced-choice
referent selection task and retention test. Kucker and colleagues tested 18-month-olds on four familiar
referent selection trials and four novel referent selection trials. After a five-minute delay, infants were
tested on three retention trials. This challenging task requires infants to select between three items.
Kucker et al. (2018) found monolingual infants picked novel referents almost universally, demonstrating
disambiguation, but showed poor retention.
Importantly, in Kucker et al. (2018), they found that 18-month-old children demonstrated some
level of a novelty bias - choosing the novel foil item on familiar referent trials instead of the target. In
related work (Kucker et al., 2020), they also found that although 24-month-old children performed at
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 10
chance correctly choosing the familiar foil, they did so at levels lower than when no novel item was
present. Following this, performance during the novel referent selection trials in the current study will
measure disambiguation. In contrast, their performance in the familiar referent selection trials will be used
to control for possible novelty bias driving children's disambiguation performance (see Kucker et al.,
2018). Finally, three post-delay retention trials will measure children's abilities to remember the novel
labels. We hypothesized that monolingual 2-year-old children would disambiguate to a greater extent than
their bilingual peers, similar to that found in prior work (Byers-Heinlein & Werker, 2009, 2013; Houston-
Price et al., 2010). For the retention trials, we predicted that we would replicate preferential-looking
studies’ findings with bilinguals (Kalashnikova et al., 2018; Repnik et al., 2021), showing that even if
bilinguals do exhibit disambiguation, they will show lower retention scores than their monolingual peers.
Additionally, we hypothesized that bilingual children's high performance in the disambiguation and
retention trials would be associated with lower translation equivalent scores but larger vocabulary sizes.
Methods
The present study was conducted according to guidelines laid down in the Declaration of Helsinki,
with written informed consent obtained from a parent or guardian for each child before any assessment or
data collection. All procedures involving human subjects in this study were approved by the Institutional
Review Board at Georgetown University.
Participants
A total of 146 24-month-old children (72 females) from families in the DMV area participated
from 2016-2019 as part of an ongoing longitudinal study. Children were included in the analyses if they
completed at least two trials for each Referent Selection type (Familiar & Novel) and at least 1 Retention
trial. Thus, the final sample consisted of 125 children (64 females). Eighty-one (81) children were
classified as monolinguals (44 females, M = 25.69mo, SD = 0.95, range = 24.03-27.97mo) and 44
age
children were classified as bilinguals (20 females, M = 25.44mo, SD = 0.67, range = 24.17-27.97mo).
age
Sixteen additional children were dropped due to being out of the age range (2), fussiness (2), parental
interference (2), experimenter error (1), language information missing (1), no significant exposure to
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 11
provides information for the final sample.
Most of the parents (99.2%) reported their child's race and ethnicity. 76% reported their child to
be Caucasian, 20% Mixed, 1.6% Asian/Asian American, 0.8% Native American, and 0.8%
African/African American. Caregivers identified 28 children as Latino/a. Participants were primarily from
college-educated families, with a mean number of 17.6 years (both parents' average; SD = 1.36 years) of
education. The families were middle- to high-income, with an average yearly income of $88,432.30 (SD =
$28,558.11) for monolinguals and $87,772 (SD = $33,539.63) for bilinguals, based on median household
income zip code for the family’s postcode at the time of participation.
Materials
Bilingualism Measure
Parents were interviewed about who spoke to the child (i.e., mother, father, siblings, nanny,
daycare, etc.), in which language, and for how many hours per day, using the Language Exposure
Assessment Tool (LEAT, DeAnda et al., 2016). Following previous studies (Barr et al., 2020; Brito &
Barr, 2012; Brito et al., 2014, 2015), if a child was exposed to a second language for at least 20% of the
time since birth, they were classified as "bilingual." Otherwise, they were labeled "monolingual." See
MacArthur Communicative Development Inventory Words and Sentences Short Form (MCDI)
We used the Level II form to measure children's productive vocabulary for the dominant and non-
their child produced or understood within a week of the study. Due to the wide variety of languages,
language-specific vocabulary measures were not feasible. Instead, the online survey prompted parents to
indicate all the languages the child is exposed to at any time since birth. The survey was created to use the
said list of languages and prompted parents with the same English-word list as many times as languages
they listed. Each time parents were instructed to select the language-equivalent words their child could
produce.
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 12
Stimuli
Three items familiar to the child were selected (duck, ball, cup) and verified by the parents as
word ducky instead of duck). These same three items were used throughout the task to ensure that children
were indeed familiar with the labels for these specific exemplars and thus could engage in mutual
exclusivity (see also Kucker et al., 2018; Horst & Samuelson, 2008 for similar paradigms). Eight
Four novel words were chosen (roke, cheem, zylow, lorp) from the Novel Object and Unusual Name
(NOUN) Database (Horst & Hout, 2016). Chosen words had no meaning or phonetic similarities to words
in the most common languages spoken by families in previous studies (Barr et al., 2020; Brito et al.,
2012, 2014, 2015).
Procedure
All sessions took place in the children's homes. The majority of the sessions were performed in
The experimenter re-prompted the child if necessary but did not provide feedback. A second experimenter
prepared the toys on the tray out of sight of the child. The parents were directed to refrain from interacting
with the child. Children were presented with a series of trials and asked to retrieve 1 of 3 items from a
(alternating familiar and novel referent selection trials).
Familiar/ Warm-Up Trials (n=4)
The task started with three trials that served as a warm-up to familiarize the child with the task
and ensure they understood the instructions. On each trial, the child was presented with the three known
items on a tray side-by-side. The primary experimenter asked the child to retrieve one item from the tray
(e.g., "Can you get the cup?"). Target locations and objects were randomized. Each object was the target
once. No praise was given.
Referent Selection Trials (n=8)
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 13
All consisted of two familiar items (from the toys used in the Familiar-Warm up trials) and one
novel item. In half of the trials, the target item was familiar (e.g., "Can you get the duck?"; familiar
referent selection). In the other alternating half of the trials, the experimenter asked the child to retrieve a
novel item by name (e.g., "Can you get the zylow?"; Novel Referent Selection). All target items were
asked once, except for one familiar item (duck), which was asked twice.
Break
There was a 5-minute break immediately following referent selection trials. During this time
children played with the experimenter or their own toys. No experimental stimuli were present.
Retention Trials (n=3)
Two novel objects that were targets in the novel referent selection trials were presented along
with a novel item used as a foil during the familiar referent selection trials.
Preference Trial
Finally, as a manipulation check, a preference trial was performed with novel objects previously
used but with no labels. The inclusion of preference trials controlled for the possibility that infants’
referent selection responses are due to preferences for specific objects rather than due to disambiguation
or retention. The experimenter prompted the child with, "Can you get one?" This trial provided a
measurement of children's preferences based on the amount of exposure. It included 1) one novel item
that was never labeled and the child has only seen once in the task, 2) a novel item that had been used as a
target only once in the task (during Novel RS trials), 3) a novel item that had been used as a target twice
(once in Novel RS and once in retention trials). If each item was similarly chosen in a no-label context,
this finding would suggest that preference for specific items was not driving the responses.
Results
Coding
consisted of timestamping each trial, indicating the pieces laid out on the trays, the label used, final
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 14
choice, and any comments associated with the task. We used R (Version 3.6.1; R Core Team, 2019) for
all analyses.
Inter-coder Reliability
A secondary coder coded 60 videos for reliability purposes using the primary coder's timestamps
for each trial. Inter-coder agreement on child's response (k = 0.94) was acceptable above 0.70 (Landis &
Koch, 1977).
Dependent Variables
To replicate previous work with this task, we divided the total number of times the child chose
the target item by the total valid trials per trial type (Invalid = child not answering or refusing to engage
with stimuli after at least three attempts from experimenter to attend to the experimental stimuli) to obtain
independent scores for familiar (warm-up) trials, familiar referent selection trials, Novel Referent
Selection trials, and Retention trials. We refer to this score as "Percent Correct Score."
For the mixed-effect regressions, we used a binary variable denoting whether the child accurately chose
the target item (1) or not (0) trial by trial – "Correct Choice."
Preliminary Analyses
Preliminary analyses were conducted to determine whether there was differential attrition
between monolinguals and bilinguals, differences in child/family characteristics (age, gender, and SES
with parental years of education and income as proxies), differences in English and total vocabulary, and
differences in translation equivalents (both total and proportion). We used logistic regression and t-tests to
conduct these preliminary analyses.
Attrition Rates
As indicated by preliminary logistic regressions, the attrition rates did not differ as a function of
bilingual status (Familiar referent selection trials: χ2(1) = 0.84, p = 0.36; novel referent selection trials:
χ2(1) = 0.004, p = 0.95; Retention trials: χ2(1) = 0.11, p = 0.74) and therefore missing data was not a
function of bilingual status.
Child and Family Characteristics
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 15
Monolingual and bilingual children did not differ in age, female/male ratio, or SES (with parental years of
English Vocabulary
Based on the MCDI, monolingual and bilingual children differed significantly on English
significantly higher (M = 66.22, SD = 22.64) compared to bilinguals (M = 53.44, SD = 27.19 ), t(63.76) =
2.11, p = 0.02, d = 0.51. Fourteen children did not have a completed MCDI for English and thus were not
included in these analyses.
Total Vocabulary
To calculate the total number of words children knew, their raw MCDI scores for their L1 and L2
were summed. Monolingual (M = 70.77, SD = 24.38) and bilingual (M = 91.11, SD = 48.83) children had
children did not have a completed MCDI for any of their languages and thus were not included in
vocabulary analyses.
Translation Equivalents (TEs)
To calculate the total number of translation equivalents, we added the number of MCDI words
parents selected for both the child's first and second language. Since some monolinguals had some
exposure to multiple languages, translation equivalents were created for them for descriptive purposes (M
= 4.11, SD = 9.45). For the bilingual group, the average number of translation equivalents was 34 words
(SD = 27.83). To match Byers-Heinlein & Werker (2013)'s approach, the proportion of translation
equivalents was included and calculated for both Monolinguals (M = 5.32, SD = 9.79) and Bilinguals (M
= 30.05, SD = 14.40) by dividing the number of translation equivalents by the total words selected for L1
and L2.
Traditional Analyses
First, we conducted analyses consistent with prior literature using this paradigm. The findings per
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 16
the performance was above chance for each group and then compared monolingual and bilingual groups
to each other. We ran Levine's test on each analysis to test for equal variance and adjusted degrees of
freedom if unequal variances were detected; none were (range p's 0.10- 0.81).
Familiar (Warm-Up) Trials
Monolinguals performed well on familiar trials, selecting the target 83.98% of the time, well
above chance (33.33%), t(76) = 16.83, p < .00001, d = 1.92. Bilinguals selected the target item 80.23% of
the time, well above chance (33.33%), t(42) = 10.24, p < .00001, d = 1.56. Children’s accuracy
identifying the familiar target was high regardless of language status.
There was no significant difference between monolinguals (M = 83.98, SD = 26.41) and bilinguals (M =
80.23, SD = 30.05), t(118) = .71, p = 0.48, d = 0.14.
Familiar Referent Selection Trials (Familiar RS)
Monolinguals selected the target 46.6% of the time, above chance (33.33%), t(80) = 3.05, p =
0.003, d = 0.34. Bilinguals selected the target 43.37% of the time, not above chance (33.33%), t(43) =
1.75, p = 0.09, d = 0.26. When comparing monolinguals (M = 46.6, SD = 39.17) and bilinguals (M =
43.37, SD = 38.06), there was no significant difference, t(123) = 0.45, p = 0.66, d = 0.08.
Additionally, we assessed their performance when they failed to choose the target item in order to
identify whether their bias was towards the other familiar item or the non-labeled novel item.
Monolinguals selected the novel object 85.38% of the times significantly above chance (50%), t(60) =
9.99, p < 0.001, d = 1.28. Bilinguals selected the novel object 86.81% of the times significantly above
chance (50%), t(35) = 7.52, p < 0.001, d = 1.25. When children did not choose the familiar object in
familiar RS trials, there was no significant difference, t(95) = -0.24, p = 0.81, d = 0.05, between
monolinguals’ (M = 85.38, SD = 27.67) and bilinguals’ (M = 86.81, SD = 29.37) rate of selecting the
novel toy. Both monolinguals and bilinguals who failed to retrieve the target item did so due to a bias
towards the novel item.
Novel Referent Selection trials (Novel RS)
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 17
Monolinguals selected the novel object 88.37% of the times significantly above chance (33.33%),
t(80) = 20.83, p < .00001, d = 2.31. Bilinguals selected the novel object 89.39% of the times significantly
above chance (33.33%), t(43) = 20.06, p < .00001, d = 3.02. There was no significant difference between
monolinguals (M = 88.37, SD = 23.78) and bilinguals (M = 89.39, SD = 18.53), t(123)= -0.25, p = 0.81, d
= 0.05.
Retention Trials
Monolinguals selected the novel object 51.23% of the time significantly above chance (33.33%),
t(80) = 5.37, p < .00001, d = 0.6. Bilinguals selected the novel object 37.88% of the time, not
significantly above chance (33.33%), t(43) = 1.16, p = 0.25, d = 0.17. Monolinguals performed better in
retention trials (M = 51.23, SD = 30.02) than bilinguals (M = 37.88, SD= 26.01), t(123) = 2.47, p = 0.01, d
= 0.47.
We also analyzed children's performance when they failed to correctly choose the target novel
item in order to test whether the lack of retention was due to a bias towards the never-labeled novel
object. Monolinguals selected the non-labeled novel object 33.82% of the time, significantly below
chance (50%), t(67) = -3.2, p < 0.002, d = 0.39. Bilinguals selected the not-labeled novel object 43.65%
of the times not significantly different from chance (50%), t(41) = -1.04, p = 0.30, d = 0.16. When
children failed to choose the right item during retention, monolinguals did not do so due to a bias for the
novel object that has never been labeled. They chose the other labeled object at a higher rate. There was
no significant difference (t(108) = -1.23, p = 0.22, d = 0.24) between monolinguals’ (M = 33.82, SD =
41.63) and bilinguals’ (M = 43.65, SD = 39.47) rate of selecting the never-labeled novel toy. This rate of
choice was not significantly different between the language groups even though bilinguals were not
significantly below chance.
Preference Trial
The preference trial served as a manipulation check to rule out the possibility that children
preferred particular novel objects in a non-labeling context. Seventy-four monolingual and 36 bilingual
children completed the preference trial. There was no significant difference in the distribution in the
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 18
preference of items among monolinguals (χ2(2) = 1.91, p = 0.38), or bilinguals (χ2(2) = 2.69, p = 0.26).
This finding indicates that there was not a stimulus effect and that monolinguals and bilinguals did not
differ on their preference distribution for the specific items used. Therefore differences in referent
selection and retention cannot be attributed to a preference for specific items. The distribution of items
chosen in the preference trial was not significantly different between monolinguals and bilinguals (χ2(2)
= 1.54, p = 0.46). Our results indicate that in the absence of a label, search was random.
Vocabulary, Disambiguation, and Retention
Children's ability to disambiguate novel labels (% correct novel RS) was not significantly
correlated with either total vocabulary size (r = 0.15 p = 0.11), number of translation equivalents (r =
0.13, p = 0.19), or proportion of translation equivalents (r = 0.05 p = 0.65). In addition, retention of novel
labels (% Correct Retention Trials) was not significantly correlated with either Total Vocabulary size (r =
0.04, p = 0.67), number of translation equivalents (r = -0.07, p = 0.48), or proportion of translation
equivalents (r = -0.14 p = 0.16).
Stepwise Multiple Regression Framework
Since the previous analyses did not demonstrate a significant difference between Monolinguals
and Bilinguals for their Referent Selection trials, the following stepwise multiple regressions focus only
on the Retention trials using the Percent Correct Score as the dependent variable.
Binary Language Status
A stepwise multiple regression predicting children's percent correct in the Retention trials was
conducted with all predicting variables on the first step (Binary Language Status, Novel Referent
Selection Scores, Familiar Referent Selection scores, and Total Vocabulary Size). We used the stepAIC
function in the MASS R package to select the best model using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC).
Only Bilingual Status entered into the equation at the final step of the analysis (AIC = 774.60), F(1,113) =
4.63, p = .03. There was a main effect of language status, with bilinguals scoring significantly lower than
Bilingual Exposure as a Continuum
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 19
To further qualify the association between second language exposure and retention, a both-
direction stepwise multiple regression predicting percent Correct for Retention trials was also conducted
with all predicting variables from earlier but using children's L2 exposure instead of the binary bilingual
status variable. Only L2 exposure entered into the equation at the final step of the analysis (AIC =
774.18), F(1,113) = 5.07, p = .03. For every 10% increase in exposure to a second language, children's
Mixed-Effects Logistic Regression Framework
As opposed to the more traditional framework reported above, the mixed-effects regression
framework allowed us to model trial-level data from individual infants rather than analyzing averages
from their proportion scores. All children who met the criteria contributed to this analysis. Our full fixed
effects modeled the main variables of interest: Bilingualism (either binary or continuous), Trial type (for
referent selection trials only), Total Vocabulary, and Translational Equivalents (for referent selection
trials and retention only) with participant and trial number as our random effects. However, the best
fitting models for each trial type justified by the data were selected comparing AIC values using the
Performance package (Seedorff et al., 2019).
To assess performance against chance for this trial-by-trial framework, the best fitting models
with the trial type and language group of interest set as 0 and the other as 1. The significance of the
intercept for each model was then used to assess if accuracy within a condition was greater than chance
(33%); because the default intercept assumes .5 as chance, an adjusted intercept was calculated by
subtracting ln(1/2) and dividing by the standard error to get a new Z score.
Familiar/Warm-up Trials
The best-fitting models for the familiar/warm-up trials were:
correct_choice ~ bilingualism(binary or L2 %) + total_vocabulary + (1|participant) + (1|trialnumber)
This suggests that the trial performance did not vary by language status (Monolingual vs. Bilingual), L2
% exposure, or total vocabulary size.
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 20
Referent Selection Trials
The best fitting models for the referent selection trials were:
correct_choice ~ bilingualism(binary or L2 %)*trial_type + total_vocabulary_centered + child_gender +
parents_education_centered +(1|participant) + (1|trialnumber)
models. Children performed better during the Novel Referent Selection trials compared to the Familiar
Referent Trials. However, there was no significant difference between monolinguals and bilingual
children in either trial type. This suggests that the performance on Novel and Familiar referent selection
trials did not vary by language status (Monolingual vs. Bilingual) or L2 % exposure. In addition, the
centered variable for Total Vocabulary size was significant. In general, children with greater total
vocabulary performed better regardless of trial type or language group. Bilingual and monolingual
children performed significantly above chance during the Novel Referent Selection trials but only
We then investigated the role translation equivalents (TEs) would play in these trials by filtering
only bilingual children and having TEs (Total or Proportion) as our variable of interest (see a similar
approach in Houston-Price et al., 2010 and Byers-Heinlein et al., 2013). As with the previous models,
there was only a significant effect on trial type when Total TEs were included. Children performed better
during novel referent selection trials than familiar referent selection trials. Translation equivalents could
not predict bilingual children's performance during the familiar and novel referent selection trials even
Retention Trials
The best fitting model for the retention trials was:
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 21
correct_choice ~ bilingualism(binary or L2 %) + total_vocabulary_centered +
Familiar_RS_%corr_score_centered + Novel_RS_%corr_score_centered +(1|participant) +
(1|trialnumber)
outperforming their bilingual peers. In the second model, greater exposure to a second language predicted
lower retention performance. Children's performance during the Familiar and Novel Referent Selection
trials did not predict their performance during the Retention trials. Additionally, only monolingual
We then investigated the role translation equivalents (TEs) would play in these trials by filtering
only bilingual children with Total TEs and Proportion of TEs variables as our variables of interest. There
were no significant main effects even when L2 percent exposure was included. Translation equivalents
Discussion
Our hypotheses were partially supported. Monolingual and bilingual 24-month-old infants did not
differ on familiar or novel referent selection but did differ at retention. Specifically, while monolingual
infants showed some retention, bilingual infants performed at chance, performing significantly worse than
their monolingual peers. These findings extend Kucker and colleagues (2018), who demonstrated good
disambiguation performance on novel referent selection but no retention at 18-months. We also find some
evidence of a novelty bias on the familiar referent selection trials in both groups - a finding similar to that
found in Kucker and colleagues (2018, 2020). This novelty bias suggests that despite knowing an
individual word well, children’s lexical networks are still fragile, shifting, and developing as their
vocabulary grows during the second year of life. Children continued to do well on the novel referent
selection trials, however. The current findings of good disambiguation here and greater retention in 24-
month-olds suggest that for monolinguals, retention might increase over time following disambiguation.
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 22
These results also replicate Kalashnikova and colleagues (2018) results, where 24-month-old
monolinguals and bilinguals diverged on their retention patterns following disambiguation in a looking
paradigm (see also Repnik et al., 2021). The current findings contribute methodologically to the literature
by utilizing the forced-choice paradigm, a more rigorous test of disambiguation with multiple items, and a
delayed retention test. Some studies have argued that object manipulation from using 3D items allows the
child to form rich representations during learning (Kucker et al., 2020, Pereira et al., 2014; Perry, 2015).
It is then easier to attach labels to rich representations during a semi-naturalistic dynamic learning
situation, like our task. However, these richer representations were not associated with better retention in
bilingual infants.
Despite differences in our methodology, our findings were consistent with those of Kalashnikova
et al. (2018), who used a two-item preferential looking task and immediate retention, and those of Repnik
and colleagues (2021) who also used a two-item preferential looking task with a 5-minute delay. In
addition, the use of a continuous bilingual measure allowed us to explore individual variation in language
experience. Bilingual exposure varied greatly in our sample, as demonstrated by the L2%. Our finding
that more balanced bilingual infants (as indexed by %L2) showed worse retention, even after a 5-minute
break, is consistent with Kalashnikova and colleagues’ theory that bilinguals might discount the utility of
disambiguation for encoding novel labels. They also hypothesized that children with higher translation
equivalents might show poorer retention because of their experience with disambiguation failure. Unlike
previous research (Byers-Heinlein & Werker, 2013), we did not find that individual differences in
translation equivalents (measured either as total TEs or proportions) were associated with retention.
However, a limitation to our protocol was that we used the MCDI short-form, which includes only 100
words reducing the potential variability in the translation equivalent measure. Future research should
continue to examine the role that translation equivalents may play in retention.
Although discounting might explain why retention failed, behavioral measures indicated that
monolinguals and bilinguals succeeded similarly well in disambiguation trials. Though disambiguation
behavior might look the same in monolinguals and bilinguals, the underlying representations and
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 23
perceptual processing could potentially differ. That is, selecting a target from an array requires, at a
minimum, the exclusion of competitors and focus on the target. Excluding a competitor or foil item to
choose a novel requires simply that the other item be minimally familiar (just less so than the target); it
does not require deep knowledge or strong semantic representations to do so. For instance, Horst et al.
(2011) found that children can disambiguate a “super novel” item from novel ones that were familiarized
for less than 30 seconds. Likewise, the lexical trace that is laid down due to a child choosing a target can
vary widely. The strength of that lexical trace is dependent upon many factors from the amount of
repetition (McMurray et al., 2012), knowledge of competitors (Kucker et al., 2020; Grassman et al.,
2020), and even the saliency of the foils (Pomper & Saffran, 2018). Bilingual children here may have
failed to retain novel word-referent pairs because the labels for the familiar referents were less well
represented in their lexicon due to competition from L2 labels - prior work suggests that the competition
present during a referent selection trial predicts the strength of the association formed (McMurray et al.,
2012; see also Kucker et al., 2020; Repnik et al., 2021). As such, the word-referent links between the
familiar items and their labels were strong enough to facilitate real-time disambiguation but too weak to
support robust retention, much like is the case with younger 18-month-olds. Although prior work suggests
weaker knowledge can facilitate rich encoding in some cases (Kucker et al., 2020), previous work has
studied monolinguals for whom "weak knowledge" is defined as both a weak label and a weak
representation of an item (Kucker, & Samuelson, 2012). Bilingual children here may have a weak
representation of the English phonological word-form, but still, a rich representation of the referent,
making it possible to engage in mutual exclusivity but difficult to draw on the full lexical network in the
same way to support retention.
To address these questions, eye tracking could examine whether visual attention allocation differs
across monolingual and bilingual infants at different phases of disambiguation and retention. Presumably,
if a word is less familiar to an infant, bilingual infants may use more attentional processing to encode,
leading to less robust disambiguation and retention. On the other hand, the representational strength of
familiar labels could be improved through repetition of the object-word pairings prior to the task. It is also
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 24
feasible that bilingual infants may solve the disambiguation trials using visual perceptual discrimination
alone - a possibility that such moment-to-moment tests may tap. That is, knowledge for the familiar foils
may be so weak infants relied on perceptual novelty to disambiguate instead of vocabulary - selecting the
most novel item regardless of label. Likewise, as proposed above, the lexical network on bilingual
children may be structured differently from monolingual children. Computational models may help
further probe the underlying competitive process supporting these children's word-referent mappings and
retention (such as that used by McMurray et al., 2012).
Finally, Repnik and colleagues (2021) suggested that researchers ought to examine the role of
other word learning strategies that bilinguals may rely upon. Prior deferred imitation studies have shown
that bilingual 24-month-olds outperform monolinguals on memory flexibility tasks. In deferred imitation
tasks, during flexibility trials, an experimenter demonstrates target actions on one set of items, but at test,
infants are presented with perceptually different but functionally equivalent items. Brito and colleagues
(2014) found 24-month-olds monolinguals relied on labels, but bilinguals did not (see Barr et al. 2020 for
similar results in 18 month-olds). Taken together, memory flexibility findings suggest that bilinguals may
rely more on visual perceptual features and use labels differently than monolinguals. Critically, relying on
perceptual features for disambiguation does not typically support word retention in younger 18-month-old
children (Kucker et al., 2018) but does facilitate memory flexibility in 18- and 24-months-olds (Barr et
al., 2020; Brito et al., 2014). However, because the field has relied on cross-sectional approaches, the
developmental trajectory of both mutual exclusivity and memory flexibility is unknown.
In conclusion, our results showing that bilingual toddlers display poorer retention after word-
learning in a disambiguation task than monolinguals is consistent with others in the field (Kalashnikova et
al., 2018; Repnik et al., 2021). According to dynamic systems theory, differences in early word learning
may depend on differences in word learning strategies deployed at the moment, as well as differences in
longer-term encoding of the associative semantic network that supports the child’s stable lexical access. It
may be that differences in the effectiveness of word-learning strategies in combination with the strength
of the associations in the underlying lexicon that leads to differences between monolingual and bilingual
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 25
retention. Despite these differences, bilingual children rapidly build vocabularies that are structured by
overlapping translation equivalents. Future research is still needed to examine alternate heuristics and
learning strategies that are effectively deployed by bilingual children, including nonverbal processing
differences.
MUTUAL EXCLUSIVITY: MONOLINGUAL & BILINGUAL 2-YEAR-OLDS 26