COALITIONAL COGNITION 1
Causes and Consequences of Coalitional Cognition
Mina Cikara
Harvard University
Invited, Advances in Experimental Social Psychology
I am very grateful to Joel Eduardo Martinez and David Pietraszewski for their insightful
comments on drafts of this paper. This work was generously supported by the National Science
Foundation (BCS-1551559 and a CAREER award, BCS-1653188 awarded to MC).
Mina Cikara
Department of Psychology
Harvard University
33 Kirkland St.
William James Hall 1420
Cambridge MA 02138
mcikara@fas.harvard.edu
COALITIONAL COGNITION 2
What is a group? How do we know to which groups we belong? How do we assign others to
groups? A great deal of theorizing across the social sciences has conceptualized ‘groups’ as
synonymous with ‘categories,’ however there are a number of limitations to this approach:
particularly for making predictions about novel intergroup contexts or about how intergroup
dynamics will change over time. Here I join a growing chorus of researchers striving to
systematize the conditions under which a generalized coalitional psychology gets activated—the
recognition of another’s capacity for and likelihood of coordination not only with oneself but
with others. First I review some recent developments in the cognitive processes that give rise to
the inference of coalitions and group-biased preferences (even in the absence of category labels).
Then I review downstream consequences of inferences about capacity and likelihood of
coordination for valuation, emotions, attribution, and inter-coalitional harm. Finally I review
examples of how we can use these psychological levers to attenuate intergroup hostility.
COALITIONAL COGNITION 3
Causes and Consequences of Coalitional Cognition
“[It] is safe to assume that there cannot be separate psychologies of prejudice in relation to this
or that group, but that they are specific cases of the general picture of prejudice.” - Sherif, 1948
(p. 64)
1. INTRODUCTION
Groups are a fundamental organizing principle of our psychology and behavior. Our
tendency to carve up the world into ‘us’ and ‘them’ is the source of our greatest triumphs but
also our greatest tragedies. Identifying and coordinating with fellow group members allows
people to satisfy their own material and psychological needs (Allport, 1954) and to develop
norms and practices that bolster our most cherished social institutions (e.g., Keltner, 2009;
Tomasello, 2009). However, group-living is a double-edged sword (Bornstein, 2003; Halevy,
Chou, Cohen, & Bornstein, 2010; Yzerbyt & Demoulin, 2010). Even under the most mundane
conditions, people prefer in-group members to out-group members, (Brewer, 1979; LeVine &
Campbell, 1972; Mullen, Brown, & Smith, 1992; Perdue, Dovidio, Gurtman, & Tyler, 1990),
treat in-group members more favorably (Hewstone, Rubin, & Willis, 2002), allocate more
resources to in-group members (Tajfel, Billig, Bundy, & Flament, 1971), and exert more effort
on behalf of the in-group’s goals (Ellemers, De Gilder, & Haslam, 2004). When intergroup
relations become more acrimonious, violence and conflict abound (Cohen & Insko, 2008).
According to one statistic, more than 170 million civilians were killed in the 20th century by acts
of genocide, war, and other forms of group conflict (Woolf & Hulsizer, 2004). Given how
consequential groups are and how much time and resources we have dedicated to studying them,
it is surprising that a deep understanding of “groups” as a general concept still eludes us
(Pietraszewski, in press).
What is a group? How do we know to which groups we belong? How do we assign others
to groups? Driven in part by the prominence of social identity theory (SIT; Tajfel & Turner,
1979) and the minimal groups paradigm, the contemporary intergroup literature has emphasized
the role of category-membership (e.g., Black vs. White people; Rattlers vs. Eagles) over
coalitional structure (i.e., friends vs. foes). This approach is limited, however, because social
categories aren’t fixed entities (Zárate, Reyna, & Alvarez, 2019). For one, the associations with
specific categories change over time (e.g., when Italian and Irish immigrants became ‘White’ in
American in the early 20th century) or categories may fracture forming new categories (Moya &
Scezla, 2015). Allegiances between categories can change (e.g., compare Americans’
relationship to Germans now versus 80 years ago) which naturally changes the nature of attitudes
and behavior that unfold in those intergroup contexts. Third, not all categories carry with them
the psychological potency of purposive groups (e.g., we have never been concerned about an
uprising of Brunettes—but it is 2020 as I write this so we may yet be surprised). Thus studying
categories is unlikely to get us very far in the pursuit of understanding the general concept of
‘groups.’
Before SIT there were relationship-based theories—specifically theories centered on
perceptions of intergroup threat. Realistic Group Conflict Theory proposed that competition for
access to limited resources is a central driver of conflict between groups (Levine & Campbell,
1972; Sherif, 1966). Since its introduction, RGCT has been extended to predict that mere
perception of threat (even in the absence of actual threat) is sufficient to ignite and sustain
COALITIONAL COGNITION 4
conflict (Esses, Jackson, & Armstrong, 1998; Stephan & Stephan, 2017). In complement,
Symbolic Threat Theory (Kinder & Sears, 1981) posited that intergroup conflict can also result
from conflicting values and beliefs between groups. Broadly, the distinction is that groups who
consume resources or threaten one’s general welfare pose realistic threats whereas groups whose
values and ideologies are at odds with our group’s pose symbolic threats. More recent theorizing
suggests that threat does not even need to be linked to social identity or groups per se to have
significant consequences for intergroup dynamics. The threat may arise from some feature of the
environment (e.g., disease, resource scarcity), which then impacts perceptions of out-groups and
their members as threats (Schaller & Neuberg, 2012; Krosch, Tyler, & Amodio, 2017). I’ll refer
to these as coalitional accounts because they speak to the roots of intergroup discrimination and
conflict invariant to the groups in question.
There is long standing debate regarding whether prejudice and conflict is better
accounted for by a category-based account or a coalitional account (Scheepers, Spears, Doosje,
& Manstead, 2006; Yamagishi et al., 1999). However I’d argue which approach makes the most
sense depends largely on one’s aims. If one’s goal is to maximize variance explained in an
outcome within a particular intergroup context in a particular space and time, then one may be
best served by accounting for the particulars of the groups in question (e.g., specific histories
between groups, relative group status/power in that moment, stereotypes associated with each
group, respectively). However, if one’s goal is to make more generalized predictions about novel
intergroup contexts or about how intergroup dynamics—even among specific, existing groups—
may change going forward, one may be better served by identifying the contextual features and
psychological interdependencies that imbue collections of individuals with the status of
purposive groups or coalitions (Balliet et al., 2017; De Dreu, Gross, Fariña Ma, 2020;
Pietraszewski, Tooby, Cosmides, 2014; Pietraszewski, 2016; 2020; Yamagishi & Kiyonari,
2000). It is noteworthy that in even in illustrations of purportedly “pure” category-based
discrimination there are coalitional features at play. For example, the resource allocation task
used in the classic Tajfel et al. (1971) minimal groups paradigm had built into it interdependence
across participants, because each person’s payout was determined by fellow in-group and out-
group members’ behavior. As such, many have countered that even some minimal group
findings can be re-cast as byproducts of a coalitional calculus (Gaertner & Schopler, 1998; Rabie
Schot, & Visser, 1989; Yamagishi & Kiyonari, 2000).
Here I join this growing chorus of researchers striving to systematize the conditions
under which coalitional psychology gets activated: the recognition of another’s capacity for and
likelihood of coordination not only with oneself but with others. More specifically, by detection
of coordination I mean believing that another is able and willing (or not) to engage in
behavior, taking into account your and others’ welfare1. First I review some recent
developments in the cognitive processes that give rise to the inference of coalitions and group-
biased preferences (even in the absence of category labels). Then I review downstream
consequences of inferences about capacity and likelihood of coordination for valuation,
1 Note that this is more specific than merely having common goals. For example, we may have
similar preferences that give rise to a common goal: we both like cookies so we’ll work together
to find some. But what if we’re only able to find one cookie? Now the resource becomes a
source of competition which may easily dismantle our cooperative stance. Coordination includes
within it expectations of considerations of one another’s welfare and corresponding reciprocity
(Yamagishi & Kiyonari, 2000).
COALITIONAL COGNITION 5
emotions, attribution, and inter-coalitional harm. Finally I review examples of how we might use
these psychological levers to attenuate intergroup hostility.
2. CAUSES
2.1 Moving away from categories toward coalitions
Before any consequences of coalitional cognition can be rendered, people have to
identify others as in-group or out-group members. This process of social categorization is unique
compared to non-social categorization because social categorization and identification are
intimately intertwined—we do not just sort people into categories the way we do fruits and
vegetables, we sort them into in-groups and out-groups, which are egocentrically defined: those
to which I do or do not belong.
Thus one process by which people may determine whether someone is an in-group
member is via judgments of similarity to one’s self on a feature that is relevant to the current
context. Among the most widely studied features are skin tone, language, nation of origin,
display of symbols signaling religious or sports team affiliation, and for good reason. These
features can become associated with expectations of capacity for and likelihood of coordination
(or conflict) not only with oneself but with others (Pietraszewski, 2013).
There are, however, many cases where shared category-membership fails to predict
coordination. One such example is the Queen Bee effect (Staines, Tavris, & Jayaratne, 1974).
This refers to a phenomenon in which successful women not only fail to promote other people
who share a female identity, they are particularly punitive toward them. One explanation for this
pattern is that the successful women had to fight negative stereotypes about femininity to ascend
to their current ranks, and so they come to denigrate that aspect of their identity—for example,
they characterize themselves in more masculine terms (for review see Derks, Van Laar,
Ellemers, 2016). They subsequently become active gatekeepers against those who don't
denounce their feminine identity—for example being even less likely to support the hiring or
promotion of female-identifying colleagues (e.g., Derks, Ellemers et al., 2011; Derks, Van Laar
et al., 2011). This example highlights one of the limitations in terms of thinking about social
categories as meaningful groups; because people within a given category can, by virtue of
surviving in these structures, become the greatest weapon against their fellow category-group
members. Nor is this phenomenon unique to gender (Huddy, 2001): consider as other examples,
Hispanic/Latinx Immigrations and Customs Enforcement officers, the adage “not all skinfolk is
kinfolk,” or widespread confusion as to how so many Latinx voters supported Trump in the 2020
election. Research treating demographic categories as purposive groups will often run into these
explanatory limitations and may ironically end up reinforcing stereotypes and the belief that
categories are social monoliths (Brick, Hood, Ekroll, & de-Wit, in press; Martinez & Paluck,
2020). If similarity is a poor cue on which to base group inferences, on what else might we rely?
Classic social psychological theories of group perception and entitativity2 remind us that
in addition to similarity there are several other dimensions by which groups may be defined,
2 While the work on entitativity is central to this inquiry, I argue that it lacks predictive power.
Dimensions like similarity and proximity give rise to increased attributions of entitativity but
where do judgments of, for example, similarity and common fate come from? Similarity on what
dimensions? Is common fate an antecedent to or consequence of grouping? All of the different
types of groups that have been characterized by work on entitativity—e.g., intimacy, task, or
COALITIONAL COGNITION 6
including common fate within groups (Campbell, 1958). Common fate refers to conditions under
which individual group members’ outcomes are interdependent (e.g., group members share
exposure to threat or benefit). Not only does common fate increase perceptions of group
cohesion within groups (Hamilton & Sherman, 1996), it promotes greater intergroup bias and
discrimination between groups (Gaertner & Schopler, 1998); therefore common fate appears to
be a relatively stronger cue to group inference than similarity. Indeed, when similarity and
common fate are pit against one another, common fate is a better predictor of behavior. For
example, when group member similarity, proximity, and common fate are independently
manipulated, common fate is the only significant predictor of competitive, group-based
aggression in the prisoner’s dilemma game (Insko, Wildschut, & Cohen, 2013). To be clear,
forces such as common fate can be and often are martialed to imbue mere categories with
coalitional potency. For example, when a class of people are systematically subjugated and
oppressed by a dominant class (e.g., the oppression and brutalization of Black Americans by
White Americans) their category takes on coalitional status via their common fate at the hand of
the oppressing class, but not because there is something intrinsic to the category, e.g., ‘Black
people,’ that makes it more monolithic relative to other demographic categories (see related work
on shared experience of discrimination binding multiple minoritized groups; Cortland et al.,
2017).
Thus feeling that one’s outcomes are tied to another’s at the hand of some outside force
(social or otherwise, e.g., a hurricane) can act as a cue to shared group membership but speaking
more specifically to the importance of coordination, people also have strong expectations about
the nature of the interactions and the obligations within and between group members:
specifically that people within groups will cooperate or try harder to coordinate with one another
while reserving obstruction, competition, and harm for out-group members (Balliet et al., 2017;
De Dreu et al. 2020; Kelley & Thibaut, 1978; Pietraszewski, in press; Rhodes & Chalik, 2013;
Yamagishi & Mifune, 2016). Perhaps not surprising then is that even very young children prefer
characters who help others to achieve their goals over those who obstruct those goals (Hamlin,
Wynn, & Bloom, 2007; Kuhlmeier, Wynn, & Bloom, 2003). Note, however, that children only
prefer these characters if they helped intentionally and with knowledge of their interaction
partner’s preferences, suggesting that what children are tracking is the coordination between one
character’s desires and the other character’s response in service of those desires (Hamlin et al.,
2013). In line with this, children use resource sharing as a strong cue to social allegiances: 4 to 9-
year old’s generally believe distributors who give more to agent A than agent B are better friends
with A than B (Liberman & Shaw, 2017). Rather than being outputs of group membership (as
they are framed in the minimal groups’ paradigm) these coordination cues may be the primary
inputs to group inference.
Even cues that are often classified as “arbitrary characteristics” may signal important
information about capacity or willingness to coordinate. For example, language is often cited as
an arbitrary characteristic that guides children’s social preferences—children prefer people who
speak the same language or share their accent (Kinzler, Dupoux, & Spelke, 2007). For young
loose association groups (Lickel et al., 2000)—can be animated to triumph or atrocity (e.g.,
people waiting at the bank, a loose association, may be mobilized by an armed robbery) just like
any of them can be neutralized to indifference. We need a unified theory that can generalize
across these levels and examples and account for the features of the context that give rise to
purposive groups.
COALITIONAL COGNITION 7
children (as well as adults), though, language is anything but arbitrary; communication is an act
of coordination. Said another way, not being able to communicate drastically reduces the
possibility of successful coordination. In line with this characterization, partner accent trumps
other category features, including skin tone, in driving children’s social preferences (Kinzler,
Schutts, DeJesus, & Spelke, 2009). Furthermore, accent, like gender, cannot be overridden by
competing coalitional information the way that race and ethnicity (i.e., skin tone) can
(Pietraszewski & Schwartz, 2014).
Thus even in the absence of threat or competition, the inference of coordination difficulty
or improbability may be sufficient to mark someone as an out-group member. Perhaps more
important, and as noted above, coordination ease (or difficulty) may or may not track with shared
category membership. Finally, people, including very young children, are sensitive to how well
agents coordinate not just with themselves but with others in the environment, indicating that
people are prone to building representations of coordinated coalitions—or social structures—out
in the world rather than just egocentric, dyadic similarities or interdependencies. (As an example
of how early emerging these inter-agent coordination sensitivities are, even infants prefer third-
party characters who obstruct hinderers and assist helpers; Hamlin et al., 2011.)
We set out to test what information people use to build these coalitional representations.
Specifically we tested to what extent people rely on similarity versus latent group structure,
based on observable behavior, to guide their choices of allies in the absence of any category
labels. A mere similarity account predicts that people simply substitute judgments of similarity to
the self on relevant features (e.g., did this person vote for the same candidate I did in the last
election?) to identify allies. An alternative hypothesis is that people’s inferences about coalition
membership may be further improved by integrating information both about how agents relate to
oneself as well as how they relate to one another (e.g., “How well do I get along with Mina?
With Carey? How do they get along with each other?”; Heider, 1958).
We have recently proposed a formal account of social group discovery in which we adopt
a computational model of latent structure learning to move beyond explicit category labels and
dyadic similarity as the sole inputs to social group or coalition representations (Gershman &
Cikara, 2020). Specifically, we examine whether people in addition to tracking dyadic similarity
also build representations of latent groups in the environment via Bayesian inference. If people
represent latent group structure in addition to dyadic similarities, then even when two agents’
choices are equally similar to their own, their decisions should be influenced by the presence of a
third agent that alters the coalitional structure. Importantly, prior models that rely on dyadic
similarity would not predict differential social influence in these cases (because similarity is
equated for the first two agents in question).
In a series of behavioral experiments framed as learning about strangers’ political issue
positions, we tested whether the degree to which participants were willing to align with one of
two agents was affected by the presence of a third agent, who formed a cluster that either did or
On each trial, participants stated their position for or against a political issue, and then predicted
the choices of three other individuals on that same issue. After each prediction, they received
feedback about that individual’s actual choice. Finally, at the end of this learning phase,
participants had to choose with which agent—Agent A or B—they wanted to align themselves
on a “mystery issue.” Critically, Agents A and B agreed with the participant an equal number of
times, making them equally similar to the participant. Depending on the block, however, Agent
C either clustered with Agent B and the participant, or only with Agent B and not the participant.
COALITIONAL COGNITION 8
figures distance is a proxy for similarity. In all panels A and B are equally similar to you, but in the
middle panel C’s placement creates a group that includes both you and B (which increases your
preference for B relative to A), whereas in the right panel C’s placement puts B in a group that does not
include you. Adapted from Lau et al. (2018).
As predicted by a latent structure learning account, participants favored Agent B over
Agent A when C’s placement created a cluster that put the participant in the same group as
Agent B (despite the fact that Agents A and B were equally similar to the participant).
Furthermore, the influence of the latent social groups generalized to other judgments.
Participants also judged Agent B as more competent, moral, and likable than Agent A when
Agent B clustered with the participant versus not. Perhaps most interesting, latent structures
continued to exert an effect on ally-choice behavior even when we provided participants with
explicit group labels that contradicted the latent structure (i.e., always put Agent B in the explicit
out-group).
In a companion fMRI study, similarity and latent structure learning were associated with
distinct neural substrates. Replicating an abundance of earlier work on judgments of similarity to
self and categorization of same-category members (e.g., Denny et al., 2012; Jenkins & Mitchell,
2011; Molenberghs & Morrison, 2012; Morrison et al., 2012), trial-by-trial estimates of
‘allyship,’ based on similarity between participants and each individual agent, recruited vmPFC
specific region within AI overlapped with a region identified by a non-social structure learning
task (Tomov, Dorfman, & Gershman, 2017), suggesting that it supports domain-general structure
representation. Most interesting, however, was that variability in the brain signal from rAI
improved prediction of variability in ally-choice behavior, whereas variability from the pgACC
did not (Lau, Gershman, & Cikara, 2020). Said another way, the neural signals associated with
‘coalitional structure’ representations further explained ally-choice behavior whereas ‘inter-agent
similarity’ representations did not.
COALITIONAL COGNITION 9
similarity model (green), a related feature similarity model (yellow), and the latent structure model (red).
Top: pgACC (at x = 10); Bottom: rAI (at x = 30). Adapted from Lau et al. (2020).
Therefore, we have rapidly accumulating evidence to indicate that judgments of another’s
capacity for and likelihood of coordination not only with oneself but with others drives social
preferences and choice, both in the absence of category labels and in spite of them.
2.2 Inter-collective functional relations as cues to coalitions
Moving beyond dyadic or triadic interactions, functional relations between collectives—
whether sets of people are driven by environmental forces to cooperate, compete, or operate
independent of one another—are powerful arbiters of coalitional boundaries. For example,
cooperation between individuals may (temporarily) change representations of previously marked
out-group members to super-ordinate in-group members (Gaertner et al., 2000; Sherif et al.,
1961). Thus one hypothesis is that people should be more sensitive to cues to functional relations
than same- versus different-category membership. Indeed, there is evidence from both behavioral
(Pietraszewski, Cosmides, & Tooby, 2014; Pietraszewski, in press b) and neuroimaging
experiments that this is the case.
The first wave of neuroimaging studies of social categorization examined participants’
neural responses to same- versus different-category targets (e.g., demarcated by skin tone; for
reviews see Amodio & Cikara, 2020; Ito & Bartholow, 2009; Kutbota, Banaji, & Phelps, 2012).
However, these early investigations of demographic, category-based groups afforded only
limited inferences because the categories were perfectly confounded with differences in the
visual appearance of targets, associated stereotypes and prejudices, perceivers’ familiarity with
COALITIONAL COGNITION 10
the groups in question, and so on. These confounds make it difficult to infer from the findings
which aspects of the results are specific to the categories under investigation versus reflecting
generalized group processes.
One obvious follow up was to directly compare the influence of category versus
coalitional information. With this objective in mind, Van Bavel et al. (2008) assigned White
participants to a minimal mixed-race team consisting of Black and White members and then had
them memorize which people were on their own team versus a different team. Participants then
viewed Black and White, own-team and other-team faces in the scanner. In contrast to the results
documented in studies of neural responses to same-race versus other-race faces—increased
amygdala activity to other-race faces—these participants exhibited greater amygdala activity in
response to same-team faces. There was no main effect of race, nor was this pattern of own-team
bias moderated by target race. Coalitional information dominated. However this work was still
limited in that it was restricted to one coalition (i.e., the Tigers or Lions teams). In the world,
which coalition or group is salient at any given moment is highly context dependent (Ellemers,
Spears, & Doosje, 2002; Gaertner et al., 1989; Turner et al., 1994; Van Bavel & Cunningham,
2011). Moreover, the variety of categories with which humans affiliate is vast and each of these
categories vary on myriad dimensions. So how do we get any traction on generalized group
processes?
By some accounts, categorizing people by specific social categories is a byproduct of
adaptations that evolved for detecting more general coalitional cues: that is, indicators of
functional relations amongst collectives (Pietraszewski et al., 2014; 2020; Sidanius & Pratto,
2001). One thing one would expect to see if this were the case, is a system of representation
distinguishing in-group versus out-group members, invariant to the groups in question. Humans
would have to have a flexible, common neural code for learning about and representing ‘in-
group’ and ‘out-group’ targets, invariant to the particular social category or features along which
group boundaries are drawn (for review, see Cikara & Van Bavel, 2014). On what brain regions
would a common neural code rely? More importantly, what would be the primary structure of the
code (e.g., in-group vs. everyone else, threatening out-group vs. everyone else, distinct codes for
in-group, neutral out-groups, and threatening out-groups)?
To adjudicate among these competing organizational structures, we conducted an fMRI
study that used multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) to test whether participants’ neural
responses associated with thinking about teammates versus competitors (novel teams, created in
the lab) could be used to successfully decode whether they were thinking about political
partisans versus opposition (an unrelated, real-world coalition; Cikara, Van Bavel, Ingbretsen, &
Lau, 2017). Unlike traditional univariate analysis, MVPA allows investigators to examine
different patterns of neural activation within a specific brain region—which may have the same
mean-level of activation and thus go undetected by traditional univariate analysis—and use this
to distinguish separate psychological representations. In this study, we trained a classifier to
encode how people represented the novel teams (i.e., Rattlers vs. Eagles vs. Bears) and then
tested how well the neural data decoded membership along a different coalition: political parties
(i.e., Democrats vs. Republicans vs. Constitutionals). Any region that results in successful cross-
category classification could be said to be representing the higher-order concepts of “us” vs.
“them.”
Across these coalitions, only two regions were associated with successful cross-
categorization: the dorsal ACC/middle cingulate cortex and anterior insula (AI). Interestingly,
the dACC and AI are hubs in the ‘salience network,’ which focuses attention on the most
COALITIONAL COGNITION 11
relevant among internal and external stimuli (both social and non-social) in service of selecting
the most sensible behavioral response (e.g., freeze, fight, flight; Menon & Uddin, 2010). This
pattern of neural representation associated with the in-group is consistent with the hypothesis
that salience, specifically functional significance or evaluation (i.e., will this stimulus help me or
not?), is the primary dimension distinguishing representations of us and them (Fiske, Cuddy, &
Glick, 2007; Fiske, 2018).
More important, this analysis revealed the structure of this neural code: classification
accuracy across coalitions was driven predominantly by the correct classification of in-group
targets, consistent with theories indicating in-group identity and expectations of coordination are
more central than out-group processing to group perception and cognition (Balliet et al., 2014;
Brewer, 1999). It is worth highlighting two points. First, we did not identify a substrate that
differentiated between threatening vs. non-threatening out-group representations, despite the fact
that people are capable of distinguishing among different out-groups; the primacy of “in-group”
observed here may be driven in part by the specifics of this experimental design. Second, the
correct categorization of in-group targets was explained in part by the classifier guessing “in-
group” more often than any other label across all trials. This over-inclusion pattern makes sense
from a statistical learning perspective. People tend to interact more often with people who belong
to the same coalitions (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, & Cook, 2001) therefore it us unsurprising that
their priors would bias them to assume other people belong to their coalition until evidence
indicates otherwise. It is also important to highlight that even though the coalitions featured in
these experiments are competitive, they are not associated with threats to individuals’ physical
safety in any immediate sense. Running the same experiment in social contexts characterized by
threats to physical safety (e.g., Gaza) could very well yield an over-exclusion bias.
Nevertheless, these findings bolster the notion that there is some basic scaffolding
underlying specific inter-coalition interactions on which the details of the relevant categories and
groups get overlaid. Understanding the structure of this basic scaffolding helps to reveal which
features (e.g., expectations of coordination, absence of competition) organize these
representations more generally.
2.3 Addressing some challenges for models of coalitional cognition
Thus one way to think about coalitional cognition is that our main priority is to preserve
ourselves and current coalition members (Balliet et al., 2014; De Dreu et al., 2020) and to be
vigilant to any indicators of threat to the coalition’s security. Said another way, we’re not anti-
specific out-groups, we’re anti-threat (Chang, Krosch, & Cikara, 2018). To state the obvious, the
actual or implied presence of threat or competition should lead to low probability estimates of
desire to coordinate. The moment feelings of threat are activated, they highlight inter-coalitional
boundaries, thereby increasing out-group negativity, out-group homogenization, and in-group
solidarity (McDoom, 2012). This principle is the foundation of the functional approach that
characterizes Realistic Conflict Theory (Campbell, 1965), Intergroup Threat Theory (Stephan &
Stephan, 2017), Social Dominance Theory (Sidanius & Pratto, 2001), and the Stereotype Content
Model (Fiske et al. 2002), to name only a subset of the relevant frameworks. In these
frameworks, there is nothing intrinsic to specific categories that make them threatening, rather it
is (perception of) competition over resources or clashes between value systems that initiate the
“othering” process (Brandt & Crawford, 2020; Esses, Jackson, Dovidio, Hodson, 2005).
However, any model of coalitional psychology will have to answer several questions
which existing accounts do with varying success. First, coalitional boundaries are often
COALITIONAL COGNITION 12
egocentrically defined (“how well will these other people coordinate with me and others in my
coalition?”), so how is it that widely-shared category stereotypes emerge across individuals and
coalitions? Second, a coalitional account would predict that stereotypes should change as
functional relations change among coalitions, so why is it that stereotypes seem so intransigent?
Finally, who counts as a threat? There are many more people outside of our coalitions than there
are in them; at what point does a collective reach a threshold that then marks them as a threat?
Below I address each of these questions in turn.
First, how do widely-shared stereotypes of categories emerge if coalitions are
egocentrically defined and different coalitions have different enemies? Recent exciting
developments in theorizing about stereotype content indicate that there is actually relatively less
consensus across people in attributions of warmth to social groups—including how threating
groups are—relative to judgments about how agentic or conservative-progressive those same
groups are (Koch et al., 2020). In other words, judgments of specific categories’ threat,
trustworthiness, and honesty are personal. Thus while some aspects of stereotypes do appear to
be widely-shared (e.g., how powerful members of a category are judged to be), perceptions of
threat are relatively more idiosyncratic, as predicted by a coalitional account.
Second why are stereotypes and other category-associated features so impervious to
change? On the contrary, the data indicate that race and nationality based stereotypes have
changed over time—in particular by increasingly omitting the negative stereotype content
(Bergsieker, Leslie, Constantine, & Fiske, 2012). Now one possibility is that these stereotype
shifts merely reflect shifts in social norms surrounding prejudice expression, as predicted by the
group norm theory of attitudes (Sherif & Sherif, 1953). Under this framework people are as
prejudiced as they believe they are allowed to be. In fact, in some studies, the correlation
between perceptions of acceptability of prejudice toward a category and self-reported feeling
thermometer scores for that category exceed .9 (Crandall et al., 2002)! There is mounting
evidence of this same flexibility on much shorter timescales even in people’s implicit
associations (Cone, Mann, & Ferguson, 2017). For example, if participants receive just one
extremely negative piece of information about a target (“Bob mutilated a small, defenseless
animal”) participants’ implicit evaluations become significantly more negative relative to their
baseline evaluations (this effect was not as marked for extremely positive information; e.g.,
donating a kidney; Cone & Ferguson, 2015). More generally, intergroup socio-cognitive
phenomena like implicit biases (Ofosu, Chambers, Chen, & Hehman, 2019; Payne et al., 2017),
and stereotypes (Oliver & Mendelberg, 2000) vary and cluster by spatial geography suggesting
that local dynamics strongly inform their valence and content consistent with a coalitional
account.
Note that this same flexibility also manifests in behavior and policy. For example, during
the 2008 Democratic presidential primary process, Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama supporters
gave more money in a dictator game to strangers who supported the same primary candidate
(coalitional in-group members) as compared with the rival candidate (out-group members). Two
months later after President Obama clinched the nomination, supporters of both candidates
coalesced around the party nominee, this bias disappeared (Rand et al., 2009). On a longer time
scale, we can look to treatment of Asian immigrants and Asian Americans in the U.S. over the
last 150 years. Though contemporary views of Asian people are relatively positive as compared
to other minoritized categories (e.g., Waters & Eschbach, 1995), this favorability is a recent
development. People often forget that the first major immigration restriction passed in the U.S.
was the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882. The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 marked a
COALITIONAL COGNITION 13
loosening of restriction, but nevertheless established annual immigration quotas of no more than
100 people for all nations including those in Asia. By contrast to 70 years ago, Asian immigrants
and Americans now comprise one of the fastest-growing groups in the U. S. (Xie & Goyette,
2004; Humes, Jones, & Ramirez, 2011). What changed?
2.4 New insights from a coalitional perspective: Social group reference dependence
That stereotypes and policies can change does not tell us why they change. When does a
category shift from threatening to neutral? Or from neutral to ally? This is where the coalitional
perspective can yield new insights, both accounting for past patterns and making novel
predictions. Whether a collective is deemed inside or outside coalitional bounds depends on
perceivers’ estimates of that collective’s ability and intent to engage in coordination or conflict.
That is, people should be sensitive to generalized group features that signal threat or
coordination, invariant to the groups in question. However, a critical point that is missing from
existing coalitional accounts is that estimates of ability and intent will be reference dependent.
Reference dependence refers to the phenomenon by which decision-makers’ preferences
for each option in a choice set shift in predictable ways as a function of the available alternatives
(Huber, Payne, & Puto, 1982; Simonson, 1989). These shifts are well documented in consumer
behavior contexts: for example, the decoy effect, in which introducing a third inferior product
changes consumers’ preferences for two original products (Pettibone & Wedell, 2000). More
recently we have documented similar preference shifts in social contexts (e.g., Chang,
Gershman, & Cikara, 2019). For example, in the context of a hiring decision, we have
demonstrated that participants had systematically different preferences for the exact same
candidate as a function of the other candidates in the choice set and the salience of the candidate
attributes under consideration (Chang & Cikara, 2018). The same logic applies to collective-level
inferences—how favorably I feel toward collective A depends not only on my estimates of how
likely A is coordinate with my collective, but also how likely B, C, and D are to coordinate with
us (and one another) as well.
Here I introduce the concept of social group reference dependence: how we feel about a
particular collective or category depends in large part on whether and which other categories are
around. Said another way, the heterogeneity of our social ecologies and relative rankings of other
collectives within it will affect our attitudes toward each constituent collective. Importing the
concept of reference dependence as a driver of coalitional structure can help us get traction on
how category-associated prejudice and discrimination will change over time. Notably reference
dependence (in the abstract) is central to multiple theories of social identification including self-
categorization theory (Turner et al,. 1994) and optimal distinctiveness theory (Brewer, 1991). In
both frameworks, which identity becomes salient or most valued is determined by one’s context
(i.e., who else is around). However, neither provides a means of making quantitative predictions
of which identity or attribute will be made most salient in a given context or precisely how
identity salience shifts in response to changes in the environment.
There are multiple historical and contemporary examples of the influence of social group
reference dependence. For example, in the Netherlands during the Holocaust, Protestants were
more likely to offer aid to Jews than Catholics in Catholic regions; conversely, Catholics
facilitated Jews’ evasion in Protestant areas. Stated more generally, minority status rather than
religious doctrine explained who offered assistance to the collective fleeing genocide (Braun,
2014). In another historical example, evidence from archival data indicates that Irish and Italian
immigrants became “American” owing in part to inflows of Black people during the Great
COALITIONAL COGNITION 14
Migration (1915-1930). Specifically, increased settlements of southern-born Black people in
northern cities (operationalized at the level of metropolitan statistical areas) were associated with
local increases in naturalization rates of Irish and Italian immigrants as well as increased
intermarriage between immigrants and native-born White people (Fouka, Mazumder, &
Tabellini, 2020). Again, more generally: prejudice and discrimination against formerly
threatening categories updated with the introduction and expansion of a new category. Similar
patterns persist today when we examine the effects of Hispanic population growth in the U.S.
For example, priming White Americans with information regarding the growth of Hispanic
population and their resulting political power (as compared to a control prime) made them more
likely to judge Asian Americans as allies (e.g., predicting that Asian Americans would vote the
same way White Americans have; Craig & Lee, under review). As I noted above, collectives
should be sensitive to more generalized group features that signal threat, invariant to the groups
in question. One such threat feature that is reflected in all these examples and which has garnered
a great deal of attention, particularly with increases in shifting demographics all over the globe
(UN World Migration Report, 2020), is group size.
That group size serves as a generalized cue to threat is an older idea in psychology and
sociology. Group threat theory predicts that as minority collectives get proportionally larger
within a region, the majority will perceive them as more threatening—both in terms of
competition for resources and jobs (Blalock, 1957) and in terms of their potential for collective
action and political power (Pettigrew, 1957)—and will in turn harbor more negative attitudes
toward them. Empirical support for this prediction bears out across multiple inter-category
contexts: e.g., White people’s attitudes toward Black people in the U.S. (Bobo, 1983; Fosset &
Kiecolt, 1989; Glaser, 1994; Quillian, 1996), and citizens’ attitudes toward immigrants in the
U.S. (Hood & Morris, 1997) and the EU (Schlueter & Scheepers, 2010). More recent work on
shifting demographics widely replicates these findings: perceptions that minoritized categories
are growing in number, and especially that the former majority will soon represent a minority,
are strongly associated with prejudice (Craig, Rucker, & Richeson, 2018). However, this
relationship between group size and prejudice is not so straightforward. First, evidence varies
depends on the level of analysis: country versus state versus municipality (Hjerm, 2009).
Because immigrants, refugees, and resident minority groups are not distributed evenly
geographically, different communities should exhibit distinct hierarchies of prejudice across
different minority categories. Second, people are quite inaccurate about demographic reality; for
example, people reliably overestimate the size of immigrant populations (Transatlantic Trends
Survey, 2010 wave; Wong et al., 2012).
The social group reference dependence hypothesis highlights another challenge. Size
judgments—of individual objects, of collectives—are reference dependent (Stevens, 2017). That
is, one’s estimate of the size of a target is determined relative to the other accessible targets (e.g.,
in a choice set or sampled from memory; see the Ebbinghaus illusion as a striking visual
register as such. What is that threshold? The minoritized group’s size relative to the majority?
How fast the minortized group grows?
Combining the U.S. Census of Population data with FBI crime records, we constructed a
novel county-group-decade dataset to test a corollary of the social group reference dependence
hypothesis: rather than being sensitive to the absolute size of any one minority group, majority
groups will be sensitive to minority categories’ relative rank in size, being most discriminating
against which ever category represents the largest local minority, followed by the second-ranking
COALITIONAL COGNITION 15
category and so on (Cikara, Fouka, & Tabellini, 2020). Specifically we tested the hypothesis that
hate crimes against a specific racial/ethnic category will increase as that category’s size-based
rank amongst minorities in a county increases in a given decade. We tested this hypothesis
focusing on the U.S. and exploiting variation in group size rank across counties for four minority
categories – Black, Hispanic/Latinx, Asian, and Arab populations – between 1990 and 2010.
Crucially, we always controlled for the relative size of each group, thereby isolating the rank
effect from a more general “size” effect. Our analysis also accounted for any time-invariant
factor – observable or unobservable – that is specific to each county (e.g., historical attitudes
toward minority groups or local “culture”) and to each minoritized category (e.g., group-specific
levels of prejudice in the U.S. as a whole). We also accounted for decade-specific shocks that
might change White people’s behavior toward minoritized categories in general (e.g., economic
shocks that might increase Whites’ propensity for “scapegoating” against minoritized categories
in general).
appear larger on the left relative to the right despite the fact that the two orange circles are the same size.
As predicted, we found that members of the largest minoritized category in a county were
significantly more likely to be targeted with hate crimes relative to when their own category
ranked second or lower in the minority group size distribution in the same county. This varied by
region, so could not be explained by countrywide increase in one category (e.g.,
Hispanic/Latinx). Furthermore, rank predicted victimization rates independent of whether we
measured relative size as a share of total population or of the minoritized population. Third, the
rank effect was robust to controlling for the relative category sizes of all other minorities and for
the difference in relative size between a minoritized category and the category immediately
below it in rank. Finally, rank did not simply capture fast growing minoritized category; our
effects remained robust to controlling for the growth rate of each category's size.
Of course, once concern might be that there is some third variable that drives both group
size rank and hate crimes. To address this concern, we followed up with an analysis to exploit
variation driven by rank switches within the same county over time. This strategy compares the
change in victimization suffered by two minoritized categories whose relative size, in a given
decade, grows by the same amount, but who experience a different “rank change” (e.g. from
COALITIONAL COGNITION 16
second to first in a county versus no change in rank). Even when applying this very stringent
empirical test, we find that a category’s members experience more victimization in counties
where that category’s rank moves from second to first relative to counties in which their rank
does not change.
Nor were our baseline results restricted only to hate crimes, which represent a rather
extreme and relatively rare inter-coalitional behavior. We replicated our analysis of the effect of
size rank, this time at the level of the individual, focusing on White respondents' explicit
attitudes toward three minority categories: Black, Asian and Arab people (our data source, the
Project Implicit database, does not include ratings of Hispanic/Latinx people). Using feeling
thermometer ratings as a measure of prejudice, we once again estimated significant effects of
category-size rank. Feelings toward the largest minoritized category in a county were
significantly more negative compared to the smallest one, conditional on the former's size.
In summary, even though individuals are bad at estimating absolute numbers or even
proportions of minority category populations, communities appear to be sensitive to these
categories’ relative rank in size. This sensitivity is reflected both in county level prejudice as
well as extreme manifestations of intergroup hostility. Interestingly, these “rank transformations”
of complex data distributions represent a form of efficient-coding present across many domains
of decision-making (Bhui & Gershman, 2018) which may help explain why rank outperforms so
many other demographic features. I find these results scientifically exciting because they suggest
there is promise in the social group reference dependency hypothesis specifically, and the
coalitional approach—i.e., an emphasis on generalized coalitional and threat cues for the
purposes of theory-building and prediction—more generally.
This framework also makes novel predictions about how demographic shifts may affect
coalitional structures going forward. For example, as noted above, in the U.S. Asian Americans
continue to be the country’s fastest growing racial group, with immigration being a major driver
of this growth (U.S. Census Bureau, 2016). As Hispanic/Latinx and Asian populations continue
to grow, counties with the greatest relative increases in these populations may see a change in
which features matter for prejudice: for example, shifting away from skin tone to language as a
primary coalitional boundary. Relatedly, Asian Americans’ tenuous status as model minorities
(Xu & Lee, 2013) may begin wane as their populations increase, particularly in places where
they begin to outnumber other minorities.
A broader theoretical contribution of this framework and these preliminary findings is
that they dispel the notion that category attitudes are fixed driven only by essentialized features
of the groups themselves. This matters because White people’s beliefs about the malleability of
racial bias influence their approaches to and strategies within interracial interactions. For
example those who (are led to) believe bias is malleable prefer learning oriented strategies (e.g.,
learning why interracial interactions are challenging) to performance-oriented strategies (e.g.,
ending the interaction as quickly as possible; Neel & Shapiro, 2012).
Thus in this section we have reviewed the evidence that inferences of individuals’ and
collectives’ capacity and desire for coordination activate coalitional cognition: that is,
categorization and ally-choice. Next I turn to come consequences of this activation.
3. CONSEQUENCES
Once coalitional psychology has been activated there is a whole cascade of consequences
for our social preferences, emotions, and attributions. However, the nature of these consequences
COALITIONAL COGNITION 17
will hinge on the particulars of the functional relations between coalitions. The absence of cues
to coordination may yield indifference, but the overt presence of cues to threat (e.g., competition
over resources and incompatibility between groups’ goals) give way to conflict (Brewer, 2000)
and emotions like fear, hatred, and disgust (Cuddy, Fiske, & Glick, 2007; Mackie & Smith,
2015). Even when coalitions are not explicitly engaged in competition, categories merely
stereotyped as competitive (e.g., Asians, professional women; Fiske et al., 2002) may elicit
hostile attributions, emotions, and behaviors. These attributions and emotions are often used to
justify overt discrimination against and persecution of minoritized groups and their members:
for example, propaganda demonizing the Jews in Europe and the Tutsi in Rwanda, as well as
anti-miscegenation laws in Nazi Germany and Apartheid South Africa.
In the sections that follow, I will review how judgments of another’s capacity for and
likelihood of coordination (where perceived competition yields very low estimates of
coordination likelihood), not only with oneself but with others, affect social preferences,
emotions, and attributions with an emphasis on how each of these, in turn, contribute to increases
in willingness to harm.
3.1 Social preferences and values
When people think of intergroup harm they likely bring to mind inter-coalitional
skirmishes, genocide, and war. However the accessibility of these exemplars occludes more
quotidian manifestations of harm in which typical people participate, for example, every time
they cast a ballot. Whether people value some collectives more than others is central to
understanding how people resolve social tradeoffs, particularly tradeoffs that help a few at the
expense of the many (e.g., welfare policy, healthcare reform). Although most people seem
fundamentally opposed (even physiologically averse) to physically harming other people
(Cushman et al., 2012; FeldmanHall et al., 2012), many may be quick to abandon their
preferences for fairness and moral prohibitions against harm when faced with tradeoffs between
more and less valued social categories (e.g., same- versus other-category members, young versus
old people; e.g., Awad et al., 2018; Petrinovich et al., 1993; Uhlmann, Pizarro, Tannenbaum, &
Ditto, 2009).
We conducted an fMRI study in which we adapted the classic trolley problem to test to
what extent fundamental coalitional features—perceived competitiveness and status—account
for people’s preferences in moral tradeoff scenarios (Cikara, Farnsworth, Harris, & Fiske, 2010).
In this dilemma, participants rated how acceptable it was for a third party, Joe, to sacrifice one
person in order to save five. Critically, we varied which target was being sacrificed and which
targets were being saved (presented in photographs) on each trial. Also important was that we
had multiple categories represent each possible combination of perceived competitiveness and
status in order to test the effect of the dimensions themselves rather than specific category
exemplars: e.g., college students and service people (military, firefighters) to represent low
competition/high status, elderly and disabled people to represent low competition/high status,
wealthy or high-prestige professional people to represent high competition/high status, and
unhomed and drug-addicted people to represent high competition/low status. This last group may
seem slightly counter-intuitive: why are unhomed people competitive? This is because of how
we defined competition in the study: any resources that go to this target are resources that will
not go to me or people like me.
Under the ‘warmth primacy hypothesis’ (Wojciszke et al., 1998), people should have
found it more acceptable to sacrifice high competition targets and to save low-competition
COALITIONAL COGNITION 18
targets because that dimension tracks expectations of likelihood of coordination. By contrast, an
‘economic valuation hypothesis’ predicts that people will engage a cost–benefit analysis of
lifetime output potential—that is, ability—for sacrificed and saved targets (Lenton, 2002), and
therefore find it more acceptable to sacrifice low-status targets to save high-status targets.
Ultimately what we found was that these two dimensions interacted to predict social preferences
(as predicted by the Stereotype Content Model; Fiske et al., 2002; Fiske et al., 2007).
Specifically it was least acceptable to save high-competition, low-status targets and most
acceptable to save a group of low-competition, high-status targets.
These findings are particularly stark when we compare them against similar trolley
problem data where targets are unspecified. For example, in one finding, 88% of people say that
pushing one person off a bridge to save five is unacceptable (Hauser et al., 2007), indicating that
most people’s default is aversion to sacrifice. However, we reversed this pattern by manipulating
the perceived competition and status of the targets involved: 84% of our respondents said it was
acceptable for Joe to push a high-competition, low-status person off a bridge to save five low-
competition, high-status targets. The fMRI results in tandem indicated that left lateral orbital
frontal cortex and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activation was related to this pattern of moral
acceptability. Interestingly, some evidence suggests that left lateral OFC is particularly important
for the suppression of distressing information and sensations in decision making (Beer, Knight,
& D’Esposito, 2006; Bishop, Duncan, Brett, M., & Lawrence, 2004). Thus one possible
interpretation of these findings is that participants were actively overriding their moral aversion
to using a “low-valued” person as a means to an end when they had the opportunity to save five
“high-valued” people.
This application of reduced moral protections to extra-coalitional members is not
relegated to hypothetical scenarios—people are reliably more aggressive when they act on behalf
of their coalitions relative to when they act alone (Cohen, Montoya, & Insko, 2006; Meier &
Hinsz, 2004): even more so when collectives are in explicit competition with one another
(Hamilton & Sherman, 1996; Tajfel, 1982). There are several reasons why this may be
(Bandura, 1999): aggression may be reframed as virtuous or necessary for a greater cause (e.g.,
Fiske & Rai, 2014), or collectives may afford a feeling of anonymity or diffusion of
responsibility (e.g., Darley and Latané, 1968). A third lesser explored explanation for this pattern
is that acting with a collective allows coalitional priorities to supersede one’s own personal moral
standards. Said another way, people may be less likely to reference their personal moral
standards in competitive intergroup contexts relative to when they are acting in their own
interests. Testing this hypothesis, however, is quite challenging. For example, previous studies
have examined reductions in private self-awareness among soccer fans, measuring self-concept
access via self-report (e.g., “If my team scores a goal I really lose myself completely”; Van Hiel
et al., 2007). Of course, the utility of this kind of self-report dependent measure hinges on
participants' ability to reflect explicitly, retrospectively, and accurately on their own
reduced…self-reflection.
To circumvent this challenge, we designed an fMRI experiment in which participants
performed a competitive task both alone and as part of a group; we indexed the salience of
participants’ own moral norms during competition unobtrusively (i.e., activation in a region of
the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) identified by an independent self-reference task); and we
assessed effects on subsequent behavior using a novel index of participants’ willingness to harm
competitors versus teammates (assigned in the lab; Cikara, Jenkins, Dufour, & Saxe, 2014).
Consistent with previous research, participants harmed competitors more than teammates:
COALITIONAL COGNITION 19
specifically, they selected relatively less flattering photographs of their competitors for public
distribution. More critically, the degree to which participants were willing to carry out such harm
was associated with the degree to which they exhibited reduced mPFC activation in response to
first person moral statements while competing in a team context (but not when competing alone).
These results suggest that acting as part of a competitive collective can reduce the salience of
one’s own moral standards and, in turn, enable out-group harm.
While value-driven beliefs and strategic considerations play a demonstrable role in
predicting aggression in inter-coalitional contexts, peoples’ behaviors are guided also in large
part by how they feel. The intergroup literature is replete with research on prejudice as a central
explanation, typically measured as an attitude. However attitudes—which in their most basic
form are conceptualized as a single dimension of valence, ranging from negative to positive—are
often not sufficiently specific to predict behaviors. For example, when do negative attitudes
predict neglect, as opposed to fear, or attack (Cuddy et al., 2007)? To better predict which
behaviors may arise between coalitions one may be better served by turning to an analysis of
discrete intergroup emotions (e.g., Neuberg & Cottrell, 2006; Mackie & Smith, 2015; Stürmer,
Snyder, & Omoto, 2005).
3.2 Emotions
Similar to goals and priorities, people’s emotional responses may shift in intergroup
contexts to reflect the interests of the coalition instead of the individual (Mackie & Smith, 2015).
Nowhere is this pattern more apparent than in the domain of how people feel in response to the
suffering of those within versus without their coalitions.
By some accounts the capacity for empathy is one of the most important faculties that
humans possess. Empathy is a powerful motivator of cooperation and altruism, cornerstones of
humanity’s social uniqueness and success (Batson, 2009; Keltner, 2009; Tomasello, 2009). It
comprises both cognitive and affective components that allow people to share, understand, and
respond to others’ experiences and feelings (Weisz & Cikara, 2020). Empathy is also, for better
or for worse, bounded: people do not empathize with everyone, in equal measure, all the time.
Specifically, people often report feeling less empathy for individuals who do not belong to their
coalitions or categories relative to those that do (Batson & Ahmad, 2009; Cikara, Bruneau, &
Saxe, 2011). Consistent with these self-report findings, dozens of neuroimaging and EEG studies
report that people show decreased and sometimes absent physiological responses associated with
empathy when witnessing out-group relative to in-group members in physical or emotional pain
(see Han, 2018 for a recent review). This intergroup empathy bias matters because the absence
of empathy reflects a reduction in motivation to engage in pro-social behavior toward those who
are suffering. Said another way, a lack of empathy for “them” places those people beyond the
spheres of morality and justice that we believe apply to “us.”
One key insight that I have sought to emphasize is that the absence of empathy is not
antipathy; it is apathy or indifference (Cikara & Fiske, 2013; 2014). Apathy is generally not a
strong motivator of behavior, perhaps with the exception of neglect. For example, people may
cross the street to avoid speaking to an unhomed person, but most of us would be surprised if
they were to go out of their way to harass that person. This absence of a relationship between
empathy and harm is borne out in a meta-analysis: across 106 effect sizes, empathy and
aggression are correlated only r = -.09 (Vachon, Lynam, & Johnson, 2014).
Much more than the absence of empathy I have focused on identifying the conditions
under which people experience the exact opposite of empathy in response to outsiders’ good and
COALITIONAL COGNITION 20
bad fortunes. By contrast to empathy, I have found pleasure in response to others’ mis-fortunes
— Schadenfreude — or displeasure in response to others’ triumphs — Glückschmerz — are
feasible motivators of inter-collective conflict and violence (Cikara, 2015). So what predicts
which emotions we experience—empathy, apathy, or Schadenfreude—when we see or learn of
another person’s suffering? While several conditions predict the experience of Schadenfreude in
interpersonal contexts (see Smith et al., 2009; Van Dijk, Ouwerkerk, Smith, & Cikara, 2015 for
reviews), here, I will focus on the effect of inter-coalition competition. Note however that the
example I just cited—of feeling indifferent toward rather than pleased about the suffering of an
un-homed individual—would suggest that competition alone is insufficient. Therefore we
predicted that the specific combination of perceptions of a collective’s competitiveness and
status—their desire and ability to enact a threat—would be most likely to elicit counter-empathic
emotions (Cikara & Fiske, 2013; 2014).
In order for Schadenfreude to qualify as an intergroup emotion, people must feel it on
behalf of their group; however, people only appraise events from an intergroup perspective when
they are highly identified with the relevant in-group (Mackie, Devos, & Smith, 2000). Another
constraint one has to consider is that Schadenfreude is a socially undesirable emotion (Smith et
al., 2009). As such people may be somewhat reticent to report it. However, sports, politics, and
celebrity gossip are a few domains in which it is acceptable, even desirable, to express pleasure
at others’ misfortunes, and so sports teams have become the fruit fly of intergroup
Schadenfreude research. The empirical evidence bolsters the notion that identification is a true
constraint on intergroup Schadenfreude. For example, college basketball fans’ identification with
their team predicted greater Schadenfreude in response to a rival player’s injury. Fans’
Schadenfreude, in turn, correlated with greater disappointment in response to news that the
injury did not end the rival player’s season (Hoogland et al., 2015). In another example, soccer
fans smiled more intensely, as measured by facial electromyography (EMG), when they watched
a rival soccer team miss a penalty kick relative to when they watched their favored team make
the goal (Boecker, Likowski, Pauli, & Weyers, 2014). Of course, Schadenfreude and
Glückschmerz are natural responses in zero-sum contexts; if ‘they’ are unhappy, ‘we’ are
pleased. This requires that intergroup Schadenfreude experiments include pure ‘spite’
conditions—those in which the threatening coalition suffers without any tangible benefit to one’s
own coalition.
The first experiment we ran to probe the relationships among perceived coalitional
competitiveness and status, Schadenfreude, and harm was in the context of a real-world conflict:
Red Sox versus Yankees fans, historic rivals in American baseball (Cikara, Botvinick, & Fiske,
2011). We pre-screened our participants for hardcore fandom: they had to love their own team
and dislike the rival team; had to identify correctly players from photos; and had to know
specific players’ positions. As predicted, pre-experiment survey data with our sample confirmed
that all our participants rated their favored team as most warm (an attribute associated with
absence of competitiveness) and competent (an attribute associated with status), the Orioles (a
relatively less competitive team in the same league) as moderately warm and moderately
competent, and most important, their rival as admittedly more competent than the Orioles, but
also less warm.
During the main experiment, Red Sox and Yankees fans underwent fMRI while viewing
animated baseball plays involving their favored team, rival team, and two other teams (the
Orioles and the Blue Jays, two non-rivals in the same league), succeeding and failing to get on
base or getting tagged out. Following each play, participants reported how much pleasure, pain,
COALITIONAL COGNITION 21
and anger they experienced watching the play unfold. Unsurprising, participants said they felt the
most pleasure and the least pain and anger when their favored team scored against their rival,
their rival failed to score against their favored team, and critically, their rival failed to score
against the Orioles as compared to plays in the control condition (the Orioles failing and
succeeding against the Blue Jays). This last condition in which the rival failed against the Orioles
was the pure Schadenfreude condition because the favored team did not benefit in these cases;
the pleasure came only from spite toward the rival. In addition, participants said they felt more
anger and pain when their favored team failed to score against their rival and their rival scored
against their favored team as compared to the control condition. Finally, one to two weeks after
participants had been scanned, they completed a follow-up survey in which we asked them how
likely they would be to enact a variety of hostile behaviors both toward rival fans and Orioles
fans. Both Red Sox and Yankees fans reported that they were more likely to heckle, insult,
threaten, and hit a rival fan as compared to an Oriole’s fan.
We analyzed our fMRI data to test whether empathy and pleasure in response to out-
group pain relied on separable neural circuitry. A wealth of existing research had already
established a strong correlation between dorsal anterior cingulate (dACC)/anterior insula (AI)
responses and self-reported empathy (see e.g., Decety, 2011); the link between ventral striatum
(VS) and reward (specifically, reward prediction error) was even better established and
conserved across numerous species (see e.g., Bartra, McGuire, & Kable, 2013). As predicted,
painful baseball plays increased responses in ACC and AI. By contrast, pleasurable baseball
plays, including rivals failing to score against the Orioles (the pure Schadenfreude condition),
increased responses in the VS, the region associated with learning from unexpected rewarding
events. Weeks later, those participants who exhibited greater VS activation in response to
watching their rivals fail also reported an increased likelihood of aggressing against rival team
fans (relative to Orioles fans). In fact, VS activation in response to watching rivals fail was a
better predictor of harm than even participants’ subjective reports of pleasure in response to
watching rivals fail. Note also that no such correlation emerged with dACC or AI (mirroring the
absence of a relationship between reduced empathy and aggression). However these findings are
based on a very small sample (n = 18) and so should be interpreted with caution.
That said, our findings dovetailed nicely with another fMRI study of intergroup
Schadenfreude that was published at the same time: only this one was with soccer fans (Hein,
Silani, Preuschoff, Batson, & Singer, 2010). In the first phase of the experiment soccer fans
received or witnessed fellow and rival fans receive electric shocks. In the second phase
participants only witnessed fellow and rival fans receive electric shocks, but had an opportunity
to volunteer to absorb some of the shocks themselves to reduce pain to others. Those participants
who had more negative views of the rival exhibited more VS when witnessing rival fans receive
electric shocks in Phase 1. More important, those same participants who exhibited greater VS in
response to rival pain also provided the least aid to rival fans in Phase 2. Thus the intergroup
Schadenfreude/VS relationship emerges in response to actual physical pain (not just team
outcomes in some abstract sense) and occurs in the case where targets are merely affiliated with
the team (fans, not players themselves). Together, these two experiments were the first to
establish a link between intergroup Schadenfreude and endorsement of harm against (and
withholding of help from) a competitive collective and its members. It is worth noting that the
VS/Schadenfreude relationship replicates in several interpersonal fMRI studies as well, but only
when people are in competition with one another or retaliating for past harm (de Bruijn, de
COALITIONAL COGNITION 22
Lange, von Cramon & Ullsperger 2009; Chester & DeWall, 2016; Singer, Seymour, O’Doherty,
et al., 2006; Takahashi et al., 2009).
Of course it is part of the script of sports rivalries that people are allowed, even
encouraged to express emotions like Schadenfreude. Thus our next aim was to test whether
people experience Schadenfreude in more subtle contexts: when targets of misfortunes are
merely stereotyped as competitive and high-status (e.g., Asians, female professionals, investment
bankers). In other words, can observers can experience Schadenfreude in the absence of any
interaction (e.g., without history of conflict, explicit competition)? Again, this is of interest to me
because these emotions may facilitate tolerance, or even commission of harm. A complementary
theoretical implication is that these fundamental coalitional cues—status and competition—
enable us to generalize our predictions and results to a wide variety of social categories and
contexts.
Why might encountering members of categories who are merely stereotyped as
competitive and high-status be sufficient to engender Schadenfreude when they experience
misfortunes? Social comparisons happen automatically (Wedell, 1994). As such, simply
encountering a target whose category is stereotyped as high-status may make one’s
comparatively lesser status more salient than at baseline. If this target’s category is also
stereotyped as competitive, social emotion theory predicts an observer will be likely to
experience a contrastive emotions, such as envy (rather than assimilative emotions like
admiration; Smith, 2000). Envy is a strong predictor of Schadenfreude in interpersonal contexts
(Smith et al., 1996) thus we predicted that envious prejudice (Fiske et al., 2002; 2007) would be
a strong predictor of Schadenfreude at the collective level of analysis (Harris, Cikara, & Fiske,
2008). Again, feeling pleasure instead of empathy disrupts the link between observing others’
suffering and being motivated to help them. Therefore we finally predicted that categories that
are most likely to elicit Schadenfreude would also be more likely to be subject to harm.
In our first experiment testing these hypotheses, participants viewed a series of positive,
negative, and neutral events, each paired with an unlabeled photograph of an individual on a
white background (e.g., a drug addict, an elderly woman, a man in a business suit; Cikara &
Fiske, 2012). Critically we included multiple categories for each of the four quadrants made up
of the competition-by-status features; this ensured that we were testing the effects of the features
rather than the categories themselves. Each image had been validated in a separate sample as
evoking the critical stereotypic traits (i.e., the correct levels of warmth and competence—
attributes associated with competition and status, respectively).We also made sure the events
were misfortune that could befall anyone: “Ate a really good sandwich,” “Got soaked by a taxi,”
and “Yawned twice in a row.” Also important: none of the events described the target taking an
action for which they were being rewarded or punished. We did this to eliminate deservingness
as a confound (i.e., to avoid a reaction such as, “I’m pleased this person suffered a misfortune
because they deserved their comeuppance”).
After each trial, we instructed participants to answer two questions: “How GOOD [BAD]
would this make you feel?” We specified that “this” referred to the target’s experience described
on the previous screen. Note that we asked participants these two questions separately to allow
for the expression of ambivalence (e.g., they could say they felt simultaneously bad and good).
One limitation is that asking how good and bad individuals feel in response to positive and
negative events cannot fully capture the constructs “empathy” and “counter-empathy.” Though
we did not have this data at the time we ran the stereotype study, a subsequent pilot study
(N=353; Hudson, Cikara, & Sidanius, 2019) assessed negative empathy and Schadenfreude
COALITIONAL COGNITION 23
using a multi-item scale that included the “good” and “bad” items as well as how
sad/sympathetic/compassionate/concerned the participant felt (for empathy; items from Stürmer,
Snyder, Kropp, & Siem, 2006) and how relieved/happy/satisfied the participant felt (for
Schadenfreude; items from Leach et al., 2003;). Each subscale was internally consistent:
empathy alpha = 0.87; Schadenfreude alpha = 0.96. Furthermore, an exploratory factor analysis
indicated that a 2-factor solution that separated empathy and Schadenfreude best characterized
the data. Finally, and most important, the “how bad [good] does this make you feel” items had
some of the highest factor loadings on the empathy and Schadenfreude factors indicating that
these items in isolation are valid measures of empathy and Schadenfreude.
There was, however, another challenge. The existing literature suggested that participants
rarely self-report feeling Schadenfreude in excess of the midpoint of a scale (e.g., van Dijk,
Ouwerkerk, Goslinga & Nieweg, 2005, Smith et al., 1996; Leach & Spears, 2008, 2009)
indicating that participant responses were potentially distorted by social desirability. To assess
another, less controllable indicator of affect, we also recorded participants’ facial muscle
movements using EMG. We predicted that participants would exhibit the most positive affect
(i.e., smiling), and not just reduced negative affect, in response to stereotypically
competitive/high-status targets’ misfortunes. We focused specifically on the ZM (zygomaticus
major; a cheek muscle) because it is the muscle responsible for pulling the corners of the lips
into a smile and correlates reliably with positive affect (Brown & Schwartz, 1980).
In a second phase of the experiment we presented each of the targets from the first phase,
this time without any events, and asked participants to rate “As viewed by society, how
COMPETENT [WARM] is this person?” This merely served as a manipulation check to confirm
that our participants’ stereotype assessments of each target’s warmth and competence replicated
the sample on which the stimuli were normed—in short, they did.
As predicted by a coalitional account, participants self-reported that they felt the least bad
about negative events, and least good about positive events for stereotypically competitive/high-
status targets. In line with our concerns about social desirability, participants did not report
feeling significantly better in response to negative events for stereotypically competitive/high-
status targets compared to the other targets. By contrast, the facial EMG measures supported all
events (an incongruent, Schadenfreude response) when they were paired with stereotypically
competitive/high-status targets. This indicates the presence of positive affect, not just the absence
of negative affect, in response to competitive/high-status targets’ misfortunes. For all other
targets, participants smiled more in response to positive relative to negative events.
Our EMG study provided us with correlational evidence that stereotypes comprising
high-status and competitiveness were sufficient to evoke Schadenfreude; however, we wanted to
test the causal influence of these coalitional features (and eliminate the possibility that there were
other features of the targets driving our results). We hypothesized that increasing the perceived
cooperation and decreasing the status (versus not) of the same stereotypically competitive/high-
status target should reduce observers’ Schadenfreude. Therefore, in another experiment we
manipulated the competitiveness and status of one particularly competitive, high-status category:
investment bankers (Cikara & Fiske, 2012). Participants read a newspaper article about one of
the following: investment bankers whose situations were status quo (competitive/high-status)); i-
bankers who were advising small businesses, pro bono, to help the economy as a whole
(decreases competitiveness); i-bankers who were using the last of their bonuses to fund their
drug habits (decreases status); or i-bankers who were unemployed but still dressing up in their
COALITIONAL COGNITION 24
suits and pretending to go to work (decreases both status and competitiveness). We predicted that
participants would report feeling significantly worse about investment bankers’ misfortunes after
reading any of the vignettes relative to the status quo vignette. As predicted, decreasing status
and competition information about investment bankers increased participants’ empathy, but only
for those targets who resembled investment bankers (not other competitive/high-status targets).
Thus, this study established more clearly that these coalitional features are driving
Schadenfreude responses.
competitive/high-status targets elicited more ZM response during negative as compared to positive
events. Bars represent SE. Adapted from Cikara & Fiske (2012).
What about willingness to harm? In a follow up fMRI study we assessed self-reported
affect as well as participants’ willingness to harm a variety of targets who varied on
competitiveness and status (Cikara & Fiske, 2011). While they were in the scanner, participants
viewed the same target-event pairs from the EMG study though they did not report how they felt
until after the scan when they viewed target-event pairs again and reported their affect on a bi-
polar scale (1 extremely bad to 9 extremely good). Replicating the results of the EMG study,
participants reported feeling worst about positive events and best about negative events when
they were paired with competitive/high-status targets as compared to all other targets. About two
weeks after the scanning session we contacted participants with a follow-up survey, which
presented the following scenario: “You are participating in a Fear Factor type game show and
have just won a challenge. This exempts you from the ‘punishment’ the rest of the players face:
they are all going to receive mild electric shocks, which are painful, but not lethal. The game
show host gives YOU the choice to decide whether all five of the players are going to get shocks
or if one person should get a stronger shock (which is again, painful, but not lethal) while you
COALITIONAL COGNITION 25
spare the other four.” We then asked how willing they would be to volunteer each person they
saw during the scan to receive a shock so that the other, unidentified players could avoid the
pain. As predicted, participants were significantly more likely to subject competitive/high-status
targets as compared to all other targets to painful electric shocks.
One notable limitation of these previous studies is that our previous competition and
status manipulations—sports rivalries and stereotypes—provide more than just competition and
status-relevant information. What happens when we strip out all social information except that
there are two collectives who are or are not in competition with one another? In the next series of
experiments in this line of work, we manipulated functional relations between novel groups, with
no history of conflict and no stereotypes associated with them, to determine whether mere inter-
group competition was sufficient to alter participants' empathy toward own team and other-team
members experiencing good and bad fortunes (Cikara, Bruneau, Van Bavel, Saxe, 2014). In each
experiment, we randomly assigned people to either the Eagles or the Rattlers team, ostensibly
based on their personality profiles. We told them that the two teams were involved in an ongoing
problem solving challenge and the two teams were neck and neck (though the other team was
just slightly ahead; this was held constant across all conditions to signal that they were a capable
team). In the competitive condition, whichever team reached 100 points first would receive a
monetary bonus and the other team would receive nothing beyond their base pay; in the
independent/neutral condition each team would receive a monetary bonus when they collectively
reached 100 points total, irrespective of what had occurred with the other team; in the
cooperative condition we said that the teams should work together to reach 200 points and only
then would everyone receive a monetary bonus. In the next phase we told them that scientific
evidence suggests that people perform better in these problem solving challenges when they
know something about the other players. To that end, they would read about recent experiences
of same- and other-team players which had been shared with us by past participants (though we
had standardized the language). Following that, participants saw a series of good and bad
fortunes associated with Eagles and Rattlers players. On each trial, participants reported how
good and how bad they felt. Critically, the events (e.g., “accidentally stepped in dog poo”) had
no bearing on each target’s ability to partake in the problem-solving challenge. As such, there
was no strategic benefit conferred by other-team members’ misfortunes.
As predicted, in competitive contexts, participants reported experiencing more empathy
for same-team than other-team targets and more counter-empathy for other-team than same-team
the cooperative condition. In a follow-up control experiment, we confirmed that our effect was
not driven by participants’ bias in their perceptions of how targets felt in response to positive and
negative events; they were perfectly happy to report that competitors felt as bad as teammates
when bad things happened to them.
Of course any time one documents a bias in feelings toward one versus another collective
it remains ambiguous whence the effect comes: specifically in this case, extraordinary empathy
for one’s own team or animus for the other team? In the next experiment we restricted the design
to include only the competitive structure, however we added a third collective. We told
participants that some people did not fit the profile of either the Rattlers or the Eagles, but that
we did not want to exclude those people from participating and earning money. Their stories
would appear interspersed among Rattlers’ and Eagles’ stories but the page would be blank
where a team logo would otherwise appear. We had two competing predictions. If participants
reported similar levels of (counter-)empathy for unaffiliated targets and competitors then we
COALITIONAL COGNITION 26
could infer that our previous results were driven primarily by increased empathy for one’s own
team. If, however, participants reported similar levels of (counter-)empathy for unaffiliated
targets and teammates, then we could infer that our results were driven more by out-group
hostility. Consistent with the second hypothesis, unaffiliated targets received empathic responses
indistinguishable from teammates, demonstrating that intergroup empathy bias in competitive
contexts is better characterized as competitor apathy/antipathy than extraordinary teammate
empathy.
novel in-group and out-group targets under competitive, cooperative, or independent functional relations.
Plotted values are least squares mean estimates and standard errors computed from the omnibus model.
Adapted from Cikara et al. (2014).
One important next step for this research program is to elucidate the temporal dynamics
of the relationship between Schadenfreude and harm. I have proposed that the capacity for
collective violence may have developed, in part, by appropriating basic reinforcement-learning
processes and associated neural circuitry in order to overcome harm aversion. That is, the cycle
of intergroup aggression may begin with the passive observation of a negative outcome for
another person. Which emotion an observer experiences will depend on the target’s coalition
membership. If the target is a competitive coalition member, the observer may be surprised to
find they experience some Schadenfreude. This pleasure may potentiate a small aggressive
action (or at least the withholding of help), the outcome of which is the continued or increased
COALITIONAL COGNITION 27
suffering of the target. Assuming the target’s identity is still “threatening coalition member,” this
should be further cause for pleasure, invigorating further aggressive behavior.
What evidence is there that Schadenfreude may contribute to learning to overcome harm
aversion? Neuroscience plays a key role here because it allows us to leverage what we have
learned from decades of research on the biological bases of reinforcement learning. There are
several regions of the brain that support encoding and representing subjective value, but VS
supports a critical component of reinforcement learning in particular—encoding rewarding
events for the purposes of learning which actions will increase the likelihood of reward in the
future (Bartra, McGuire, & Kable, 2013; O’Doherty, 2004). The consistent relationship between
Schadenfreude and VS engagement implicates not only the VS’s valuation function (i.e.,
evaluating competitor harm as positive), but also its motivation function (i.e., biasing action
selection toward behaviors that harm competitive coalitions and associated individuals). This
suggests that the repeated experience of pleasure in response to competitive coalition members’
suffering may make people more likely to become first person agents of harm when given the
opportunity. As we have already reviewed, VS activation increases in response to rivals’
suffering (e.g., in the context of the baseball and soccer studies described above) and is
associated with an increased subsequent desire to harm (Cikara et al., 2011) and decreased
willingness to help rival fans (Hein et al., 2010). Interesting, even rats exhibit a dopamine spike
within VS after attacking an intruder (Van Erp & Miczek, 2000); mice also exert effort to harm
other submissive mice (Legrand, 2013). Thus there is evidence across species to suggest that in
some contexts harm carries intrinsic value just like other reinforcers (Chester, 2017).
We have some preliminary evidence to suggest that people who are particularly hostile
toward an out-group experience out-group directed spite as a reinforcer (Moore et al., in
preparation). Across three behavioral studies, we had participants complete an incentivized
probabilistic decision-making task in which they could learn via trial-and-error to obtain
individual or own-team benefits (which had no effect on the other team) or those same benefits
while also causing the other-team harm (what we call “spiteful” actions); both outcomes were
action in the task was probabilistically associated with a helpful versus spiteful outcome, which
meant that even the most harm-avoidant individuals sometimes took an action that resulted in
harm, giving them a chance to update their preferences via experience. We then used a
reinforcement-learning approach to model participants’ latent preferences for pure own-team
help versus other-team spite.
Critically, we structured the task so that it was costly to exhibit a preference both for and
against other-team harm. Our goal was to attenuate socially desirable responding (i.e., avoiding
spiteful behavior) or responding in line with a demand characteristic (i.e., enacting an intergroup
script by pursuing other-team harm in excess of one’s personal preferences). Specifically, in our
task, money-maximizing players ought to have been indifferent between actions associated with
a lower versus higher likelihood of other-team harm because both outcomes yielded the same
amount of money to the self when they paid out. However, a preference for either avoiding or
seeking other-team harm would bias participants to select actions associated with either low or
high probability of harm, even during low payout periods for those actions. This is how
exhibiting a preference became costly: participants gave up real money to take subjectively
preferable actions. Finally, we examined whether subjective valuation of other-team spite was
correlated with negative out-group attitudes to bolster our confidence that participants’ behavior
reflected their social preferences.
COALITIONAL COGNITION 28
participants selected one of four slot machines and then received feedback. Each machine could yield a
burn (earn money for self/own-team and subtract money from competitor), an earn (earn money for
self/own-team), or a “no points” outcome (“miss” was only an option in the fMRI version of the task if
participants did not answer within the trial time). Bottom panel: Each machine paid out with a drifting
probability (orthogonal to one another), however each machine, when it did give a reward, had a fixed
probability of yielding an earn versus a burn. As such, participants could learn via experience which
machines were burn-biased and which machines were earn-biased. Adapted from Ichikawa, Moore, &
Cikara (2019).
Across these three studies, and in contrast to previous research (albeit with very different
paradigms that did not allow for learning via experience; e.g., Halevy, Bornstein, & Sagiv,
2008), participants exhibited a small (or absent) aversion to spite. At the individual level, more
negative other-team attitudes correlated with a greater preference for spiteful actions. These
effects held across hypothetical and political group conflicts, and both when participants were
COALITIONAL COGNITION 29
benefiting themselves and their coalitions. In short, greater dislike of the other team was
associated with greater subjective valuation of spiteful out-group harm. These results may have
important implications for escalation of inter-coalition aggression. If harm for harm’s sake acts
as a reinforcer for some, those people may be more likely to engage in harm without
provocation. These proactive aggressors are dangerous because their actions may incite other,
less inclined individuals to aggress as well; for example, people are twice as likely to imitate
aggressive behavior when it targets an ethnic out-group member relative to coethnics (Bauer,
Cahlíková, Chytilová, & Želinský, 2018). These and our findings together suggest that it may
take only a few proactive individuals to generate a contagious spiral of collective violence.
Another important future direction for this work is to determine how these emotions
serve to motivate behaviors that reinforce individuals’ coalition-related ideologies. We have
begun to examine this question specifically in the context of Social Dominance Orientation
(SDO; Hudson, Cikara, & Sidanius, 2019). SDO is an ideological variable indexing how much
people prefer and promote group-based inequalities. It is an excellent candidate as a moderator
of intergroup emotions because it is associated with a competitive worldview in which resources
are zero-sum and some groups deserve more than others. To the extent that people are
predisposed to view everything as a competition, they should also exhibit reduced empathy and
increased counter-empathy toward everyone, but especially toward those whose oppression
maintains the social hierarchy. Across three studies we found that higher SDO scores among
White participants were associated with less empathy and more Schadenfreude in response to
others' bad fortunes—this was for people in general. However, when we primed White
respondents with symbolic threat, they reported significantly less empathy and more
Schadenfreude for Asian and Black targets than for White targets. In a final study we found that
this pattern replicated even in novel groups, so long as the groups were competitive: higher SDO
scores were associated with decreased empathy and increased counter-empathy for competitive
team members relative to one’s own team members.
Do these emotion patterns facilitate hierarchy-reinforcing behaviors and lead people to
avoid those behaviors that might undermine the hierarchy? If so, people with differing ideologies
should be motivated to experience or avoid empathy and Schadenfreude. In ongoing work we’ve
found that people will relatively higher levels of SDO not only desire to feel less empathy and
Schadenfreude toward low-status targets, but when given a choice, choose to feel less empathy
and more Schadenfreude (Hudson, Cikara, & Sidanius, under review).
Thus, consistent with a coalitional account, high-status, competitive collectives are more
likely to be targets of Schadenfreude and harm than other collectives who do not exhibit those
features. The novel groups results illustrate the fluid nature of this phenomenon: groups need not
have a long history of interaction to elicit malevolent affective reactions. This suite of findings
are promising for at least two reasons. First, focusing on generalized features such as perceptions
of status and competitiveness affords us the ability to make predictions about when and which
collectives will be at greatest risk, particular in times of social instability when threat is
heightened for all collectives in an environment. Second, knowing that these perceptions are
malleable or context-bound, rather than “essential” to groups themselves, means it is possible to
combat hostile emotional and behavioral responses. Giving people this knowledge may empower
them to second guess their more cruel impulses across a variety of ethically consequential
contexts including, but not limited to policy preferences, discrimination, and inter-coalitional
conflict.
COALITIONAL COGNITION 30
3.3 Attributions of emotion
Just as cues to coalition competition and status shape our own emotions, so too do they
shape our attributions and expectations of emotion to other-coalition members. Accurate
expectations of emotions matter in inter-coalitional contexts because our perceptions and
forecasts of the other side’s emotions inform our decisions about and behaviors toward them.
In the first series of studies we ran examining attribution of emotion we focused on
judgments of facial displays of emotion (Lazerus et al., 2016). We tested two competing
hypotheses: an own-team accuracy hypothesis (that people would be more accurate judging own-
team emotion displays) and an own-team positivity bias hypothesis (that people would simply
judge own-team emotion displays as more positive than competitors’, irrespective of which
emotion they were displaying). In the first experiment we randomly assigned people into two
novel, competitive groups—the Green Team and the Blue Team—who were competing for a
bonus. Participants then rated the valence of both same-team and competitor-team members’
fearful, happy, and neutral facial expressions using a two dimensional grid including valence
(negative to positive) and arousal (low to high) dimensions. Irrespective of which emotions
targets displayed, participants judged own-team members’ expressions as more positive than
competitor-team members’ expressions. In the next experiment participants categorized same-
team and competitor-team members’ fearful and happy expressions as either “positive” or
“negative” in a mouse-tracking paradigm. Participants exhibited the most direct trajectories
toward the “positive” label for same-team happy expressions but also an initial attraction toward
“positive” for same-team fear faces. The competitor team trajectories were intermediate between
the two same-team trajectory extremes. Finally the last experiment replicated Experiment 2 and
demonstrated that the effect held irrespective of whether targets’ gaze was direct or averted. In
summary, we found support for the own-team positivity bias: people judged same-team faces as
more positive than competitor-faces, regardless of emotion, across multiple modes of
measurement.
In the second line of experiments in this emotion attribution line of research we moved
away from facial displays to examine affective forecasts for same-category, competitive-
category, and unspecified people in intergroup contexts (e.g., elections, football games; Lau,
Morewedge, & Cikara, 2016). Typically, providing forecasters with more relevant information
improves accuracy (Gilbert & Wilson, 2007). By contrast, we found that providing forecasters
with targets’ social-category information made forecasts more extreme and less accurate. In both
political and sports contexts, forecasters across five experiments overestimated the emotional
reactions of hypothetical targets when targets were labeled by category membership relative to
when they were unspecified. For example, when asked how people in the U.S. would feel if their
party lost/failed to gain the majority in the 2014 Senate midterm election, participants said
targets would be significantly unhappier (when the target was labeled as a “Democrat” or
“Republican” relative to just “person.” Importantly, this made forecasters less accurate: forecasts
for category labeled targets were more extreme than experiencers ratings of how they actually
felt. This overestimation effect held for both same-category and competitive-category members
and when predicting responses to positive and negative outcomes.
What was the source of this forecasting in accuracy? Having participants make judgments
under time pressure reduced the extremity of forecasts for category-labeled but not unspecified
targets, suggesting that the effect was due to overcorrection for social-category information
rather than differing priors for category-labeled versus unlabeled targets. What we discovered
was that stereotypes, rather than retrieval of extreme exemplars, better accounted for this
COALITIONAL COGNITION 31
overcorrection. Specifically, participants forecasted that a stereotypically unreactive but still
labeled category—Buddhists—would be least unhappy after suffering a loss in an online game,
followed by unspecified targets, with political party-labeled targets rated as most unhappy
to mind from each category. After making their forecast, participants indicated how that target
would rank among 100 of his or her peers who also watched their group lose the tournament.
Forecasters did not report recruiting more extreme exemplars when making predictions for
category-labeled targets. Therefore, stereotypes, in particular those associated with competitive
categories, drove overcorrection, making forecasts less accurate.
along with peer-rank estimates for each target. On the y-axis, 0 indicates neutral affect. Error bars
represent +/- 1 SEM. Adapted from Lau et al. (2016).
Nowhere is the importance of accurate affective forecasts more consequential for inter-
coalitional behavior than group-meta perceptions. What ‘we’ believe ‘they’ feel about us and our
behavior contributes to our assessments of the possibility of inter-coalitional coordination versus
conflict. Inaccuracy, more specifically pessimism, in these estimates (e.g., I believe that you’re
outraged by my coalition and everything we do) forecloses on the possibility of working together
effectively (Lees & Cikara, 2020). Our first aim was to test whether people were inaccurate in
their group meta-perceptions. In one of the experiments we asked a representative sample of
Democrats and Republicans to read a series of scenarios about interparty sabotage. The scenarios
ranged from one party changing a highway name so it was named for a beloved party member to
one party gerrymandering a district in their favor. Each respondent was randomly assigned to
one of three treatments: an actual perception condition, an in-group perception condition, or a
group meta-perception condition. In the actual perception condition we just asked Democrats and
COALITIONAL COGNITION 32
Republicans: how much would you dislike it if the other party engaged in this behavior? In the
in-group perception condition we asked people: how much would the average fellow in-group
member dislike it if the other party engaged in this behavior? Finally in the group meta-
perception condition we asked: how much would the average out-group member dislike it if
YOUR party engaged in this behavior? Averaged across scenarios Democrats and Republicans in
the actual perception condition indicated dislike at only about the midpoint of the scale: 55 out of
100. What about estimates for a fellow party member? Here we already began to see inaccuracy.
People reported that fellow party members would be significantly more upset—about 11 points
more—than Democrats and Republicans actually were. Finally, in the group meta-perception
condition, the average dislike rating was 77 with many responses clustering at 100: maximal
dislike. In other words people’s meta-perceptions of how upset the other side would be were
inflated by 40% relative to how the other side said they would actually feel. Democrats and
Republicans exhibited this inaccuracy in equal measure and the pattern of data was identical
when we asked how opposed respondents were to the behavior and how unacceptable they
thought the behaviors were. Note that when we changed the behaviors so that they were
cooperative (e.g., gerrymandered a distract in the other party’s favor) group meta-perceptions
were accurate. Thus group meta-perception inaccuracy is not just an extremity bias in how we
believe the out-group will react to the in-group’s actions in general, but rather, and more
specifically, a negativity bias in competitive contexts.
Recall also that in this first study we asked participants to respond to a series of scenarios
that varied in how severe they were in undermining democracy. In a re-analysis of our data, we
found that respondents were sensitive to severity when making judgments about fellow party-
the average Democrat in the fellow in-group conditions reported that they believed other
Democrats would be more upset about gerrymandering than renaming a highway. This was not
the case for the group meta-perception condition; “upset” ratings were high irrespective of the
behavior under consideration. Again, as an example, the average Democrat reported that they
believed the average Republican would be equally upset across all the scenarios. This pattern
suggests that overly negative group meta-perceptions do not result from a lack of knowledge per
se (in this case the relative extremity of the scenarios), but rather from an inability (or
unwillingness) to apply the knowledge we already possess.
Are these misperceptions actually related to estimates of the possibility of coordination?
In a follow-up study we replicated just the group meta-perception condition and then asked
participants to what extent they thought the opposing political party was driven by purposeful
obstructionism. As predicted, greater meta-perception inaccuracy was associated with increased
belief that the other party is motivated by purposeful obstructionism. However, this was just a
correlation study. As such, we followed up with an intervention experiment. Again, we
replicated just the group meta-perception condition but then assigned participants to one of three
interventions: one that showed them what their meta-perception rating had been on the previous
page (control), one that informed them of the other party’s average response (meta-perception
correction), and one that informed them both of their own party’s and the other party’s average
response (in-group and meta-perception condition). The correction intervention worked;
participants who were assigned to the group-meta perception correction condition reported lower
ratings of out-group obstructionism than did the control group and the in-group correction
conferred no additional benefit.
COALITIONAL COGNITION 33
(by panel), condition: in-group perception (blue-dashed) vs. meta-perception (orange solid), and other
participants’ actual or true values in predicting participants’ judgments. For both parties, results indicate
significant and positive linear relationships between in-group perceptions and corresponding “true”
values, providing evidence for rank-related accuracy; there is no such evidence for rank-related accuracy
in group meta-perceptions. Error bars 95% CIs. Adapted from Lees & Cikara, (2021).
Particularly exciting is that these results replicate and generalize across cultures (Ruggieri
et al., under review). A team of over 80 researchers replicated both our basic meta-perception
effect and our intervention in a sample of over 10,000 participants spread over 26 countries
(using a variety of competitive social groups). Thus we are reasonably confident that this is not a
uniquely U.S. or even political phenomenon.
Unlike intervening on first-order polarization—e.g., trying to change people’s actual
issue positions or prejudices—combating misperceptions of polarization is just about improving
accuracy: specifically, improving accuracy in how ‘they’ see ‘us.’ This highlights one way that
meta-perceptions are uniquely powerful. They are ultimately about ourselves. The drives to be
liked and respected are core social motives (Fiske, 2018b). Thus people may be uniquely
COALITIONAL COGNITION 34
sensitive to corrective information about how others see them and their groups (particularly if it
is in a relatively more positive light)—certainly more sensitive than they are about how wrong
they are about “them.”
Again, consistent with a coalitional account, cues to competitiveness reliably distort
emotion attribution to other-coalition members across a wide variety of methodological
assessments and intergroup contexts. These distortions have demonstrable implications for
predictions regarding inter-coalition coordination and hold some potential for reducing suspicion
amongst coalitions in conflict.
4. INTERVENTIONS
One of the primary benefits of a coalitional account is that it highlights the specific cues
that drive the cleaving of collectives into “in-groups” and “out-groups,” irrespective of whether
those inferences come from collectives’ size, actual functional relations between collectives, or
even divisive political rhetoric. This orientation gives us greater purchase on what levers to pull
to try to attenuate inter-coalitional conflict.
4.1 Manipulating experienced or implied competition and coordination
If ideologies such as SDO, which imbue people with a chronic tendency to see the world
as a competitive place, increase inter-coalitional antagonism, one possibility is that reducing
individuals’ chronic experience of threat might mitigate said antagonism. In line with this
proposition, we found that priming people with secure attachment schemas significantly
decreased negative out-group emotions and aggressive inter-coalition behavior (Saleem, Prot,
Cikara, Anderson, & Lam, 2013). Across a series of studies employing variants of the guided
imagination task (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2001), we randomly assigned participants to write either
about an experience with close others or a trip to the grocery story. American participants who
recalled a time when someone close to them was available, supportive, and loving reported
feeling significantly less intense negative emotions (e.g., fear, anger, disgust) toward Arab
people relative to participants in the control condition. This effect was not accounted for by
increases in positive mood more generally and replicated when the group was identified as
Muslims or Ohio State University students (for the University of Michigan sample). More
important, participants primed with a secure attachment schema were less likely to support
military and aggressive measures against ISIS members compared with those in the positive
mood induction and control conditions. One of the benefits of an approach like this is that it does
not harbor the same potential for backfiring, that, say recategorization might. Telling people that
they suddenly belong to the same group as “the other side” can threaten group distinctiveness
(e.g., Spears, Doosje, & Ellemers, 1997) and dampen motivation for progressive social change of
the groups are of differing status (e.g., Saguy, Tausch, Dovidio, & Pratto, 2009). Because it is
effectively a self-focused strategy, priming attachment security sidesteps these risks.
A more intuitive manipulation is simply to provide people with information that reduces
perceptions of other categories as a threat. In a recent suite of experiments, we attempted to
leverage positive, achievement-oriented narratives, which emphasize broader contributions to
society (and therefore coordination with all collectives) to reduce prejudice and discrimination,
specifically toward immigrants (Martinez, Feldman, Feldman, & Cikara, in press). Why
immigrants? The U.S. and other western countries have seen massive backlash in response to a
perceived influx of immigrants, particularly those who are non-white in recent years. One
COALITIONAL COGNITION 35
driving force of this backlash is the rhetoric—specifically the “criminal narrative”—surrounding
the character of immigrants and their impact on residents’ lives. Though claims of relatively
greater criminality among some immigrant groups are statistically unfounded (Lee & Martinez,
2009), these claims may nevertheless alter the structure of the cognitive representation of
“immigrants” as a whole—for example, cleaving immigrants into “good” vs. “bad” subgroups,
or more specifically, “white” and “non-white” subgroups (Flores & Schachter, 2018). Of course
at the time of data collection these criminal characterizations were already widespread. If
participants’ representations were subgrouped prior to beginning the experiment, then another
way to test whether narratives could alter them was to examine the opposing effect of
coordination-emphasizing narratives, e.g., the achievement narrative (e.g., Moffit, Nardon, &
Zhang, 2019). From a representation-structure perspective, achievement narratives should
counteract subgrouping effects by making all immigrants from all countries more similar to one
another, because positive stimuli tend to be rated and represented more similarly than negative
stimuli (Alves et al., 2017). Why would subgrouping dampen (or homogenization increase)
support for immigrants and immigration? Greater accessibility of negative relative to positive
exemplars (Rozin & Royzman, 2001) makes it more likely that people will substitute “bad”
immigrants for “immigrants” in general when considering their policy preferences. If all
immigrants are the same (and cooperative), negative exemplars are less likely to come to mind
and inform policy choices.
Across two experiments we manipulated participants’ exposure to criminal, achievement,
or struggle-oriented descriptions of immigrants in order to assess how they impact participants’
latent representations of four politically salient immigrant groups—Germans, Russians, Syrians,
and Mexicans. We included struggle narratives as a control condition to isolate the effect of
criminalized narratives above and beyond being negatively-valenced. We then applied a novel
analytic technique borrowed from cognitive neuroscience—representational similarity analysis—
to extract participants’ latent cognitive representations of these immigrant groups and their
members.
As predicted, we found that criminal, achievement, and struggle-oriented narratives about
different immigrant groups shaped the way people represent these groups and their members;
these representations, in turn, informed immigration policy preferences. Most troubling, was that
criminal narratives fostered racialized immigrant representations (i.e., creating two clusters of
white versus non-white immigrants in trait space)—even among our most egalitarian
respondents. Achievement narratives, by contrast, made immigrants from different backgrounds
more similar to one another and increased respondents’ support for immigration.
Of course, in many cases we cannot simply “prime” away competitiveness or force
coordination when there are, or have been, real zero-sum resources at stake (nor would it be
desirable to do away entirely with conflict; Cikara & Paluck, 2014). For example, in the
Experiments 3a and 3b examining the effect of competition among novel groups on (counter-)
empathy we found that the intergroup empathy bias persisted even after competitor threat was
decreased (participants learned their team had pulled ahead) or eliminated (participants learned
their team had won the problem-solving challenge; Cikara et al., 2014). The recent history of
competition without subsequent cues to increased capacity or desire to coordinate carried the
empathy gap forward. So what are the alternatives to manipulating the experience or perception
of other-coalition competition and status?
4.2 Reducing perceptions of coalitional cohesion via individuation
COALITIONAL COGNITION 36
From a coalitional perspective, the capacity and desire to coordinate (or not) are doing
the work of imbuing collectives with the quality of ‘groupiness.’ Similar to the way that large
external magnetic fields align hydrogen nuclei, competition gives rise to the inference that other-
coalition members are united in their purpose against ‘us.’ Thus directly targeting this quality by
dismantling perceptions of coalitional cohesion carries the potential to change attitudes,
emotions, and behavior. For example, in Experiment 4 of the novel groups/empathy paper
(Cikara et al., 2014) we found that we could significantly attenuate the intergroup empathy bias
by providing participants with visual cues to reduced in-group and out-group distinctiveness (see
high-distinctiveness condition (left), and the low-distinctiveness conditions (right). Adapted from Cikara
et al. (2014).
With this goal of dismantling perceptions of coalitional cohesion in mind, we conducted a
series of experiments in which we tested whether embedding the good and bad fortune
information about same-team versus competitor-team targets in a larger narrative individuated
the targets and thereby attenuated the intergroup empathy bias (Bruneau, Cikara, & Saxe, 2015).
Indeed it did. Moreover, we found that narratives, which endowed each target with a mind
through descriptions of their mental states, were more effective at decreasing empathy bias than
group membership (but not memory for other aspects of the scenarios) mediated the relationship
between the narrative manipulation and the empathy bias, suggesting that the narratives had their
effect by shifting focus away from each target’s group membership toward individuating
information.
In another line of research, we found that asking people to vividly simulate a helping
scenario increased how much people helped opposing political party members (Gaesser,
Shimura, & Cikara, 2019). Particularly surprising was that scene vividness (rather than the
vividness of the person participants imagined helping) and perspective-taking independently
drove increases in helping. This suggests that the sensory properties of simulations, especially
when they pull attention away from person-specific features like group membership, may play a
much larger role in social behavior than we have previously recognized (Vollberg & Cikara,
2018). We have recently replicated this increase in empathy for both same and opposing political
party members using an incidental manipulation of episodic simulation that does not direct
COALITIONAL COGNITION 37
people to simulate helping at all, but rather just potentiates one’s tendency to engage in episodic
simulation (Vollberg, Gaesser, & Cikara, under review).
response to good and bad fortunes presented by themselves (event-only) or after a
narrative about the target (event + narrative). Right: At the end of the study, participants performed a 2-
alternative forced-choice task to recall the group membership of each of the 16 targets (group memory),
or the event that happened to each target (event memory). Error bars represent SEM. Adapted from
Bruneau et al. (2015).
I would be remiss, however, if I did not emphasize that simply increasing empathy for
other-coalition members is not a panacea. One common assumption is that exercises designed to
increase empathy should eliminate empathic failures and their assumed consequences (e.g.,
harm), but the story is not so simple (for reviews, see Zaki & Cikara, 2015; Weisz & Cikara, in
press). Our findings strongly challenge that assumption. We find that neglectful behavior and
policy preferences are better predicted by the size of the gap between in-group and out-group
empathy, rather than participants’ absolute levels of empathy. For example, across three studies
we found that American respondents cared more about fellow Americans suffering misfortunes
relative to Arabs; Hungarians were more empathic toward their countrymen than Muslim
refugees; and the same with Greeks toward Germans. And across all three studies, people’s
empathy gaps—controlling for participants’ trait empathic concern—predicted their perspectives
on policy: how much Americans approved of Arab immigration, how many asylum seekers
Hungary should accept, and how much Greece should help if a natural disaster hit Germany
(Bruneau, Cikara, & Saxe, 2017). Therefore, interventions or programs aimed at increasing
overall empathy (e.g., generalized compassion training) may have little or no effect on increasing
inter-coalition harmony or so long as that gap is maintained.
One final intriguing possibility is that we can fight a group-level cognitive bias with an
individuating cognitive bias: specifically in this case the good-true-self bias, which falls
specifically out of reasoning about the essence of an individual person. Mounting evidence
indicates that people exhibit a robust, invariant tendency to believe that inside every individual
there is a ‘good true self’ calling every person to behave in morally virtuous ways and that this
essence is separate from a person’s superficial features (Strohminger et al., 2017). This bias is
present across cultures, perspectives (first versus third), and individual differences, and appears
to be rooted in the basic cognitive tendency to assume that all entities have deep, unobservable,
COALITIONAL COGNITION 38
inherent properties that comprise their true nature (DeFreitas et al., 2017). If this is the case, then
even threatening category members should be judged as having good true selves, deep down. A
positive bias that falls out of thinking about the essence of an individual person could be
leveraged to reduce a negative bias that falls out of thinking about the nature of a threatening
coalition.
Across three experiments we tested whether Americans believed that an American, an
Arab, and an Arab in the U.S. all contain good true selves, deep down, to equal extents
(DeFreitas & Cikara, 2017). Not only did our participants attribute good true selves across these
targets in equal measure, we found that asking Americans to reflect on individual Arab targets’
true selves first made them less prejudiced toward and less threatened by Arab people in general
and more likely to donate money to the Syrian Arab Red Crescent charity (relative to people who
completed prejudice/donation judgments prior to making true self judgments). We submit that
thinking about whether an agent's behavior reflected their true versus surface-self led to a
particularly strong form of individuation, which in turn led to more nuanced representations of
all people as possessing multiple layers (i.e., surface self could go either way but the true self is
good) rather than merely characterizing people as “us” (good) versus “them” (bad).
5. CONCLUSION
To summarize:
• The contemporary intergroup literature has emphasized the role of category-membership
over coalitional structure; however research treating demographic categories as purposive
groups will often run into explanatory limitations and may ironically end up reinforcing
stereotypes.
• We should focus much more instead on the conditions under which coalitional
psychology gets activated: the recognition that another is able and willing (or not) to
engage in behavior having accounted for your and others’ welfare.
Even in the absence of threat or competition, the inference of coordination
difficulty or improbability may be sufficient to mark someone as an out-group
member. Coordination ease (or difficulty) may or may not track with shared
category membership.
People of all ages are sensitive to how well agents coordinate not just with
themselves but with others in the environment, indicating that people are prone to
building representations of coordinated coalitions—or social structures—out in
the world rather than just egocentric, dyadic similarities or interdependencies.
Neural responses associated with generalized “us” vs. “them” representations are
consistent with the hypothesis that salience, specifically functional significance or
evaluation (i.e., will this stimulus help me or not?), is the primary dimension of
distinction.
As predicted by a coalitional account, stereotypes and prejudices change because
people are sensitive to generalized group features that signal threat or
coordination, invariant to the groups in question (e.g., members of the largest
minoritized group in a county were significantly more likely to be targeted with
hate crimes relative to when their own category ranked second or lower in the
minority group size distribution in the same county).
COALITIONAL COGNITION 39
• Once coalitional psychology has been activated there is a whole cascade of consequences
for our social preferences, emotions, and attributions. However, the nature of these
consequences will hinge on the particulars of the functional relations between coalitions.
People are more willing to sacrifice groups that are stereotyped as unable and
unwilling to coordinate in the absence of any group labels.
Acting as part of a competitive collective can reduce the salience of one’s own
moral standards and, in turn, enable out-group harm.
Inter-coalitional competition not only reduces empathy but also increases pleasure
in response to the other side’s suffering, i.e., Schadenfreude: in sports contexts,
when targets are merely stereotyped as competitive and able, and when equally
able novel groups are placed in competition with one another. This emotional
profile is associated with greater willingness to harm the other side.
Preliminary findings suggest that emotions like Schadenfreude may serve to
motivate preferences for out-group harm via (i) reinforcement learning-like
updating mechanisms and (ii) observers’ ideologies: specifically Social
Dominance Orientation.
Cues to coalition competition and status also shape our attributions and
expectations of emotion to other-coalition members. People judge same-team
faces as more positive than competitor-faces, regardless of emotion, across
multiple modes of measurement. More important for conflict escalation: people
significantly overestimate how outraged competitive coalitions will be toward
their own group’s behaviors, which is associated with reduced estimates of of the
possibility of coordination.
• One of the primary benefits of a coalitional account is that it highlights the specific cues
that drive the cleaving of collectives into “in-groups” and “out-groups.”
Reducing individuals’ chronic experience of threat via secure attachment primes
or providing people with information that reduces perceptions of other categories
as threatening mitigates inter-coalitional antagonism.
Reducing perceptions of coalitional cohesion—via individuation, episodic
simulation, or the good-true-self bias—also increases empathy and helping
behavior toward competitive, threatening out-groups.
My primary goal here was to catalog some of the evidence we have to indicate that much
of what we understand as intergroup conflict stems not from category membership or features we
believe are intrinsic to said categories but rather from our recognition of one another’s capacity
for and likelihood of coordination: not only with oneself but with others. The principal strength
of the coalitional approach is that it allows us to make predictions about novel intergroup
contexts and about how intergroup dynamics may change over time rather than having to appeal
post-hoc to intergroup-specific factors to explain conflict.
That said, I want to be clear that my aim is not to dismiss the roles of specific group
histories or group-bound stereotypes. Nor do I want to claim histories and stereotypes have no
explanatory power. Rather my aim is to ask: where do those histories and stereotypes come
from? What would a unifying framework of “group” psychology look like? To answer these
questions we have to abstract away from many of the details that are category-bound. I also think
it is important to remember that so many of the categories that intergroup conflict researchers
study are those that are imposed by us on the very populations we are interested in understanding
(whether or not their constituent members consent to those category assignments). These priors
COALITIONAL COGNITION 40
are at best placeholders and at worst misguided structures preventing us from gaining a deeper
understanding of the causal factors and constructs at work in conflict.
There are many exciting next steps to take in this line of thinking, many of which I have
already highlighted. Very broadly, our field must grapple with the notion that we lack a scientific
definition of the generalized concept of “group.” Instead we appeal to attributes that tend to
characterize collectives we perceive as “groups” to then define groups as construct
which group it belongs? We have already seen that similarity is insufficient. So what are the
correct inputs? My hope is that the framework and findings reviewed here will help to move this
line of questioning forward.
COALITIONAL COGNITION 41