The Importance Of Applying Environmental
Materials In Learning Indonesian
By: Silvia Anggraini / 19016194
Universitas Negeri Padang
Silviaanggraini190701@gmail.com
Maintaining and caring for the environment, we must instill it from an early age. The
environment is the place where all living things live on earth, including humans, animals and plants, we
must protect it. The environment is very important for survival. Because if the environment does not exist
then humans, animals, and plants cannot survive.
According to Ramadhan, Sukma, and Indriyani (2020), environmental education can be
integrated into the learning process. Environmental education can be used as a science that can be
integrated with various supporting branches of knowledge in the learning process. Sukma, Ramadhan, and
Indriyani (2019) said that the lack of reading about environmental problems and a lack of interest and
concern because the environment is one of the factors causing it. Guci, Ramadhan, and Nursaid (2016)
said that the environment is everything that is around humans as individuals or in the process of social
interaction and the relationships between the various organisms in which they live. Wasillah, Ramadhan,
and Noveria (2016) said that language activities can be learned by students through Indonesian language
learning which aims to improve their ability to communicate in Indonesian properly and correctly. Suardi,
Ramadhan, and Asri (2019) said that the acquisition of a person's first language is very much influenced
by the family environment around the child.
Ramadhan, Sukma, Indriyani (2019) said technology is the basis for finding various types of
information via the internet. According to Angin, Ramadhan, and Agustina (2015) students are more
sensitive to their environment because they can present their observations through advertisements.
According to Fitri, Ramadhan, and Tamsin (2016) teachers plan, implement, evaluate, and apply learning
models to students so they don't learn quickly. Sukma (2012) states that literature learning is aimed at
improving students' abilities to enjoy, appreciate, and understand literary works and take lessons from the
noble values hidden in them. According to Sukma (2007) the delivery of learning objectives and steps
aims to focus students' minds on what students must achieve and master in learning, so that students do
not experience difficulties.
Based on the above problems, the authors conducted research on "Benefits of Environmental
Materials in Indonesian Language Learning" with the title of the author's essay "The Importance Of
applying Environmental Materials In Learning Indonesian" which was distributed to students. The
number of students who filled out the questionnaire was 30 people such as IAIN Bukittinggi Semester III
students, UIN Imam Bonjol Padang students Semester III, Stikes Syedza Saintika students in semester V
and semester III, Universitas Negeri Padang semester III and semester I, students from Universitas
Pattimura semester III, and Universitas Andalas Semester III. All respondents are required to provide
gender. From the total number of respondents who filled out the questionnaire, it turned out that women
were more dominant than men, with the presentation of women (100%) and men (0%). This study uses
google form, the author provides 10 questions that must be filled in by respondents who fill out the
questionnaire. The results obtained from this study are as follows. The first question, namely learning
Indonesian is very useful in environmental material states agree (56.7%), strongly agree (43.3%), disagree
(0%) and disagree (0%). The second question, namely in learning Indonesian, discourse material (text)
with the theme of the environment is one strategy to integrate education, states agree (63.3%), strongly
agree (33.3%), disagree (00.3%) and disagree (0%). The third question, namely themes based on
environmental material is a source of knowledge in Indonesian language learning, agreeing (66.7%),
strongly agree (26.7%), disagree (6.7%) and disagree (0%). ). The fourth question, namely learning
Indonesian is a must in preserving and protecting the environment, agreeing (66.7%), strongly agree
(26.7%), disagree (6.7%) and disagree (0%). The fifth question, namely learning Indonesian based on the
environment is strived so that the grammar and diversity of languages that represent biodiversity in the
environment agree (76.7%), strongly agree (23.3%), disagree (0%) and disagree (0 %). The sixth question,
namely through environment-based learning can restore interaction with the environment, agreeing (60%),
strongly agree (40%), disagree (0%) and disagree (0%). The seventh question, namely in the learning
environment is an important thing in relation to a language, states agree (80%), strongly agree (20%),
disagree (0%) and disagree (0%). The eighth question, namely the environment in society can be
presented as a source of learning Indonesian, states agree (70%), strongly agree (30%), disagree (0%) and
disagree (0%). The ninth question, namely learning Indonesian based on the environment is the
implementation of environmental education, agreeing (73.3%), strongly agree (23.3%), disagree (00.3%)
and disagree (0%). The last question, namely environment-based Indonesian language learning is learning
that emphasizes the environment as a medium or learning resource, agreeing (66.7%), strongly agree
(33.3%), disagree (0%) and disagree (0%) .
From the results of the author's research above, it can be concluded that environmental material is
very important to be applied in Indonesian language learning. The school environment can be integrated
into Indonesian language subjects, namely, by linking the material being taught with environmental
education.