Running Head: OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 1
Emotions as overlapping causal networks of emotion components: Implications and
methodological approaches
a b
Jens Lange & Janis H. Zickfeld
a b
University of Hamburg, Aarhus University
Emotion Review
in press at
Author Notes
Jens Lange, University of Hamburg, Department of Psychology, Germany. Janis H.
Zickfeld, Aarhus University, Department of Management, Denmark.
Correspondence should be addressed to Jens Lange, University of Hamburg, Von-
Melle-Park 5, 20146 Hamburg, Germany, E-mail: lange.jens@outlook.com.
The research reported in this article was supported by grants from the German
Research foundation (DFG) awarded to Jens Lange (LA 4029/1-1, LA 4029/2-1).
We thank the members of the Amsterdam Interdisciplinary Centre for Research on
Emotion at the University of Amsterdam, the members of the group for General Psychology II
at the University of Cologne, the members of the group for Social Psychology at the
University of Jena, and the members of the Affective Sciences Group at the University of
Oslo for valuable feedback. Jens Lange presented parts of this research at the conference of
the International Society for Research on Emotions in Amsterdam 2019.
Data and the analysis script of the example are available on the Open Science
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 2
Abstract
A widespread perspective describes emotions as distinct categories bridged by fuzzy
boundaries, indicating that emotions are distinct and dimensional at the same time.
Theoretical and methodological approaches to this perspective still need further development.
We conceptualize emotions as overlapping networks of causal relationships between emotion
components networks representing distinct emotions share components with and relate to
each other. To investigate this conceptualization, we introduce network analysis to emotion
research and apply it to the reanalysis of a data set on multiple positive emotions. Specifically,
we describe the estimation of networks from data and the detection of overlapping
communities of nodes in these networks. The network perspective has implications for the
understanding of distinct emotions, their co-occurrence, and their measurement.
Keywords: emotion networks, network analysis, clique percolation
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 3
Emotions as overlapping causal networks of emotion components: Implications and
methodological approaches
Emotion research has for a long time faced a conundrum. In a dominating school of
thought, emotions are discrete and evoked by independent mechanisms, causing various
component changes (e.g., cognitions, facial expressions) that the respective emotion entails
(Levenson, 1994). From this perspective, emotions are distinct because multiple components
are uniquely tied to them (Ekman & Cordaro, 2011), allowing to measure a particular emotion
by assessing its specific changes. However, research converges on the conclusion that all
emotions share multiple component changes with other emotions (e.g., Ellsworth & Scherer,
2003; Siegel et al., 2018; Witkower & Tracy, 2019), implying that few components are indeed
unique indicators of specific emotions. Such observations led to the widely shared perspective
that emotions are distinct categories with fuzzy boundaries between them (e.g., Cowen &
Keltner, 2017; Fehr & Russell, 1984) emotions are distinct, yet they share various
components. A theoretical approach explaining this perspective is not yet available.
In the present article, we provide such a theoretical approach. Specifically, we
conceptualize emotions as networks of causally connected emotion components, and we argue
that the causal networks of different emotions overlap. From this perspective, emotions are
distinct, while they also share components with and relate to other emotions. Our goal is (a) to
provide a theoretical conceptualization accounting for the nature of distinct emotions and (b)
to introduce methodological tools to investigate overlapping causal networks.
Conceptualizations of Emotions
Traditionally, theories conceptualized emotions as discrete (for a review of an
alternative tradition see Gendron & Barrett, 2009). In these conceptualizations, distinct innate
mechanisms (e.g., neural programs or appraisal patterns) trigger emotions, causing unique
changes in the person (e.g., Ekman, 1999; Ekman & Cordaro, 2011; Panksepp, 2007).
Accordingly, research demarcated emotions from each other by testing whether they differ in
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 4
specific vocalizations (Cordaro, Keltner, Tshering, Wangchuk, & Flynn, 2016; Sauter, Eisner,
Ekman, & Scott, 2010), action tendencies (Frijda, Kuipers, & ter Schure, 1989), physiological
changes (Ekman, Levenson, & Friesen, 1983), or, most prominently, facial muscle
contractions (Cordaro et al., 2018; for a review on multiple components see also Lench,
Flores, & Bench, 2011). For instance, research suggested that the appraisal of goal obstruction
uniquely signals anger (Ekman & Cordaro, 2011), lower somatic activity uniquely signals
fear (Levenson, Carstensen, Friesen, & Ekman, 1991), or tears uniquely signal sadness
(Cordaro et al., 2016).
Even though each emotion may have a distinct mechanism, emotions are not entirely
independent of each other. Specifically, in daily life, people frequently experience blends of
distinct emotions (Scherer, Wranik, Sangsue, Tran, & Scherer, 2004) that can even be of
opposite valence (Larsen & McGraw, 2014; Moeller, Ivcevic, Brackett, & White, 2018;
Trampe, Quoidbach, & Taquet, 2015). Moreover, theorizing argues that non-basic emotions
(e.g., shame, guilt) are constructed from or accompanied by basic emotions (Oatley &
Johnson-Laird, 1987). Relatedly, measures of different emotions are oftentimes positively
correlated at both the state (e.g., Weidman & Tracy, 2020) and trait level (Diener, Smith, &
Fujita, 1995) and these correlations between emotions or their components map onto a lower-
dimensional space, specified for instance, by valence, arousal, or potency (e.g., Fontaine,
Scherer, Roesch, & Ellsworth, 2007; Russell, 1980; Wundt, 1887). Put to the extreme, the
same emotion words sometimes measure different emotions (Weidman, Steckler, & Tracy,
2017). These findings imply that multiple distinct emotions relate to each other, while certain
dimensions can represent these relationships (for a stricter understanding of dimensions as
biological primitives see, for instance, Russell, 2003).
The perspective that emotions may be simultaneously distinct and nevertheless
arranged on multiple dimensions is widespread. Notably, in a survey among established
emotion researchers, the majority endorsed this view (Ekman, 2016). Such a position also
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 5
prevails in specific emotion theories (Plutchik, 1982) or measurement tools (Scherer, 2005).
Recently, studies with ratings of thousands of representatively sampled emotional videos,
vocal bursts, or emotional expressions indeed supported the perspective (Cowen, Sauter,
Tracy, & Keltner, 2019) even across cultures (Cowen, Fang, Sauter, & Keltner, 2020). The
emotional stimuli clustered together, and participants consistently labeled these clusters with
respective emotion terms. Yet, most emotional stimuli elicited states that participants labeled
with different emotion terms. In line with such findings, it is reasonable to argue that the
boundaries between emotions are fuzzy, defined as conceptual overlap of emotions that
manifests in shared (i.e., non-unique) components (Fehr & Russell, 1984; Russell & Fehr,
1994). For instance, multiple emotions share appraisals (Ellsworth & Scherer, 2003; Kuppens,
Van Mechelen, Smits, & De Boeck, 2003), have physiological changes in common (Siegel et
al., 2018), or include similar expressive displays (Witkower & Tracy, 2019). These findings
indicate that many if not all emotional experiences are in fact combinations of multiple
— —
emotions in terms of shared components.
A satisfactory theoretical conceptualization of how emotions can be distinct and
dimensional at the same time is still lacking. Such a conceptualization must account for two
observations. First, emotions are distinct in a sense that they have at least some characteristics
that distinguish them from other emotions. Second, emotions have fuzzy boundaries in a sense
that they share components with each other. We aim to provide one theoretical
conceptualization that accounts for these observations (for a discussion of other models that
could be extended to alternative conceptualizations see Lange, Dalege, Borsboom, Van Kleef,
& Fischer, 2020; see also Barrett, 2011; Coan, 2010; Schmittmann et al., 2013).
Emotions as Causal Networks
We base our argument on a definition of emotions as synchronized changes in
multiple components. That is, when people experience an emotion, this changes their feelings,
cognitions, physiology, motivations, and expressive behaviors (e.g., Moors, 2009; Niedenthal
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 6
& Ric, 2017). In fact, most emotion theories share the notion that emotions entail changes in
multiple components (e.g., Coppin & Sander, 2016; Izard, 2010; Russell, 2003), even though
different theories emphasize different components. Not all emotions entail changes in all these
components, but all emotions entail changes in at least some of them (Fehr & Russell, 1984).
A central finding is that the component changes of an emotion cause each other.
Specifically, multiple theories of emotions in general (Lewis, 2005; Scherer, 2009) or of
specific emotions such as shame (Gausel, Leach, Vignoles, & Brown, 2012), envy (Lange,
Weidman, & Crusius, 2018), or kama muta (Fiske, Seibt, & Schubert, 2019) at least indirectly
rely on the notion of causal relationships between emotion components. Moreover, research
implies that there are causal relationships between cognitions and all other components
(Scherer & Moors, 2019), between motivations and feelings (Carver & Scheier, 1990), or
between expressive behaviors and feelings as well as physiological changes (Coles, Larsen, &
Lench, 2019).
Based on this central finding, we propose to conceptualize emotions as networks of
causally interacting emotion components (Lange et al., 2020; see also Bringmann et al.,
2016). According to this conceptualization, emotions are dynamical systems that evolve over
time (for similar theoretical conceptualizations see Izard, Ackerman, Schoff, & Fine, 2000;
Lewis, 2005). They are episodes or events that unfold along the causal relationships in the
network. In line with common terminology, emotion components are then called nodes and
their causal connections are called edges. In this conceptualization, a network that entails
causal connections between, for instance, physiological arousal, aggressive thoughts,
frowning, and attack motivation would constitute anger. In a relevant situation, physiological
arousal may increase aggressive thoughts, mediating an effect on attack motivation and
frowning, while frowning could further increase physiological arousal via facial feedback. As
components of one emotion typically cohere strongly with only some components of the same
emotion but weakly with others (e.g., Evers et al., 2014; Mauss, Levenson, McCarter,
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 7
Wilhelm, & Gross, 2005), one emotion likely entails groups of components that are more
tightly connected to each other than with other components (Lange et al., 2020). For instance,
theories of specific emotions such as awe (Yaden et al., 2019), envy (Lange et al., 2018), or
shame (Gausel et al., 2012) are based on the notion that subgroups of components of the
respective emotion (e.g., some thoughts and motivations) cohere more strongly with each
other than with other subgroups of components of the same emotion.
If emotions are causal networks of emotion components, various networks of distinct
emotions probably overlap they share various nodes and are related to each other. This
proposition directly follows from the observation that emotions have fuzzy boundaries.
Despite such overlap, there can nevertheless be distinct components or distinct relationships
between components for each emotion (Campos, Shiota, Keltner, Gonzaga, & Goetz, 2013).
For instance, in both awe the emotion experienced when trying to accommodate vastness
(Keltner & Haidt, 2003) and admiration the emotion experienced
— — in response to other’s
excellence (Schindler, Zink, Windrich, & Menninghaus, 2013) people may wonder about
something they observe. Yet, awe entails passive contemplation and freeze reactions (e.g.,
time slowing down), which directly opposes the improvement motivation and activation that
admiration entails (Onu, Kessler, & Smith, 2016). Moreover, awe and gratitude the feeling
moral deeds (McCullough,
that one has been the beneficiary of another individual’s
Kilpatrick, Emmons, & Larson, 2001) both entail prosocial behavior towards other people
and are regarded as self-transcendent emotions, but feature different appraisals, subjective
feelings, and facial expressions (Campos et al., 2013; Stellar et al., 2017). Notably, even when
the networks representing different emotions share nodes or are related to each other, the
components of one emotion should be more tightly connected to each other than to the
components of another emotion, allowing to distinguish emotions from each other.
These arguments lead to a conceptualization of emotions as overlapping causal
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 8
emotions. First, each emotion constitutes a causal network of partly connected emotion
components. These patterns of components can account for the observation that emotions are
distinct. Second, some emotion components belong to the networks of multiple emotions or
relate to components of other networks. Such network overlap accounts for the observation
that emotions have fuzzy boundaries. Moreover, network overlap provides an explanation for
why emotions are correlated and, hence, why different emotions can be arranged on
dimensions. Thus, conceptualizing emotions as networks (Lange et al., 2020) may explain
how emotions can be distinct with fuzzy boundaries, combining central insights from distinct
emotion and dimensional approaches.
Methodological Approach to the Investigation of Overlapping Emotion Networks
Even though previous research already emphasized that emotions are dynamical
systems of interacting components (e.g., Izard et al., 2000; Lewis, 2005), a lack of
methodological approaches hindered the investigation of such a perspective. We want to
introduce tools to emotion research that help testing a conceptualization of overlapping causal
emotion networks, that is, tools allowing to gain deeper insight into direct relationships
between multiple emotion components representing one or more emotions. First, one needs to
estimate a network of emotion components from data. Second, one needs to analyze the
structure of this network. To familiarize emotion researchers with this methodological
approach, we introduce network estimation, as well as one algorithm to identify network
overlap and apply it to an openly available rich data set on a multitude of positive emotions
(Weidman & Tracy, 2020).
Network Estimation
Network analysis in general facilitates the analysis of systems of relationships
between multiple entities. In emotion research, network analysis enables the analysis of direct
relationships between multiple components of an emotion and to investigate properties of the
entire network structure. In an investigation of a conceptualization of emotions as overlapping
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 9
causal networks, the nodes represent the components of one or multiple emotions and the
edges represent relationships between the components. For instance, a researcher could have
measurements of all feelings, cognitions, physiological changes, motivations, and expressions
of admiration, awe, and gratitude for multiple participants in response to a specific situation.
Network analysis provides methods to estimate the relationships between all the components,
to investigate how certain components group together, or to determine which components are
more central (i.e., more strongly connected) and thereby potentially have stronger influence
on all other components.
Recent developments offer several ways to estimate networks from multi-
componential data. Most commonly, researchers estimate networks via pairwise Markov
Random Field Models. For continuous data for instance when multiple participants rate how
much each component of the three emotions applied to them during an emotion episode on a
scale from 1 (not at all) to 5 (very much) the corresponding Markov Random Field Model is
the Gaussian Graphical Model (Epskamp, Waldorp, Mõttus, & Borsboom, 2018). In the
Gaussian Graphical Model, two emotion components are (not) connected by an edge if they
are conditionally (in)dependent given all other components in the network. One way to
estimate such conditional (in)dependence relationships are partial correlations (Epskamp et
al., 2018). A partial correlation between two emotion components means that the components
are correlated with each other after controlling for all other components in the network. Even
in networks with only a few components, this strategy leads to the estimation of many partial
correlations, potentially increasing the number of non-zero partial correlations that are
actually zero (i.e., false-positive partial correlations). One way to reduce the number of false-
positive partial correlations is regularization. Regularization is a statistical technique that
decreases the size of all partial correlations and sets small, likely false-positive, partial
correlations to exactly zero. It is then possible to visualize the entire set of regularized partial
correlations between a multitude of emotion components, representing a visual depiction of
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 10
the estimated network of emotion components (Epskamp, Borsboom, & Fried, 2018;
Epskamp et al., 2018).
Conducting the estimation of the Gaussian Graphical Model is straight forward. All
popular statistical programs allow estimating partial correlations between variables. However,
applying regularization and visualizing networks is not conveniently implemented in most
software environments. One software environment that makes network estimation easily
accessible is R (R Core Team, 2019). For instance, the estimation and visualization of a
network of regularized partial correlations requires only two short lines of code. Beyond this,
dedicated software packages in R provide numerous additional features around network
estimation. A tutorial on central steps in network estimation is available in Epskamp,
Borsboom et al. (2018; for an extensive discussion of the applicability of the Gaussian
Graphical Model to different kinds of data, including mathematical details see Epskamp et al.,
2018).
Identifying Overlapping Causal Networks: Community Detection
After the estimation of the network, the investigation of a conceptualization of
emotions as distinct with fuzzy boundaries based on overlapping networks requires another
step. Specifically, one needs to investigate whether there are indeed strongly connected
substructures of multiple components in the full component network that could represent
distinct emotions. Moreover, one needs to investigate whether these substructures indeed
overlap such that they share components with each other. For instance, in a network of
regularized partial correlations between emotion components of admiration, awe, and
gratitude, are there groups of components that are more strongly related, representing the
three emotions? And do these groups of components share components with each other such
that the three emotions overlap? For these purposes, the methodological toolbox of network
science offers additional algorithms.
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 11
Multiple algorithms exist that can detect strongly connected substructures of multiple
components in a network, called communities (Fortunato, 2010). These communities, hence,
represent distinct emotions. That some components of an emotion are more tightly connected
to each other than to other components of the same emotion (Lange et al., 2020) should also
lead each emotion to include multiple smaller communities. Hence, estimating overlap in a
large network representing different distinct emotions requires to identify multiple smaller
communities within and across emotions that share components with each other.
Community detection algorithms developed in network science are differently
equipped to fulfill this requirement. A limitation of most community detection algorithms is
that they allocate each node to only one community, precluding nodes that are shared between
multiple communities. In contrast to this forced allocation of nodes, a few community
detection algorithms can account for overlapping community structures, such that nodes may
belong to multiple communities at the same time. One such algorithm is the clique
percolation algorithm (Farkas, Ábel, Palla, & Vicsek, 2007; Palla, Derényi, Farkas, & Vicsek,
2005; Adamcsek, Palla, Farkas, Derényi, & Vicsek, 2006; see also Blanken et al., 2018). For
networks such as the kind estimated via the Gaussian Graphical Model, the clique percolation
algorithm first detects k-cliques fully connected subnetworks with k nodes if their
— —
intensity (i.e., the geometric mean of the partial correlations) exceeds a specified threshold I.
This implies that when a node does not belong to a k-clique it would be isolated (never belong
to a community). Second, two k-cliques are called adjacent, if they share all but one (i.e., k
1) nodes with each other. A set of adjacent k-cliques then forms a community. As such, the
algorithm, by definition, allows overlapping communities.
1 6
k-cliques with three components (i.e., triangles; 3-cliques), namely C -C -C , C -C -C , C -
1 2 4 2 3 4 3
C -C , and C -C -C . Assuming that all 3-cliques are sufficiently strongly connected, such
4 5 4 5 6
that their intensity exceeds I, the clique percolation algorithm subsequently checks whether
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 12
the 3-cliques share k 1 = 2 components with another 3-clique. Indeed, all of the 3-cliques
share two components with one of the other 3-cliques. For instance, the 3-cliques C -C -C
1 2 4
and C -C -C share the components C and C . Consequently, components C to C belong to
2 3 4 2 4 1 6
the same community, collectively constituting Emotion i. Similar considerations allocate
components C to C into one community, collectively constituting Emotion j. Thus, the
6 10
algorithm identifies two communities (i.e., two emotions) that share the component C the
two communities (i.e., two emotions) overlap and in the current case, no component is
isolated.
The clique percolation algorithm is also implemented in R. Specifically, we
developed an R package CliquePercolation that facilitates running the algorithm and
— —
visualizing its results. For more details on the algorithm (including information on how to
derive optimal values for k and I as well as how to decide in favor of a community partition)
and its application, the package includes an extensive vignette that is accessible via the
project.org/web/packages/CliquePercolation/vignettes/CliquePercolation.html).
Reanalysis of Weidman and Tracy (2020)
To showcase network analysis with the subsequent application of the clique
percolation algorithm, we re-analyzed a recently published data set targeting subjectively
focus on the emotions categorized by Weidman and Tracy (2020) as other-appreciating,
namely admiration, awe, and gratitude. The proposed methodological approach investigates
whether the components of the three emotions form an interconnected network of
relationships and whether there is evidence for overlapping communities representing the
three emotions. In their Study 2, Weidman and Tracy asked participants to report emotional
situations in which participants experienced these emotions. In total, we collapsed across 267
participants who recalled situations for two or three emotions (i.e., the network is based on
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 13
573 observations). Participants subsequently rated 56 non-redundant items taken from another
study in which lay people’s task was to list feelings, thoughts, and action tendencies of each
of the three emotions. The i
tems should therefore assess most of the emotions’ central
components. Yet, a limitation is that these items primarily refer to components of subjective
experience and, hence, may underestimate the influence of physiological or expressive
changes. Additional information about the sample and analysis is available in the
Supplementary Materials.
We estimated the component network and applied the clique percolation algorithm.
network of the 56 items, colored according to the communities they belong to. We assigned a
color to each of the three emotions. When an identified community entailed items from only
one emotion, we assigned the pure color to its nodes, shaded towards white for smaller
communities. For communities entailing items from multiple emotions, we assigned
proportionally mixed colors to its nodes. Shared nodes have multiple colors in pie charts and
isolated nodes are white. Hence, if distinct emotions are identifiable in the overall network,
we expect to see various shades of the original colors we assigned to the emotions as
compared to a uniform mixed color that would result when the components of an emotion are
as strongly connected to each other as they are to components of another emotion. In Panel B,
the so-called community graph, a node represents a community and an edge represents the
number of nodes the two communities share. The more nodes a community includes, the
larger its size. Hence, if distinct emotions overlap, we expect communities including
components of different emotions and many edges in the community graph.
Across both networks, the analysis supports a conceptualization of the three
emotions as overlapping networks. The areas in the colored shades of admiration, awe, and
gratitude were pronounced, yet less so for admiration. There were nine communities of which
only one gratitude community was pure. The other communities entailed items from multiple
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 14
emotions but were often largely dominated by items from one emotion. Moreover, 23 nodes
were shared among communities. For instance, the admiration I had a great deal of
item “
respect toward a specific person admiration and gratitude or the awe
” was shared between
I was inspired by what I saw awe and admiration. Finally, one
item “ ” was shared between
I felt humbled We share the data and reproducible code for this
node was isolated (“ ”).
Theoretical Implications and Future Research Directions
A conceptualization of emotions as overlapping causal networks constitutes a
theoretical approach explaining why emotions are distinct with fuzzy boundaries between
them. Network estimation alongside the identification of overlapping communities using the
clique percolation algorithm provides the methodological tools to investigate this
conceptualization. As a first example, we applied the methodological approach to the
reanalysis of a data set of component measures of admiration, awe, and gratitude. The
reanalysis indicated that despite tight interconnections between the three emotions, all of them
had partly unique patterns of relationships among their components. However, there was also
a substantial amount of mixed communities and overlap, suggesting that the three emotions
share various components with and relate to each other. Thus, it is reasonable to consider
admiration, awe, and gratitude as three distinct emotions bridged by fuzzy boundaries.
Conceptualizing emotions as overlapping causal networks contributes to resolving
theoretical disagreement on the question whether emotions are distinct or dimensional. In line
with evidence (e.g., Cowen et al., 2019; Fehr & Russell, 1984) and surveys among popular
emotion researchers (Ekman, 2016), emotions may be distinct and dimensional at the same
time, captured in a conceptualization of emotions as overlapping causal networks.
Specifically, the communities in a network of emotion components can represent distinct
emotions and represent dimensions. We showcased
the communities’ overlap may
overlapping networks by investigating admiration, awe, and gratitude. As these emotions are
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 15
similar on important dimensions (e.g., valence), their networks were likely to be overlapping.
Future research should investigate emotions with varying similarity on different dimensions,
testing whether higher and lower similarity indeed aligns with more or less network overlap,
respectively.
Moreover, if causal networks of different emotions overlap, the amount of overlap
could be a predictor of the probability that these emotions co-occur. So far, research
documents that emotions co-occur frequently (e.g., Larsen & McGraw, 2014; Moeller et al.,
2018; Scherer et al., 2004; Trampe et al., 2015) but it is less clear how this comes about. From
the current perspective, activation of the causal network representing one distinct emotion
may spread via shared nodes to causal networks representing other distinct emotions. For
instance, when being inspired by a person, this may activate parts of the awe network, such as
the motivation to accommodate what is happening, and this may also activate parts of the
admiration network, such as emulation and goal activation. The stronger the overlap of two
emotions, the more cross-activation is possible, rendering co-occurring emotions in any
situation more likely. If, however, different emotions do not share components or do not relate
to each other, cross-activation is less likely. From a conceptualization of emotions as
overlapping causal networks, there should be hardly any emotional event that will elicit only
one emotion at a time, which has been supported by recent evidence (Cowen et al., 2019).
Thus, the amount of network overlap should relate to the probability of two emotions co-
occurring, a testable prediction when using the presented methodological approach.
Furthermore, conceptualizing emotions as overlapping causal networks provides new
perspectives on the variability of emotions. Evidence widely supports that emotions are
experienced and expressed differently across and within individuals, cultures, and historical
timepoints (e.g., Averill, 1983; Crivelli, Russell, Jarillo, & Fernández-Dols, 2016; Jack,
Garrod, Yu, Caldara, & Schyns, 2012; Kuppens & Tong, 2010; Russell, 1994). From a
network perspective, this could imply that relationships between emotion components vary
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 16
across or within contexts and persons (Lange et al., 2020) fuzziness among emotion
networks may differ across and within situations, cultures, and individuals. For example, awe
and admiration might share more edges in some contexts, whereas admiration and gratitude
might be more strongly connected on other occasions and these differences are likely
influenced by cultural and social norms, as well as personality traits. When researchers
complement the estimation of networks and the clique percolation algorithm with cross-
cultural comparisons as well as manipulations of central contextual variables, or when they
relate it to expressions of personality characteristics across and within persons, they can
approach such questions. It would even be possible to investigate how individuals with
different network structures interact with each other over time, combining psychological
networks with social networks.
Finally, when a conceptualization of emotions as overlapping causal networks allows
emotions to be distinct and dimensional at the same time, it may further contribute to
integrating insights from affect program theories and constructionist theories (see also Lange
et al., 2020). Consider for instance the activation of emotions in a situation and subsequent
attempts to put the experience into words. People may go through a distinct emotion episode
in line with affect program theories in a sense that the network representing the emotion is
activated. Spreading activation to overlapping networks will most certainly activate additional
distinct emotion episodes. The process of putting the overall experience into words may then
be a conceptual act as outlined in constructionist theories (e.g., Barrett, 2014; see also
research on affect labeling Torre & Lieberman, 2018). That is, people may recognize patterns
of component changes in an emotional episode and label the collective experience with a
respective word. How this process unfolds could depend on internal factors, including the
amount of overlap between the activated emotions. Or the words used to categorize the
experience may depend on contextual cues and attributions. People should then more
frequently assign the same label to patterns of component changes of multiple emotions that
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 17
share more components with each other. Network analysis shows promise in contributing to
address such fundamental issues.
Methodological Challenges of Network Analysis
The theoretical implications and future research directions suggest that network
analysis can move the field forward theoretically. But the application of network analysis also
has a few challenges that researchers should consider. In what follows, we describe three such
challenges and how to address them.
Selection of components and component operationalization. As a first challenge,
researchers should carefully think about the emotion components they want to assess in their
study. This consideration includes two tasks. First, the researcher needs to identify all non-
redundant components of the involved emotion(s). The goal of network analysis as used for
component networks is to test causal network theories. Not assessing a central component in
the network can lead to false conclusions about the network structure. Relatedly, when
including redundant measures of a component, any relationship between these components
results from their redundancy and not from a causal relationship. Thus, the goal should be to
assess components that exhaustively capture the emotion (for a discussion see Christensen,
Golino, & Silvia, 2020), which is a challenging goal to accomplish.
Strict criteria for choosing the components are difficult to propose. Which
components are important will depend on the research context (for a discussion see Lange et
al., 2020). And some emotions will not have certain component changes (e.g., guilt has no
known facial expression). Hence, researchers will need to decide from study to study.
Nevertheless, we think that theorizing and evidence can and will inform comprehensive lists
of components for multiple emotions. There are comprehensive lists of component changes
for emotions such as awe (Yaden et al., 2019), envy (Lange et al., 2018), or shame (Gausel et
al., 2012). Moreover, lots of research used prototype approaches for specific emotions (e.g.,
Luo, Van Horen, Millet, & Zeelenberg, 2020; Shaver, Schwartz, Kirson, & O’Connor, 1987)
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 18
which results in an exhaustive list of central and non-central components. Research in the
distinct emotion tradition often aimed at identifying shared and unique components of
multiple emotions (e.g., Campos et al., 2013). Or research showed how different contexts may
require different sets of components for the very same emotion (Boiger et al., 2018). Turning
the logic around, it may even be possible to not start from an emotion label but to first
investigate (causal) relationships of numerous components and look for densely connected
patterns (exemplified in research on kama muta, Zickfeld et al., 2019).
Second, the researcher needs to operationalize the components. For instance,
participants may work on questionnaires to assess feelings or thoughts, specific devices may
assess physiological changes, or EMG recordings may track facial expressions. However, it is
challenging to combine such multimodal measurements in one study, yet previous research
already succeeded in creating solutions for this challenge (e.g., Mauss et al., 2005;
Reisenzein, 2000). Alternatively, it is also imaginable to assess all components only with self-
report as in the reanalysis (for a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of using self-
report see Mauss & Robinson, 2009; Scherer, 2005; Weidman et al., 2017). Deciding which
operationalization is preferable may be similarly challenging. Eventually, this decision hinges
on the validity of different measurement approaches for the specific study.
Sample size. As a second challenge, researchers need to collect rather large sample
sizes. Simulations can provide insights into the number of participants needed for common
kinds of networks (for a tutorial and for the example see Epskamp, Borsboom, et al., 2018). In
such simulations, researchers created a network and generated numerous fictitious random
samples in which this network should actually be true. They then tested how well the
networks estimated in each sample mapped onto the true network they created and how this fit
changed depending on the number of nodes and the size of the sample. For instance, in a
simulation with a network of 20 nodes, 250 participants led to satisfactory results. Larger
sample sizes would even improve the fit, yet they are more challenging to collect, especially
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 19
with multimodal measurement approaches. Alternatively, if the network would include less
nodes, the fit would probably be higher even for 250 participants.
Causality in network analysis. As a third challenge, it is difficult to infer causal
relationships between emotion components from regularized partial correlation networks
alone. In line with the goal to estimate causal networks and test causal network theories,
conditional (in)dependence relationships (e.g., partial correlations) are indeed consistent with
causal structures (Epskamp, Borsboom, et al., 2018; Epskamp et al., 2018). Yet, it is
important to point out that an edge, as represented by a conditional dependence relationship
(e.g., a partial correlation), does not equate a causal relationship between two nodes
(Epskamp, Borsboom, et al., 2018; Epskamp et al., 2018). An edge between two nodes A and
B is consistent with a causal effect of A on B, a causal effect of B on A, a bi-directional
causal effect, or a collider pattern in which A and B cause a third node C (if A and B have no
zero-order correlation). The absence of an edge, when there has been a zero-order correlation,
is consistent with a mediation of A via C on B, the reversed mediation, or a common cause
pattern in which C causes both A and B. Furthermore, testing causal network theories with
partial correlations requires that the nodes exhibit change during the assessment and that the
nodes change roughly on the same time scale. If changes of a node proceed more quickly than
those of other nodes or if certain nodes do not change at all during the assessment period, the
estimated partial correlations will be biased.
Therefore, a researcher should be cautious when drawing conclusions about
relationships between specific components in a regularized partial correlation network. Such
networks represent one way to investigate causal network theories, but the estimation of
causal structures remains challenging. Ideally, researchers should investigate all edges of a
causal network theory experimentally. However, already in networks with few components,
this quickly leads to an unmanageable amount of experimental variations and required
measurements. Moreover, it may be hard to design experimental interventions that target only
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 20
one component at a time. A somewhat easier approach may be to investigate just one
particular causal relationship between two components in an experiment (for a review see, for
instance, Scherer & Moors, 2019), yet such experiments potentially underestimate the effect
of non-included components. Thus, addressing the challenge of causal conclusions will be an
important task for future research.
Comparison of Network Analysis with Other Methods
Despite its challenges, we argue that network analysis substantially expands the
methodological toolbox of emotions researchers. In fact, the methodological approach we
propose extends and complements more traditional methods, especially (exploratory and
confirmatory) factor analysis. On a conceptual level, network and factor models are radically
different. The factor model conceptualizes emotions as latent (i.e., unobservable) mechanisms
that cause emotion components, while the components themselves have no causal
relationships among each other. In contrast, in the network model, the components have direct
causal effects on each other. These differences in the theoretical interpretations of both
models lead to a number of diverging implications (for an extended discussion see Lange et
al., 2020). One central implication of the factor model is that if one latent variable causes all
components, changes in these components will (ideally) be identical. If one component gets
activated by the latent emotion, all other components must as well. The components therefore
provide redundant information. Accordingly, when using factor analysis during the
development of questionnaires to measure emotions, researchers often include rather
redundant items, assessing the same component in slightly different ways. Assessing multiple
components becomes challenging, potentially explaining why many questionnaires focus on
single components, most frequently feelings. This recommendation stands in direct opposition
to the recommendation for the network model, for which researchers should assess all (non-
redundant) components of an emotion. Put to the extreme, different contexts or cultures may
require to measure partly different components, such that across contexts or cultures, some
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 21
parts of the network are universal and others vary (for a related example see Jackson et al.,
2019).
Nevertheless, network and factor analysis are complementary. For instance, to
control for measurement error, a researcher can include multiple redundant measures of each
component (e.g., multiple items asking for the same cognition; multiple items asking for the
same feeling) and model them as latent variables. The latent variables can then be the nodes in
network analysis (Epskamp, Rhemtulla, & Borsboom, 2017). Moreover, a community in a
network can be indicative of a factor, allowing community detection algorithms to achieve
similar goals as factor analysis (Golino & Epskamp, 2017).
As another method, instead of using network analysis, researchers could also apply
structural equation modeling. Structural equation modeling is a large class of methods broadly
concerned with relationships between multiple (latent) variables. Most commonly, researchers
specify theoretically predicted, directed relationships between variables. This specified model
implies a certain pattern of correlations between all the variables. Several techniques then
allow testing whether the implied correlations of the specified model are in line with the
observed correlations in the data. Accordingly, it is possible to use structural equation
modeling to investigate specific theoretical models outlining relationships between different
emotions or emotion components (e.g., Gausel et al., 2012; Leach & Spears, 2008). In such
models, a causal interpretation of the relationships between emotions or emotion components
is indeed feasible (Bollen & Pearl, 2013) making them comparable to network analysis.
However, structural equation modeling can hardly incorporate feedback loops between
different variables and one specified model can have an almost infinite number of equivalent
models, that is, models that look entirely different, yet predict the same correlations among
the variables (Kline, 2011). In contrast, a specific Gaussian Graphical Model has no
equivalent models (Epskamp et al., 2018). Moreover, it can incorporate feedback loops, which
emotion networks realistically have. However, specifying a theoretically predicted network
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 22
model and testing whether it is in line with the observed correlations is still challenging. So
far, network analysis is largely exploratory. Yet, inspired by methods from structural equation
modeling, some confirmatory approaches are already available (e.g., Kan, de Jonge, Van der
Maas, Levine, & Epskamp, 2020).
Conclusion
Emotion research for a long time faced the conundrum that specific emotion
components are not uniquely tied to distinct emotions, even though this was implied by the
dominant theoretical model. Instead, substantial evidence suggests that emotions are both
distinct and dimensional. However, there were neither a theoretical approach explaining how
emotions can be distinct with fuzzy boundaries nor corresponding methodological tools to
investigate this perspective. Conceptualizing emotions as overlapping causal networks and
investigating them with network estimation and the clique percolation algorithm contributes
to advancing research on emotions in this area.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.
OVERLAPPING EMOTION NETWORKS 23