EFFECTIVENESS OF A NUMERACY INTELLIGENT TUTOR
Effectiveness of a Numeracy Intelligent
Tutoring System in Kindergarten: A
Conceptual Replication
Grimes, K. R., Park, S., McClelland, A., Park, J., Lee, Y. R. Nozari, M., Umer, Z., Zaporilli,
B., Bryant, D.
Abstract
Intelligent Tutoring Systems are a genre of highly adaptive software providing individualized
instruction. The current study was a conceptual replication of a previous randomized control
trial that incorporated the intelligent tutoring system Native Numbers, a program designed for
early numeracy instruction. As a conceptual replication, we kept the method of instruction,
the demographics, the number of kindergarten classrooms (n = 3), and the same numeracy
and intrinsic motivation screeners as the original study. We changed the time of year of
instruction, changed the control group to a wait-control group, added a maintenance
assessment for the first group of participants, and included a mathematical language
assessment. Analysis of within- and between-group differences using repeated measures
ANOVA indicated gains of numeracy were significant only after using Native Numbers (𝜂2 =
.147). Results of intrinsic motivation and mathematical language were not significant. The
effect size of numeracy achievement did not reach that of the original study (𝜂2 = .622). Here,
we compared the two studies, discussed plausible reasons for differences in the magnitude
of effect sizes, and provided suggestions for future research.
Keywords
replication, numeracy, kindergarten, intelligent tutoring system, computer-assisted
instruction, tablets, wait-control design
Results from syntheses and meta-analyses of research on difficulties with mathematics
indicate that many students who struggle with mathematics at the end of kindergarten
continue to struggle throughout their schooling (e.g., Morgan et al., 2016; Nelson & Powell,
2017). Students who have persistent challenges with mathematics in early grades may have
or be at risk for mathematics difficulty (MD); and, at some point, be diagnosed as having
mathematics learning disability (MLD; Chinn et al., 2017; DSM-5, American Psychiatric
Association, 2013). Difficulties associated with identifying MLD, however, are complicated by
the current limited understanding of the neural and behavioral mechanisms of numerical
cognition, the wide variety of assessments used, and differences in cut scores used across
schools and researchers (Alcock et al., 2016; Lewis & Fisher, 2016; Jordan et al., 2019;
Watson & Gable, 2013). Given the long term negative impact of low numeracy prior to
entering the primary grades (Geary, 2015), prevention research in preschool and
kindergarten is both logical and recommended to prevent the risk of MD and to help build the
emerging body of research identifying characteristics of MD and MLD (Morgan et al., 2016;
Nelson & Powell, 2017; Nguyen et al., 2016; Penner et al., 2019).
In the United States, the National Association of Education of Young Children (NAEYC,
2012) and the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM, 2010) recommended
the use of technology as a tool to help develop conceptual understanding of mathematics for
young students; and researchers support the use of technology as one means of
differentiated instruction (Deunk et al., 2018; Twyman & Sota, 2016). Reported effectiveness
of technology to increase numerical skills, however, has been mixed and may be due to
methodological issues, the pedagogy and content of the software, or the software’s
architecture (Cheung & Slavin, 2013; Harskamp, 2014; Moyer-Packenham et al., 2019; Ok et
al., 2020; Twyman & Sota, 2016). Thus, evaluating the effectiveness of mathematics
instructional software also requires identifying the software’s architecture to help understand
potential mechanisms driving academic outcomes (e.g., Larkin & Milford, 2018; Moyer-
Packenham et al. 2019; Ok et al., 2020).
Intelligent Tutoring Systems
The architectural designs of educational software include, for example, models wherein a
user works through a series of items in a linear fashion, models that allow users to adjust
instruction based on preference, and models that adapt instruction (Van Lehn, 2011). The
degree to which a program adapts instruction also varies, prompting discussion among
experts in the artificial intelligence for education community regarding the need for
operational definitions of the term adaptive and for standards and the criteria necessary for
software to qualify as being labeled adaptive (e.g., Aleven, V. 2015; R. S. Baker, 2016; Ma et
al., 2014; Rozo & Real, 2019; Wilson & Scott, 2017; also see
An intelligent tutoring system (ITS) is a distinctly different type of adaptive instructional
software designed with complex models that embed individualized instruction in tandem with
dynamic assessment (Ma et al., 2014; Pirolli, 2014). The term tutoring, in an ITS, describes
an active, adaptive, student-centered, individualized mode of delivery (Bourdeau &
Grandbastien, 2010). Ma et al. (2014) explained that an ITS:
“computes inferences from student responses, constructs either a persistent
multidimensional model of the student’s psychological states (such as subject matter
knowledge, learning strategies, motivations, or emotions) or locates the student’s
current psychological state in a multidimensional domain model...” and “uses the
student modeling functions…to adapt one or more of the tutoring functions” (p. 902).
Critically, the student model is the software design element that differentiates an ITS from
other educational instructional software (Ma et al., 2014; Pavlik et al., 2013). The student
model, also referred to as a learner model (Pelánek, 2017), describes the psychological state
(i.e., cognitive state) of the user (Ma et al., 2014).
One potential advantage of utilizing an ITS for instruction is that elements required within the
software’s architecture inherently include practices some researchers have recognized as
evidence-based: explicit instruction, adapting instruction to individual needs based on
assessment, and providing feedback (e.g., Barnes et al., 2016; Clarke et al., 2015; Dennis et
al., 2016; Mononen et al., 2014; Nelson & McMaster, 2019; Wang et al., 2016). That is not to
say that other instructional software does not include evidence-based practices, nor suggest
that inclusion or exclusion of evidence-based practices alone can predict academic
outcomes (e.g., Kiru et al., 2017). Nonetheless, meta-analyses and reviews of ITSs revealed
that some ITSs were more effective than small-group instruction and almost as effective as
one-to-one tutoring (Kulik & Fletcher, 2016; Ma et al., 2014; Steenbergen-Hu & Cooper;
2013; VanLehn, 2011).
Research Including an Early Numeracy Intelligent Tutoring System
Despite the potential benefits of using an ITS for mathematics instruction, none of the studies
included in the published meta-analyses and syntheses of ITS (e.g., Kulik & Fletcher, 2016;
Ma et al., 2014; Steenbergen-Hu & Cooper; 2013; VanLehn, 2011) included the use of an
ITS designed for early numeracy instruction. In a systematic review of adaptive early
numeracy software in grades pre-school through first grade, (authors, in preparation)
identified one unpublished dissertation (Dias, 2016) in which the author included an early
for delivery via iPads.
The location of the Dias (2016) study was in a private school in the United States. Dias
randomly assigned participants (n = 57) within three kindergarten classrooms into either the
treatment group or the active control group. During regularly scheduled center activity time,
both groups worked on supplemental numeracy activities; the treatment group used Native
Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) and the active control group worked on paper-and-pencil
numeracy enrichment problems with content aligned to Native Numbers’ content. The
students’ classroom teachers monitored all students’ activity and provided encouragement or
responded to questions regarding technology but did not provide instruction. The student-to-
teacher ratio was 1:19. At the individual level, once a student had completed Native Numbers
or the enrichment activities, they received post-tests, and moved into business-as-usual
mathematics center activities. Dias (2016) reported a substantially large effect size on
differences in mathematics outcome scores for participants in the treatment groups
compared to the active control groups: 𝜂2 = .622.
Based on the need for early numeracy instruction to prevent MD (Geary, 2015; Morgan et al.,
2016; Nguyen et al., 2016; Penner et al., 2019), the effectiveness of Native Numbers (Native
Brain, 2014) reported by Dias (2016), the call for replication studies (e.g., the Standards of
Evidence for Efficacy, Effectiveness and Scale-up Research in Prevention Science: Next
Generation, Gottfredson et al., 2015), and the lack of studies incorporating ITSs for early
numeracy instruction (authors, in preparation), replication of the Dias (2016) study was
warranted. The structure of the remainder of the paper includes the purpose of the current
conceptual replication study, descriptions and comparisons of the methods and outcomes of
the original study and the current study, and discussion of how the results of both studies
provide an opportunity to design future research to examine aspects of numerical cognition
that are either emerging lines of research or are missing in the literature (e.g., ordinality,
mathematical language, multiple representations, number rods).
Purpose of the Study
The purpose of the current study was to conduct a conceptual replication of the Dias (2016)
study. Conceptual replications differ from direct replications in that specific features from the
original study are intentionally manipulated to investigate theoretically important variables
while maintaining critical elements of the original study (Cai et al., 2018; Coyne et al., 2016).
For the current study, we maintained the participant demographics as closely as possible,
the treatment instrument (i.e., Native Numbers; Native Brain, 2014), and the two outcome
measures. However, we identified four theoretically relevant elements to manipulate:
a. implementing the treatment in the spring
b. providing the same treatment to a wait-control group
c. assessing maintenance of academic gains over time
d. assessing mathematical language
Dias (2016) conducted the study in the fall, at the beginning of the school year. We reasoned
staring a study later in the year allowed exploring the variable of maturation and opportunities
for students to experience formal mathematics instruction after entering kindergarten.
Changing the control group to a wait-control group allowed measuring maintenance of any
academic gains the first-treatment group may have had, comparing outcomes of two groups
of participants receiving treatment at different points in time, and providing a control for the
novelty effect from the use of technology.
The fourth change to the Dias (2016) study was the inclusion of a mathematical language
assessment. Beyond mapping number words to symbolic or non-symbolic notations,
mathematical language includes words that describe relationships and space; for example,
terms such as “greater” and “below” (Hornburg et al., 2018). Mathematical language is critical
for understanding concepts of cardinality, ordinality, sets, and magnitude (Hornburg et al.,
2018). Despite the emerging evidence of the importance of mathematical language, to date,
few experimental studies have included and measured explicit instruction of mathematical
language in early childhood; notable exceptions include studies utilizing storybooks in
prekindergarten (Hojnoski et al., 2014; Purpura et al., 2017) and kindergarten (Hassinger-
Das et al., 2015; Jennings et al., 1992), and a study using manipulatives, hand gestures, and
verbal instruction of mathematical terms in first grade (Powell & Driver 2014). Native
Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) provides explicit instruction of mathematical relational terms,
thus we added a measurement of mathematical language to the conceptual replication.
With the changes to the Dias (2016) study described above, we sought to answer the
following research questions:
1. How do gains in students’ numeracy compare to the original study?
2. How do the outcomes of intrinsic motivation compare to the original study?
3. Did students’ outcomes on a mathematics language screener change as a result of
using the Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014)?
Method
Participants and Setting
In the United States, the age of kindergarten attendance is around the age of 5. However,
kindergarten is not mandatory across all states. As previously described, the Dias (2016)
study participants included students from three kindergarten classrooms attending a private
school in the northeast of the United States. The sample included 30 girls and 26 boys: 2%
African American, 26% Asian, 56% Caucasian, and 16% multi-ethnic. All participants who
started the study remained in the study (i.e., zero attrition).
Participants in the current study (n = 46) also attended a private school, but the location was
in the United States’ southwest region. The teacher-to-student ratio was 1:9, except for one
group which had only 17 students. The total number of kindergarten students enrolled at the
site was 53 students. However, only 24 girls and 22 boys returned consent forms and
provided assent. Ethnicity, as reported by caregivers, indicated the following percentages:
4% Asian; 69% Caucasian; 9% Hispanic; 11% Multi-Ethnicity; 7% preferred not to report.
The attrition was also zero.
Although treatment for both studies occurred during regular center-based activity time,
prevalent in kindergarten classrooms in the United States, the grouping of students into
classrooms was distinctly different in the current study. Specifically, rather than having three
separate kindergarten classrooms, with individual teachers assigned to each class, the
current study site was a large complex without separate classrooms, per se. The building
had several smaller rooms used for small group instruction, and each of the smaller rooms
opened up to larger common use spaces. Students received core instruction within one of
three groups, as opposed to classrooms, and each group had two teachers serving as the
primary teachers for that group. Students interacted with any of the six teachers in fluid
grouping formats throughout the building throughout the day. The teacher-to-student ratio in
the current study was approximately 1:9 as opposed to 1:19 in the Dias (2016) study.
Based on the dynamics of the center-based instruction time, the building’s design, and the
classroom teachers’ preference, treatment in the current study occurred in one of the larger
multi-purpose rooms, rather than in individual classrooms as in the Dias (2016) study. Thus,
in the current study, the physical location and monitoring use of Native Numbers (Native
Brain, 2014) was similar to what might occur in a school computer lab.
Measures
Intrinsic Motivation
Similar to Dias (2016), we assessed intrinsic motivation via the Young Children’s Academic
Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (Gottfried, 1990). The inventory was developed for use with
students in 1st through 3rd grade as a downward progression of the Children’s Academic
Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (Gottfried, 1990) and consists of three sub-measures: math,
reading, and general overall school experience. Each sub-measure contains 13 statements
to which participants are asked to respond whether a statement is very true, a little true, or
not true for them. The statements are the same for all sub-measures, only the domain
changes for each measure. For example, the statement, "I like to do easy reading work," is
changed to "I like to do easy math work.” Individual items are assigned a score from 1 to 3
related to the motivation attributed to that item; higher scores represent higher motivation.
Scores can include the individual sub-measures or a combination of the sub-measures. The
inventory is not available commercially; we received permission for use within this study
(Gottfried, personal communication).
Gottfried (1990) reported reliability and validity based on a cross-sectional study and a
longitudinal study. Both studies included 7 to 9 year old participants; although, the ages and
number of participants varied for each analysis. Combining the data from both studies,
Gottfried reported strong internal consistency for reading motivation ( = .82), math
motivation ( = .84), and motivation for overall school experience ( = .82). For the cross-
sectional study, two-month test-retest correlations (n = 57) were r = .73 for the reading
subscale and r = .73 for the math subscale (p < .001). Correlations between the total score of
all scales and researcher developed questions of students’ perception of competence were
r(96) = .37 and r(105) = .35, p < .001, for the 7 and 8 year old participants in the cross-
sectional and the longitudinal studies respectively. Correlations between teacher reports of
student motivation across the subscales ranged from r = .18, p < .05, to r = .25, < .001;
correlations by subscale were not reported. Correlations between a modified version of the
Children's Academic Anxiety Inventory (Gottfried, 1982, 1985) were r(96) = −.25, p < .01, for
participants in the cross-sectional study and r(103) = −.20, p < .01, for 7 year old participants
in the longitudinal study.
Numeracy
Similar to Dias (2016), we assessed numeracy via the Number Sense Screener™ (Jordan et
al., 2012). The screener includes 29 items, is standardized, and takes approximately 15
minutes to administer one-on-one. Each item answered correctly receives one point. The
screener assesses six numerical concepts: counting, number recognition, number
comparisons, non-verbal calculation, story problems (oral addition and subtraction), and
single-digit number combinations. Additionally, the screener is normed for kindergarten
students in the fall and spring and for first-grade students in the fall. Jordan et al. analyzed
construct and predictive validity using the Woodcock-Johnson III calculation and applied
problem scales (WJ, Woodcock et al., 2007). The correlation between the screener and the
WJ composite scores of the subscales produced an average r = .62 for 1st grade and r = .65
for 3rd grade (N = 288). The fall of 1st grade WJ composite scores correlated (r = .72) with the
spring of 1st grade WJ composite scores (n = 279) and with the spring of 3rd grade WJ
composite scores (r = .70; n = 175). Jordan et al. reported an average internal consistency of
 = .85.
Mathematical Language
To our knowledge, a validated stand-alone kindergarten assessment of mathematical
language in English does not exist. Therefore, we chose the Preschool Assessment of
Mathematical Language (Purpura & Logan, 2015), a researcher-developed measure
currently undergoing psychometric evaluation to assess mathematical vocabulary. We
obtained permission (Purpura; personal communication) to use the current version of the
assessment that includes 16 items drawn from a larger battery (e.g., Purpura & Logan 2015).
The 16 items include six quantitative terms (e.g., more, less) and ten spatial terms (e.g.,
under, last). Students respond to pictures with oral prompts such as “Point to the box with
more dots,” where more is the target vocabulary term. The assessment takes approximately
10 minutes to administer one-on-one and students receive once point for each correct item.
Convergent validity has not been reported; however, this measure has shown strong internal
consistency across several studies:  = .85 in Purpura and Logan (2015),  = .78 in Purpura
et al. (2017),  = .78 in Hornburg et al. (2018), and  = 0.80 in Purpura et al. (2020).
Numeracy Instruction
All Participants: Regular Numeracy Instruction
In both the Dias (2016) study and the current study, all participants received regular
classroom mathematics instruction, and the treatment groups and control groups received
additional supplemental mathematics instruction. Thus, the control groups for both studies
were active-control groups. In the current study, all participants received regular daily
org/number-corner). Dias did not indicate the specific curriculum used at the school site.
Treatment Groups: Native Numbers
For both the Dias (2016) study and the current study, participants in the treatment conditions
received instruction via Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014), an application (i.e., app)
designed for use on the iPad, available for free, and downloaded via iTunes. The adaptive
algorithm in Native Numbers includes measuring accuracy and, at higher levels of difficulty,
response time as a measure of fluency and as an indicator within the architecture to further
adapt instruction. Based on the description provided by the parent company of Native
levels of academic performance, moving users to more difficult tasks, or returning to earlier
concepts when a user experiences difficulty. Once a user has reached the third level, the
next set of activities is unlocked. Once unlocked, users can continue working on accuracy
and fluency (Levels 4 and 5) on their current activity, move on to the next activity, or move
back and forth between any of the unlocked activities.
Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) provides instruction for five areas of early numeracy for
quantities 1–9: number concepts (mapping the verbal quantity to a visual representation);
number relations (instruction of mathematical vocabulary such as more and less); ordinality;
counting (one-to-one, counting on, and counting back); and a set of activities named
“Demonstrate Mastery” which requires consolidation of all previous learning. Each of these
five areas is further sub-divided into five sets of activities for a total of 25 sets of activities
(see Appendix A).
Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) incorporates symbolic representation (i.e., Arabic
digits) and two non-symbolic representations of discrete magnitude: (a) sets presented in
arrays similar to playing cards and (b) tally marks. Additionally, Native Numbers includes one
non-symbolic representation of continuous magnitude: number rods similar to Cuisenaire
Rods®. Users learn to map between quantities for each of the different representations
through blocked practice and interleaved practice. Also, as part of the Demonstrate Mastery
activities, some activities are designed with reversibility (e.g., Simon et al., 2016); for
example, given a target quantity and a starting amount, a user must add or remove a
quantity to reach the target quantity. Native Numbers, however, does not include symbolic
operational signs.
Control Groups: Numeracy Enrichment Activities
Participants in the Dias (2016) study received additional numeracy instruction through paper
and pencil activities aligned to Native Numbers’ (Native Brain, 2014) content. Participants in
the current study had daily center-based supplemental instruction for approximately 45
minutes in the afternoon. Students worked in small groups with teachers, one-on-one with
teachers, or in peer-to-peer activities during this time. The numeracy enrichment activities
during this center-based time varied throughout the study, based on the teachers’ goals and
individual students’ needs, and included other instruction such as reading, writing, science,
and art (see Appendix B for a list of the different numeracy activities used during the
timeframe of the study).
Procedures
The current study was approved by the University of Texas at Austin Institutional Review
Board (IRB). Teachers and parents/guardians provided written consent, and students
provided verbal and written assent. Prior to beginning the assessments, we used an online
random number generator to randomize the participants by their primary
groups into the first-treatment group or the wait-control group. For ethical and pragmatic
reasons, all students had the opportunity to use Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014);
however, analyses included only data from the participants who returned consent forms and
provided assent (n = 46). The teachers and parents/guardians received outcome scores from
all the assessments, and the teachers received typed narrative reports on student progress.
Baseline and Pre-Tests
In the Dias (2016) study, additional school staff helped facilitate the assessments. The
teachers at the site of the current study requested that the researchers conduct all the
assessments. Pre-testing in the current study occurred in either the large multipurpose
rooms or smaller areas throughout the building. Unlike Dias, we included an assessment of
mathematical language and combined this assessment with the Number Sense Screener™
(Jordan et al., 2012) into one sitting, administered one-on-one. After completing all the
assessments, participants began instruction in their separate groups; however, due to the
large number of participants, we phased in the first-treatment group over three days.
Assessment of intrinsic motivation via the Young Children’s Academic Intrinsic Motivation
Inventory (Gottfried, 1990) differed significantly in the current study from the Dias (2016)
study. Specifically, during a pilot administering the inventory to nine kindergarten students,
we found that students had difficulty understanding the directions for responding to negative
statements. For example, we included three practice statements as pre-training to ensure
participants understood the format and how to respond. For negative statements such as “I
do not like ice-cream,” participants responded “very true” when in fact, the students meant
the opposite response; they did like ice-cream. This confusion occurred across the negative
response statements of the practice statements and the statements in the inventory, despite
explicit modeling and feedback with the practice statements. Additionally, facilitating the pilot
of the inventory took more than 30 minutes for only two of the three sub-measures.
Concerned about participant testing fatigue and reliability of responses, we removed the
overall schoolwork sub-measure and we removed two questions each from the reading and
mathematics sub-measures (the same questions for both content areas): one indicating
negative intrinsic motivation and one indicating positive intrinsic motivation. Also, due to time
constraints and researcher availability, we chose to implement the Young Children’s
Academic Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (Gottfried, 1990) in small groups of three, rather than
one-on-one. Additionally, as our question of interest was whether the use of Native Numbers
(Native Brain, 2014) increased intrinsic motivation, we changed the timing of the pre-test for
each group such that we administered the inventory immediately before using Native
Numbers (i.e., the pre-test assessment for the wait-control group was later than the first-
treatment group, occurring just prior to using Native Numbers).
Treatment
Dias (2016) reported participants in both groups (i.e., treatment and control) worked for up to
30 minutes and were allowed to quit at any time; the range of hours participants used Native
Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) was from 5–12, for one to three days per week. Like the Dias
(2016) study, in the current study, the number of days per week participants used Native
Numbers varied and averaged to three days per week. Participants in the current study were
also permitted to quit working at any time, although we encouraged participants to work for at
least 10 minutes and announced when 10 minutes had elapsed. Each day we were at the
site, the classroom teachers provided us names in advance for the treatment participants
that they needed to work with for non-mathematics instruction (e.g., writing, reading, or group
projects requiring intact groups of students). Due to the dynamic structure of this activity
time, tracking the exact time participants entered or exited the room where Native Numbers’
instruction occurred was difficult. Therefore, we recorded only whether a participant logged
on to Native Numbers or not. The average time available for working was up to about 30
minutes, similar to that of Dias.
Also similar to Dias (2016), we designed the current study such that as each participant
completed all 25 sets of activities in Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) to the 5th level, we
administered the post-tests individually, after which the participant transitioned to a business-
as-usual control group status. Although we designed the study with a goal of a clear line of
separation between when the wait-control group would switch to using Native Numbers, we
explicitly planned for, and included in the IRB proposal, the possibility that some students in
the first-treatment group would not reach the 5th level on all 25 activities before the wait-
control group entered into the treatment phase. We monitored the progress of the first
treatment group and determined when to enter the wait-control group based on the number
of days remaining in the academic year; that is, a point at which we could reasonably expect
that all participants would have the same minimum number of days available in the treatment
phase. As the study progressed, we set the minimum number of days at 22 (i.e., both groups
had the opportunity to use Native Numbers for at least 22 days). The study’s total elapsed
time was 18 weeks, including holidays, field trips, professional development days, pre-
testing, and post-testing.
One week before the minimum 22 days possible for the wait-control group to use Native
Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) we assessed the wait-control group participants on motivation
and facilitated the second assessment of the Number Sense Screener™ (Jordan et al.,
2012) and the Preschool Assessment of Mathematical Language (Purpura & Logan, 2015).
After completing the three assessments, similar to the first treatment group’s entry,
participants in the wait-control group transitioned to the treatment phase over three days. As
each participant in the wait-control group reached the 5th level on all 25 activities of Native
Numbers, we administered the numeracy, mathematical language, and intrinsic motivation
post-tests; then, these participants returned to business-as-usual center activities. Two
weeks before the end of the school year, we began administering maintenance assessments
of numeracy and mathematical language to the first treatment group participants who had
completed Native Numbers a minimum of four weeks earlier. One week before the end of the
school year, we administered the numeracy, mathematical language, and intrinsic motivation
post-tests to the wait-control participants who had not yet finished all 25 activities (n = 6).
Fidelity
All researchers received training on administering and coding the assessments prior to the
start of the study. We randomly selected 33% of the assessments for each of the three
testing time points and coded fidelity of the researchers’ implementation of the assessments
using checklists based on the measures’ scripted instructions. Fidelity was 99.8% for the
numeracy and mathematical language assessments, and fidelity for the intrinsic motivation
was 99.3%, with the modifications described earlier. Additionally, we double coded all
assessment data during grading and when coding into the Excel spreadsheet, ensuring a
research team member who did not facilitate the assessment conducted the second coding.
We verified participant usage of Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) by cross-checking the
attendance records provided by the teachers and by data collected on the teacher dashboard
associated with Native Numbers.
The iPads belonged to the school site. Each participant was assigned an iPad for use
throughout the day. To minimize the risk that a student could log on to Native Numbers
(Native Brain, 2014) while one of the researchers was not present, we took daily screenshots
of the dashboards to verify participants had not logged on. To further minimize the risk that
participants might use Native Numbers when it was not their assigned treatment phase, we
installed Native Numbers only on the iPads of the participants currently assigned to use
Native Numbers, and we removed Native Numbers from each iPad after a participant
completed all 25 activities to the 5th level. According to the dashboards, none of the
participants used Native Numbers outside of the time set for the study. Furthermore, results
from a survey sent home with the consent forms indicated that none of the participants had
used Native Numbers prior to starting the current study.
Analyses
Analyses included raw scores for all measures and, with the exception of a robust test of
imputed data described later, were conducted using SPSS for Mac, Version 26. Syntax for all
analyses are provided in Appendices E–G. Additionally, before describing the primary
analyses, in the following section, we described the methods used to examine the scores of
13 participants, seven from the first-treatment group and six from the wait-control group,
whose use of Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) varied compared to the other
participants.
Preliminary Analysis: Difference in Days of Use
Seven participants from the first-treatment group had not completed all 25 activities to the 5th
level of Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) when it was time for the wait-control group to
enter the treatment phase. Therefore, these participants continued to work, potentially
introducing bias into the analysis. Importantly, the threat of bias was due to the difference in
the number of days afforded these seven participants, not due to contamination. That is, the
participants in the first-treatment group were not in both conditions at the same time.
Visual inspection of the dashboard data indicated that six participants in the wait-control
group either did not complete all 25 activities (n = 2) or did not reach the 5th level on one or
more activities (n = 4). An examination of attendance records indicated that for 11 of these
13 participants, the discrepancies in the number of days using Native Numbers (Native Brain,
2014) were due to absences, participating in reading or writing assessments during the
period offered to use Native Numbers, or work involving projects requiring intact groups (e.g.,
end-of-the-year presentations).
To assess the potential impact the additional elapsed time the seven first treatment group
participants had to use Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) compared to the six wait-control
group participants, we first inspected each participants’ total number of days of use (see
of changes from the pre-test to the post-test of numeracy. For example, only two of the
seven participants in the first treatment group worked more than the 22 days afforded to both
groups. Notably, one participant in the first-treatment group who worked 28 days, and two
wait-control group participants who worked only 15 days, had the same pre-test scores and
almost identical post-test scores; the two wait-control group participants’ post-test scores
were one point higher than the participant in the first-treatment group.
Days of Use and Outcome Scores for Participants Who Did Not Complete All
25 Activities to the Highest Level by Day 22
Group: NSSa Pre- NSS Post- NSS Days Total Days
Student Test Score Test Score Change at 22a Days > 22b
First: 1 19 22 3 17 28 6
First: 2 20 26 6 19 26 4
First: 3 17 23 6 21 22 0
First: 4 20 27 7 19 22 0
First: 5 18 29 11 18 21 0
First: 6 14 25 11 14 20 0
First: 7 22 23 1 12 17 0
Wait:1 25 27 2 17 17 0
Wait: 2 18 22 4 16 16 0
Wait: 3 25 26 1 15 15 0
Wait: 4 19 23 4 15 15 0
Wait: 5 19 23 4 15 15 0
Wait: 6 22 27 5 11 11 0
Note: Group = first or wait-control; Student = participants not completing 25
activities in Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) to the 5th level by the 22nd day;
NSS = The Number Sense Screener™ (Jordan et al. 2012).
a = Days worked up through the 22nd day available
b = Days worked above 22
To further analyze the extent to which these 13 participants varied by outcome scores, we
conducted an independent sample t-test. The results indicated the means of the numeracy
outcome scores for the seven participants in the first treatment group (M = 25.00, SD = 2.52)
compared to the six in the wait-control group (M = 24.67, SD = 2.25), were not significantly
different, t(1, 11) = .250, p = .81, 95% CI [–2.605, 3.272]. Given the lack of significant
difference in outcome scores, we did not consider that the 13 participants presented a risk of
bias based on the number of days they used Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014).
Preliminary Analysis: Missing Data
Although the seven participants in the first treatment group did not appear to introduce bias,
they were missing the third assessment, the maintenance assessment, because they did not
have a minimum of four weeks remaining in the year to examine retention of academic gains.
We considered two options for analyzing repeated measures for within- and between-group
analyses: repeated measures mixed ANOVA (RMM ANOVA) and linear mixed model (LMM)
regression (Verma, 2015). LMM’s are robust to unbalanced designs containing missing data
(e.g., Muth et al., 2016), whereas RMM ANOVAs are sensitive to unbalanced groups and
SPSS will list-wise delete all data from subjects missing even one data point. On the other
hand, while statisticians have proposed models for reporting significant effects for LMMs, not
all statisticians agree on the procedures (e.g., Meteyard & Davies, 2020; Rights & Sterba,
2019). In keeping with Meteyard & Davies (2020) recommendation for reporting why a
particular analysis was chosen over another, we chose to replace the missing data and run
the analyses with a RMM ANOVA because (a) the number of participants in our study was
small, thus risking non-convergence for all the possible decisions of random effects in a
LMM, and (b) the point of the analyses was not to fit a best model for our data, per se, but to
compare the differences in the magnitude of effects between the current study and that of the
Dias (2016) study.
We also considered two different methods of replacing the missing data of the seven
participants in the first treatment group’s maintenance scores: multiple imputation and the
Last Observation Carried Forward (LOCF). Generally, statisticians highly discourage using
the LOCF; however, for the current study, we considered the LOCF the most parsimonious
and valid procedure (e.g., Overall et al., 2009). First, the missing data were the maintenance
scores for the seven first treatment group participants who did not have a full month
remaining post-treatment, not data from their pre-test or post-test scores. Second, we did not
need the maintenance scores to compare differences in the effect of treatment between the
first group and the wait-control group after each had used Native Numbers (Native Brain,
2014). Last, we did not need the maintenance scores to compare the magnitude of
differences in the effect between the treatment and control group in the Dias (2016) study to
the effect between the first treatment group and the wait-control group in the current study
prior to the wait-control group receiving treatment. We needed the missing data to (a)
examine the first-treatment group’s maintenance of gains after a minimum of one month and
(b) to allow SPSS to run a RMM ANOVA without deleting the seven participants entirely.
Nonetheless, given the unfavorable view of statisticians to use the LOCF, as a robust test we
ran five imputations and examined differences in the means and pooled means of the
imputed data to the mean of the LOCF (see Appendix D for descriptive statistics). Although
across the five imputations the means of the imputed data were slightly higher than the mean
of the LOCF, the difference in pooled means were not significant: t(40) = 1.634, p = .102.
The degree of freedom of the pooled result was corrected using an approximation suggested
by van Ginkel and Kroonenberg (2014). Based on the results of the robust test and the
justifications provide above, we retained the LOCF as the means for replacing the missing
data on the third measure of the seven first treatment group participants when conducting the
RMM ANOVA. Additionally, we removed these seven participants when examining the first
treatment group’s maintenance gains.
Preliminary Analysis: Wait-Control Group Pre-Test Scores
Due to the length of time from the first numeracy assessment to the second assessment,
approximately six weeks, we used the second testing point as the wait-control group’s pre-
test score and considered the first assessment score as their baseline. Further justification
for using the second assessment point as the wait-control group’s pre-test was that results
from a paired sample t-test indicated that the wait-control group had growth during the time
between the first testing point and the second testing point, although the growth was not
statistically significant: t(1, 21) = –1.47, p = .157, 95% CI [–.738, .119]. Nonetheless, rather
than taking an average of the wait-control group’s first assessment and their second
assessment, we considered their second test to be the most accurate reflection of their
growth and used it as their pre-test.
Primary Analysis
We analyzed within- and between-group differences of the numeracy scores, across the
three testing points, via a two-way RMM ANOVA. Two-way RMM ANOVAs are suitable for
designs with two independent groups when looking at both between-group and within-group
differences on a dependent variable measured repeatedly across both groups (Verma,
2016). We also conducted two separate t-tests to (a) examine the growth of the wait-control
group after they used Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) and (b) to determine if the first-
treatment group maintained any potential gains a minimum of one month after their post-test.
Initial descriptive statistics examining Q-Q Plots, Boxplots, and the Shapiro-Wilk test
indicated the scores of the Preschool Assessment of Mathematical Language (Purpura &
Logan, 2015) were not evenly distributed. At the pre-test, approximately 80% of the
participants scored at or close to ceiling. Therefore, we conducted separate non-parametric
tests for within- and between-group differences using Mann-Whitney U Tests for between-
group analysis (e.g., Nachar, 2008) and Wilcoxon Sign tests (e.g., Harris & Hardin, 2013) to
analyze within-group differences.
Similar to the Preschool Assessment of Mathematical Language (Purpura & Logan, 2015),
the initial descriptive statistics of the Young Children’s Academic Intrinsic Motivation
Inventory (Gottfried, 1990) indicated a violation of assumptions of normal distribution for both
reading and mathematics intrinsic motivation. Therefore, we conducted separate non-
parametric tests for within- and between-group differences via a Mann-Whitney U Test for
differences between groups and a Wilcoxon Sign test for differences within groups.
Results of the Current Study Compared to Dias (2016)
We included the same numeracy outcome measure and the same intrinsic motivation
measure as Dias (2016): The Number Sense Screener™ (Jordan et al., 2012) and the
Young Children’s Academic Intrinsic Motivation Inventory (Gottfried, 1990). Based on the
significant modifications we made when implementing the intrinsic motivation inventory, we
did not compare the results from the current study to those reported by Dias (2016).
Furthermore, the results from both the mathematical language assessment and the intrinsic
motivation inventory indicated insignificant differences between the first-treatment group and
the wait-control group from pre-test to post-test scores; therefore, we presented these
findings first.
Intrinsic Motivation Results
We ran two Mann-Whitney U tests to determine if there were differences between the groups
for intrinsic motivation for reading and intrinsic motivation for math. Our visual inspection
indicated that although the distributions of scores for the two groups were not similar,
differences between the groups’ levels of intrinsic motivation for both reading and math were
not significantly different (U = 291.50, z = –.607, p = .544; U = 231.50, z = –7.20, p = .471,
respectively). We ran a series of Wilcoxon Signed Rank Tests to determine if there were
significant changes from the pre-test to the post-test for reading motivation and for
mathematics motivation within each group. For the first-treatment group, the median
difference from the pre-test to the post-test for reading motivation was not significant (z =
1.513, p = .130); however, there was a statistically significant median increase in
mathematics motivation from the pre-test to the post-test for mathematics motivation (z =
1.190 p = .047). For the wait-control group, the median differences from the pre-test to the
post-test of reading motivation (z = .487 p = .626) and mathematics motivation (z =
and standard deviations of the intrinsic motivation analyses.
Mathematical Language Results
Initial descriptive statistics of the Preschool Assessment of Mathematical Language (Purpura
& Logan, 2015) indicated that almost all the participants across both groups were at ceiling
on the pre-test. Mann-Whitney U tests confirmed the median difference between the groups
was not significant for either the first test, the second test, or the third test (U = 186.00, z =
–1.834, p = .067; U = 287.00, z = .577, p = .564, U = 278.00, z = .373, p = .709,
respectively). Similarly, the Wilcoxon Signed Rank tests also indicated that within-group
differences between the first testing period and the second testing period were not significant
for the first-treatment group (z = 1.00, p = .000). However, changes from the first test to the
second test were statistically significant for the wait-control group (z = 2.507, p = .012); that
is, changes from their baseline to their pre-test were significant, although the median change
was one point. Wilcoxon Signed Rank tests also indicated that within-group differences
between the second testing period and the third testing period were not significant for the
first-treatment group (z = .333, p = .739) or the wait-control group (z = .604, p = .546).
analyses.
Numeracy Results
Results of the RMM ANOVA indicated that the mean difference (.723) of numeracy scores
between the groups was not significant (F = .918, p = .343, 95% CI [–.798, 2.245]);
1,44
however, there was a significant interaction between Group and Testing Periods (F =
2, 88
6.432, p = .002). These results are in line with a wait-control design in which all participants
receive the instruction, but at different points in time. That is, if both groups received
treatment, collapsed across the testing periods, the between-group differences should not be
different if the treatment was effective for both groups.
Follow up univariate analyses for each of the testing periods indicated the mean difference
(.193) between the first-treatment group’s numeracy scores and the wait-control group’s
scores was not significant on the pre-test/baseline (F , = .033, p = .857, 95% CI [–1.950,
1 44
2.336]). Similarly, the mean difference (1.176) on the third test, after removing the seven
participants who did not have the third test, was not significant (F = 2.847, p = .100, 95%
1, 37
CI [–.236, 2.589]). However, the mean difference (2.36) of the numeracy scores between the
groups was significantly different on the second test, the post-test for the first-treatment
1, 44
Outcome Scores of the Number Sense Screener™
Note: Participants were tested three times using the Number Sense Screener™ (Jordan et
al., 2012). The first test (NSS1) served as the first-treatment group’s pre-test and the wait-
control group’s baseline. The second test (NSS2) was the first-treatment group’s post-test
and the wait-control group’s pre-test. The third test (NSS3) was the wait-control group’s post-
test and a maintenance test for the first-treatment group.
To determine the effect of using Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) for the wait-control
group, we conducted a paired sample t-test from the second testing point to the third testing
point, their pre-test to post-test period. Results indicated the use of Native Numbers elicited a
mean increase of 2.634 (SE = .339) in the wait-control group’s numeracy scores, t(6.973), p
< .001, d = 1.48, 95% CI [1.659, 3.609]). Thus, after using Native Numbers both groups
significantly increased their numeracy scores, as measured by the Number Sense
Screener™ (Jordan et al., 2012).
Removing the seven participants who did not have a maintenance test, we conducted a t-test
to examine if the first treatment group maintained their previous gains. The results indicated
that the first-treatment group maintained their growth, and slightly increased their numeracy
scores (M = .765, SE = .689), although the changes were not statistically significant, t(16) =
Descriptive Statistics of the NSS Scores for the Current Study
Group / Test N Mean SD SE
First Group Pre-Test 24 22.63 3.62 .74
Wait-Control Baseline 22 22.82 3.58 .76
First Group Post-Test 24 26.00 2.36 .48
Wait-Control Pre-Test 22 23.64 3.40 .73
First Group Maintenance 17a 27.18a 1.94 .47
Wait-Control Post-Test 22 26.00 2.31 .49
Note: NSS = The Number Sense Screener™ (Jordan et al., 2012)
a = This number reflects removing the seven participants from the first group who
did not have the maintenance assessment.
Descriptive Statistics of the NSS Scores for the Dias (2016) Study
Group / Testing N M SD
Treatment Group Pre-Test 27 16.63 4.84
Control Group Pre-Test 30 19.05 5.10
Treatment Group Post-Test 27 22.04 3.87
Control Group Post-Test 30 18.87 5.13
Note: NSS = The Number Sense Screener™ (Jordan et al., 2012)
Discussion
The purpose of this conceptual replication study was to examine changes in numeracy
achievement, intrinsic motivation, and mathematics language when instruction was provided
by Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014), an ITS. As a conceptual replication, we aimed to
use the same assessment instruments, grade level, number of classrooms, and participant
demographics as the original study (Dias, 2016). For pragmatic reasons, we chose to
conduct the study in a geographical location close to the authors. However, we manipulated
five distinct aspects of our study: the time of year of the study, the inclusion of a wait-control
group, the inclusion of an assessment of mathematical language, the setting within the
school where participants used Native Numbers, and who facilitated and monitored the
participants’ assessments and use of Native Numbers. The last two changes came about
through collaborative discussions with the participating teachers prior to the study’s start and
were included in the IRB proposal as potentially malleable components to change based on
the teachers’ preferences.
Our first research question was whether we could replicate similar effects as Dias (2016) on
numeracy outcomes (e.g., 𝜂2 = .622) given our changes in design. While we did not replicate
the same effect size as Dias (2016), the effect size in the current study was moderate to
high: 𝜂2 = .147. Within-group gains for the first-treatment group and the wait-control group
were significant after receiving instruction via Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014); and the
first group maintained their achievement for at least one month.
From a design perspective, we matched participant demographics as closely as possible
regarding the type of school (i.e., private) and socio-economic status. One plausible
explanation for differences in effect sizes is that the studies occurred at different times of the
year: fall versus spring. Initial pre-treatment scores differed between the Dias (2106) groups
and our groups. The post-test scores for the Dias treatment group were close to the pre-test
scores in our sample: M = 22.04 for Dias compared to M = 22.72 for the entire sample in the
current study. Even without treatment, the participants in our entire sample had close to the
same scores in the middle of February as the Dias treatment group had post-treatment in the
fall. We inferred that kindergarten participants in our sample eventually had the same scores
as the Dias’ participants had in the fall; however, the participants in our study did not reach
this level of achievement until well past the middle of the school year. We did not have the
beginning of the year data for the current sample as a direct comparison to the Dias pre-test
scores for the same time period, nor end of the year data for the Dias’ participants; however,
one implication is higher numeracy earlier in the year may allow for additional growth in
numeracy for the remainder of the year.
Two additional changes in the current study from the Dias (2016) study that may explain
differences in the effect sizes were who facilitated the supplemental numeracy activities and
where the participants engaged in these supplemental activities. Specifically, having more
students working on Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) in a computer lab-type setting, as
in the current study, leaving a lower teacher-to-student ratio to work with the wait-control
group, could have provided the wait-control group an advantage over the control group in the
Dias study, as well as over the first-treatment group in the current study. The regular teacher-
to-student ratio in our sample was 1:9 as opposed to the 1:19 ratio in the Dias study. With
rare exception, only one of the researchers in the current study monitored all the treatment
participants who were gathered in one room. Thus, the researcher-to-student ratio average
was 1:27 for the treatment group, but the teacher-to-student ratio was 1:5 for the wait-control
group. The teacher-to-student ratio for the Dias study participants remained 1:19 as the
classroom teachers monitored both the treatment and the control groups at the same time.
Despite the differences in the adult-to-participant ratios, both groups in the current study
significantly increased their numeracy scores after using Native Numbers. Therefore, having
more students together in a larger room did not appear to negatively impact the first
treatment group’s outcome scores compared to the wait-control group. Regardless, whether
the differences in the magnitude of effect sizes were due to differences in the adult-to-
student ratios is unknown.
Our second research question was whether we could replicate similar intrinsic motivation
findings like those in the Dias (2016) study. Results of the current study indicated that the
use of Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) did not significantly increase between-group
differences for intrinsic motivation for mathematics or reading. The only significant change in
motivation was for the first treatment group for mathematics. Given the small sample size
and lack of between-group differences, we do not have an explanation for why the first
treatment group increased their intrinsic motivation for mathematics and the wait-control
group did not.
One thing to note is that, as an indicator of being intrinsically motivated to read or to engage
in mathematics, the highest score possible was 33. A score of 22 would indicate that a
participant was neither intrinsically motivated nor unmotivated to read or do mathematics; an
11 would indicate a participant was generally unmotivated to read or engage in mathematics.
For both groups, the medians for reading and mathematics leaned towards being more
intrinsically motivated; for example, the lowest median (24.50) was on the pre-test for
mathematics. The significant modifications we made when implementing the motivation
inventory and the difficulty the participants had interpreting how to respond to the negative
questions may explain this null finding. However, Dias (2016) noted that even though the
treatment group's intrinsic motivation scores increased significantly compared to the control
group, intrinsic motivation scores did not predict numeracy outcomes.
Our last research question looked at mathematical language changes, a measure not
included in the Dias (2016) study. We did not find differences in mathematical language
achievement after using Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014). The null results are partially
explained by the fact that nearly all participants were at or near ceiling at the pre-test. The
Preschool Assessment of Mathematical Language (Purpura & Logan, 2015) was designed
for pre-kindergarten, not kindergarten. Based on the results of our analyses, we cannot
report an impact on mathematical language after using Native Numbers.
Limitations
The current study had notable limitations preventing generalization to different contexts and
demographics. Importantly, both studies included small sample sizes and were conducted in
private schools with predominately Caucasian participants. Additionally, unlike the teacher-
to-student ratio in the Dias (2016) study (i.e., 1:19), our participants had an average teacher-
to-student ratio of 1:9; a ratio unlikely to occur in public school settings in the United States.
Furthermore, a researcher monitored the use of Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) in the
current study, compared the participants’ teachers in the Dias (2016) study. While the ratio of
adults-to-participants provided a proof of concept that Native Numbers can be utilized in a
computer lab type of setting, or with entire classrooms at one time, how the role of a
researcher monitoring use of Native Numbers impacted outcomes (i.e., compared to a lab
instructor or classroom teacher) is unknown and was not a research question explored in the
current study. Importantly, however, the researchers did not provide additional instruction or
help other than problem-solving technology issues or providing encouragement for
participants to think through a problem when they were stuck.
Next, the mathematical language measure used in the current study was not designed for
kindergarten. We caution readers not to use the results from our study to compare the results
to other mathematical language studies using the Preschool Assessment of Mathematical
Language (Purpura & Logan, 2015) with pre-kindergarten students, the age group for which
the assessment was designed. Likewise, the Young Children’s Academic Intrinsic Motivation
Inventory (Gottfried, 1990) was not designed for kindergarten. The lack of grade-level-
appropriate standardized measures for both intrinsic motivation and mathematical language
in kindergarten impedes our understanding of these two roles in numerical cognition for
kindergarten aged participants.
Additionally, one of the primary limitations preventing direct comparison of the current study
to the Dias (2016) study was that all the participants in the Dias study completed all 25
Native Numbers’ (Native Brain, 2014) activities to the highest level; the participants in the
current study did not. The time of year we started the study limited the number of days
available for instruction. Starting earlier in the year may have allowed all participants to finish.
However, this may have confounded the variable of interest related to allowing participants in
the current study more time attending formal schooling before using Native Numbers.
Nonetheless, including extra days in the current study was not possible.
Because of the highly adaptive nature of ITSs, we planned in advance for the possibility that
some students would finish quickly, while others would take more time. We considered
several different options. For example, before entering the wait-control group into treatment
status, we could have administered the post-assessments to the first treatment group
participants who had not yet completed all 25 activities to the fifth level and then moved them
into the business-as-usual status. Alternatively, we could have kept the participants who had
finished and had received post-tests in the same room with the participants who were still
working on Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014). A third option was to shorten the study’s
duration by setting a firm number of days for each phase. We did not consider any of the
above options as being consistent with an ecologically valid design.
First, we were concerned about a potentially demotivating impact for both those who finished
early and those still working if we kept the students who had finished together in the same
room. If we had kept the treatment participants together, we would have needed an
additional activity to keep those who finished early occupied, introducing a confounding
variable. Conversely, removing the participants who had not yet finished might have been
seen as unfair if they were engaged and wanted to finish. We planned for and allowed
participants to choose how long they wanted to work, not only to maintain ecological validity
but also to acknowledge and honor the participants’ agency.
We also chose not to limit the number of days participants used Native Numbers (Native
Brain, 2014) as this would have: (a) prohibited a direct comparison of outcome scores from
the current study to those of the Dias (2016) study, and (b) ignored results from other studies
that included adaptive software where the authors noted that shorter lengths of time for the
interventions might not have been adequate for some participants (e.g., Garduno, 2016;
Salminen et al., 2015). At the design phase of this study, we explicitly chose to monitor how
the first treatment group participants progressed and then decided when to enter the wait-
control group based on the number of days remaining in the year. Importantly, the
conceptual changes for this replication were driven by the question of whether the time of
year was a potential variable for differences in effect sizes, if effect sizes were replicated.
The addition of the wait-control group was an additional measure of validity for any significant
outcomes between the first treatment group and the wait-control group but was not required
as a replication of the Dias study.
Furthermore, we theorized that if participants in the first treatment group needed additional
time, these students could potentially represent a subset of students at risk for MD, and
analyzing their data could potentially inform future studies of MD. Results from our study did
not indicate risk for MD. The outcome scores for the first treatment group participants who
had not finished all activities to the 5th level by the 22nd day were not significantly different
from the outcome scores of the wait-control group participants who did not finish the 25
activities to the highest level. Except for two participants in the first group who needed
additional days, the discrepancies in the number of days available for working and the
number of days students actually worked were due to absences, the classroom teachers
pulling the students to conduct other classroom assessments, or participants working in
groups with teachers for class-wide projects requiring intact groups.
While we monitored the days students used Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) and cross-
checked the days with the attendance records and daily screen shots, we did not track the
number of minutes each student used Native Numbers. This was an intentional decision on
our part based partially on the logistics (e.g., the lack of researchers available for notation
and IRB requirements for videotaping participants) and partially due to the dynamics of the
naturalistic setting: students interacting with their peers showing their progress (e.g., Lim,
2012), the freedom to move about the room or to leave to get a drink of water and entering
the room later or leaving sooner to work with their classroom teachers on other projects.
Likewise, we did not ask the developers to extract the number of minutes from the log-file
data because we would have needed additional data to verify the number of minutes logged
into Native Numbers equated to the minutes the students were actively engaged (e.g., Bond
& Bedenlier, 2019; Fincham et al., 2019).
Beyond the limitations related to tracking minutes of active engagement, the range of the
difference in the number of days the participants required to reach the highest level across all
the activities is an example of the logistical challenges of incorporating highly individualized,
adaptive instruction (e.g., Bondie et al., 2019), whether by practitioners or researchers. That
is, determining how to balance instruction at the group level, while also providing instruction
for students who finish well ahead, or behind, their peers, is a problem of practice. On the
other hand, highly adaptive software theoretically affords the individualized instruction that
students need.
Future Directions for Classroom Use and Research
While the current study contributes to the scant literature of replication studies of numerical
cognition, based on the limitations described above, we outlined several possibilities for
future research: the timing of and need for additional support while using technology, the
generalization of concepts, and specific future numeracy research possibilities using Native
Numbers (Native Brain, 2014), other ITS, or other software.
First, the use of Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014), regardless of the time of year initiated,
brought the majority of students' levels of achievement up to the highest percentiles,
according to the Number Sense Screener™ (Jordan et al. 2012). Where Dias (2016)
reported a between-group difference of 𝜂2 = .622 at the beginning of the school year, our
between group-difference in late spring was well above a moderate effect (𝜂2 = .147).
Although none of the participants in our study would have met the definition of MD if using a
<30% cut-off score, some participants were close to that cut-score at the pre-test (e.g., the
34th percentile) and required additional time to complete all the activities. Thinking about who
is at risk for MD, and that the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP, 2017)
report indicated 60% of 4th grade students in the United States performed at or below
proficiency, the use of a cut score below the 30th percentile for determining who needs
additional assistance may not capture all students needing support. Students at the edge of
any cut score, or performing above but not to proficiency, are not considered at risk for MD,
yet may not have a solid conceptual understanding of numeracy. The 60% of students in the
United States performing at or below proficiency likely needed additional, or different,
instruction well before 4th grade, even if their performance was not below the 30th percentile,
or other percentiles used for tiered response to intervention support.
Together, the findings from the current study and the Dias (2016) study provided evidence
that the use of Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) as a supplement to instruction can
increase numeracy achievement, even for students performing at or above-average
performance; although, the sample sizes of both studies do not support a definite conclusion.
One question of interest is how the instruction of Native Numbers, which only includes
quantities of 1–9, allowed participants to significantly increase their numeracy scores on the
Number Sense Screener™ (Jordan et al., 2012) for items that assessed content not provided
by Native Numbers. The Number Sense Screener™ contains 29 items; ten directly aligned
with the content and range of quantities instructed by Native Numbers. At the middle of the
year pre-test, 40% of the kindergarten participants performed above the 90th percentile. At
the end of the study that number increased to 74% and only one participant fell below the
80th percentile. Tools such as Native Numbers, which provide intelligent tutoring, may offer
what Fuchs, Fuchs, and Compton (2012) described as “secondary prevention” or “booster
lessons” (Bryant et al., 2008). Dias (2016) reported changes from the pre-test to the post-test
for the treatment group moved participants from the 68th percentile to 91st percentile on the
Number Sense Screener™. Implementing highly individualized technology brought the
scores of most participants using Native Numbers, in both studies, up to the highest levels of
performance. However, the highly individualized tutoring also introduced challenges related
to the number of days each student needed to reach the highest level in Native Numbers.
Future studies are warranted to investigate Native Numbers’ pedagogy for the potential
mechanisms of generalization to concepts not included in Native Numbers’ instruction.
Additionally, different study designs such as staggered entry or single-subject studies with
multiple baselines may afford ways to navigate the logistical challenges of research
incorporating adaptive software.
A second, research opportunity is to analyze the log-file data produced when using
technology within an experiment (see a suggested framework by Heffernan and Heffernan,
2014). All technology can track interactions, affording fine-grained analyses of performance
(e.g., Heffernan & Heffernan, 2014; Larkin & Milford, 2018; Rau et al., 2013). Native
Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) has features that are well suited to the types of micro-genetic
studies that log-file data can provide such as how individuals vary when acquiring flexible
use of different representations of quantities and the relationships between shared
underlying numeric structures (e.g., Goldwater & Schalk, 2016; Parviainen, 2019). For
example, Native Numbers includes three sets of five activities using the different
representations for quantity recognition, ordinality, and relational language. Studies of
relational language and ordinality with young participants are underexplored areas of
numerical cognition, as are studies using number rods, which are introduced as the first
activity (e.g., Coles & Sinclair, 2018; Goffin & Ansari, 2016; Schalk et al., 2018; Morsanyi et
al., 2018; Venenciano et al., 2012).
Additionally, Dias (2016) noted participants required between 1000–3000 tasks to reach
mastery of the 25 sets of numeracy activities. In our study, that range was approximately
1200–7700. While these numbers may seem incredibly high, at face value, the numbers
align to a finding in a recent approximate number system training study with adult
participants conducted by Cochran et al. (2019). Some (expert) adults required more than 20
days of training and over 8000 trails to increase approximate number system performance.
Cochran et al. noted the long, slow progression of change for a novel task. In a study with
prekindergarten participants using a numeracy app, Broda et al. (2019) noted that when
participants completed 400 practice opportunities, their accuracy increased 80%. In another
study, although not with technology, Doabler et al. (2015) examined the ratio of teacher
instruction-to-student practice opportunities and noted that a ratio of 1:3 significantly
increased kindergarten participants’ achievement; that is for every one instance of teacher
delivered explicit instruction, participants needed three opportunities to practice.
Why would the number of tasks or practice attempts matter? A commonly accepted theory in
early numeracy is that acquiring mastery of the counting system takes years (e.g., Geary et
al., 2019). However, how many years and how many tasks (i.e., attempts, practices) an
individual needs are unknown. Like the literature on mathematical relational vocabulary in
kindergarten, the literature on how much practice students need to master numerical skills is
virtually silent. Nonetheless, schools implement pacing guides and standards of practice
assuming a normal progression of mastery without a clear understanding of how long a
normal progression to mastery takes. McLean and Rusconi (2014) argued, "no empirically-
based normative developmental trajectory for mathematics learning has been yet
established, and the non-problematic range of variation for age-appropriate levels is currently
untested" (p. 1). Educators, policymakers, and researchers would benefit from knowing how
many tasks, and therefore, how much time or differentiation is required to reach fluency, as
well as how long this information remains in long-term memory. The use of log-file data from
software like Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) can help us answer questions like those
above because of the fine-grained levels of data produced while learning (e.g., R. Baker,
2016; U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology, 2012).
However, tracking the number of tasks alone is likely insufficient to capture the process of
learning, just as tracking the number of minutes the program is running is insufficient to
capture learning. Despite the significant gains in the current study, not all participants had the
same amount of growth. As discussed previously, we did not examine possible reasons why
some participants did not finish all 25 activities to the highest level within the 22-day
timeframe. Research on how kindergarten students, both at risk and not at risk for MD,
present with different degrees of difficulty is necessary to help researchers and teachers
understand possible correlations between general domain abilities, self-determination,
resilience, and goal orientations; specifically in the domain of mathematics, but also when
using technology (e.g., Higgins et al., 2019; Hohol et al., 2017; Keller & Libertus, 2015;
Matusz et al., 2019; Peng et al., 2016; White et al., 2017). To understand the process of
learning likely requires mixed-methods studies incorporating multiple data sources (e.g.,
Baccaglini-Frank et al., 2020; Fincham et al., 2019). One option is to use the screen capturing
capabilities of iPads while the students are using Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014), or
other software. Audio and video data may provide information such as meta-cognitive self-
talk, social dialogue, and potentially different problem-solving strategies for the specific
numeracy skills designed into Native Numbers. Audio and video data captured by the iPads
during use also reduces the need for the number of observers and additional equipment
required for an observational study.
Finally, neither our study nor the Dias (2016) study considered how using an alternative
software program, whether an ITS or not, may affect differences in outcome scores,
persistence, or motivation. Native Numbers (Native Brain, 2014) provides valuable lab space
to investigate different types of numerical representation, different instructional methods such
as blocked or distributed learning and reversibility problems (e.g., Barzagar & Ebersbach,
2018), as well as relational language and ordinality. Given the above opportunities to
advance knowledge of early numeracy, future studies are warranted using either adapted
versions of the current Native Numbers model, incorporating another software into the design
of a study, or using another ITS.
Classroom teachers need viable, economically feasible means of providing individualized
instruction. However, not all software, or other curricular resources, are designed with
substantial pedagogy, and the role of the teacher is critical to the success of any curriculum,
supplemental or otherwise (e.g., Nye, 2014; Wen et al., 2019). The Dias (2016) study was
an initial confirmation of Native Numbers’ (Native Brain, 2014) effectiveness, and before
embarking on the type of research described above, we sought to replicate effectiveness.
Although our effect size was not as substantial as that of the Dias study, both studies’ effect
sizes were moderate to extremely high for a small homogeneous sample of 73 participants
combined. Nonetheless, the Dias study and our conceptual replication provided emerging
evidence that using Native Numbers for supplemental instruction holds promise as a useful
tool, a one-to-one tutor in the room, and as a tool for researching numerical cognition.