AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 1
Individual and Contextual Moderators of the Relationship Between Authoritarianism and Religiosity
Christopher M. Federico
Hui Bai
Rafael Aguilera
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
Word Count: 6,997 (excluding abstract and references)
In press, British Journal of Social Psychology
sample size was pre-determined by the organizers of the World Value Survey.
Author Note
Christopher M. Federico is Professor in the Departments of Political Science and Psychology at the
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities. Rafael Aguilera is a Ph.D. student in the Department of
Psychology at the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities. Hui Bai is a Ph.D. student in the
Department of Psychology at the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities. *Address correspondence to
Christopher M. Federico, Department of Political Science, University of Minnesota, 1414 Social
Sciences Building, 267 19th Avenue South, Minneapolis, MN 55455; e-mail: federico@umn.edu.
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 2
Abstract
Social scientists have devoted much attention to explaining individual and contextual
variation in religiosity. Among other things, authoritarianism is reliably found to be associated with
greater religiosity. Though education and human development are often thought to reduce religiosity,
we show in this study that the relationship between authoritarianism and various indices of
religiosity is stronger in the presence of greater educational attainment and living in a society with a
higher level of human development. Using two large cross-cultural datasets from the World Values
Survey, we find evidence that authoritarianism is more strongly associated with religious
involvement and practice among individuals at higher levels of education and individuals living in
societies with higher level of human development. Thus, we demonstrate that the connection
between authoritarianism and religiosity is contingent on both individual-level and societal
moderators.
KEYWORDS: authoritarianism, religiosity, education, human development
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 3
Individual and Contextual Moderators of the Relationship Between Authoritarianism and Religiosity
Religion is an enduring feature of human social life, but not all human beings are equally
religious. To explain variation in religiosity, social scientists have focused on both characteristics of
individuals and characteristics of the societies they live in. A common assumption is that individuals
are more likely to be religious to the extent that religion provides them with security and certainty
(Jost et al., 2014; Saraglou, 2002a,b; see also Norenzayan, 2013; Stark, 2001). In this study, we focus
on a psychological variable that has been frequently identified as an antecedent of greater religiosity:
authoritarianism, which reflects a general preference for social conformity over individual autonomy
(Altemeyer, 1996; Leak & Randall, 1995; Wink et al., 2007). We argue that the relationship between
authoritarianism and various indices of religiosity may be stronger in the presence of two factors
often thought to reduce religiosity: greater educational attainment and living in a society with a higher
level of human development (e.g, Johnson, 1997; McCleary, 2008). Using two large World Values
Survey datasets, we find evidence for these predictions, in addition to confirming the usual main-
effect relationship between authoritarianism and religiosity. In doing so, we demonstrate that the
connection between authoritarianism and religiosity is contingent on both individual-level and
societal moderators.
Authoritarianism and Religiosity
As noted above, authoritarianism is a psychological variable reflecting individual differences
in preferences for social conformity, willingness to defer to ingroup authorities and norms, and
hostility toward those who threaten relevant forms of normative order (Adorno et al., 1950;
Altemeyer, 1988, 1996, 1998; Duckitt & Bizumic, 2013; Feldman & Stenner 1997; Feldman 2003;
Stenner 2005). Many studies suggest that authoritarianism is a robust predictor of religiosity
(Altemeyer & Hunsberger, 1992; Duck & Hunsberger, 1999; Hunsberger, 1995; Rubinstein, 1996;
Weller, Levinbok, Maimon, & Shaham, 1975; Wink, Dillon, & Prettyman, 2007; Wylie & Forest,
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 4
1992). For example, authoritarians tend to see religion as a more important part of their life
(Blogowska & Saraglou, 2011), they endorse religious beliefs more strongly (Altemeyer &
Hunsberger, 1992; Canetti-Nisim, 2004; Leak & Randall 1995; Rowatt et al., 2005, 2006), and
practice their religion more frequently (Jones, 1958; Leak & Randall 1995; Weller, Levinbok,
Maimon, & Shaham, 1975). Among individuals who were raised with religious beliefs in childhood,
authoritarians also tend to retain the beliefs they were socialized into more than non-authoritarians
do (Altemeyer, 1981, 1988).
The relationship between authoritarianism and religiosity is not specific to any one religion
or culture. Denominationally, studies suggest that authoritarianism predicts religiosity well among
Christians, Hindus, Muslims, and Jews alike (e.g., Duriez & Van Hiel, 2002; Altemeyer &
Hunsberger, 1992; Canetti-Nisim, 2004; Hunsberger, 1996). The relationship between
authoritarianism and religiosity has also been observed in the United States (e.g., Watson et al.,
2003), Canada (e.g., Altemeyer & Hunsberger, 1992), Belgium (e.g., Duriez & Van Hiel, 2002),
Poland (e.g., Blogowska & Saraglou 2011) and Israel (e.g., Rubinstein, 1996; Canetti-Nisim, 2004).
Evidence also suggests that dispositional variation in authoritarianism is at least partly prior
to variation in religiosity. For instance, Weller and colleagues (1975) found that authoritarians
became more religious over time regardless of whether they were raised in a traditionally-religious
home or a secular one as children. This suggests that authoritarianism is antecedent to religiosity
rather than vice versa (see also Photiadis & Johnson, 1963). What accounts for this relationship? A
core theoretical approach suggests that religion is more appealing to those who desire security,
certainty, and order (Jost et al., 2014; Norenzayan, 2013; Stark, 2001). According to Hogg, Adelman,
and Blagg (2010), people are motivated to reduce uncertainties in their life, and group identification
is an effective way to manage uncertainties. Since religions are groups that provide clear narratives
about the nature and meaning of human existence and appropriate ways of conducting oneself,
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 5
religion may be a particularly attractive venue for reducing uncertainty. Religion’s ability to promise
order, security, and certainty offer authoritarians what they need psychologically. In addition,
authoritarians tend to have high levels of need for closure and are lower in openness to experience
(Onraet, Van Hiel, Roets, & Cornelis, 2011; see also Saraglou, 2002a, b; Streyffeler & McNally,
1998). As such, they may especially benefit from the epistemic, existential, and social resources
provided by religiosity (Jost et al., 2014; see also Jost, Federico, & Napier, 2009). Consistent with
this idea, research suggests that authoritarianism is particularly related to fundamentalist forms of
religious belief and practice, which subject the individual to stricter forms of orthodoxy and
obligation than other modes of religious life (Altemeyer 1988, 1996; Altemeyer & Hunsberger 1992;
Hall, Matz, & Wood, 2010; Hunsberger 1995; Kirkpatrick 1993; Laythe, Finkel, & Kirkpatrick 2001;
McCleary, Quillivan, Foster, & Williams, 2011).
Moderators of the Relationship Between Authoritarianism and Religiosity
Despite the wealth of research connecting authoritarianism with religiosity, few studies—
beyond the aforementioned ones examining authoritarianism as a predictor of fundamentalist versus
non-fundamentalist forms of religiosity—have explored possible moderators of this relationship. In
this study, we argue that the relationship between authoritarianism and religiosity should be
conditioned by both individual-level and societal-level variables. At the individual level, we
hypothesize that authoritarianism will more strongly predict religiosity among individuals with higher
levels of educational attainment. At the societal level, we hypothesize that authoritarianism will be
more strongly associated with religiosity among individuals living in societies at higher levels of
development. At first glance, these predictions may not be very intuitive: we are predicting that
education and development should strengthen the link between authoritarianism and religiosity,
despite the fact that extant theory and research commonly suggests that religiosity and
authoritarianism both decline as individual-level education and societal development increase. To
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 6
develop our predictions, we first of all review previous research on how religiosity and
authoritarianism vary as a function of education and development.
The role of education. Educational attainment has been repeatedly linked to variation in
both religiosity and authoritarianism. With respect to religiosity, the most common theoretical
expectation has been that education weakens religiosity, as suggested by the “erosion thesis”
(Johnson, 1997; see also Beckwith, 1985; Herbert, 2003). This may occur for two reasons. First,
education may expose people to knowledge (scientific knowledge, in particular) and to secular
outlooks that are usually inherently incompatible with traditional or orthodox interpretations of
religious teachings (Johnson, 1997; Sherkat, 1998). Second, education may serve as an alternate
means of satisfying psychological needs that might otherwise motivate people to adhere to religions
(Jost et al., 2016). That is, education may provide people with useful information and skills to
manage and adapt to the complex and uncertain world that they reside in. As a result, the existential
and epistemic benefits promised by religion may be less appealing to highly-educated individuals,
leading to lower religiosity. Parallel arguments have been made with respect to authoritarianism. As
with religiosity, one argument is that education may provide knowledge and tools that can buffer
against the sensitivity to threats that predispose people to authoritarianism (Allport, 1954; Christie,
1954; Stenner, 2005; see also Kemmelmeier, 2007). Moreover, education may expose individuals to
norms of tolerance and provide greater experience with worldview diversity, weakening authoritarian
tendencies (Lipset, 1960; McClosky & Zaller, 1984; Sniderman, Brody, & Tetlock, 1991).
Consistent with these arguments, education often has a “main effect” of undermining both
religiosity (Beckwith, 1985; Johnson, 1997; Mocan & Pogorelova, 2014; Hungerman, 2014; Roozen,
Carroll, & Roof, 1995) and authoritarianism (e.g., Altemeyer, 1996; Christie, 1954; Duriez & Van
Hiel, 2002; Kohn, 1969; Lipsitz, 1965; Simpson, 1972). Importantly, these associations are somewhat
variable. In particular, the relationship between education and reduced religiosity does not appear to
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 7
be the same across all manifestations of religiosity. It is stronger for religious belief and personal
importance of religion than for practice (which is sometimes higher among the well-educated,
consistent with the notion that the educated are generally higher in social capital; Brown & Taylor,
2007; Johnson, 1997; Petersen, 1994; Sherkat, 1998).
The role of development. One of the oldest ideas in the social sciences is the secularization
hypothesis—the prediction that religiosity and other manifestations of traditionalism will decline as a
society undergoes development (Weber, 1904; for reviews, see Inglehart, 2018; Swatos & Christiano,
1999). Social and economic development, in this context, has a number of aspects. Broadly speaking,
human development describes the quality of people’s lives within any given society. Developed
societies are those that provide individuals with greater freedoms, opportunity, and well-being —via
access to knowledge, human rights, security, health, and a decent standard of living (United Nations
Development Programme, 2016).
Societies with high levels of human development afford their members resources and
security that reduce uncertainty. In contemporary scholarship, modernization theory makes some of the
clearest arguments about how development should affect religiosity and orientations reflective of
authoritarianism (Inglehart, 1990, 2018; Inglehart & Baker, 2000; Ingelhart & Norris, 2011l;
Inglehart & Welzel, 2005, 2010). According to this perspective, social and economic development
provides individuals with greater security from economic and physical threats. This change in
material conditions leads to a motivational shift from survival values (focused on collective effort to
avoid danger and deprivation) to self-expression values (focused on autonomy and self-
actualization). This value shift lessens the need for institutions and norms that preserve group
cohesion by strongly embedding the individual in a thick set of social ties and constraints (Inglehart
& Welzel, 2005, 2010).
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 8
This shift manifests itself notably with respect to the two variables of interest in the present
study: religiosity and authoritarianism. Religion is a key form of traditional social solidarity in which
the individual is subordinated to both an institutional order and a posited cosmic order (e.g., Stark,
2001). By shifting individuals from survival to self-expression and increasing the scope for individual
autonomy, development thus weakens the underpinnings of religiosity. Consequently, development
is usually associated with reduced levels of religiosity (Barber, 2011; Inglehart, 2018; Inglehart &
Baker, 2000; Inglehart & Norris, 2011). More broadly, development is also associated with a shift
away from authoritarian worldviews that emphasize conformity, conventionalism, and submission to
authority (Inglehart, 1990; Inglehart & Welzel, 2005, 2010). Thus, like education at the individual
level, development at the societal level is associated with lower levels of religiosity and
authoritarianism.
Moderating Effects of Education and Development?
Based on the above discussion, it may appear that authoritarianism and religiosity are
mutually-reinforcing aspects of a traditionalist outlook that should be most common among those
low in education and who live in less-developed societies. This suggests that, if anything,
authoritarianism should more strongly predict religiosity among individuals with lower levels of
education and those residing in societies with lower levels of social and economic development.
However, we argue that the opposite should be the case: education and development should
strengthen rather than weaken the relationship between authoritarianism and religiosity. But why?
In the case of education, a growing body of research suggests that education allows people
to adopt attitudes and behaviors that are more aligned with their basic psychological dispositions—
including, in the present case, authoritarianism (Federico & Deason, 2012; Federico & Malka, 2018).
Among other things, education brings a greater level of cognitive sophistication, which makes it
easier for people to see which inclinations, attitudes, and behaviors “go together” (either logically or
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 9
normatively; Barton & Parsons, 1977; Converse, 1964). To the extent that religiosity in part reflects
individual differences in authoritarianism, education should facilitate the process of adopting a level
of religiosity consistent with one’s degree of authoritarianism. In other words, despite existing
evidence that education is associated with lower levels of authoritarianism (and for that matter,
religiosity), it may at the same time increase the extent to which religiosity reflects variation in
authoritarianism. Though we are not aware of any studies that have examined this hypothesis,
public-opinion research suggests that political preferences are more (rather than less) strongly rooted
in authoritarianism among the educated (Federico & Reifen Tagar, 2014; see also Federico, Fisher, &
Deason, 2011; Federico & Malka, 2018). Thus, the relationship between authoritarianism and
religiosity should be stronger among those higher in education.
In the case of societal-level development, we expect a similar effect. Though the security that
development brings may “liberate” individuals from authoritarian worldviews and dependence on
religion, it may also facilitate individuals’ adoption of orientations that are more expressive of the
self, such as orientations toward religion. In this vein, the shift from survival values to self-
expressive ones that comes with material security suggests that individuals are free to adopt religious
orientations that more clearly reflect their basic inclinations as individuals, including their level of
authoritarianism (Inglehart, 1990, 2018). Similarly, developed societies have richer communicative
environments that are more likely to expose people to discourse that facilitates an understanding of
the symbolic meanings of attitudes and behaviors, as well as how those meanings correspond to
underlying needs (United Nations Development Programme, 2016; see also Federico & Malka, 2018;
Inglehart, 1990). Finally, development facilitates the emergence of sociopolitical divides over the
relative value of cultural openness and individual autonomy versus the maintenance of traditional
social practices (Inglehart & Welzel, 2005, 2010). This means that developed societies may produce
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 10
more variation in social practices—including ones linked to religion—for individual differences in
authoritarianism to “seize on.”
Thus, although development may have the main effect of dampening both authoritarianism
and religiosity, development may also strengthen the relationship between authoritarianism and
religiosity. As with education, we are not aware of extant research that examines this. However,
research does suggest that the relationship between psychological variables and political preferences
is stronger among individuals living in societies with higher levels of development (Malka, Soto,
Inzlicht, & Lelkes, 2014; Malka, Lelkes, & Soto, 2017). As such, the relationship between
authoritarianism and religiosity should be stronger among those who live in societies with higher
levels of human development.
Overview
Below, we examine the aforementioned theoretical expectations about individual-level and
contextual moderators of the relationship between authoritarianism and religiosity in two large
samples taken from the World Values Surveys. We test three hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1: Authoritarianism will be associated with greater religiosity.
Hypothesis 2: The positive relationship between authoritarianism and religiosity will be
stronger among highly-educated individuals.
Hypothesis 3: The positive relationship between authoritarianism and religiosity will be
stronger among individuals living in nations at a higher level of human development.
Methods
Data
Our analyses rely on data from waves 4 (1999-2004) and 5 (2005-2009) of the World Values
Survey; each wave is a separate cross-section with different respondents, carried out by teams of
social scientists from the nations the survey reaches. In each nation, the English root questionnaire
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 11
for the WVS is translated into all local languages spoken by at least 15% of the nation’s population
to ensure representativeness. The resulting surveys are then administered in face-to-face interviews
to a representative sample of adults in each country. In each WVS dataset, we used only those
national samples that included our key variables for each analysis. In Wave 4, this gave us samples
from 36 nations for all analyses. In Wave 5, it gave us 49 nations for the religious-identification
analysis and 47 nations for the religious-practice analysis.1 In each analysis which follows, only
respondents from these nations with complete data on all included variables were used; exact sample
sizes are provided below for each model estimated.
Measures
Descriptions of the WVS measures are provided below. Detailed information is provided for
each WVS in the supplemental materials.2
Religious identification. Two items were used to measure religious identification. The first
is from a series of items prefaced with the following: “For each of the following, indicate how
important it is in your life,” with the response options (1) “very important,” (2) “rather important,”
(3) “not very important,” and (4) “not at all important.” We used responses to the one asking about
“religion.” The second item asked participants, “Independently of whether you attend religious
services or not, would you say you are (1) a religious person, (2) not a religious person, or (3) an
atheist?” Both items were reversed and recoded to run from 0 to 1 so that 1 reflects a higher degree
of religiosity. The items were related (α=0.64, in Wave 4, α=0.69, in Wave 5), and thus were
averaged (M=0.83, SD=0.25, in Wave 4; M=0.76, SD=0.29, in Wave 5).
1 In Wave 5, religious practice was not measured in two of the nations (Malaysia and Morocco) that
religious identification was measured in. Therefore, all descriptive statistics and model estimates
involving religious practice rely on 47 nations rather than 49.
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 12
Religious practice. We used one item to measure level of religious practice: “Apart from
weddings and funerals, about how often do you attend religious services these days?” Responses
included: (1) “more than once a week,” (2) “once a week,” (3) “once a month,” (4) “only on special
holy days,” (5) “once a year,” (6) “less often,” and (7) “never.” Responses were reversed and
recoded to run from 0 to 1 so that 1 indicates more frequent practice (M=0.58, SD=0.37, in Wave 4;
M=0.63, SD=0.37, in Wave 5).
Authoritarianism. Authoritarianism was assessed using a measure of childrearing values
(Federico et al., 2011; Federico & Reifen-Tagar, 2014; Hetherington & Weiler, 2009; Stenner, 2005).
In contrast to other measures of authoritarianism (e.g., the RWA scale; Altemeyer, 1996), these
measures are relatively free of explicit political content and tap the predisposition toward conformity
and deference to authority apart from its political consequences (e.g., social conservatism). We rely
on a variant of a measure originally employed by Stenner (2005) and a variety of other researchers
who have examined authoritarianism in the WVS (Brandt & Henry, 2012; Dunn, 2015; Dunn &
Singh, 2014; Singh & Dunn, 2013; Weiner & Federico, 2016). The measure was constructed from
responses to checklist items inquiring about “qualities that children can be encouraged to learn at
home.” Respondents were permitted to check up to five they considered “especially important.” To
generate the scale, responses to three traits were considered: obedience, imagination, and
independence. Responses were scored 1 if the quality was endorsed and 0 otherwise. Scores on
imagination and independence were reversed. These were supplemented with a fourth item dealing
with respect for authority: “I'm going to read out a list of various changes in our way of life that
might take place in the near future. Please tell me for each one, if it were to happen, whether you
think it would be a good thing, a bad thing, or don't you mind?” The stimulus was: “Greater respect
for authority.” “Good” responses were coded as authoritarian (1); “don’t mind” and “bad”
responses were coded as non-authoritarian (0). The scale measure was then constructed by summing
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 13
responses to the four items and then recoding the sums to run from 0 to 1 (with 1 reflecting higher
authoritarianism; M=0.59, SD=0.28, in Wave 4; M=0.58, SD=0.24, in Wave 5).3
Demographics. These included: age (in years), income (rescaled from 0 to 1 where 1 reflects a
higher level of income), gender (1=male, 0=other), and education (seven ordered categories, rescaled to
run 0 to 1, where 1 reflects a higher level of education).
Nation-level variables. First, to assess the general level of development in each
respondents’ nation, we relied on the United Nations Human Development Index (HDI). The 2001
HDI for each nation was used in the Wave 4 data and the 2005 HDI was used in Wave 5. In each
nation, this index is a composite of life expectancy at birth, mean years of schooling, and per capita
income. Conceptually, the HDI represents the extent to which a nation’s social and economic
conditions materially allow individuals to self-actualize and accomplish their goals (ul Haq, 2009).4
Second, to check on differences due to national religious culture, we also included a series of four
dummy variables indicating the numerically-dominant religious group in each nation (Central
3 The WVS authoritarianism items make traditional indices of internal consistency inappropriate
(Dunn & Singh, 2014; see also Brandt & Henry, 2012; Weiner & Federico, 2016). This is because 3
of 4 of the items have a checklist format that does not require respondents to explicitly choose only
one of two desirable qualities for children or to rank-order the qualities, as other childrearing-values
scales do (Federico, Fisher, & Deason, 2011). With checklist items like these, a ‘high’ level of the
construct is indicated by an accumulation of diagnostic responses across stimuli relevant to different
facets of the construct rather than consistent responding across items (Bollen & Lennox, 1991;
McCrae, 2015; Streiner, 2003). Despite this difference in measurement characteristics, previous
research using the measure consistently indicates that this checklist-based authoritarianism scale
predicts theoretically-related outcome variables in much the same way other measures of
authoritarianism do (Brandt & Henry, 2012; Dunn, 2015; Dunn & Singh, 2014; Stenner, 2005). That
said, to be sure that our results are not an artifact of this operationalization of authoritarianism, we
replicate our results in the WVS 5 using a measure of conservation values (e.g., Dunn et al., 2017).
These results can be found in the supplemental materials.
4 In contrast to what we do at the individual level with income and education, we do not consider
the individual components of HDI. Rather than being distinct characteristics, our theory regards the
individual HDI components as indicators of a common construct. Indeed, the three HDI
components are so highly correlated at the nation level (rs>0.70) as to be conceptually redundant
and statistically impossible to differentiate in a regression context (Ghislandi et al., 2003; Ogwang &
Abdou, 2003).
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 14
Intelligence Agency, 2017). These included “Protestant,” “Orthodox,” “Muslim,” and “Other
Religion.” “Roman Catholic” was the excluded group.
Results
Preliminary Analyses: Bivariate Correlations
We begin by examining the bivariate relationships between the two dependent measures
(religious identification and religious practice) and three key individual-level predictors (income,
weaker among both those high in income and formal education (ps<0.001), but stronger among
those high in authoritarianism (p<0.001). Similarly, religious practice was less frequent among those
high in income and education (ps<0.001), but more frequent among those high in authoritarianism
(p<0.001). Importantly, both religiosity indices were more strongly associated with authoritarianism
than with either of the two demographics (income and education). For example, in WVS Wave 4,
religious identification correlated more strongly in absolute terms with authoritarianism (r=0.29)
than with income (r=-0.08) or education (r=-0.15); religious practice was also more strongly
correlated with authoritarianism (r=0.16) than with income (r=-0.04) or education (r=-0.04).
Religious identification and practice were also strongly correlated in both datasets (r=0.46 in
Wave 4, r=0.56 in Wave 5; ps<0.001). Authoritarianism also showed the usual negative relationships
with both income (ps<0.001) and education (ps<0.001) in both datasets, consistent with the idea that
authoritarianism is lower among those with higher incomes and greater education attainment.
Main Analyses: Moderators of the Relationship Between Authoritarianism and Religiosity
To test our main hypotheses, we estimated a series of multilevel linear mixed models, since
individual WVS respondents (level 1) were nested in nations (level 2). For each dependent variable
in each dataset, we estimated three models. In Model 1, we regressed each dependent variable on the
level-2 predictors (the religious-culture dummies and HDI) and the level-1 main effects (income,
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 15
education, gender, age, and authoritarianism). In Model 2, we added the level-1 Authoritarianism ×
Education interaction, along with the Authoritarianism × Income to distinguish the moderating
effect of education from that of income. In Model 3, we added the cross-level Authoritarianism ×
HDI interaction, along with four other cross-level interactions between authoritarianism and each of
the level-2 national religious-culture indicators to distinguish the moderating effect of education
from that of nation-level religious differences. In each model, we allowed the intercept to vary
randomly, along with selected coefficients indicated below.5 Given the lack of an agreed-upon
method for computing effect sizes in linear mixed models (Peugh, 2010), we rely on the 0 to 1
coding of our key independent and dependent variables to provide an indication of effect size
(Baguley, 2009). With this coding, each coefficient estimate indicates the proportion change in
religious identification or religious practice associated with moving from the minimum to the
maximum value of each independent variable.
Authoritarianism and religious identification. The models predicting religious
identification are summarized in Tables 2 (WVS 4) and 3 (WVS 5). We begin with Model 1.6
Looking at the estimates for this model, we find support for Hypothesis 1 in both datasets:
authoritarianism was associated with greater religious identification (b=0.08, in Wave 4; b=0.11, in
Wave 5; ps<0.001). Moving from the lowest to the highest authoritarianism level was associated with
8% and 11% increases in religious identification in each sample, respectively. That said, the
estimated effect of authoritarianism varied considerably across nations. To illustrate this, we provide
within-nation coefficients for the relationship between authoritarianism and religious identification
in the left-hand panels of Figures 1 (WVS 4) and 2 (WVS 5) derived from empirical Bayes estimates
5 Random-effect variance estimates for all models are provided in the supplementary materials.
6 In Model 1 in Tables 2 and 3, we allow the intercept and the coefficients for income, education,
and authoritarianism to vary randomly across nations.
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 16
of the random effects for the slope of authoritarianism in Model 1 (Rabe-Hesketh & Skrondal,
2008). In Wave 4, the coefficients range from b=-0.005 (Pakistan) to b=0.26 (South Korea); in Wave
5, they range from b=0.001 (Georgia) to b=0.26 (United States). Despite this variance, it is notable
that the nation-level effects whose 95% confidence intervals did not include 0 were predominantly
positive. Estimates from both samples also indicated that HDI was associated with reduced religious
identification at the national level (ps<0.001) and that education was associated with reduced
religious identification at the individual level (p<0.001 in Wave 4 and p=.086 in and in Wave 5).
Income had far weaker relationships with religious identification in both datasets (ps>0.250). Finally,
individuals who identified themselves as male were less religiously-identified in both samples
(ps<0.001), while older individuals displayed higher identification (ps<0.001).
Model 2 examined Hypothesis 2 by adding the Authoritarianism × Education interactions
(with the Authoritarianism × Income interactions as a control).7 As expected, these interactions were
significant and positively signed in Wave 4 (b=0.05, p=0.013) and Wave 5 (b=0.09, p<0.001). To
break down these interactions, we estimated conditional effects for authoritarianism across the range
of education values from the minimum (0) to the maximum (1). These conditional effects are
estimates and can be interpreted as the proportion change in religious identification associated with
going from the lowest to the highest value of authoritarianism at a specific education level. As an
additional illustration, we plot regression lines for authoritarianism at minimum and maximum
(95% CI=0.04, 0.08; p<0.001) at the lowest education level to b=0.11 (95% CI=0.07, 0.14; p<0.001)
at the highest education level. In Wave 5, the effects ranged from b=0.06 (95% CI=0.04, 0.09;
7Based on likelihood-ratio tests, we added random coefficients for the two level-1 interactions to
Model 2 in Tables 2 and 3 (in addition to the random effects included in Model 1).
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 17
p<0.001) at minimum education to b=0.15 (95% CI=0.12, 0.18; p<0.001) at maximum education.
Results were less consistent for the Authoritarianism × Income interactions; it reached conventional
worth noting that education is associated with lower religiosity among those at all levels of
authoritarianism in Wave 4, though the gap is largest among those low in authoritarianism.
However, education is associated both with reduced religious identification among those low in
authoritarianism and greater identification among those high in authoritarianism in Wave 5.
Model 3 tested Hypothesis 3 by adding the Authoritarianism × HDI interactions (plus the
interactions between authoritarianism and the level-2 religious-culture indicators as controls).8 As
predicted, Authoritarianism × HDI interaction was significant and positively-signed in both Wave 4
(b=0.12, p<0.001) and Wave 5 (b=0.14, p<0.001). To unpack these interactions, we estimated
conditional effects for authoritarianism across the range of HDI values from the minimum (0) to the
values represent the conditional effects and indicate the proportion change in religious identification
associated with going from the lowest to the highest value of authoritarianism at a particular level of
human development at the national level. For additional illustration, we plot regression lines for
In Wave 4, the conditional effects ranged from b=0.01 (95% CI=-0.03, 0.05; p>0.250) at
minimum national HDI to b=0.13 (95% CI=0.10, 0.16; p<0.001) at maximum national HDI. In
Wave 5, the effects ranged from b=0.01 (95% CI=-0.04, 0.05; p>0.250) at the lowest level of human
development to b=0.14 (95% CI=0.12, 0.17; p<0.001) at the highest level of human development.
None of the other cross-level interactions reached conventional levels of significance in either wave
8 Based on likelihood-ratio tests, we included the same random effects in Model 3 as Model 2 in
Tables 2 and 3.
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 18
of the interactions: though respondents in high-HDI nations are lower in religious identification
across the authoritarianism spectrum, the gap is largest among those low in authoritarianism. This
suggests that those low in authoritarianism are especially likely to abandon religious identification in
low-HDI nations.
Authoritarianism and religious practice. The models predicting religious practice are
summarized in Tables 4 (WVS 4) and 5 (WVS 5). Looking first at Model 1, we again found support
for Hypothesis 1 in both samples.9 As predicted, authoritarianism was associated with greater
religious practice (b=0.07, in Wave 4, p<0.001; b=0.10, in Wave 5, p<0.001). Moving from the
lowest to the highest authoritarianism level was associated with 7% and 10% increments in religious
practice in Waves 4 and 5, respectively. Again, however, the estimated effect of authoritarianism
varied markedly across nations. For illustrative purposes, within-nation coefficients for the
relationship between authoritarianism and religious practice are provided in the right-hand panels of
Figures 1 (WVS 4) and 2 (WVS 5); these were computed using empirical Bayes estimates of the
random effects for the slope of authoritarianism in Model 1. In Wave 4, the within-nation
coefficients for authoritarianism ranged from b=-0.18 (Bangladesh) to b=0.33 (United States). In
Wave 5, they ranged from b=-0.10 (Mali) to b=0.31 (United States). Again, despite the variance in
nation-level effects, the vast majority of the estimates whose 95% confidence intervals did not
include 0 were positively-signed. The only negatively-signed nation-level estimates whose confidence
intervals did not include 0 were Bangladesh in Wave 4, and Vietnam and Mali in Wave 5. Consistent
with prior research, HDI was also associated with reduced religious practice (ps<0.001). However,
education was associated with reduced religious practice at the individual level only in Wave 5
9 In Model 1 in Tables 4 and 5, we again specify the intercept and the coefficients for income,
education, and authoritarianism as random effects.
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 19
(p=0.046). Income was related to religious practice only in Wave 5 (p=0.013). Older respondents
showed higher levels of practice (ps<0.001).
Turning to Hypothesis 2, Model 2 added the Authoritarianism × Education interactions
(again with the Authoritarianism × Income interactions for control purposes).10 As expected, these
interactions were significant and positively-signed in Wave 4 (b=0.07, p=0.007) and Wave 5 (b=0.09,
p<0.001). We unpacked the interactions using conditional-effect analyses paralleling those
conducted for religious identification. These conditional effects are plotted in the left-hand panels of
visualization, we also plot regression lines for authoritarianism at minimum and maximum education
CI<0.01, 0.08; p=0.039) at minimum educational attainment to b=0.11 (95% CI=0.06, 0.16;
p<0.001) at maximum educational attainment. In Wave 5, the estimates ranged from b=0.05 (95%
CI=0.02, 0.09; p=0.001) at the lowest education level to b=0.15 (95% CI=0.11, 0.18; p<0.001) at the
highest education level. Results for the Authoritarianism × Income interactions were similar to those
in the religious-identification analyses. The interaction was positively-signed in both samples, but it
was statistically different from zero only in Wave 4 (p=0.035). Looking at the left two panels in
those low in authoritarianism and greater practice among those high in authoritarianism in both
waves.
10 We added random coefficients for the two level-1 interactions to Model 2 (in addition to the
likelihood-ratio tests indicated an improvement in fit from their addition in the former case but not
the latter case.
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 20
Turning to Hypothesis 3, Model 3 added the Authoritarianism × HDI interactions (plus the
interactions between authoritarianism and the religious-culture indicators).11 Consistent with
predictions, the Authoritarianism × HDI interactions were significant and positive in Wave 4
(b=0.19, p<0.001) and Wave 5 (b=0.15, p=0.002). We broke down these interactions using
conditional-effect analyses similar to those used to unpack the corresponding interactions in the
religious-identification analyses. These conditional-effect estimates are plotted in the right-hand
(95% CI=-0.11, 0.02; p=0.210) at minimum HDI to b=0.15 (95% CI=0.10, 0.20; p<0.001) at
maximum HDI. In Wave 5, there was some evidence that authoritarianism was marginally associated
with reduced practice in nations at the lowest level of human development, though the strongest
positive relationship between the two variables was again observed at maximum HDI. Here, the
effects ranged from b=-0.01 (95% CI=-0.08, 0.061; p>0.250) at the lowest level of human
development to b=0.14 (95% CI=0.11, 0.18; p<0.001) at the highest level of human development. In
high-HDI nations are lower in religious practice at all authoritarianism levels, the gap is largest
among those low in authoritarianism. This suggests that those low in authoritarianism are especially
likely to drift away from religious practice in low-HDI nations.
Discussion
A wealth of research has explored the individual and contextual correlates of religiosity. In
particular, whereas higher authoritarianism is associated with higher levels of religiosity, both low
levels of education at the individual level and residence in a nation with a low level of human
11 Based on likelihood-ratio tests, we included the same random effects in Model 3 as Model 2 in
Tables 4 and 5.
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 21
development are associated with higher levels of religiosity. In the present research, we argue that
education and development interact with authoritarianism to predict religiosity. Using data from two
large cross-cultural datasets, we confirm that authoritarianisms predict greater religiosity (Hypothesis
1), and that religiosity is higher among individuals with lower levels of education and those living in
less-developed nations. More importantly, we found that the relationship between religiosity and
authoritarianism is stronger among highly educated individuals (Hypothesis 2) and among
individuals living in societies that have higher levels of development (Hypothesis 3).
In terms of overall contribution, the current study suggests that although education and
development are associated with reduced levels of religiosity, religiosity varies more strongly as a
function of authoritarianism among those high in educational attainment or who reside in a more
developed society. Put differently, our studies suggest that education and social development may
play a powerful yet thus far underexplored role in shaping society by allowing individuals to sort into
more religious or more secular worldviews and lifestyles based on their level of authoritarianism.
Looking at the plots in Figures 4 and 6, it is apparent that education and development strengthen
the link between authoritarianism and religiosity in somewhat different ways, though. On one hand,
except in the case of religious identification in wave 4 of the WVS, education is associated with
reduced religiosity among those low in authoritarianism and greater religiosity among those high in
authoritarianism. Thus, education appears to be associated with differential sorting into varying
levels of religiosity—in opposed directions—at both ends of the authoritarianism spectrum. On the
other hand, development is consistently associated greater drops in religiosity among those low in
authoritarianism than among those high in authoritarianism, though respondents in developed
nations are lower in religiosity at all authoritarianism levels. This suggests that those low in
authoritarianism may be especially likely to fall away from religion as development increases.
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 22
In sum, our results reveal that the relationship between authoritarianism and religiosity is
more complex and conditional than previously thought. Furthermore, it contributes to the growing
body of literature on variables, such as education and development, that can facilitate the expression
of psychological dispositions (Federico & Deason, 2012; Federico & Malka, 2018; Malka, Soto,
Inzlicht, & Lelkes, 2014; Malka, Lelkes, & Soto, 2017), sometimes in the counterintuitive ways such
as those found in the present study.12
Limitations
The current study has some limitations. One limitation is a result of the cross-sectional
nature of our current study, which does not allow our analyses to identify whether religiosity is
caused by either authoritarianism, education, a country’s level of development or their interactions.
Although experimentally manipulating a personality variable such as authoritarianism might be
practically difficult, if not impossible, longitudinal models may help to provide stronger evidence of
causal relationships.
Another limitation is the relatively simple instrumentation provided by the WVS. Though
this is offset by the large, cross-national samples provided by the WVS, most of our core variables
were operationalized using single items or only a small number of items whose measurement
properties are difficult to assess in the full samples and in subsamples. In particular, our measure of
authoritarianism was based on a simple four-item scale (consisting largely of checklist-style items),
12 Research has also found positive relationships between religiosity and authoritarianism in a
different sense: i.e., support for actual autocratic governance (Malka, 2020). The question of whether
our moderation hypotheses for education and HDI apply to the relationship between anti-
democratic attitudes and religiosity is beyond the scope of the present investigation, which follows
Stenner (2005) in focusing specifically on authoritarianism in the pre-political sense, i.e., as a general
orientation toward obedience and conformity apart from specific political commitments. We leave
this question for future research, though we speculate that the democracy/religiosity relationship
may be more strictly moderated by individual-level variables governing ideological constraint (such
as education or political engagement; Federico & Malka, 2018).
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 23
which is not as psychometrically ideal as longer measures (Altemeyer, 1998). The scale is not without
its advantages over other measures, though. Unlike multifaceted inventories like the Right-Wing
Authoritarianism scale, another commonly used measure, the items in the WVS scale do not
explicitly mention respect for religious authority which may confound any associations we make
between authoritarianism and our measures of religiosity. Therefore, by relying on the scale (which
focuses largely on childrearing values) we avoid inflating the relationship between authoritarianism
and religiosity due to wording similarities. In addition, we find similar results using a conceptually-
related measure of conservation values in the supplementary materials, adding confidence that our
key results are not an artifact of the WVS authoritarianism measure. Nevertheless, because of the
limits of the WVS measures, we cannot be as sure of our results as we would be with longer scores
whose psychometric properties can be more easily evaluated.13
Future Directions
We would also like to highlight a number of directions for future research. Although it is not
a focus of our current study, we also found some evidence that income plays a role similar to that of
education and development in two of four analyses. Specifically, the relationship between
authoritarianism and religiosity is stronger among individuals with access to financial resources,
suggesting that income may also facilitate the religious expression of authoritarianism. Given the
inconsistency of this moderating effect across analyses, future research may wish to identify the
boundary conditions for the moderating effect of income, if any. Relatedly, researchers should
explore the possibility that other variables may moderate the relationship between authoritarianism
and indices of religiosity. In this vein, one candidate variable is the need for cognition. Individuals
higher in need for cognition tend to cognitively elaborate on prior predispositions and develop
13 In section 6 of the supplemental materials, we address these measurement concerns in more detail,
with attention to the possibility of measurement differences across education and HDI.
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 24
stronger justifications for them, which may in turn increase consistency between those
predispositions and related attitudes and behaviors (e.g., Cacioppo, Petty, Kao, & Rodriguez, 1986;
Tam, Leung, & Chiu, 2008). Similar processes may also make it easier for individuals high in need
for cognition to adopt religious orientations that are more consistent with their psychological needs.
On a different front, if the relationship between authoritarianism and religiosity is
conditioned by development, our results also suggest that we may observe changes in this
relationship across time within societies. Specifically, if a society that initially scores low on
development experiences an increase in development over time, authoritarianism may become more
strongly predictive of religious involvement and practice over that interval. While this question is
beyond the scope of the present study, future research should identify candidate nations in which
survey data covering a period of intense development are available for testing this prediction.
Conclusion
In the analyses reported here, we shed new light on the relationship between individual
differences in authoritarianism and religiosity. Using data from two large cross-cultural surveys, we
demonstrate that authoritarianism is more strongly related to religious involvement and practice
among individuals with higher levels of education and those who reside in nations at higher levels of
human development. Taken together, our findings suggest that authoritarianism is more likely to
predict religiosity when individual and contextual factors facilitate the adoption of expressive
attitudes and behaviors.
AUTHORITARIANISM AND RELIGIOSITY 25