Digital Nudges for Screen Time Reduction:
A Randomized Control Trial with Performance and Wellbeing Outcomes
Laura Zimmermann (School of Human Sciences & Technology, IE University)
Michael Sobolev (Cornell Tech, Cornell University)
Date: Dec 30, 2020
Address correspondence to laura.zimmermann@ie.edu or michael.sobolev@cornell.edu
​ ​ ​
Abstract
Many people want to reduce their smartphone usage to increase productivity and well-being, but fail to
accomplish this goal. We conduct a randomized control trial with a student population (N=112) over
three weeks to test the effectiveness of two widely available digital nudges for screen time reduction.
Along with a tracking-only control condition, a passive digital nudge (i.e., grayscale mode) was compared
to an active digital nudge (i.e., time limits). The passive nudge led to an immediate, significant reduction
of objectively measured screen time compared to the control condition. Conversely, the active nudge
led to a smaller and gradual screen time reduction. Those in the control condition, who simply tracked
their usage, did not lower their screen time. As opposed to the popular belief that reducing screen time
is beneficial, we found no immediate causal effects of reducing screen time on subjective well-being and
academic performance.
Keywords: Screen time, Digital addiction, Digital nudge, Cyberpsychology, Distraction, Smartphone
Statement of Relevance
Despite the huge advantages of smartphones, a significant proportion of people believe they are
over-using their phone and would like to change their mobile habits. As a solution, screen time
applications were recently launched by the biggest technology companies (e.g., Apple) to empower
people to change their smartphone usage and to increase digital wellbeing. In this study, we
experimentally test the effectiveness of two smartphone features for reducing screen time: grayscale
mode and time limits. These features are available on nearly any smartphone and are designed to nudge
people to spend less time on the phone, for example with time limits for ‘addictive’ social media apps.
We confirm the effectiveness of these digital nudges for supporting users in their endeavour to reduce
screen time. Conversely to the typically expected benefits, we find no improvements of well-being or
academic performance due to reduced smartphone usage.
Digital Nudges for Screen Time Reduction 1
Introduction: The Smartphone Dilemma
Since their inception less than 15 years ago, smartphones had an unparalleled success story. For many of
the approximately 3.5 billion smartphone users worldwide (Statista, 2020), the phone is an ever-present
companion in their life. On average, users spend over 3.5 hours daily looking at their smartphone
(GlobalWebIndex, 2020) adding up to 53 days per year. The fundamental change in mobile technology
has impacted our lives not only positively. Recently, ample media discussion has raised concern about
the increasing “addictiveness” of mobile technology.
This is supported by research highlighting negative links between smartphone usage and performance at
work (Lanaj et al., 2014) and university (Felisoni & Godoi, 2018), emotional health (Lee et al., 2014),
sleep patterns (Thomée et al., 2011) as well as cognitive capacity (Ward et al., 2017). Despite recent
controversy regarding the magnitude (Bjerre-Nielsen et al., 2020) and causality of such negative
relationships (as in the case of screen time and wellbeing in adolescents; Orben & Przybylski (2019a)),
many people see it as an important self-improvement goal to reduce their screen time. In fact, a
significant proportion describe themselves as smartphone “over-users” (Deloitte, 2019).
A habitual, automatic and impulsive behavior such as mobile usage (Billieux et al., 2008; Lyngs et al.,
2019; Sobolev et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2020) is difficult to change. Apart from pragmatic purposes,
smartphones convey deep-rooted emotional benefits that are hard to replace. Melumad and Pham
(2020) show that smartphones are essentially “adult pacifiers” enhancing psychological comfort in
stressful times. Smartphones, particularly their social media apps, help people regain a sense of
community and belonging (David & Roberts, 2017). Thus, it is not surprising that it is hard for people to
reduce their mobile usage. The extreme notion of “digital addiction”, however, implies that behavior
change is almost impossible with self-imposed techniques. Labelling smartphone usage as “addictive”,
rather than problematic or maladaptive, seems to be unjustified based on literature at this point
(Panova & Carbonell, 2018).
Our research answers the question of whether two digital nudges (Okeke, Sobolev, & Estrin, 2018), that
are readily available on almost any smartphone, can be effective tools to lower mobile usage.
Theoretically, we distinguish between an active (i.e., time limits) and a passive (i.e., grayscale mode)
nudge and evaluate their impact on objectively measured screen time. Finally, we investigate the causal
effect of reducing screen time on subjective well-being and academic performance in the form of grade
point average (GPA).
Previous research on solutions for reducing screen time
Both low-tech and high-tech solutions for screen time reduction can be effective. Allcott et al. (2020)
incentivized individuals with monetary rewards to deactivate Facebook for four weeks leading to a 90%
compliance rate. The immediate decrease in online activity was accompanied by an increase in
wellbeing. Their intervention also led to a persistent reduction in Facebook use after the experiment.
However, monetary incentives for screen time reduction are often not feasible or scalable. Further, they
Digital Nudges for Screen Time Reduction 2
can “crowd out” intrinsic motivation and be counterproductive for long-term habit formation (Gneezy et
al., 2011).
Digital solutions for screen time reduction vary along an active-passive continuum depending on the
required engagement. Active digital nudges require users to proactively engage in behavior change
strategies, for example by using planning prompts or by setting time limits. Apps with time limits are the
most common nudges to enhance digital self-control (Lyngs et al., 2019). They can reduce
self-interruptions and stress (Kim et al., 2017) as well as smartphone usage (Ko et al., 2015). At the
opposite end of the continuum lie passive digital nudges including reminders and feedback messages
(Hiniker et al., 2016), screen changes or vibrations (Okeke, Sobolev, Dell, et al., 2018). Passive nudges do
not require specific actions from users and do not limit the ability to use the phone (as opposed to time
limits). But, they provide more support than just usage information to nudge individuals to reduce
screen time. Passive digital nudging can be achieved, for example, by incorporating design frictions in
the usage process which introduce difficulty in the technology interaction. This can disrupt automatic
behavior and stimulate more mindful interaction with the phone (Cox et al., 2016). As a prime example,
Okeke et al. (2018) developed a mobile app that digitally nudges individuals when exceeding a daily
Facebook limit via subtle, repeating phone vibrations. This passive digital nudge led to a 20% decrease in
Facebook use.
In most cases, the apps and interventions used previously were specifically developed for research
purposes limiting their scalability and impact. It is extremely hard to convince people to download and
use apps in natural settings outside the lab (Murnane et al., 2015). We use a scalable approach by
leveraging mobile features that are readily available on most phones. Faced with the reckoning of ever
increasing “mobile addiction”, tech giant Apple released a time management application (Screen Time)
as part of its operating system. The Screen Time app is one of the most accessible solutions to mobile
reduction since it is almost ubiquitously available on any iPhone. Using the active nudge approach, users
can self-commit to abstain from their phone at specific times or after reaching time limits .
A widely accessible passive nudge is ‘grayscale mode’ (i.e., turning ones’ phone screen to black and
white). Grayscale mode was originally developed for colorblind people but recently it has been hailed as
an effective design friction to curb smartphone usage. It is a passive nudge since it steers users towards
reducing usage by making the experience less engaging, while preserving all functionality.
The current research
We experimentally investigate the effect of two digital nudges compared to a control group for screen
time reduction in a field study. We leverage the capabilities of Apple’s Screen Time app to alter the
choice architecture of mobile consumption using a passive and an active digital nudge (as illustrated in
​ ​
usage; (2) Passive nudge: changing the color of the screen (i.e., grayscale mode) to be less engaging; (3)
​ ​
Active nudge: self-committing to restrictive time limits on phone and app usage.
Digital Nudges for Screen Time Reduction 3
In line with the nudge approach, these changes to the digital choice architecture were suggested but not
enforced (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). We test whether these digital nudges are effective in decreasing
screen time compared to the control condition and investigate the causal impact of a reduction on
academic performance and wellbeing.
We contribute to the previous literature in the following ways. First, we measure mobile screen time
objectively using a novel methodological approach (i.e., screenshots of screen time apps). Second,
employing an RCT, we systematically test the effectiveness of interventions which are available to most
smartphone users free of cost. Third, we investigate grayscale mode as a passive nudge and compare it
to the established active nudge of time limits. Finally, we contribute to the understanding of the causal
relationship between screen time, academic performance and well-being.
Method
Participants
The study was run as part of a workshop at a large university with an international body of students. The
workshop was provided for different postgraduate programs and introduced students to the science of
attention and the role of distractions in the workplace. As part of the workshop, students completed a
‘smartphone project’ which entailed tracking their phone usage with a screen time app (see description
below) over a period of several weeks. This smartphone project constituted our intervention.
Digital Nudges for Screen Time Reduction 4
Our sample size was based on the availability of participants. We enrolled the maximum number of
participants who consented (N=353) out of the total number of workshop participants (N=395). To
reduce unnecessary variance, we only focused on iPhone users (the majority of our sample). We aimed
to recruit enough participants so that each experimental condition would include at least N=50
participants. Previous research indicated a high effect size (Cohen’s d between 0.4 and 0.5) for screen
time reduction interventions. Under this assumption, assuming a sample of at least 40 participants per
condition, our study should be able to detect an effect in a one-way ANOVA with at least 97% power.
The final sample consisted of 112 participants (Mage=26 years; 77% female). We excluded participants
​ ​
who did not submit viable screen time data, who did not complete a post-treatment survey or did not
Description of Screen Time App
Apple’s Screen Time app, now a core feature of iOS, provides a graphical overview of daily as well as
weekly total screen time. Screen time is also organized in different categories (e.g., social networking,
productivity, gaming, reading & reference). In addition, users can see their most used apps, their
number of pickups and notifications. These features allowed our control condition to self-monitor their
mobile behavior. For our active nudge condition, two time management features in the app were used:
1) ‘Downtime’ allows people to schedule time away from the screen during which only phone calls and
certain apps are be available; 2) ‘App Limits’ allows users to set daily time limits for certain apps or app
categories such as social networking. Limits are reset every day at midnight. If a person reaches their
limit, the app is blocked and a notification is provided. Users can extend or remove their self-set limits,
meaning that the time limits are not strictly enforced.
Experimental Design
Each participant was randomly assigned to one of three conditions: 1) control condition (n=39), 2)
passive nudge condition (grayscale, n=40), or 3) active nudge condition (time limits, n=33). All conditions
included basic instructions to use Apple’s Screen Time feature on iPhone devices.
In the control condition, participants were instructed to use Screen Time to track their phone usage
without any additional suggestions. In the passive nudge condition, participants were instructed to track
Specifically, they were instructed to switch their phone display from color to grayscale mode (i.e. black
and white screen). In the active nudge condition, participants were instructed to track their usage and
​ ​
instructed to activate the ‘Downtime’ feature to schedule time away from the screen during which they
wouldn’t use the phone. In addition, they were instructed to activate the ‘App Limits’ feature to set time
limits for different apps. Our experimental design was pre-registered (aspredicted.org/9ss3t.pdf) and
​ ​
received approval from the university review board.
Participants completed a baseline survey (T1) before the intervention as well as a post-treatment survey
(T2). The instructions for each condition, supplementary materials and survey items are available at OSF
Digital Nudges for Screen Time Reduction 5
(osf.io/k9bdf). There were no significant differences at baseline between the different conditions on key
​ ​
measures, including smartphone dependence, ability to reduce mobile usage and self-reported mobile
overview of the sample characteristics across conditions.
Procedure and Measures
T1 Survey
Participants received an online survey before the workshop (and smartphone project) with questions
about their smartphone usage and subjective wellbeing, embedded in other teaching-related items. We
describe the key measures next.
First, participants estimated their typical smartphone screen time per day (in hours and minutes), their
typical number of unlocks, and notifications per day. We also asked how much participants would be
able to reduce their screen time (scale: 0–100% reduction). While participants were unaware of the
mobile project at this point, we elicited their beliefs about how effective they thought three different
techniques were for reducing screen time (Efficacy expectations: “Looking at detailed information about
your individual smartphone usage”, “Setting yourself time limits for different apps”, “Turning your
smartphone to grayscale mode”, 0=not at all effective, 100=very effective). Next, we elicited
participants’ subjective wellbeing; specifically, their life satisfaction, sleep quality, stress level and
happiness. This was followed by an eleven-item smartphone dependence scale from Ward et al. (2017).
Finally, participants answered questions regarding demographics (age, gender), use of screen time apps
(current usage, which app?) and provided informed consent.
Screen Time
Previous research indicates that subjective screen time estimates only weakly correspond to objectively
measured screen time (Andrews et al., 2015; Boase & Ling, 2013; Kaye et al., 2020). Thus, to collect
objective screen time data, participants were instructed to take screenshots of their average
smartphone usage (‘last 7 days’) as provided in the Screen Time app, after every seven days from when
they received the instructions. Participants submitted these screenshots online, which were then coded
manually. The average daily screen time in minutes obtained from the screenshots constitutes our main
dependent variable.
T2 Survey
After the final workshop session (and the end of the smartphone project), participants received a second
online survey with questions regarding the project, compliance checks, subjective wellbeing and two
attention measures. We describe the key measures next.
The survey was adapted to the experimental conditions. Participants in the passive nudge condition
indicated which percentage of time during the project they had activated grayscale mode (0=not at all,
100=all the time), and whether grayscale mode had helped them to reduce screen time (0=definitely
not, 100=definitely yes). Participants in the active nudge condition were probed which goal-setting
Digital Nudges for Screen Time Reduction 6
features they had activated in the app, and to describe which limits they had set themselves. They were
further asked how frequently they had broken their own time limits (0=almost never, 100=almost every
day), and whether these had helped them to reduce screen time (0=definitely not, 100=definitely yes).
All participants estimated the percentage of productive mobile time during the project (0%-100%) and
their enjoyment of social media (e.g., Instagram, Facebook, YouTube) on their phone during the project
(0=not at all, 100=very much). All participants were asked whether using the Screen Time app had
helped them to reduce their mobile usage (0=definitely not, 100=definitely yes), and whether they had
felt committed to lowering their usage (0=not at all, 100=very much). Next, all participants completed
the same wellbeing questions as previously. Finally, to measure attention, participants completed three
items from the Cognitive Reflection Test (Frederick, 2005) and an attention filter item (‘Select strongly
disagree’) embedded in the Ten Item Personality Inventory (Gosling et al., 2003).
Academic Performance
To measure academic performance, we collected GPA for all courses from the university administration
with consent from participants. Since this was the first year of studying for our participants, we were not
able to obtain pre-treatment GPAs.
Results
We report the effect of the experimental condition on screen time, subjective well-being, and academic
performance. We provide descriptive results on the feasibility and acceptability of the Screen Time app
and the digital nudges. We additionally describe exploratory finding on other outcomes.
Efficacy Expectations T1
There were no differences in efficacy expectations across the conditions (all ps=ns) before the project.
​ ​
However, participants had different efficacy expectations for the three techniques (F(2, 220)=18.87,
​ ​
p<.001). Surprisingly, grayscale mode (M=26.70, SD=25.92) was expected to be least effective when
​ ​ ​ ​ ​
compared to time limit (M=40.88, SD=29.61, p<.001) and self-monitoring (M=45.21, SD=28.87, p<.001).
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
The difference between the latter two was not significant (p=.195). Before the smartphone project,
​ ​
participants expected self-monitoring to be the most effective and grayscale mode to be the least
effective strategy for reducing screen time.
Main Outcome: Screen Time
​ ​
average daily screen time without collapsing over the screenshots. Since the project duration varied for
the different master’s programs due to scheduling constraints, participants submitted a varying number
of screenshots (M=2.33, SD=.84). Ninety-five percent of participants submitted screenshots for at least
​ ​ ​ ​
two weeks, 40% submitted screenshots for three weeks. The number of submitted screenshots did not
differ across conditions (F(2, 109)=0.05, p=.953).
​ ​ ​ ​
Digital Nudges for Screen Time Reduction 7
A one-way ANOVA comparing the average screen time indicated a significant difference between
conditions (F(2, 109)=3.30, p=0.040). Participants’ average screen time in the passive nudge condition
​ ​ ​ ​
(M=233.19, SD=88.18) was lower than in the control condition (M=283.20, SD=97.25, t(77)=2.39
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
p=0.019). Participants’ screen time in the passive nudge condition was also marginally lower than in the
active nudge condition (M=270.17, SD=81.10, t(71)=-1.84, p=0.068). There was no significant difference
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
between the active nudge and control condition (t(70)=0.61, p=0.543). This indicates that on average
​ ​ ​ ​
grayscale mode was effective in lowering participants’ screen time by about 50 minutes per day. On
average, screen time in the active nudge condition with time limits was not lower than in the control
condition.
Next, we look at the progression over time without collapsing across data points using fixed-effects
regressed participants’ average daily screen time on to the condition (base: control condition), the
number of the submitted screenshot (week 1, week 2 etc.) as well as their interaction. Participants’
screen time in the passive nudge condition did not vary over time (coefficient=-11.64, p= 0.152).
​ ​
However, there was a significant interaction for the active nudge condition. Participants with
self-imposed time limits significantly lowered their usage over time (coefficient=-20.37, p=0.019). This
​ ​
indicates that our grayscale intervention had an immediate and stable effect on screen time, while the
time limits intervention helped people to gradually reduce their screen time.
Digital Nudges for Screen Time Reduction 8
Secondary Outcomes: Wellbeing and Performance
Subjective Well-being
At baseline, there were no significant differences between conditions in terms of life satisfaction, stress
level, sleep quality and happiness (all ps=ns). Importantly, after the intervention we also found no
​ ​
significant differences between the conditions for any of the wellbeing measures (all ps=ns). Conducting
​ ​
repeated measure ANOVAS comparing pre- versus post-treatment effects for the different conditions,
revealed no systematic patterns that would be consistent with the notion that a reduction of screen
reducing screen time did not have an immediate causal effect on subjective well-being.
Academic Performance
Students’ GPA (M=3.56, SD=0.176) ranged from 3.17 to 4, with higher scores indicating better academic
​ ​ ​ ​
performance. There were no significant GPA differences between conditions (F(2, 106)=0.10, p=0.905).
​ ​ ​ ​
However, we do find that students’ average screen time significantly predicts GPA (p=0.014). Every
​ ​
30-minute decrease in screen time was associated with a 0.0135 increase in GPA. Controlling for age and
gender did not impact the results.
Acceptability and Feasibility
Participants in the passive nudge condition indicated they had activated grayscale mode for
approximately half the time during the intervention (M=46.5, SD=32.79). Similarly, in the active nudge
​ ​ ​ ​
condition, participants indicated to have surpassed their self-set time limits about half the time (M=
​ ​
53.18, SD= 29.70). While this data is not directly comparable, it indicates similar levels of acceptance.
​ ​
After the project, participants in the treatment conditions also evaluated the passive and active nudge
as equally effective for reducing screen time (M_passive= 52.80, M_active= 55.42, F(1, 71)= 0.12,
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
p=0.732).
In general, participants in the treatment conditions, especially in the active nudge condition (M=58.45),
evaluated using the Screen Time app as more helpful for reducing mobile usage than participants in the
control condition (M_passive=51.10, M_control=39.61, F(2, 109)=4.05, p=0.020). Further, participants in
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
the treatment conditions, especially in the passive nudge condition (M=57.62) felt more committed to
​ ​
reducing screen time than participants in the control condition (M_active=55.90, M_control=43.35, F(2,
​ ​ ​ ​ ​
109)=3.08, p=0. 0.049). This indicates that both nudges positively influenced participants’ perception of
​ ​
the Screen Time app and their ability to reduce usage.
Other exploratory measures
People with higher enjoyment ratings of social media tended to have a higher average screen time
(coefficient=1.44, p<0.001). We do find that participants in the passive nudge condition enjoyed their
​ ​
social media time during the intervention marginally less than in the other conditions (coefficient=-9.27,
p=0.053). This suggests that grayscale mode may have been effective in reducing screen time partially by
lowering enjoyment of social media activities. Participants’ estimated productive mobile time during the
Digital Nudges for Screen Time Reduction 9
intervention, on the other hand, was not different across conditions. Finally, we found no differences
measures).
Discussion
We show that digital nudges can be effective tools to support people who wish to reduce their mobile
usage. Our research highlights passive and active digital nudges that are available on nearly any
smartphone and free of cost as effective solutions to mobile overuse. The passive nudge had an
immediate and consistent effect on screen time. Participants who were encouraged to activate
grayscale mode reduced their screen time by 17.6% compared to the control condition. On the other
hand, the active nudge with time limits helped people to gradually reduce their screen time indicating
habit formation. We suspect these results to be conservative estimates of the effectiveness since we did
not enforce or incentivise compliance. Similar to past research (Okeke, Sobolev, Dell, et al., 2018),
smartphone tracking alone, which constituted our control condition, in the absence of digital nudges did
not lead to a change in mobile usage. It is becoming clear that self-monitoring is insufficient and that
other solutions such as digital nudges are required to regulate phone usage.
Interestingly, participants’ efficacy expectations showed exactly the opposite pattern to the empirical
results. Participants believed self-monitoring to be most effective and grayscale mode to be least
effective for reducing usage. This is in line with research showing that people typically prefer educative
‘system 2’ nudges that enhance powers of agency over non-educative ‘system 1’ nudges, unless they are
informed about the effectiveness of the latter (Sunstein, 2016). Therefore, as a first step, it might be
important to inform users which techniques really work and which don’t for reducing usage.
We found no immediate causal effect of reducing screen time on subjective well-being and academic
performance. While mobile technology influences the way we interact, connect and share information
(David & Roberts, 2017; Sherman et al., 2016), there seems to be little scientific evidence that well-being
is generally harmed. Using self-reports, Przybylski and Weinstein (2017) found that moderate use of
digital technology is not intrinsically harmful for adolescents and may even be advantageous. Similarly,
Orben and Pryzbylski (2019b) found little evidence for negative associations between digital screen
engagement and adolescent well-being. Hall et al. (2019) found that social media abstinence for four
weeks had no effects on loneliness and wellbeing. We add experimental evidence to this growing
literature that calls into question the popular narrative that screen time is harmful for well-being.
In line with previous research (Felisoni & Godoi, 2018; Lepp et al., 2015), our results indicate that screen
time is associated with academic performance. While screen time was linked to GPA, it is unclear
whether students had lower grades because of the amount of time they spent on mobile, vice versa or
due to other factors. Our digital nudges, however, did not lead to increased GPA despite lowering screen
time. Technology multitasking whilst studying can have detrimental effects on performance (Ravizza et
al., 2017). But recent evidence also suggests that the negative effect of smartphone use on academic
performance may be overestimated (Bjerre-Nielsen et al., 2020). Our findings indicate that a general
Digital Nudges for Screen Time Reduction 10
screen time reduction might not effectively translate into the desired increase in performance or
productivity.
Our research approach and findings are of practical significance. In prior research, solutions of mobile
overuse relied on applications that were specifically developed for research purposes (Allcott et al.,
2020; Hiniker et al., 2016; Okeke, Sobolev, Dell, et al., 2018) which limits their scope. The advantage of
using commercially developed screen time apps like we did in our study, is that they are available on the
majority of smartphones. Hence, a large proportion of people have access to and can use these features
easily. The use of digital nudges, as opposed to more costly interventions, could be applied ubiquitously
and continuously (Okeke, Sobolev, & Estrin, 2018) to self-regulate phone usage.
Mechanisms and Future Research
Our study tackles the relationship between phone usage and important life outcomes such as subjective
well-being and performance. We find no evidence of a causal link, however this might depend on
different measures of phone usage and outcomes. Screen time is composed of a variety of tasks that
people undertake on their smartphones, ranging from meaningful to meaningless and from productive
to problematic activities (Billieux et al., 2008; Lukoff et al., 2018; Panova & Carbonell, 2018). Specific
behaviors such as passive social media scrolling or phone checking at night might be especially
problematic for sleep, well-being and performance (Liu et al., 2020). In the current study, data was
collected via screenshots which limits our ability to conduct more nuanced analysis. Future research
requires longitudinal data on different types of smartphone usage and more proximal daily outcomes.
Understanding the mechanisms behind the effect of digital nudges on screen time and related outcomes
is of theoretical and practical significance. Our study was not designed or statistically powered to
investigate mechanisms but we identified enjoyment of social media, which is considered most addictive
and problematic (Ding et al., 2016), as a potential mechanism for the effect of the passive grayscale
nudge. The gradual decline of screen time in the active nudge condition suggests that people
progressively become better at achieving their self-set time limits. Future research should investigate
general mechanisms for phone checking behavior and the effect of experience further (Roth et al.,
2016).
Conclusion
Our research offers insights for researchers, practitioners and consumers who are interested in
smartphone overuse and digital distraction. The findings can be used to encourage individuals, for
example in workplace situations (Gill et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2020; Nevskaya & Albuquerque, 2019) or in
educational settings (David et al., 2015; Taneja et al., 2015), to use their smartphones less with the help
of digital nudges. Considering that the median consumer would require a compensation of around $48
to give up Facebook for one month (Brynjolfsson et al., 2019), there exists a consumer demand for
cost-effective and scalable solutions to reduce mobile usage and screen time.
Digital Nudges for Screen Time Reduction 11