Running head: LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 1
Preverbal syntactic complexity leads to local coherence effects in Hindi
Sakshi Bhatia
Department of Linguistics, Central University of Rajasthan, Ajmer, India
Samar Husain
Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi,
India
Author Note
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Sakshi Bhatia,
Email: sakshi.bhatia@curaj.ac.in or to Samar Husain, E-mail: samar@hss.iitd.ac.in
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 2
Abstract
The effective use of preverbal linguistic cues to make successful clause-final verbal
prediction as well as robust prediction maintenance has been argued to be a
cross-linguistic generalization for SOV languages such as German and Japanese. In this
paper, we show that native speakers of Hindi (an SOV language) falter in maintaining
clause-final verbal predictions in the presence of a center-embedded relative clause with
a non-canonical word order. The fallibility of the parser is illustrated by the formation
of a grammatically illicit locally coherent parse as well as by poor comprehension
accuracy. Our investigations suggest that while plausibility is essential, presence of
overt agreement features might not be necessary for forming a locally coherent parse in
Hindi. The work highlights how top-down processing and bottom-up information
interact during sentence comprehension in SOV languages – comprehension suffers with
increased complexity of the preverbal linguistic environment.
Keywords: Local Coherence Effect; Syntactic prediction; Good-Enough
Processing; Sentence Comprehension; SOV languages
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 3
Preverbal syntactic complexity leads to local coherence effects in Hindi
Introduction
Top-down processing forms a critical component of sentence comprehension (e.g.,
Altmann & Kamide, 1999, 2007; Fischler & Bloom, 1979; Kliegl, Grabner, Rolfs, &
Engbert, 2004; Kutas & Hillyard, 1984, 1980; Levy & Keller, 2013; Marslen-Wilson,
1973; Schwanenflugel & Lacount, 1988; Schwanenflugel & Shoben, 1985; Staub &
Clifton, 2006; Zola, 1984). For example, Altmann and Kamide (1999) have shown that
English native speakers effectively use information about the verb’s selectional
restriction to preactivate the appropriate syntactic object prior to the object onset. In a
visual world paradigm, participants selectively moved their gaze to the image of a ‘cake’
on hearing ‘eat’ in the utterance such as 1(a). In contrast, while attending to sentences
such as 1(b), they started looking at the image of a ‘cake’ only at the onset of its
utterance.
(1) a. The boy will eat the cake
b. The boy will move the cake
This line of research (Altmann & Kamide, 1999, 2007, among others) highlights how
prediction can lead to the formation of grammatically licensed structures. See,
Kuperberg and Jaeger (2016); Kutas, DeLong, and Smith (2011); Levy (2013); Staub
(2015) for recent reviews on the role of prediction during sentence comprehension.
Interestingly, the generated predictions need not always be licensed by the grammar.
For example, in a recent study, Kamide and Kukona (2018) demonstrated that native
speakers of English generate predictions that are not consistent with the global
structure of the sentence. Rather, the generated parse is consistent only with the local
input. Participants were more likely to look at the image of a ‘bike’ after hearing the
‘the man from London’ in 2a compared to ‘the man very much’ in 2b. In addition,
participants also looked at the globally consistent object ‘carousel’ in condition 2a
suggesting that both the local as well as the global parse were active.
(2) a. The girl who likes the man from London will ride the carousel
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 4
b. The girl who likes the man very much will ride the carousel
The above study highlights that in certain syntactic configurations, the parsing process
can lead to grammatically illicit prediction. One such configuration is the locally
coherent structure (the man from London will ride in 2) which has previously been
shown to trigger parsing errors (Konieczny, Müller-Feldmeth, Hachmann, Schwarzkopf,
& Wolfer, 2009; Tabor, Galantucci, & Richardson, 2004). Such locally consistent (but
globally inconsistent) parses seem to arise in embedded structures such as relative
clauses which are known to incur memory load (Gibson, 1998; Grodner & Gibson, 2005;
Levy & Keller, 2013). In fact, another much discussed parsing error occurs in
configurations involving multiple embeddings. In the context of the so called structural
forgetting effect (Frazier, 1985), Gibson and Thomas (1999) showed that English native
speakers rated sentences such as 3a as good as sentences such as 3b. Note that 3b is
ungrammatical, as a verb (‘was cleaning’) in the embedded structure is missing; this
missing verb is denoted by a ‘∅’ symbol. Gibson and Thomas (1999) explained this
effect by assuming that the parser is unable to maintain the prediction of multiple verbs
in 3a due to increased memory load and therefore tends to forget the verb which incurs
the maximum cost.
(3) a. The apartment that the maid who the service had sent over was cleaning
every week was well decorated.
b. * The apartment that the maid who the service had sent over ∅ was well
decorated.
Effects such as local coherence and structural forgetting highlight that the parser is
susceptible to forming grammatically illicit parses. While in the case of local coherence,
the global parse was presumably active along with the local parse; in the case of
structural forgetting the global parse was completely abandoned in favor of a simpler
structure. Both these effects happen with clausal embeddings, suggesting that the
parser is particularly vulnerable in such syntactic configurations.
A parsing mechanism that can lead to grammatically illicit parses is compatible with a
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 5
variety of theoretical approaches to sentence processing. For example, a noisy-channel
model of language processing (e.g., Gibson et al., 2013; Kuperberg & Jaeger, 2016;
Piantadosi, Tily, & Gibson, 2011) is able to predict the formation of grammatically
illicit parses. The noisy channel model assumes that the comprehension system is
predictive because it needs to accommodate for the noisy transmission of information
from the speaker (cf. Kurumada & Jaeger, 2015). Therefore, unexpected input during
comprehension can lead to effects such as local coherence (Kamide & Kukona, 2018;
Konieczny et al., 2009; Tabor et al., 2004) and misinterpretation due to non-canonical
order (Ferreira, 2003). Similarly, the good-enough processing system (Ferreira, Bailey,
& Ferraro, 2002) also assumes that speakers make mistakes and therefore
comprehenders rely on various heuristics to accommodate their error-ridden input to
arrive at meaning. Under a good-enough system, the parser can rely on very little
information from the input, leading to a shallow or incorrect interpretation of the
received input. It has been proposed that a processing of such a kind could be a result
of limits on time and resources that the parsing system is typically subject to (Ferreira
& Patson, 2007). Finally, local coherence has been explained by a self-organizing
parsing mechanism (Tabor et al., 2004) where global syntactic structures compete with
structures formed based on local input. Together, we refer to such proposals as the
fallibility hypothesis. The fallibility hypothesis states that the comprehension system can
generate grammatically invalid parses due to factors such a processing load, etc.
Interestingly, the structural forgetting effect in the context of multiple clausal
embeddings discussed above has been shown to disappear in SOV languages like
German and Dutch. Vasishth, Suckow, Lewis, and Kern (2010) used the German
equivalent of sentences 3a-b to demonstrate that German native speakers rate 3b worse
than 3a (though see Häussler & Bader, 2015). Dutch has also been shown to pattern
with the German results (Frank, Trompenaars, & Vasishth, 2016). Vasishth et al. (2010)
explain this lack of forgetting in German by arguing that German native speakers get
exposed to clause final SOV structures much more than speakers of English. Hence, the
parser in German becomes adept at efficient handling of such verb-final structures. A
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 6
similar rationale has been invoked to explain the anti-locality effect in SOV languages.
Anti-locality effects are characterised by a facilitation at the clause final verb with
increased distance between the verb and its prior dependents. For example, Vasishth
and Lewis (2006) used items such as 4 a-b to show that reading times at the relative
clause verb dekhaa ‘saw’ were faster in the long conditions compared to the reading
times in the short conditions.
(4) a. Short, Subject Relative
vo-lar.kaa jisne us-kaagaz-ko dekhaa bahut-jigyaasu thaa
that-boy who that-paper-acc saw very-inquisitive was
‘That boy who saw that (piece of) paper was very inquisitive.’
b. Long, Subject Relative
vo-lar.kaa jisne us-kaagaz-ko mez ke-piiche gire-hue dekhaa
bahut-jigyaasu thaa
very-inquisitive was
inquisitive.’
Such facilitatory effects are generally understood to arise due to the better prediction of
the clause final verb in the long condition compared to the short condition. While
Vasishth and Lewis (2006) explain anti-locality through memory reactivation, their
model assumes a a left-corner parsing mechanism to predict the relevant clause final
verbal phrase. Note that the facilitation is found within a relative clause which is
deemed to be a difficult to process syntactic environment (e.g. Gibson, 1998; Just &
Carpenter, 1992; Miller & Chomsky, 1963; Yngve, 1960). Similar effects have been
demonstrated in other head-final languages as well such as German (Konieczny, 2000)
and Japanese (Nakatani & Gibson, 2010), pointing to the role of parser adaptability.
Information theoretic metrics such as surprisal (Hale, 2006; Levy, 2008) have been used
to account for the prediction-based effects such as anti-locality as high probability
structures are associated with low surprisal values.
To summarize, effects such as lack of structural forgetting and anti-locality effects in
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 7
SOV languages has been explained by the adaptability hypothesis. According to this
hypothesis, the parser becomes better at processing certain linguistic patterns in a
language because of the frequent exposure to those patterns (Christiansen & Chater,
1999; Christiansen & MacDonald, 2009; Engelmann & Vasishth, 2009; Hsiao &
MacDonald, 2013; Levy, 2008, 2013; MacDonald & Christiansen, 2002; Vasishth et al.,
2010). In the current context, the parser for SOV languages becomes efficient in robust
verbal prediction based on preverbal cues. Consequently, a key prediction of the
adaptability hypothesis is that comprehenders of SOV languages such as Hindi,
Japanese, German, etc. will effectively use the preverbal information (e.g., nominal
semantics, case-markers, etc.) to correctly predict a valid clause-final verb. In addition,
as demonstrated by the lack of structural forgetting in these languages, the hypothesis
also predicts that such predictions should be maintained robustly even in syntactic
configurations involving clausal embeddings.
Given the lack of structural forgetting and facilitation in processing of clause final verb
within relative clauses, it is quite possible that local coherence effects that arise within
RCs in English would fail to arise in an SOV language like Hindi. This is because in
Hindi, the prediction of the RC structure as well as the matrix verb should be
maintained robustly given previous evidence for efficient processing of clause final
structures in SOV languages. In such a scenario the globally consistent structure should
always be chosen over any locally consistent (grammatically illicit) structure.
In this paper, we investigate two questions, (1) Can a local coherence effect be observed
in an SOV language like Hindi? and (2) If yes, then what are the possible factors due to
which such an effect may arise? We report 6 experiments to investigate these questions.
Following the frequent use of center-embedded relative clause (RC) strcutures to
illustrate robust prediction in Hindi (Husain, Vasishth, & Srinivasan, 2014; Vasishth &
Lewis, 2006), we also utilize center-embedded RCs in our experiments. In particular, we
investigate if the prediction of a clause-final verb (and the relevant structure) is
forgotten in the head final language Hindi in the presence of a center-embedded relative
clause (RC) with non-canonical word order. This word-order manipulation is central to
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 8
our investigation into local coherence effects in Hindi. A failure to observe such an
effect would be consistent with the adaptability hypothesis. On the other hand, if a local
coherence effect is observed, that would be consistent with the fallibility hypothesis. In
addition, we also investigate the role of two factors – verbal agreement and semantic
plausibility – in inducing a locally coherent parse in Hindi.
The paper is arranged as follows: first, we discuss the key experiment that demonstrates
a local coherence effect in Hindi (Experiment 1). Next, we discuss three experiments
(Experiments 2-4) that investigate syntactic and semantic factors that could lead to a
local coherence effect arising. We probe the dependencies formed in head-final
structures with center-embedded RCs and word order variation through targeted
comprehension questions in Experiment 5. These results are further investigated using a
sentence completion study in Experiment 6. Finally, we consolidate the findings of all
the experiments in the General Discussion and conclude the paper.
Experiment 1
The goal of this experiment was to investigate if native speakers of Hindi form a locally
coherent parse during online comprehension. In order to probe this we employed the
design in Husain et al. (2014), shown in 5. In condition 5a, the NP vah laRkaa ‘That
boy ’ is modified by a subject relative clause (RC) which has an SOV word order. In
Masc
condition 5b, this relative clause has a non-canonical order such that the object of the
relative clause verb kitaab ‘book ’ appears after the relative clause verb paRhii thii
F em
‘read had ’; i.e., the RC has an SVO word order. Husain et al. (2014) found a
F em F em
significantly longer reading time at the RC verb in condition 5b compared to the RC
verb in condition 5a. The RT difference at the RC verb was explained through an
expectation-based account (Levy, 2008) by arguing that SOV structure of the RC in
condition 5a is strongly expected compared to the non-canonical SVO structure found
in 5b. Not encountering the expected OV order in 5b lead to a processing slowdown.
Critically, their experiment demonstrates that the RC structure is successfully predicted
during the comprehension process.
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 9
(5) a. Canonical, Subject Relative
Vah laRkaa jisne kal bahut dilchaspii se kitaab
That boy who yesterday lots interest with book
Masc Erg F em
paRhii thii, meraa dost hai
read had my friend is
F em F em Gen.Masc
‘That boy, who read the book with great interest, is my friend’
b. Non-canonical, Subject Relative
Vah laRkaa jisne kal bahut dilchaspii se paRhii thii
That boy who yesterday lots interest with read had
Masc Erg F em F em
kitaab, meraa dost hai
book my friend is
F em Gen.Masc
‘That boy, who read the book with great interest, is my friend’
In the current experiment, we adapted their design to evaluate Hindi speakers’
propensity to build a locally coherent parse involving relative clause internal material
and the post-RC material. Specifically, we used a post-RC verb which cannot be
grammatically integrated with other matrix clause material but which is compatible
with relative clause internal material in the non-canonical order as part of a locally
coherent parse.
Material and methods
Participants. 52 native speakers of Hindi participated in this experiment. All the
participants in the experiments reported in this paper were undergraduate or graduate
students from the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi (IIT, Delhi) between the ages of
18 to 40 years, with the exception of Experiment 3, where we also included students
from Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi. Participants provided informed consent and
were paid between INR 150 to 300 for their participation. The amount was pro-rated as
a function of time spent in the lab: INR 150 was paid for 30 minutes of experiment
participation; payments for experiments that lasted more than 30 minutes increased
accordingly.
Word Order
Items. We used a 2×2 design crossing RC-internal
Clause Type
(Canonical/Non-canonical) and post-RC (Copula/Transitive). The
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 10
Canonical condition has SOV order in the RC (6a,c), while the Non-canonical
conditions has SVO order (6b,d). Importantly, all four experimental conditions are
ungrammatical – the post-RC material cannot be integrated with the RC head noun
NP (vah laRkaa ‘That boy ’ in 6 a-d). In the Copula conditions (6a,b), the
Masc Masc
post-RC verb incorrectly bears a feminine agreement, matching the RC internal object
NP Fem (kitaab ‘book ’) rather than the features of NP . In the Transitive
F em Masc
conditions (6c,d), in addition to the incorrect agreement, NP and the post-RC verb
Masc
are thematically incompatible. We use underlining in the sample item below to draw
attention to the locally coherent parse.
24 experimental items in 4 conditions were prepared. 56 filler sentences with varied
levels of acceptability were also included. In the current experiment (and in subsequent
experiments), some of the filler sentence were ungrammatical. These ungrammatical
filler sentences were used to filter out participants who were not paying attention during
the data analysis phase. A latin-square design was used to present different items.
(6) a. Canonical, Copula
vaha laRkaa jisne kal bahut dilchaspii se kitaab
That boy who yesterday lots interest with book
Masc Erg F em
paRhii thii moTii thii . . .
read had fat was . . .
F em F em F em F em
b. Non-canonical, Copula
vaha laRkaa jisne kal bahut dilchaspii se paRhii thii
That boy who yesterday lots interest with read had
Masc Erg F em F em
kitaab moTii thii . . .
book fat was . . .
F em F em F em
c. Canonical, Transitive
vaha laRkaa jisne kal bahut dilchaspii se kitaab
That boy who yesterday lots interest with book
Masc Erg F em
paRhii thii mujhe bechnii paRii . . .
read had I sell had-to . . .
F em F em Dat F em F em
d. Non-canonical, Transitive
All the data and analysis files for this and subsequent experiments can be obtained from :
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 11
vaha laRkaa jisne kal bahut dilchaspii se paRhii thii
That boy who yesterday lots interest with read had
Masc Erg F em F em
kitaab mujhe bechnii paRii . . .
book I sell had-to . . .
F em Dat F em F em
Procedure. We used the self-paced reading (SPR) paradigm (Just, Carpenter, &
Woolley, 1982) with centered presentation for the reading task. Stimulus items were
presented using the online Ibex Farm platform. A Latin square design ensured that
each participant sees each item in only one condition. The target items and fillers were
randomized for each participant.
The experiment began by explaining the task to the participants verbally as well as in
written form. After this, several practice sentences were presented in order to
familiarize participants with the task. At the beginning of each trial, the participant
saw a fixation cross at the center of the screen. When the participant pressed the
space-bar key, the first word was displayed at the center of the screen. With each
successive press of the space bar, the previous word disappeared and the next word or
phrase was displayed. This successive replacement continued until the participant had
read the whole sentence. Reading times or RTs (in milliseconds) were taken as the
measure of relative momentary processing difficulty. In addition, participants were
asked to rate the sentence on a scale of 1–7 (with 1 signifying completely unacceptable
and 7 signifying completely acceptable) at the end of each trial.
Predictions
The adaptability hypothesis does not predict any difference in RTs between the
conditions at the critical post-RC verb. This is because these accounts assume that the
parser is actively predicting and successfully maintaining this clause-final verb (Levy,
2008; Vasishth et al., 2010). Since all the four conditions become ungrammatical at the
critical post-RC region, the adaptability hypothesis, will predict equal difficulty in all
the four conditions. Indeed, based on a metric like surprisal (Hale, 2006; Levy, 2008)
that quantifies the processing difficulty at the word as its conditional probability in the
sentential context, the probability of encountering the critical verb-forms in the
experimental items will be close to zero. This is on account of a critical assumption that
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 12
surprisal makes: the probability mass is distributed over only grammatically licensed
structures.
On the other hand, the fallibility hypothesis will predict that increased processing load
due to the unexpected SVO order of the relative clause could make the parser
susceptible to making errors. Under such a condition, a locally coherent structure
(Tabor et al., 2004) could be formed such that the RC internal NP gets structurally
F em
integrated with the post-RC material in the Non-canonical condition. We would
therefore expect to see a main effect of Word Order such that RTs at the (post-RC)
matrix verb in the Non-canonical condition should be less than the Canonical condition.
No such locally coherent structure is possible in the Canonical order. The predictions
discussed above were pre-registered on AsPredicted.com.
Also, since the SPR paradigm is known to have spillover effects (Kaiser, 2014), the
predicted RT difference can also appear at the post-critical regions. Consequently,
similar to the critical region, the post-critical regions were kept identical across
conditions.
In addition to the RTs, the fallibility hypothesis also makes predictions regarding
grammaticality ratings: it may be the case that comprehenders are susceptible to an
illusion of grammaticality for the non-canonical conditions due to the availability of a
locally coherent parse.
Results
For the data analyses in Experiment 1 and all subsequent experiments the statistical
analysis for the RT/acceptability data was done using linear mixed-effects model
through the lme4 package (Bates, Machler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015) in the R statistical
computing environment (R Core Team, 2013). Maximal models were fit when possible
(Barr, Levy, Scheepers, & Tily, 2013); in case of convergence failure, a less complex
model was fit by successively removing the random slopes of the by-subject and by-item
random effects component. Raw RTs were log transformed and acceptability ratings
were scaled before fitting the lmer models.
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 13
In addition, participants who rated ungrammatical fillers more than 3.7 were removed
rd
from analysis. The threshold of 3.7 was chosen as it was the value for the 3 quartile of
all ungrammatical ratings in this experiment. This step led to the removal of data from
14 participants.
The average ratings for the experimental conditions were found to be significantly
higher than the rating for the ungrammatical filler sentences (t=-12.32). The mean
st rd
rating for the experimental items was 3.7 (Min=1, 1 Quartile=2, Median=4, 3
Quartile=5, Max=7) while the mean rating for the ungrammatical fillers was 2.4
st rd
(Min=1, 1 Quartile=1, Median=2, 3 Quartile=3, Max=7). The analysis of the
acceptability ratings found a significant effect of Word Order (t=-4.22) such that the
ratings for the non-canonical conditions were less than the ratings for the canonical
condition. These figures can be seen in Tables 1, 2.
Experiment 1: Average acceptability ratings for the four conditions.
Condition Rating
a. Canonical, Copula 4.1
b. Non-Canonical, Copula 3.4
c. Canonical, Transitive 3.8
d. Non-Canonical, Transitive 3.4
RTs at the critical post-RC matrix verb region showed a significant main effect of
Clause Type (t=-2.0) such that RTs in the Transitive conditions were higher than the
RTs at the Copula conditions. In addition, a marginal interaction effect (t=1.68) was
observed – in a nested contrast the Non-canonical Transitive condition was marginally
faster than the Canonical Transitive condition (t=-1.9), while no difference was found in
the Copula conditions (t=0.01). RTs at the post-critical region showed a significant
effect of Word Order (t=-2.77) such that the Non-canonical canonical conditions was
and the post-critical regions. The RTs at the critical and the post-critical regions are
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 14
Experiment 1: lmer results for the acceptability ratings. Anova sum contrasts were used
for the two main effects and the interaction.
Coefficient SE t-value
Intercept 0.014 0.09 0.14
Word Order -0.13 0.03 -4.22
Clause Type 0.05 0.05 0.99
Word Order:Clause Type -0.03 0.03 -1.00
conditions. We also note that not removing the participants based on the exclusion
criterion mentioned above did not change the salient findings of the presented analyses.
Experiment 1: lmer results for the RTs at the critical and post-critical regions. Anova
sum contrasts were used for the two main effects and the interaction.
Critical Region Post-critical Region
Coefficient SE t-value Coefficient SE t-value
Intercept 6.72 0.05 127.08 6.48 0.04 157.61
Word Order -0.01 0.02 -0.72 -0.04 0.01 -2.77
Clause Type -0.05 0.02 -2.0 -0.02 0.01 -1.43
Word Order:Clause Type 0.02 0.01 1.68 -0.01 0.01 -1.02
Discussion
The RT results show that Hindi native speakers are susceptible to local coherence in the
non-canonical conditions where the RC internal NP object appears after the RC
F em
verb. Additionally, the acceptability ratings shows that non-canonical order conditions
are dispreferred compared to the canonical order conditions.
The RT results are surprising as they show that, in the face of a locally coherent parse,
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 15
Critical
Post−critical
C.Cop NC.Cop C.Trans NC.Trans
Condition
]sm
ni
TR[
emit
gnidaeR
4 conditions. C.Cop=Canonical, Copula; NC.Cop=Non-canonical, Copula;
C.Trans=Canonical, Transitive; NC.Trans=Non-canonical, Transitive.
native speakers of the head-final language Hindi are unable to sustain the prediction of
the matrix verb that was to be integrated with the head noun, NP . This goes
Masc
against the adaptability hypothesis that predicts robust prediction and successful
maintenance of clause final structures even in the face of clausal embeddings. These
results cannot be explained by the surprisal metric that would predict no difference
between various conditions.
What can explain this effect? There are two possibilities that we consider. The first
relates the use of clause final verb as a sentence boundary marker: the finite verb in the
RC could be a strong cue for a clause boundary and the RC-final NP may be
F em
treated as being beyond this boundary allowing NP to be integrated with the
F em
upcoming string. However, this still does not explain as to why the prediction of the
matrix verb due to the head NP is simply discarded. In fact, as we show in Experiment
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 16
PN orpleR 1tcnujdA 2tcnujdA breV−CR/tcejbO tcejbO/breV−CR brev−lacitirC 1lacitirc−tsop 2lacitirc−tsop 3lacitirc−tsop 4lacitirc−tsop 5lacitirc−tsop 5lacitirc−tsop
Position
]sm
ni
TR[
emit
gnidaeR
Condition
C.Cop
NC.Cop
PN orpleR 1tcnujdA 2tcnujdA breV−CR/tcejbO tcejbO/breV−CR taD−PN brev−lacitirC 1lacitirc−tsop 2lacitirc−tsop 3lacitirc−tsop 4lacitirc−tsop 5lacitirc−tsop 6lacitirc−tsop
Position
]sm
ni
TR[
emit
gnidaeR
Condition
C.Trans
NC.Trans
4 conditions.
5, the RC verb is not simply treated as the clause boundary and the RC-object is
predicted at the RC verb.
The second possibility relates to the processing load at the RC verb and its NP
F em
object in the non-canonical conditions. RTs at these regions show a clear effect of word
order (t=3.43) such that the canonical conditions were faster than the non-canonical
explained as a revision cost due to dashed expectation of the SOV order in the RC
structure (Husain et al., 2014). On this account, the head NP and its associated
prediction could become less activated as more time needs to be spent to process the
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 17
RC due to the revision process at the RC verb and its object.
In order for the local coherence effect to arise, not only does the prediction of the matrix
verb have to be discarded, but in addition, the structural relation of the RC object with
its verb also needs to be discarded. In Experiment 5, we report a completion study that
shows that the NP object is indeed predicted at the RC verb (also see Husain et al.,
F em
2014). This fact makes the local coherence effect even more striking. Such a pattern is
however compatible with the fallibility hypothesis that predicts parsing errors due to
increased processing load. For example, the self-organizing parsers (SOPARSE) (Tabor
et al., 2004) could explain the RT patterns. As stated earlier, SOPARSE assumes a
formation of local structures that compete with non-local structure. In the current
experiment, in the non-canonical structure, an infrequent verb before object RC
structure is formed, while the post RC material leads to a more frequent object before
verb structure. For instance, in a Hindi dependency treebank (Bhatt et al., 2009), there
were 8620 instances of Object before Verb order in the treebank, compared to a mere 33
instances of Verb before Object cases. This asymmetry in frequency between the word
orders could lead the local structure to win over the non-local structure.
Interestingly, the acceptability rating results show a different pattern than the RT data
– Canonical conditions were rated higher than the Non-canonical conditions. This
seems to go against the SOPARSE account which would predict higher ratings for the
locally coherent (Non-canonical) structures. One way to reconcile the RT and the rating
pattern would be to assume the parser forms a locally coherent parse temporarily before
realizing that it had made a mistake. However, a post-hoc analysis of the RTs in the
post-critical regions showed no evidence for an effect of word order (t=0.28). Indeed, in
Experiment 5 we report comprehension accuracy results on similar items that also do
not support this possibility. The rating study seems to be capturing just an overall
preference for canonical vs non-canonical order in Hindi.
To summarize, the results show a local coherence effect during online comprehension in
Hindi, thus highlighting fallibility in the prediction process in a head-final language.
The effect was demonstrated using an embedded RC structure; a similar structure has
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 18
been used by Vasishth and Lewis (2006) and Husain et al. (2014) to show robust
prediction in Hindi. We suggested that one possible explanation for observing local
coherence effect in head-final language could be reduced activation of the head noun
and its associated predicted structure due to increased processing in the non-canonical
conditions. But could there be certain linguistic features in the post-RC region that
cause the locally coherent structure to arise? In the three experiment discussed in the
following sections we explore two such features, (a) verbal agreement and (b) semantic
plausibility.
Experiment 2
The goal of the current experiment was to investigate if certain linguistic factors are
necessary for the local coherence observed in Experiment 1 to arise. In particular, this
experiment evaluated the contribution of verb agreement which is a key device to
encode syntactic relations between words in Hindi. Hindi has a mixed agreement system
- verb agreement morphology can index the features of the subject or the object or no
argument depending on the sentence structure. The verb agrees with the subject if the
subject lacks overt case-marking; failing that the verb agrees with the object if the
object lacks overt case-marking; failing that the verb exhibits default agreement
morphology (Kachru, 2006; Pandharipande & Kachru, 1977). In order to probe the
hypothesis that agreement constitutes a necessary condition for local coherence to arise
we manipulated agreement morphology on the post-RC verb for transitive sentences.
We compared sentences where this verb incorrectly bears overt agreement morphology
indexing the features of the RC internal NP to sentences where the verb bears default
agreement morphology (not indexing any NP’s features) to evaluate if the presence or
absence of agreement morphology impacts local coherence.
Material and methods
Participants. 63 native speakers of Hindi participated in this experiment at IIT
Delhi.
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 19
Word Order
Items. We used a 2×2 design crossing RC-internal
Agreement-type
(Canonical/Non-canonical) and (Overt/Default). Canonical order is
SOV, while non-canonical order is SVO. All four experimental conditions are
ungrammatical as in Experiment 1 – the post-RC verb is thematically incompatible
with the RC head noun, NP ( vah laRkaa ‘That boy ’). In the Overt Agreement
Masc Masc
conditions (7a,b) the post-RC verb incorrectly bears Feminine agreement matching the
RC internal object NP (kitaab ‘book ’) rather than the NP . The Overt
F em F em Masc
Agreement conditions are identical to the transitive sentences in Experiment 1 (6c,d).
In the Default Agreement conditions (7a,b), the post-RC verb bears default agreement
morphology which does not index any NP’s features. Note that in order to allow for the
possibility of a locally coherent parse in the Default agreement conditions, the RC
internal object NP bears an overt case-marker ko which blocks agreement in the
language and is consistent with default agreement on the post-RC verb.
24 experimental items in 4 conditions were prepared. 56 filler sentences with varied
levels of acceptability were also included. Some of the filler sentence were
ungrammatical. These ungrammatical fillers were used to filter out participants who
were not paying attention during the data analysis phase. A latin-square design was
used to present different items.
(7) a. Canonical, Overt
vah larka/ jisne/ kal/ bohot dilchaspii se/ kitaab/ parhi
that boy who yesterday lots interest with book read
Masc Erg F em F em
thii/ mujhe/ bechnii parhii
had I sell had-to
F em Dat F em F em
b. Non-Canonical, Overt
vah larka/ jisne/ kal/ bohot dilchaspii se/ parhi thii/
that boy who yesterday lots interest with read had
Masc Erg F em F em
kitaab/ mujhe/ bechnii parhii
book I sell had-to
F em Dat F em F em
c. Canonical, Default
vah larka/ jisne/ kal/ bohot dilchaspii se/ kitaab ko/ parhaa
that boy who yesterday lots interest with book ACC read
Masc Erg F em Def
thaa/ mujhe/ bechnaa parhaa
had I sell had-to
Def Dat Def Def
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 20
d. Non-Canonical, Default
vah larka/ jisne/ kal/ bohot dilchaspii se/ parhaa thaa/
that boy who yesterday lots interest with read had
Masc Erg Def Def
kitaab ko/ mujhe/ bechnaa parhaa
book ACC I sell had-to
F em Dat Def Def
Procedure. We followed the same procedure discussed in Experiment 1.
Predictions
The predictions of the adaptability hypothesis will be similar to those mentioned in
Experiment 1. With respect to the fallibility hypothesis, the SOPARSE account predicts
that the presence of overt agreement would make the local coherence effect stronger.
This is because the account assumes each node in an activated treelet to be a vector of
semantic and syntactic features. Increased match between nodes of different treelets
leads to increased strength of link between the treelets (see, Villata, Tabor, & Franck,
2018, for more details). Therefore, if agreement is a necessary condition for the building
of a locally coherent parse, then we expect the local coherence effect on RTs to manifest
differently across the Overt Agreement and Default Agreement conditions. The reading
time difference between the Canonical and Non-canonical condition ought to be larger
in the Overt Agreement conditions since the morphology on the post-RC verb overtly
indexes the features of the RC-internal object NP here but not in the Default
Agreement conditions.
Results
We follow the same statistical analysis procedures as discussed in Experiment 1. In
addition, participants who rated ungrammatical fillers more than 3.5 were removed
rd
from analysis. The threshold of 3.5 was chosen as it was the value for the 3 quartile of
all ungrammatical ratings. This step led to the removal of data from 17 participants in
this experiment.
The average rating for the experimental conditions were found to be significantly higher
than the rating for the ungrammatical filler sentences (t=-12.51). The mean rating for
st rd
the experimental items was 3.6 (Min=1, 1 Quartile=2, Median=4, 3 Quartile=5,
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 21
st
Max=7) while the mean rating for the ungrammatical fillers was 2.5 (Min=1, 1
rd
Quartile=1, Median=2, 3 Quartile=4, Max=7). The analysis of the acceptability
ratings found a marginal effect of Word Order (t=-1.74) such that the ratings for the
non-canonical conditions were less than the ratings for the canonical condition. In
addition, a significant effect was found for Agreement (t=-2.26) such that Overt
agreement conditions were rated higher than the Default agreement conditions. These
figures can be seen in Tables 4, 5.
Experiment 2: Average acceptability ratings for the four conditions.
Condition Rating
a. Canonical, Overt 4.0
b. Non-Canonical, Overt 3.7
c. Canonical, Default 3.5
d. Non-Canonical, Default 3.4
Experiment 2: lmer results for the acceptability ratings. Anova sum contrasts were used
for the two main effects and the interaction.
Coefficient SE t-value
Intercept 0.004 0.09 0.04
Word Order -0.04 0.02 -1.74
Agreement -0.09 0.04 -2.26
Word Order:Agreement 0.02 0.02 0.78
RTs at the critical and post-critical region showed a trend for faster RTs in the
Non-canonical conditions compared to the Canonical conditions; however, this
difference was not statistically significant. The effects of Agreement and the interaction
the post-critical region. RTs at the critical and the post-critical regions are shown in
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 22
conditions.
We also note that not removing the participants based on the exclusion criterion
mentioned above did change the results in the following ways – for the acceptability
ratings there was a significant effect of Word Order (t=2.5), in addition to the main
effect of Agreement (t=-3.6). For the RT results at the critical region, the effect of
Word Order was marginally significant (t=-1.8) with the Non-canonical conditions
being read faster compared to the Canonical conditions. For this unfiltered data, the
average rating for the experimental conditions were still found to be significantly higher
than the rating for the ungrammatical filler sentences (t=-10.35).
Experiment 2: lmer results for the RTs at the critical and post-critical regions. Anova
sum contrasts were used for the two main effects and the interaction.
Critical Region Post-critical region
Coefficient SE t-value Coefficient SE t-value
Intercept 6.71 0.05 123.90 6.44 0.03 164.28
Word Order -0.01 0.01 -1.01 -0.01 0.01 -1.35
Agreement -0.009 0.01 -0.70 0.007 0.01 0.61
Word Order:Agreement -0.007 0.01 -0.46 -0.007 0.01 -0.55
Discussion
The RT results and the acceptability ratings results in the current experiment show
similar numerical trends to Experiment 1 with regard to the Word Order manipulation.
However, the effect of Word Order was non-significant for both dependent variables. A
main effect of Agreement was also observed in the acceptability data.
The lack of a differential impact of overt agreement morphology versus default
agreement morphology on the reading times suggest a number of possibilities. One, it
could be the case that this morphological difference is not particularly contrastive to
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 23
Critical
Post−critical
C.Overt NC.Overt C.Default NC.Default
Condition
]sm
ni
TR[
emit
gnidaeR
4 conditions. C.Overt=Canonical, Overt Agreement; NC.Overt=Non-canonical, Overt
Agreement; C.Default=Canonical, Default Agreement; NC.Default=Non-canonical,
Default Agreement.
Hindi speakers who may be treating the Overt Agreement conditions at par with the
Default Agreement conditions in terms of agreement evaluation since the locally
coherent parse in both the conditions is consistent the agreement grammar of the
language. Alternatively, it could be the case that the structure may not be processed
deeply enough to allow agreement constraints to be evaluated immediately.
Given the effect of word order in Experiment 1, and a similar trend observed in the
current experiment, but no observable effect of agreement on RTs, it is possible that
overt agreement does not form a necessary condition for local coherence to arise.
A further possibility is that while overt agreement on the post-RC verb is not a
necessary condition for local coherence, overt agreement elsewhere in the sentence, for
example on the RC-internal verb, impacts local coherence effects. In the next section,
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 24
PN orpleR 1tcnujdA 2tcnujdA breV−CR/tcejbO tcejbO/breV−CR taD−PN brev−lacitirC 1lacitirc−tsop 2lacitirc−tsop 3lacitirc−tsop 4lacitirc−tsop 5lacitirc−tsop
Position
]sm
ni
TR[
emit
gnidaeR
Condition
C.Overt
NC.Overt
C.Default
NC.Default
4 conditions. C.Overt=Canonical, Overt Agreement; NC.Overt=Non-canonical, Overt
Agreement; C.Default=Canonical, Default Agreement; NC.Default=Non-canonical,
Default Agreement.
we present a sentence completion study which investigates this possibility.
Experiment 3
This section presents a sentence completion study to investigate the errors after the RC
verb in the two non-canonical conditions. While agreement morphology on the post-RC
verb, as manipulated in Experiment 2, does not appear to impact local coherence, one
further test of the contribution of agreement would be at the RC-verb. We evaluated
participant performance in a sentence completion task involving Non-canonical sentence
preambles truncated at the RC-verb with Agreement type manipulated at this verb.
The linking hypothesis is that the more susceptible participants are to locally coherent
parses after encountering the RC verb, the more likely they are to make completion
errors. If participants make similar amounts of errors after seeing Overt agreement and
Default agreement morphology on the RC-verb in Non-Canonical sentence preambles
then it can be concluded that they will be equally susceptible to the local coherence
effect irrespective of the agreement morphology at the RC-verb. On the other hand, if
agreement morphology is contrastive for Hindi speakers here, then a differential error
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 25
rate should be observed, which would suggest that the susceptibility to building a
locally coherent parse rests on agreement morphology on the RC-verb.
Material and methods
Participants. 21 Hindi native speaker participated in the experiment. The
participants were undergraduate or graduate students at Jawaharlal Nehru University
Delhi and IIT Delhi.
Agreement-Type
Items. We used a 1×2 design manipulating (Overt/Default) at
the RC-internal verb in sentences with non-canonical word order in the relative clause.
Participant were shown 24 items following example 8. The items were presented using a
latin square design. In addition, 122 filler items were also included in the experiment.
(8) a. Non-Canonical, Overt
vah larka/ jisne/ kal/ bohot dilchaspii se/ parhii thii . . .
that boy who yesterday lots interest with read had . . .
Masc Erg F em F em
b. Non-Canonical, Default
vah larka/ jisne/ kal/ bohot dilchaspii se/ parhaa thaa . . .
that boy who yesterday lots interest with read had . . .
Masc Erg Def Def
Procedure. The sentence completion task was employed as the experimental
paradigm (Taylor, 1953). Each sentence was presented using the centered self-paced
reading (SPR) paradigm. Participants were provided an incomplete sentence and their
task was to complete it such that it was meaningful. Each sentence appeared on the
screen in the self-paced reading format. Initially, a ‘+’ sign appeared on the center of
the computer screen. When the participant pressed the space-bar key this ‘+’ sign got
replaced with the first word of the sentence. Successive button presses displayed the
remaining words of the sentence at the center of the screen. A . . . symbol signalled the
end of the sentence fragment and prompted the participant to complete the sentence.
This was done in a text box that appeared by pressing ‘space-bar’ after the . . . symbol.
After typing in the text the participants pressed the ‘enter’ key to move to the next
trial. The experiment was conducted using Douglas Rohde’s Linger software (version
2.94). Items were automatically randomized by Linger.
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 26
Response coding
The completion data was coded for two variables (a) whether the direct object of the
RC verb was posited (1 if yes, 0 otherwise), and (b) whether the completion was
grammatical (1 for yes, 0 otherwise).
Predictions
As stated previously, the aim of the current completion study was to investigate if the
susceptibility to form locally coherent structures is affected by the agreement
morphology at the RC-verb.
Note that given the SV order in the relative clause, speakers ought to predict an object
argument for the RC-verb, and that this step would precede the building of any locally
coherent parses. Object prediction may have been directly affected by the agreement
morphology on the RC-verb – Overt agreement requires the positing of a case-unmarked
NP with the relevant person/number/gender features. On the other hand Default
agreement may not be as strongly predictive because in the language default agreement
can arise in a number of contexts – when argument NPs are case-marked or when there
are no argument NPs present (e.g. in infinitive clauses). Therefore, completions with a
valid RC-object are predicted to be higher in the Overt condition compared to the
Default condition.
In order to form the locally coherent parse the prediction of the head NP-matrix verb
structure has to be discarded by the parser. By hypothesis, increased completion errors
in this experiment constitute a signal of the discarding of this prediction and can be
used as a measure of the strength of local coherence in the two conditions.
If the local coherence effect is impacted by agreement morphology at the RC-verb we
should expect a differential rate of ungrammatical completions in the Overt condition
compared to the Default condition. It may be the case that in the Overt agreement
condition, the RC internal structure is processed more deeply compared to the Default
agreement condition, leading to reduced susceptibility to a locally coherent parse in
sentence completion. On the other hand, if the susceptibility to form a locally coherent
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 27
parse is not influenced by agreement morphology, we would see no difference in the
number of valid grammatical completions in the two conditions.
Results
The statistical analysis for the completion data was done using the generalized linear
mixed-effects model with logit link function. This has been done using the lme4
package (Bates et al., 2015) in R. Maximal models were fit when possible (Barr et al.,
2013); in case of convergence failure, a less complex model was fit by successively
removing the random slopes of the by-subject and by-item random effects component.
The percentage completion for the two response variables coded by us is shown in
grammatical completions.
Experiment 3: Percentage completions for valid RC object and valid grammatical
continuations in the two conditions.
Condition RC object Grammatical
completions
Non-Canonical, Overt 62 57
Non-Canonical, Default 57 59
Experiment 3: glmer results for the completion data. Treatment contrast was used with
Non-Canonical, Default as the baseline condition.
RC object Grammatical completion
Coefficient SE z-value Coefficient SE z-value
Intercept 0.45 0.71 0.64 0.51 0.43 1.19
Non-Canonical, Overt 0.52 0.45 1.17 -0.10 0.28 -0.38
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 28
Discussion
These results show that completions in sentences with overt agreement features on the
RC verb do not differ from cases where there were default agreement features on the RC
verb. Hindi speakers are just as likely to (a) posit an RC-object in the Overt agreement
condition as the Default agreement condition; and (b) grammatically complete the
sentences in both the conditions. While there may be some generalized susceptibility to
locally coherent parses in these sentences – as signalled by the relatively low proportion
of grammatical completions across the board – overt agreement at the RC-verb does not
modulate this effect.
Experiment 4
The aim of the current experiment was to evaluate if plausibility underlies the local
coherence effect observed in Experiment 1. Words in a structure are in a semantic
relationship with one another and plausibility is a key device to encode the
well-formedness of these semantic relations. In this experiment, we specifically ask if
local coherence arises only when the RC-internal object is a plausible argument of the
post-RC verb.
Material and methods
Participants. 63 native speakers of Hindi participated in this experiment at IIT
Delhi. Please note that although, the number of participants in this experiment and
Experiment 2 is same, these experiments were conducted separately.
Word Order
Items. We used a 2×2 design crossing RC-internal
Plausibility
(Canonical/Non-canonical) and (Plausible/Implausible). All
experimental conditions are ungrammatical as in Experiment 1. As before, Canonical
order is SOV, and Non-canonical SVO. In the Plausible conditions, the RC-internal
NP-object is a semantically plausible argument of the post-RC verb, while in the
Implausible conditions, NP-object is not a plausible argument of the post-RC verb: for
example, in the sample item given in 9, while the sale of a book is a plausible event, the
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 29
sale of an eye is less so.
(9) a. Canonical, Plausible (= 6c / 7a)
vah larka/ jisne/ kal/ bohot dilchaspii se/ kitaab/ parhi
that boy who yesterday lots interest with book read
Masc Erg F em F em
thii/ mujhe/ bechnii parhii
had I sell had-to
F em Dat F em F em
b. Non-Canonical, Plausible (= 6d / 7b)
vah larka/ jisne/ kal/ bohot dilchaspii se/ parhi thii/
that boy who yesterday lots interest with read had
Masc Erg F em F em
kitaab/ mujhe/ bechnii parhii
book I sell had-to
F em Dat F em F em
c. Canonical, Implausible
vah larka/ jisne/ kal/ bohot dilchaspii se/ aankh/ dekhii
that boy who yesterday lots interest with eye seen
Masc Erg F em F em
thii/ mujhe/ bechnii parhii
had I sell had-to
F em Dat F em F em
d. Non-Canonical, Implausible
vah larka/ jisne/ kal/ bohot dilchaspii se/ dekhii thii/
that boy who yesterday lots interest with seen had
Masc Erg F em F em
aankh/ mujhe/ bechnii parhii
eye I sell had-to
F em Dat F em F em
24 experimental items in 4 conditions were prepared. 56 filler sentences with varied
levels of acceptability were also included.
Procedure. We followed the same procedure discussed in Experiment 1.
Predictions
The predictions for the adaptability hypothesis for the items in current experiment are
similar to those mentioned in Experiment 1.
With respect to the fallibility hypothesis, both the SOPARSE account as well as the
good-enough processing account would predict that for local coherence to arise,
semantic compatibility should be a necessary condition. In the SOPARSE account,
semantic match is a precondition for forming links between nodes of various treelets
since the treelest are assumed to be vectors of semantic and syntactic features (see,
Villata et al., 2018, for more details). Similarly, the good-enough account assumes use
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 30
of various heuristics during the comprehension process. According to this account,
heuristics based on semantics and world knowledge can override the grammatical
constraints during online structure building (Ferreira, 2003). So both these accounts
predict semantic plausibility to be a necessary prerequisite for local coherence to arise,
as plausibility is a key device to encode semantic relations between words. If this is
correct then, we would expect to observe a faster reading time in the Plausible
Non-canonical condition compared to the Plausible Canonical condition. No difference
in RT should be observed in the two Implausible conditions.
Results
We follow the same statistical analysis procedures as discussed in Experiment 1. In
addition, participants who rated ungrammatical fillers more than 4.1 were removed
rd
from analysis. The threshold of 4.1 was chosen as it was the value for the 3 quartile of
all ungrammatical ratings. This step led to the removal of 16 participants.
The average rating for the experimental conditions were found to be marginally higher
than the rating for the ungrammatical filler sentences (t=-1.8). The mean rating for the
st rd
experimental items was 3.1 (Min=1, 1 Quartile=1, Median=2, 3 Quartile=5,
st
Max=7) while the mean rating for the ungrammatical fillers was 2.9 (Min=1, 1
rd
Quartile=1, Median=2, 3 Quartile=5, Max=7). The analysis of the acceptability
ratings found a significant effect of Word Order (t=-2.69) such that the ratings for the
non-canonical conditions were less than the ratings for the canonical condition. A
significant effect of Plausibility (t=8.27) was also observed such that plausible
conditions were rated higher than the implausible conditions. These figures can be seen
in Tables 9, 10. In addition, a nested contrast showed that the ratings in the Plausible
conditions were marginally different (z=-1.9) while the rating in the Implausible
conditions were not (z=-1.6).
RTs at the critical region showed a significant main effect of Word Order (t=-2.83) such
that RTs in the Non-canonical conditions were faster than the Canonical conditions.
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 31
Experiment 4: Average acceptability ratings for the four conditions.
Condition Rating
a. Canonical, Plausible 4.06
b. Non-Canonical, Plausible 3.7
c. Canonical, Implausible 2.41
d. Non-Canonical, Implausible 2.1
Experiment 4: lmer results for the acceptability ratings. Anova sum contrasts were used
for the two main effects and the interaction.
Coefficient SE t-value
Intercept -0.0008 0.07 -0.01
Word Order -0.06 0.02 -2.69
Plausibility 0.38 0.04 8.27
Word Order:Plausibility -0.01 0.02 -0.38
this effect was driven by the Plausible conditions (t=-3.49) – the Plausible
non-canonical condition was faster than the Plausible canonical condition while no
results of the nested contrast. No significant effect was observed in the post-critical
shows the RTs for all the regions across all the experimental conditions. We also note
that not removing the participants based on the exclusion criterion mentioned above
did not change the salient findings of the presented analyses.
Discussion
The results from Experiment 4 show that the local coherence effect appeared in the
non-canonical condition only when the post-RC object and the clause final verb and its
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 32
Experiment 4: lmer results for the RTs at the critical region. Anova sum contrasts were
used for the two main effects and the interaction.
Coefficient SE t-value
Intercept 6.67 0.08 79.94
Word Order -0.05 0.01 -2.83
Plausibility -0.01 0.02 -0.45
Word Order:Plausibility -0.02 0.02 -1.07
Experiment 4: lmer results for the RTs at the critical region. Anova sum contrasts were
used for the nested comparisons.
Coefficient SE t-value
Intercept 6.67 0.08 79.94
Plausibility -0.01 0.02 -0.45
Implausible.Order -0.03 0.03 -0.98
Plausible.Order -0.07 0.02 -3.49
subject formed a plausible parse. It also showed that while the implausible conditions
were rated lower than the plausible conditions, the two implausible conditions were
rated similarly.
The results replicate the key result of the speed-up in the non-canonical word order
found in Experiments 1. It shows that semantic plausibility is a key precondition for the
local coherence effect to arise. With regard to the processes assumed by SOPARSE and
good-enough processing accounts, the results show that syntactic compatibility alone
cannot allow a local parse to override competing parses and that semantic coherence is
critical.
So far we have observed that a local coherence effect arises in a head-final language like
Hindi. We noted that agreement is not a necessary precondition for this effect to arise,
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 33
Critical
Post−critical
C.Plaus NC.Plaus C.Implaus NC.Implaus
Condition
]sm
ni
TR[
emit
gnidaeR
4 conditions. C.Plaus=Canonical, Plausible; NC.Plaus=Non-canonical, Plausible;
C.Implaus=Canonical, Implausible; NC.Implaus=Non-canonical, Implausible.
while semantic plausibility is. At the same time, the acceptability ratings clearly show
that while the experimental items are rated higher than the ungrammatical fillers, they
are also consistently rated worse than the grammatical fillers. This suggests that the
purported illicit parse (that shows up as facilitation in reading time) in the
non-canonical conditions could be short-lived. Given the SPR+acceptability rating
paradigm employed so far it is difficult to say if the locally coherent parse persists after
the participant has comprehended the sentence. In order to assess this we also
conducted an SPR experiment where comprehension questions probe dependencies
formed between verbs and nouns in the sentences during the comprehension process.
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 34
PN orpleR 1tcnujdA 2tcnujdA breV−CR/tcejbO tcejbO/breV−CR taD−PN brev−lacitirC 1lacitirc−tsop 2lacitirc−tsop 3lacitirc−tsop 4lacitirc−tsop 5lacitirc−tsop
Position
]sm
ni
TR[
emit
gnidaeR
Condition
C.Plaus
NC.Plaus
C.Implaus
NC.Implaus
4 conditions. C.Plaus=Canonical, Plausible; NC.Plaus=Non-canonical, Plausible;
C.Implaus=Canonical, Implausible; NC.Implaus=Non-canonical, Implausible.
Experiment 5
The aim of the current experiment was to probe whether Hindi speakers are able to
successfully form the various structural dependencies in the sentences presented in
previous experiments by utilizing targeted comprehension questions. We presented
Hindi speakers with copular verb sentences in a self-paced reading paradigm which was
followed by comprehension questions targeting the integration of NPs in the sentences.
Our primary focus was the integration of the RC-internal object NP – we tested a licit
integration (RC object NP – RC verb) and an illicit integration (RC object NP –
matrix verb) to evaluate whether faulty NP integrations underlie the observed local
coherence effects – but we also tested the integration of the head NP. Furthermore, in
addition to ungrammatical copular sentences, we also tested grammatical copular
sentences to establish a baseline for local coherence effects.
Material and methods
Participants. 46 native speakers of Hindi participated in this experiment. While the
planned number of participants was 70, data collection had to be stopped partway due
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 35
to COVID related disruptions.
Items. We used a 2×2 within-subjects repeated measures design crossing RC-internal
Word order (Canonical/Non-canonical) and Grammaticality (Grammatical/
Ungrammatical). Canonical order is SOV (9a,c), while Non-canonical order is SVO
(9b,d). Grammaticality is manipulated via the RC head NP and the relationship
between this NP and the agreement morphology on the post RC verb – distinct NPs
with different gender specifications were used in the grammatical and ungrammatical
conditions. In (10), the ungrammatical conditions have a masculine NP as the head NP
(vah laRkaa ‘That boy ’) while the grammatical conditions have a feminine NP as
Masc
the head NP (vah raajkumaarii ‘That princess ’). The post-RC verb bears the same
F em
agreement morphology across all conditions of an item, in 10 feminine agreement. In
the ungrammatical conditions (10a,b), this feminine agreement morphology on the
post-RC verb does not correspond to the features of the grammatical target of
agreement, the RC head NP (vah laRkaa ‘That boy ’) but rather to the features of
Masc
the RC internal object (kitaab ‘book ’), as in Experiments 1. In the grammatical
F em
conditions (10c,d), the feminine agreement morphology on the post-RC verb correctly
matches the RC head NP (vah raajkumaarii ‘That princess ’).
F em
(10) a. Canonical, Ungrammatical
vah laRkaa jisne kal bahut dilchaspii se kitaab
That boy who yesterday lots interest with book
Masc Erg F em
paRhii thii shaayad moTii thii . . .
read had maybe fat was . . .
F em F em F em F em
b. Non-canonical, Ungrammatical
Vah laRkaa jisne kal bahut dilchaspii se paRhii thii
That boy who yesterday lots interest with read had
Masc Erg F em F em
kitaab shaayad moTii thii . . .
book maybe fat was . . .
F em F em F em
c. Canonical, Grammatical
vah raajkumaarii jisne kal bahut dilchaspii se kitaab
That princess who yesterday lots interest with book
F em Erg F em
paRhii thii shaayad moTii thii . . .
read had maybe fat was . . .
F em F em F em F em
d. Non-canonical, Grammatical
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 36
vah raajkumaarii jisne kal bahut dilchaspii se paRhii thii
That princess who yesterday lots interest with read had
F em Erg F em F em
kitaab shaayad moTii thii . . .
book maybe fat was . . .
F em F em F em
24 experimental items in 4 conditions were prepared. Every experimental trial was
followed by a Yes-No comprehension question. 88 filler sentences were also included.
The filler sentences included both monoclausal and biclausal sentences in canonical and
non-canonical word orders. The complete list of experimental items can be obtained
from the authors. A latin-square design was used to present different items. Overall,
comprehension questions were included for 70% of trials.
Comprehension Questions
The comprehension questions for the critical experimental items sought to evaluate the
success of various NP integrations in the sentences. Question type was manipulated as a
between items factor to give three types of question-item pairs probing distinct NP
integrations.
The first two subsets of questions are concerned with the integration of the RC-internal
NP and are our primary focus. Of these two subsets, one subset tested the integration
of the RC internal object NP with the RC internal material. This is a grammatically
licit dependency since both these elements are part of the the relative clause. To
illustrate, if the sample item in (10) was part of the subset probing RC internal NP-RC
internal material integration, then the corresponding question would be as in (11). 8
out of 24 items in the experiment had this kind of comprehension question.
(11) RC internal NP-RC internal integration
kyaa kitaab kal paRhii gayii thii?
Q book yesterday read go was?
‘Was the book read yesterday?’
The second subset tested the integration of the RC internal NP with the post-RC
material. Since the RC internal object NP and the post RC material are from distinct
clauses and the RC internal object NP is not an argument of the post RC verb, this is a
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 37
grammatically illicit dependency. If the sample item in (10) was part of the subset
probing RC internal NP-post RC integration, then the question would be as in (12). 8
out of 24 items in the experiment had this kind of comprehension question.
(12) RC internal NP-post RC integration
kyaa kitaab moTii thii?
Q book fat was
‘Was the book thick?’
In addition, we also had a third subset of questions which probed the integration of the
head NP with distinct parts of the structure. Distinct questions had to be used in the
grammatical and ungrammatical conditions due to the non-identical head NP across
these conditions. In the grammatical conditions, the questions probed the integration of
the head NP with the post-RC material. Since both the head NP and the post RC
material are part of the matrix clause structure, this integration is licit. However, in the
ungrammatical conditions we probed the integration of the head NP with the RC
internal verb since the integration with the post RC verb is illicit here. If the sample
item in (10) was part of the subset probing head NP-RC integration/post RC
integration, then the questions would be as in (13).
(13) head NP integrations
a. kyaa laRke ne kuchh paRhaa thaa?
Q boy erg something read was
‘Did the boy read something?’
b. kyaa raajkumaarii motii thii?
Q princess fat was
F em
‘Was the princess fat?’
Note that while we illustrate the various question types for a single item here (10), in
the experiment any one item corresponded to only one question type subset for all
participants.
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 38
Procedure
We followed the same procedure discussed in Experiment 1. However, instead of
ratings, the SPR reading was followed by yes-no comprehension questions. The
experiment was conducted using Douglas Rohde’s Linger software (version 2.94).
Predictions
We expected to replicate the reading time pattern observed in previous experiments,
wherein Word Order has an impact on RTs. If the RC internal NP gets integrated with
the post-RC material, then the RTs for the Non-canonical condition should be lower
than the Canonical condition as in the previous experiments.
Turning to question comprehension accuracy, the primary predictions are regarding the
integration of the RC-internal NP. If Hindi speakers are successfully integrating the RC
internal object NP with the RC internal material, then they should have high accuracy
on questions probing this dependency. Furthermore, since the RC internal object NP
and the post RC material are from distinct clauses, Hindi speakers ought not to
integrate these elements. If Hindi speakers do not attempt such an integration, then
they should exhibit high accuracy on questions targeting this dependency. However, if
Hindi speakers erroneously attempt to integrate the RC internal NP with the post RC
material then they are expected to exhibit low accuracy on questions targeting this
dependency.
In addition, a more general point can be made regarding the integration of the head NP
– if Hindi speakers are able to make a successful prediction about upcoming matrix
material at the head NP and maintain that prediction, then the integration of the head
NP with the matrix material ought to proceed smoothly. However, if they fail to
maintain that prediction they should subsequently have difficulty in answering
comprehension questions about this integration which would manifest as low accuracy
in the grammatical conditions of the head NP-integration subset.
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 39
Results
We follow the same statistical analysis procedures as discussed in Experiment 1. Data
from participants with less than 70% accuracy across all the trials (including fillers)
were excluded from analysis. This led to the removal of one participant’s data.
RTs at the critical region showed a significant effect for Grammaticality (t=-2.07) such
that RTs in the Grammatical condition were faster than the Ungrammatical condition.
the post-critical region. There was a numerical trend in the post-critical2 region
consistent with the effect of Word order observed in previous experiments –
Non-canonical conditions were marginally faster than the Canonical conditions
all the regions across all the experimental conditions.
Experiment 5: lmer results for the RTs at the critical region. Anova sum contrasts were
used for the two main effects and the interaction.
Coefficient SE t-value
Intercept 6.425 0.053 120.778
Word Order 0.018 0.012 1.478
Grammaticality -0.026 0.012 -2.070
Word Order:Grammaticality 0.006 0.012 0.496
speakers are fairly accurate at answering questions probing the integration of the
RC-internal NP with the RC internal material. At the same time, they struggle with
questions probing the integration of the RC internal NP with the post RC material.
The accuracy data for the two question types probing the RC internal NP was analyzed
using generalized linear mixed effects model. There is a significant main effect of
Question Type (p < 0.001). This shows that Hindi speakers are quite susceptible to the
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 40
Critical
Post−critical2
C.Ungram NC.Ungram C.Gram NC.Gram
Condition
]sm
ni
TR[
emit
gnidaeR
the 4 conditions. C.Ungram=Canonical, Ungrammatical; NC.Ungram=Non-canonical,
Grammatical; C.Gram=Canonical, Ungrammatical; NC.Gram=Non-canonical,
Grammatical
Experiment 5: lmer results for the RTs at the post critical 2 region. Anova sum
contrasts were used for the two main effects and the interaction.
Coefficient SE t-value
Intercept 6.308 0.04 156.385
Word Order -0.02 0.01 -1.945
Grammaticality 0.003 0.01 0.309
Word Order:Grammaticality -0.004 0.01 -0.409
incorrect integration of the RC-NP with post-RC material.
In addition, we evaluated accuracy on comprehension questions targeting the
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 41
PN orpleR 1tcnujdA 2tcnujdA breV−CR/tcejbO tcejbO/breV−CR brevdA brev−lacitirC 1lacitirc−tsop 2lacitirc−tsop 3lacitirc−tsop 4lacitirc−tsop 5lacitirc−tsop
Position
]sm
ni
TR[
emit
gnidaeR
Condition
C.Ungram
NC.Ungram
C.Gram
NC.Gram
4 conditions. C.Ungram=Canonical, Ungrammatical; NC.Ungram=Non-canonical,
Grammatical; C.Gram=Canonical, Ungrammatical; NC.Gram=Non-canonical,
Grammatical.
Experiment 5: Comprehension accuracy for questions
Question Type Accuracy %
RC internal NP – RC Verb 75
RC internal NP – post RC material 26
Experiment 5: lmer results for comprehension accuracy for questions probing integration
of RC-internal NP. An anova sum contrast was used.
Coefficient SE z-value p-value
Intercept 0.001 .32 0.003 0.997
Question Type 1.436 .316 4.551 < 0.001
integration of the head NP with post-RC matrix material in grammatical conditions
separately. Hindi speakers appear to struggle with this integration – speakers’ accuracy
is close to chance levels here (53%). Finally, we note that not removing the participants
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 42
based on the exclusion criterion mentioned above did not change the salient findings of
the presented statistical analyses.
Discussion
The comprehension question accuracy results from this experiment allow us to establish
that Hindi speakers are forming faulty integrations during structure building in
sentences with center embedded relative clauses. Accuracy on questions targeting the
RC internal NP suggests that licit integrations and illicit integrations coexist – Hindi
speakers integrate the RC object NP with RC internal material and they also integrate
RC object NP with post RC material. Alongside this susceptibility to incorrect
integrations, we also observed that Hindi speakers struggle with the integration of the
head NP with the post-RC material. The near chance performance on questions
targeting this integration suggests that Hindi speakers failed to adequately maintain the
predictions associated with this dependency.
The reading times results in this experiment are consistent with the key result of speed
up in non-canonical word order observed in previous experiments, although the effect is
only marginally significant in the present study. We also observe a main effect of
grammaticality in the reading times at the critical region – Hindi speakers are faster at
reading grammatical sentences than ungrammatical sentences. The existence of this
grammaticality effect in RTs alongside a susceptibility to building locally coherent
parses (as suggested by the comprehension question accuracies) may appear puzzling at
first glance. However, this can be treated as an ambiguity advantage effect explicable in
terms of underspecification (Swets, Desmet, Clifton, & Ferreira, 2008). In the
Grammatical conditions, where the (sub-)strings associated with the global parse (head
NP integration with post RC verb) and the local parse (RC-NP integration with post
RC verb) are well-formed, speakers do not need to commit to a particular parse at the
post-RC verb in the absence of disambiguating information. In contrast, in
ungrammatical sentences, the global parse may be ruled out immediately upon
encountering the post-RC verb which signals the ungrammaticality, and only the local
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 43
parse remains viable.
In sum, this experiment shows that Hindi speakers are struggling with the various NP
integrations in sentences with center-embedded relative clauses. This may be due to
failure to maintain various details of predictive structure building during incremental
processing of head final structures with clausal embedding. In order to further assess
the nature of predictive processes, we conducted a sentence completion experiment
comparing canonical and non-canonical word orders.
Experiment 6
The goal of the current experiment was to investigate if Hindi speakers are successfully
predicting upcoming structure in sentences with embedded relative clauses and if
prediction is modulated by relative clause internal word order in such cases. In order to
investigate this we conducted a sentence completion study.
Material and methods
Participants. 36 Hindi native speakers participated in the experiment but data from
one participant had to excluded due to no responses on nearly all trials.
Word Order
Items. We used a 1×2 design manipulating RC-internal
(Canonical/Non-canonical) with the sentence preambles truncated at the RC-internal
verb in both cases. In the Canonical conditions the RC internal order was SOV, but in
the Non-canonical conditions, no object was present and the order was SV.
Participants were shown 24 items following example (14). Items presented using a latin
square design. In addition 52 filler items were also shown.
(14) a. Canonical
vah larka/ jisne/ kal/ bohot dilchaspii se/ kitaab/ parhii
that boy who yesterday lots interest with book read
Masc Erg F em F em
thii . . .
had . . .
F em
b. Non-Canonical
vah larka/ jisne/ kal/ bohot dilchaspii se/ parhii thii . . .
that boy who yesterday lots interest with read had . . .
Masc Erg F em F em
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 44
Procedure. The sentence completion task was employed as the experimental
paradigm in this experiment in a manner identical to that outlined in Experiment 3.
The experiment was conducted using Douglas Rohde’s Linger software (version 2.94).
Items were automatically randomized by Linger.
Response coding
The completion data was coded for two variables (a) whether the completion was
grammatical (1 for yes, 0 otherwise), and (b) whether the direct object of the RC verb
was posited (1 for yes, 0 otherwise).
Results
The statistical analysis for the completion data was done using the generalized linear
mixed-effects model with logit link function. This has been done using the lme4
package (Bates et al., 2015) in R. Maximal models were fit when possible (Barr et al.,
2013); in case of convergence failure, a less complex model was fit by successively
removing the random slopes of the by-subject and by-item random effects component.
showed that grammatical completions in the Canonical condition were significantly
different from the Non-canonical condition (z=4.06). The glmer analysis is provided in
Non-canonical condition while it was not predicted in the Canonical condition.
Experiment 6: Percentage completions
Condition Grammatical RC object
completions
Canonical 71 0
Non-Canonical 42 73
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 45
Experiment 6: glmer results for the completion data. Treatment contrast was used with
the Non-canonical condition as the baseline. * signifies significant at alpha < 0.05.
Grammatical completion
Coefficient SE z-value
Intercept -0.87 0.56 -1.55
Canonical 2.13 0.52 4.06 *
Discussion
The results of the completion study show that the head NP and its prediction is
frequently forgotten during prediction in the structures used in the reported
experiment. This is signalled by the proportion of ungrammatical completions in the
study. The results also show that the relative clause internal prediction is fine - the
direct object of the RC verb in the Non-canonical condition is predicted frequently.
These findings support the comprehension accuracy patterns observed in the previous
experiment. The results suggests that the parser is vulnerable to making errors in the
Post-RC region, specially in the Non-canonical condition. It is therefore likely that in
such situations the parser could commit to a locally coherent parse.
In Experiment 1, we entertained two hypothesis regarding the manifestation of a locally
coherent parse in the post-RC region. One of the hypothesis was that the RC verb
could be treated as clause boundary and therefore in the Non-canonical order, any
material following the RC verb (i.e. the RC object here) could be treated as belonging
to a new clause. The results of the completion study suggests that this
verb-as-boundary hypothesis is incorrect. The other hypothesis that we entertained was
that there is a revision cost at the RC verb - RC object region in the Non-canonical
condition. In light of the completion data and the RT results where Hindi speakers
frequently posit an object NP after the RC verb, it is more likely that the NP head and
its associated predictions are forgotten in the Non-canonical condition owing to
increased processing cost due to this revision. This suggests that simultaneously
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 46
maintaining the prediction about the RC-internal object and the matrix verb in the
non-canonical sentences proves to be difficult for Hindi speakers.
General Discussion
The key results of the series of experiments on the processing and production of
sentences with word order variations in embedded relative clauses in Hindi were as
follows. In Experiment 1, Hindi speakers were faster at reading the post-RC material
when the RC-internal word order was non-canonical (VO) compared to when it was
canonical (OV). This suggests that they are susceptible to a local coherence effect where
the RC-object in the non-canonical order and post-RC verb are part of a grammatically
illicit but locally coherent parse. In end-of-sentence acceptability ratings, sentences with
canonical word order were rated better than sentences with non-canonical word order
consistent with the generalized difficulty observed for non-canonical order in the
absence of licensing discourse contexts in languages allowing flexible word order (Kaiser
& Trueswell, 2004).
In Experiments 2 and 3, we tested the role of syntactic dependencies, here verb
agreement, in giving rise to a locally coherent parse. In Experiment 2, where we
manipulated agreement on the post-RC verb in addition to word order, we observed a
marginal effect of word order on RTs and on ratings consistent with Experiment 1. In
addition, an effect of agreement-type was observed on the ratings – sentences with overt
agreement were rated better than sentences with default agreement – but not on the
RTs. Experiment 3 was a sentence completion study where we manipulated agreement
on the RC-verb in non-canonical sentence preambles truncated at the RC-verb. Hindi
speakers were observed to be just as likely to grammatically complete the sentences
irrespective of the agreement-type on the RC-verb. Together these two experiments
suggest that the building of grammatically illicit locally coherent parses doesn’t
necessarily rest on agreement dependencies.
In Experiment 4, we tested the role of semantic information, here plausibility, in giving
rise to a locally coherent parse. We manipulated whether the RC-object could be a
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 47
plausible argument of the post-RC verb, in addition to manipulating word order. We
observed a significant effect of word order on RTs consistent with Experiment 1.
Crucially this effect was driven by the plausible conditions pointing to the role of
semantic plausibility in the building of locally coherent parses. In addition, an effect of
plausibility was also observed in ratings: sentences where the RC-object was a plausible
argument of the post-RC verb were rated better. We also replicated the effect of
word-order on the ratings observed in Experiment 1: here too sentences with canonical
word order were rated better than sentences with non-canonical word order.
Experiment 5 probed the building of structural dependencies by utilizing targeted
comprehension questions. We observed that while Hindi speakers were able to
successfully integrate the RC-object with the RC-verb, they struggled with inhibiting
the ungrammatical integration between the RC-object and the post-RC material. In
addition, integrations involving the head-NP and post-RC material also seemed to be
non-trivial for Hindi speakers. Finally, in Experiment 6 we used a sentence completion
task to evaluate the nature of predictive processing. We observed that Hindi speakers
struggled with grammatical sentence completions in sentences with non-canonical word
order pointing to the forgetting of the (predictions of the) head-NP in such structures.
Together Experiments 5 and 6 suggest that the parser is subject to significant
processing difficulty during structure-building in sentences with clausal embeddings,
particularly in non-canonical orders, even in head-final languages.
In summary, through a series of online and offline experiments, this work demonstrated
the local coherence effect in Hindi. We highlighted the possible reasons for the parser
becoming susceptible to forming a locally coherent parse. In the context of the RC
construction used in various experiments, we used multiple methods to show that
parsing errors take place in sentences with non-canonical SVO order where there is a
higher processing cost due to revision in the RC-verb RC-object region. Under such
conditions, the susceptibility to form locally coherent parse increases when there is a
semantic compatibility between the RC object and the matrix verb. To our knowledge,
this is the first demonstration of local coherence in an SOV language during online
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 48
sentence comprehension.
Is the locally coherent structure formed bottom-up or top-down?
The evidence for the formation of a locally coherent structure from the present set of
experiments is compatible with the parser fallibility hypothesis wherein the
comprehension system can generate invalid parses. There are a number of potential
explanations to the observed local coherence effect such as a SOPARSE account of
parsing, good-enough processing or the noisy-channel processing framework. In
particular, it is unclear from the results so far if the faster RTs in the non-canonical
condition reflect active prediction of a locally coherent parse on the part of the parser or
is it the case that the parser forms a locally coherent parse bottom-up using the input
encountered in the post-RC region? There are key differences between the two kinds of
parsing processes in the current set up: while a top-down account assumes that a locally
coherent parse is predicted at the post-RC object, a bottom-up account assumes that a
locally coherent parse is formed because the prediction of the head NP and associated
structure is less activated. Furthermore, while a bottom-up account of local coherence is
compatible with SOPARSE and good-enough processing mechanisms, a top-down
account would be more compatible with the noisy-channel processing framework.
In order to explore this issue further, we coded the completion data discussed in
Experiment 6 for two additional variables. These were, (a) whether a resumptive
pronoun referencing the head NP was used in the completion (1 for yes, 0 otherwise),
and (b) whether the completion was locally coherent with the RC object (1 for yes, 0
otherwise). Sentence 15(a) shows an instance where a resumptive pronoun (vah ‘that’)
is used during the completion. The use of resumptive pronouns in this context can be
understood to constitute a successful attempt at reactivating the head NP (cf. Keshtiari
& Vasishth, 2012) especially when the continuation is otherwise well-formed vis a´ vis
the integration of the head NP and post RC-verb. Sentence 15(b) shows an instance of
a locally coherent parse.
(15) a. Use of resumptive pronoun
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 49
vah raajkumaarii jisne kal bahut dilchaspii se kitaab
That princess who yesterday lots interest with book
F em Erg F em
paRhii thii vah shaayad moTii thii . . .
read had that maybe fat was . . .
F em F em F em F em
b. Locally coherent completion
vah aadmi jisne parson dhiire dhiire
That man who day-before-yesterday slowly
Erg
cunii thii divaar aaj vah dheh gaii . . .
i i
constructed had wall today that fall had . . .
F em F em F em F em
compared to the Non-canonical condition, the number of resumptive pronouns was
higher in the Canonical condition (z=4.2). The number of locally coherent completions
did not differ between the two conditions (z=0.55). A higher number of resumptive
pronouns in the Canonical condition suggests that compared to the Non-canonical
condition, the head NP was more likely to be retrieved successfully in the Canonical
condition. Combined with the difference in grammatical completions between the two
conditions, the results suggest that the parser’s tendency to form locally coherent
structure is mostly driven by bottom-up information rather than by a top-down process.
Percentage instances of resumptive pronouns and locally coherent structures in
Experiment 6
% Completion
Completion type Canonical Non-canonical
Resumptive pronoun for head NP 47 25
Locally coherent 7 9
However, the issue of which of the two bottom-up accounts discussed above –
SOPARSE and good-enough processing – is the best explanation for the current set of
observations needs further investigation.
One possibility worth considering is that the two bottom-up accounts may be linked to
differing parsing strategies which arise in different contexts. For instance, while
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 50
SOPARSE may correspond to a more general parsing strategy used to navigate
bottom-up structure building that is not necessarily triggered by any particular
processing difficulty, good-enough processing may be a parsing strategy that is adopted
in the face of processing difficulty due to high memory load (Ferreira & Patson, 2007).
Furthermore, given that it is plausibility rather than agreement that underlies the
observed local coherence effects in our experiments, and SOPARSE is argued to utilize
both semantic and syntactic features, SOPARSE in its current form will be inadequate,
tilting the scales towards good-enough processing. Alternatively, our findings could be
used to motivate a more curtailed SOPARSE model with weighted vectors such that the
model privileges semantic information over syntactic information during bottom-up
structure building.
Understanding the mechanisms that subserve the formation of a locally coherent
structure during online comprehension is critical because it highlights the interaction
between top-down and bottom-up processing. The locally coherent parse in previous
work that probed this interaction (e.g. Gibson, 2006) was mainly driven by lexical
ambiguity (also see, Bicknell & Levy, 2009). The locally coherent structures explored
in our work, on the other hand, are driven by syntactic dependency resolution involving
argument structure, agreement operation, etc. (cf. Kamide & Kukona, 2018). Indeed, a
fuller understanding of this interaction is critical in uncovering the parsing mechanisms
in SOV languages.
Implications for processing of SOV languages
As discussed in the Introduction section, it is generally understood that clause final
verbal prediction is quite robust in SOV languages (e.g., Konieczny, 2000; Levy &
Keller, 2013; Vasishth et al., 2010). On this account, the current results are quite
striking. They show that when the processing load is high, the prediction mechanism in
an SOV language can falter. In the experiments reported, an embedded RC as well as a
cost of revision due to dashed expectation, was assumed to lead to high processing load.
These factors are known to cause processing difficulty during comprehension (e.g.,
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 51
Frazier, 1985; Gibson, 1998). One implication of this would be that processing in SOV
languages should be easier when the preverbal linguistic configuration is simple and
when the core verbal arguments are closer to the the clause final verb, thus highlighting
the influence of working-memory limitation (cf. Futrell, Gibson, & Levy, 2020; Gibson
et al., 2013; Ros, Santesteban, Fukumura, & Laka, 2015; Ueno & Polinsky, 2009).
Recent experimental/corpus studies in Hindi and other SOV languages do support this
hypothesis. For example, Apurva and Husain (2020a, 2020b) find that parsing errors in
Hindi increase with complex argument structure involving multiple embeddings and
increased linear distance between the verb and its arguments. In a cross-linguistic
corpus study involving multiple SOV languages (including Hindi), Yadav, Vaidya,
Shukla, and Husain (2020) found that the linguistic context intervening a verb and its
dependent has few embeddings. Similarly, using a corpus study, Sharma, Futrell, and
Husain (2020) found that, compared to adjuncts, arguments (subject, objects and
indirect objects) in Hindi, are, on average, linearly close to the verb. Together these
results suggest that processing in a head-final language like Hindi involves robust
prediction when the preverbal linguistic material is simple; with increased preverbal
complexity, prediction can become fallible and the parser can falter.
Broader implications for prediction and future directions
The results discussed in this paper allow us to segue into more specific questions about
predictability and the load-bearing capacity of the parser. In the current set of
experiments, speakers needed to parse various dependencies within the relative clause
(e.g. argument structure, agreement) and resolve the connection between the relative
clause and matrix clause, all while also navigating the word order variations and
retaining the details of the predicted matrix structure. While it is clear that Hindi
speakers struggle with the prediction of matrix verb as generated at the head NP in this
context, the details of what is remembered and what is forgotten needs further probing.
For instance, we can ask which features of the upcoming verb are predicted, and which
of these predicted features are retained at the end of a period of processing complexity.
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 52
Recent work suggests that native speakers of Hindi predict valency of the verb and its
selection restrictions (Apurva & Husain, 2020b; Husain et al., 2014), event structure
(Eva Wittenberg & Vaidya, 2020), tense and agreement features (Dillon, Nevins,
Austin, & Phillips, 2012). However it is still unclear if some of these predictions are
more robust than others and therefore more likely to be retained.
Verb agreement in Hindi may be one domain where forgetting of specific predictions
could be investigated. Bhatia (2019) has demonstrated agreement attraction effects for
matrix agreement in sentences with a center embedded relative clause. However,
attraction effects were restricted to contexts where the distractor noun in the relative
clause was itself an agreement controller within that relative clause. These attraction
effects can be viewed as an instance of a failure to retain the specific prediction for the
matrix clause verb – it may be the case that the agreement dependency between the
distractor NP and the relative clause internal verb interferes with the specific prediction
about the agreement features of the matrix verb generated based on the features of the
head NP leading to the forgetting of this prediction. More broadly, it will be important
to investigate the underlying representation of the predictions and how this
representation relates to the linguistic entity that generated the predictions. This
should help to identify the limits on the adaptability of the parser to head-final
structures, thereby giving us a fuller picture of human cognitive capacities.
Conclusion
In this paper we examined the nature of predictive structure building during
incremental processing in head-final languages in the context of high processing load
created by varying word order in embedded relative clauses. We contrasted two
hypotheses: the adaptability hypothesis, which predicted that speakers ought to face no
difficulty in building head-final structures on account of the parser’s adaptation to
language specific statistics, and the fallibility hypothesis which predicted that in
contexts with high processing load the parser would become susceptible to errors even
in head-final languages. Across various experiments on processing and production we
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 53
observed that Hindi speakers struggled with head-final structures. They formed
grammatically invalid parses as indexed by a local coherence effect in reading
ungrammatical sentences, with this effect resting on the plausibility of the local parse.
Hindi speakers also struggled with maintaining predictions regarding the matrix
structure as indexed by ungrammatical completions and faulty structural integrations.
The results draw attention to the limits of parser adaptability in head-final languages
and demonstrate that the parser can falter with respect to predicting and maintaining
linguistic structure in the face of increased complexity. Further we suggest that in the
context of the fallibility hypothesis, the pattern of results is best explained by
bottom-up processes, with good-enough processing being the most likely model.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Apurva, Niralee Gupta, Vasundhara Srivastava, and Srabasti
Dey for their help with data collection.
Funding
This work was partially supported by a Department of Science and Technology -
Cognitive Science Research Initiative grant (SR/CSRI/29/2015) to Samar Husain.
LOCAL COHERENCE IN HINDI 54