Neonatal participation in neonatal imitation:
Narrative in newborn dialogues.
1 1
Timothy McGowan & Jonathan Delafield-Butt
Laboratory for Innovation in Autism, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland, United
Kingdom
ACCEPTED AUTHORS’ MANUSCRIPT
To be published in Human Development,
Corresponding author: Timothy McGowan.
Laboratory for Innovation in Autism, University of Strathclyde, 50 George Street, Glasgow
G1 1QE, Scotland, United Kingdom
timothy.mcgowan@strath.ac.uk
Number of tables: 0
Number of Figures: 1
Word count: 10998
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
Neonatal participation in neonatal imitation:
Narrative in newborn dialogues.
1 1
Timothy McGowan & Jonathan Delafield-Butt
Laboratory for Innovation in Autism, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, Scotland, United
Kingdom
Keywords: neonatal imitation, narrative, social cognition, infant development, primary
intersubjectivity.
Abstract
Since the publication of Meltzoff and Moore’s seminal paper, neonatal imitation has been
discussed, debated and scrutinised at considerable length. Despite this, the temporal structure
within which the interaction sits, has received limited attention. We hypothesise underlying
successful examples of neonatal imitation exists a narrative temporal structure, expressed and
perceived not only through vocalisations but also (if not primarily) through movement. We
contextualise neonatal imitation through a communicative lens, viewing the phenomenon as
an early dialogue between adult and infant, underpinned by the same narrative structure as
other ‘proto-conversations’ in infancy. From this perspective several of the leading and
traditional theories that have been proposed to explain neonatal imitation are considered.
Ultimately, we argue neonatal imitation is an innately dialogical phenomenon that forms one
of the first examples of primary intersubjectivity, exemplifying the importance of the
neonatal period in human psychological and social development. On this basis we propose
further study is required into the temporal structure underlying neonatal imitation.
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
Neonatal participation in neonatal imitation:
Narrative in newborn dialogues.
1.0 Narrative in the neonatal phase
Narrative structures underlie multiple aspects of our culture. They can be found
throughout many parts of our daily lives - in the music we listen to, the books we read, and in
the dance, theatre, television and film we enjoy. They exist in the speeches we hear from our
political leaders and the conversations we have with our friends. Bruner (1990) considered
narrative to form an organising life principle of human cognition, and to be central in human
communication. It is through narratives that we develop our understanding of the properties
of objects and how persons of different character are motivated and interact. Narrative gives
meaning to our scientific and general understanding of the world. They form a fundamental
architecture of intelligence that allows individuals to create meaning within an interaction,
and in everyday projects.
These narratives, and the form of meaning-making they constitute, can be traced back
to the earliest stages of human development. Even before birth, evidence indicates the actions
of the foetus are purposive, and made with awareness of a social other (Castiello et al., 2010;
Piontelli, 2010; Delafield-Butt & Gangopadhyay, 2013; Quintero & De Jaegher, 2020).
These self-generated actions, which test the world seeking a response from the environment,
are what Piaget identified as the earliest sensorimotor intelligence (Piaget 1953, 1954). This
basic action-response testing nature of foetal and infant action forms the foundation for the
development and learning (Trevarthen and Delafield-Butt, 2017).
Following birth, the interests of the neonate can become entwined with those of the
caregiver in early intersubjective events or proto-conversations during which vocal and
movement-based interactions (that are not yet imbued with language) are structured through a
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
narrative architecture (Gratier & Trevarthen, 2008). Within dyadic infant-parent interaction
these early interactions follow a common motif, or template, of expressed interest, arousal,
and intention shared on both sides (Brazelton, 1974; Stern, 2000; Trevarthen, 2012). Acoustic
analysis of these interactions demonstrated a regular temporal pulse or rhythm, where each
expressive act is reciprocated by the other, reflecting and improvising its quality (Malloch,
1999; Trevarthen, 1999). These reciprocated expressions increase the interest and intensity
of the interaction, and generate a clear narrative structure common to all the time-based adult
human arts of introduction, development, climax, and conclusion (Malloch and Trevarthen,
2009). Stern (1999) described these prelinguistic infant-adult interactions as 'proto-
narratives', which as an infant grows and develops become imbued with words to begin new,
linguistic competences built from these interactions and their shared meaning (Terrace,
Bigelow, Beebe, 2022). Those regularly structured patterns of emotions and intentions
develop conversations with ever more complex narrative form (Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen,
2013). Such narrative-based interactions are imperative for successful socio-cognitive and
communicative development (Delafield-Butt 2018). Understanding the organisational
structure of the earliest interactions in which infants engage their human companions is an
important consideration for the field of developmental psychology, and especially important
for understanding the context in which neonatal imitation is proposed to unfold. Theoretical
re-positioning (aligned with embodied (Di Paolo & De Jaegher, 2015; Varela et al, 1991),
enactive (Stewart et al, 2011; De Jargher & Di Paolo, 2007), and ecological perspectives
(Reed, 1996) that take into account infant agency) allow us to approach these interactions
from a fresh perspective by placing greater emphasis on social context and the body's
function in social cognition and meaning-making (Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen, 2015) whilst
stillretaining the benefits of clear, quantifiable, and testable experimental findings.
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
For many years narratives were thought to be dependent on language and an abstract
rationale form of intelligence (Hutto, 2007), but recent infant research has shown the
capabilities of even newborn infants to engage in proto-conversations. These exchanges
contain a prelinguistic meaning-making that utilises vocal and bodily gestures to create non-
verbal, co-created narratives within the proto-conversation (Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen,
2015; Malloch, 1999; Malloch & Trevarthen, 2009). Dautenhahn (2002) considered these
pre-verbal narratives the basis of a consciousness in a purposeful social existence. For this to
be true, narratives do not need to be based in language. Indeed, all narratives are rooted and
expressed in movements of the body. The infant’s role in the creation of these 'units' of
meaning-making generates the foundation of learning patterns that allow the formation of the
embodied practices, including music, theatre, dance, storytelling and all forms of co-
operative activity (Cobley, 2013; Delafield-Butt & Adie, 2016; Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen,
2015; Gratier & Trevarthen, 2008; Negayama et al., 2015).
It is also possible that a narrative architecture underpins successful examples of
neonatal imitation. Neonatal imitation can be argued to represent sensitivity to another human
being (Trevarthen, 2001) and may serve as an early example of early reciprocal
communication present long before the development of language (Nagy & Molnar, 2004). It
has been proposed that such imitative interaction provides an initial means of communication
for infants with caregivers, and may aid in the development of conceptual understanding of
others as those with whom goals and interests can be shared (Meltzoff & Moore, 1998).
Viewing this phenomenon through a dialogical lens allows us to consider it as an early
example of primary intersubjectivity, and of being a precursor to other proto-conversations
already identified between adults and infants (e.g. Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen, 2015;
Gratier, 2003; Jaffe et al, 2001; Stern, 1977, 1999). On this basis, we might expect imitative
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
interactions to possess the same generative architecture and characteristics as other proto-
conversations.
However, in a laboratory setting neonatal imitation is simply defined as movements
(usually involving the face, hands or fingers) or vocalisations made by infants in the first
month after birth that imitate those made by a human or non-human model. Within this strict
experimental paradigm, a model presents a movement that can be a facial or bodily
expression, or a sound, and an infant’s response is monitored for attempts at responding with
the same movement or sound. It is important to note that despite the ongoing debate
surrounding neonatal imitation, it is not necessarily the neonate’s ability to imitate that is of
the greatest importance when considering the phenomenon. Indeed, there has been limited
examination of neonatal imitation in natural settings with parents, and in the studies that have
been completed it is a behaviour that is displayed rarely during interactions with carers
(Simpson et al., 2014). It is perhaps more useful to view neonatal imitation as one of multiple
ways neonates can express themselves, and so it forms part of much more nuanced, and
complex, natural behavioural repertoire (Trevarthen, 1979).
1.1 Imitation as communicative social learning
In this paper, we propose that through study of the temporal organisation of neonatal
imitation, it will become possible to delve more deeply into the fundamental capacity of
neonates to engage with another individual's actions and agency, and therefore to better
understand the role of this particular, peculiar element in neonatal social behaviour. The
importance of imitative interactions in building attachment and in developing cultural
intelligence has been supported in a wealth of psychological research (e.g. Nadel, 2014), and
in recent neuroscientific findings (Ammaniti & Gallese, 2014). Indeed, imitation through
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
infancy allows infants to socially connect with and learn from others. Meltzoff and Marshall
(2018) argue that even though other animal species have been found to imitate, in humans
there is a unique ability to imitate across modalities (from bodily movements to
vocalisations), and that human children are highly motivated to be like their caregivers and
other adults. This helps underpin the diverse cultural outcomes found in human societies, as
imitation forms a bridge between infants and caregivers, from whom cultural information in
gathered, re-embodied, then remembered and understood.
Imitation plays a fundamental role in establishing what Piaget came to term the
child’s developing ‘sensorimotor intelligence’ (Piaget, 1953, 1954). From the very beginning
of child psychology, Baldwin recognised imitative mechanisms as fundamental for learning
the patterns of one’s own body, made with self-conscious awareness, “The self-repeating or
'circular' reaction... is seen to be fundamental and to remain the same, as far as structure is
concerned, for all motor activity whatever: the only difference between higher and lower
function being, that in the higher, certain accumulated adaptations have in time so come to
overlie the original reaction, that the conscious state which accompanies it seems to differ per
se from the crude imitative consciousness in which it had its beginning.” (Baldwin, 1895, p.
23, italics our emphasis).
Baldwin’s ‘circular reaction’ is a conscious act that explores repetition and deviation
from the model (antecedent) made creatively in subsequent self-generated movement. In this
case, he is concerned with intra-personal imitation, per se. But we now know how self-
generated movement and observation of others’ actions harness the same neural systems
(Rizzolatti & Sinigaglia, 2007). Indeed, Meltzoff and Marshall (2020) review and describe
the neurological basis of infant bodily processing (in regard to the infant’s own body and
bodies belonging to other individuals) and, stemming from this, propose an early recognition
of the correspondence between self and other in terms of bodily representations. This forms
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
the foundation for the future generation of a shared social intelligence (Bråten, 2009;
Rizzolatti & Sinigaglia, 2008).
The notion of neonatal imitation having a social or communicative function has been
expressed for some time. Meltzoff & Moore's (1997) active intermodal matching mechanism
(AIM), for example, described a mechanism underpinning neonatal imitation that also forms
the basis for understanding the intentional acts of others. Meltzoff and Gopnik (1993)
believed it is through this mechanism and the act of imitation that a neonate begins to identify
a person as ‘like me’ relative to other inanimate or physical objects. Similarly, Trevarthen
(1979, 1980) proposed an innate readiness in infants to know another human being, which
allows them to intrinsically appreciate the ‘other’ as being separate from themselves, and
facilitates direct contact between them and their carers (alongside other adults). The
phenomenon of neonatal imitation sits comfortably within this ideal of an infant mind being
predisposed to social interaction with other human beings, with Bråten (1988), Maratos
(1982), and Užgiris (1991) all linking neonatal imitation with the wider concept of social
communication. The work of Nagy (Nagy & Molnar, 2004; Nagy 2006) has furthered this
idea, describing neonatal imitation as ‘the first dialogue’, and demonstrating the infant’s
ability to initiate imitative interactions, as well as simply imitating an adult or experimenter.
When we view neonatal imitation in this way, as opposed to an action-response phenomenon,
its importance with regard to human (and even non-human primate) social capacities
becomes more prominent. Seen as an interaction, neonatal imitation can be considered the
first step on the road to wider social cognition. Based on the argument presented by Fuchs
and De Jaegher (2009), social understanding and social cognition are rooted in the embodied
interactions we engage in from the earliest age. They argue it is the interaction process that
gives rise to intersubjectivity: through the reciprocity, musicality, affective attunement, vocal
expression and movement of an interaction, social cognition emerges and meaning is created
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
and transformed in what is described as participatory sensemaking (De Jaegher and Di Paolo
2007, 2008; De Jaegher 2009). Looking at neonatal imitation through an intersubjective lens
(where the temporal organisation of the interaction plays a fundamental role in the successful
communicative creation of imitative acts of meaning), could allow for a deeper understanding
not only of the function of neonatal imitation in human and non-human primates, but also a
reappraisal of the current debate and the mixed findings that continue to fuel disagreement
within the field.
2.0 The structure of narrative
Narratives form the foundation upon which the development of our understanding and
communication with the world is built. But what form do the narratives themselves take? All
narrative structures, from the most complex to the simplest, find their foundation in the
vitality dynamics of play during infancy (Stern, 2010), and in the musicality of infant-adult
intersubjectivity (Malloch & Trevarthen, 2009). Analysis of temporal form of early dyadic
interactions demonstrate a common motif, or template, of expressed interest, arousal, and
intention. Malloch (1999) and Trevarthen (1999) mapped a regular temporal pulse or
rhythm, where each expressive vocalisation was reciprocated by the other, reflecting its
quality by matched timbre, intensity, and pitch. Considered alongside the bodily movements
of the dyad, these reciprocated, matched expressions generated a narrative structure of
increasing intensity of interest and arousal. before receding again (Malloch and Trevarthen,
2009). This narrative structure has four simple phases of arousal and intensity interspaced in
a patterned manner which builds and fades (Trevarthen & Delafield-Butt, 2013). Indeed,
throughout a child's development this patterning remains remarkably stable, whether it is in
the babbling of an infant to its mother, or the classroom interaction between teacher and
student (Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen, 2013; Delafield-Butt & Adie, 2016). This format can
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
more precisely be broken down into four distinct states (see Fig. 1), which exist in a cyclical
format. These are the 'introduction' state, the 'development' state, the 'climax' state and the
'resolution' state (Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen, 2015). The stability of the patterning across
these different stages of development casts a shadow over Stern's (1999) characterisation of
the initial, prelinguistic adult-infant interactions as 'proto-narratives'. Instead of being a
precursor to the future development of fully fledged narratives, we follow the rationale that
they are complete acts of meaning-making in their own right, despite the lack of linguistic
precision. This notion is predicated on the fact that meaning, even in adult-adult interaction,
can be non-verbal. It supports the ideas of Bruner (1990) who saw narrative structuring as
being present in social interactions even before the onset of language use – “narrative
structure is even inherent in the praxis of social interaction before it achieves linguistic
expression” (Bruner, 1990,p. 77). Similarly, Read and Miller (1995), social psychologists,
consider narratives to be “universally basic to conversation and meaning making” (pp. 143).
Each of the states within the narrative structure have specific qualities and
characteristics that allow them to play a key role in the development of narrative and the joint
creation of meaning (Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen, 2015). The introduction state brings the
onset of the interaction, where a shared attention is established and two individuals begin to
form the narrative that will follow. In the development state the narrative begins to build both
in terms of arousal and intensity, with reciprocal acts being enacted in an almost musical
exchange that share common timing and a reciprocity of the quality and form of a gestural or
vocal expression. These may build in intensity, sometimes rising rapidly in a crescendo, until
a peak moment of excitation and arousal is reached in the climax of the interaction, after
which the arousal, intensity and excitement subside and the energy imbued within the
narrative recedes as the memory of the act is consolidated in the resolution phase, and the two
agents recover their poise ready for the next project. At this conclusion, the involved parties
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
may disengage from the narrative. This will often be followed by a period of contemplation
where the involved parties may reflect on the interaction that has been shared, and the
episode is processed, even if brief. This period of reflection will then allow the participants to
renew their joint focus and begin to build a new narrative, if both parties choose. This
temporal format has been mapped in the proto-conversations of adults and infants (Delafield-
Butt & Trevarthen, 2015; Gratier, 2003; Gratier & Trevarthen, 2008; Malloch, 1999;
Malloch and Trevarthen, 2009; McGowan & Delafield-Butt, 2022). When neonatal imitation
is viewed as an example of such proto-conversational dialogue, a narrative framework within
these reciprocal, rhythmic exchanges becomes a logical extension to the application of
narrative theory within human development.
Whilst the structure described here is often considered to be the typical narrative
format for an interaction, it is important to bear in mind that the precise presentation of these
phases can vary depending on multiple factors. Often an entire narrative structure may not be
successfully created in a single attempt, and an interaction will instead be formed of multiple
broken narratives which might gradually build until a complete narrative structure is achieved
(Delafield-Butt et al., 2018). The exact make-up of the four-part structure can also vary
dramatically, with for example, multiple climaxes within a single cycle. Despite this, a full
and successful narrative interaction will contain each of these elements (Delafield-Butt &
Trevarthen, 2015).
There is also evidence to support the presence of this four-part patterning across
multiple languages in the proto-conversations of infants and adults (Gratier, 2003; Gratier &
Apter-Danon, 2009; Gratier & Trevarthen, 2008; Malloch, 1999; Trevarthen et al, 2014) and
in non-human primates such as chimpanzees. For example, Marler & Tenaza (1977) outlined
narrative patterning, but under a different guise and using different terminology - they
labelled the respective sections as the introduction, build-up, climax and let down. The
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
acoustic features of chimpanzee pan hoot patterning as described by Mitani & Gros-Louis
(1998) align with the narrative structure outlined above and highlight the presence of this
temporal structure across species. Additionally, non-human primates have been shown to
manipulate this temporal structure within their calling, modifying the length and timing of
their vocalisations (Roy et al., 2011), and even altering the structure so as to facilitate joint
pan hoot chorusing between individuals (Fedurek et al., 2013). This, along with previous
evidence demonstrating the bonding effect of pan hoot chorusing between male chimpanzees
(Mitani and Brandt, 1994) highlights the social nature of the narrative temporal structure in
chimpanzees as well as humans.
In humans, these narrative structures can be considered a version of Piagetian
schemas, the effective conclusion of which leads to satisfaction in its accomplishment,
learning its patterns and effects, and a tendency for its repetition. These narrative schemas
serve as a template for future engagement. The affective element of satisfaction created
through the narrative’s successful completion, is thought to be particularly important. It
gives it a special affective tone to the thoughts and memory of its unfolding, and of the
participants in which it was shared. Narrative forms a memory of a single, mutual
experience, the joint creation of which gives it special social significance.
Delafield-Butt and Adie (2016) considered the narratives between teachers and
children in nurture groups. In one example, the interaction between adult and child as they
engaged with the task of descending flights of stairs was analysed and the narrative
structuring of the interaction examined. In this case the impact of the successful completion
of the task, as well as the narrative structuring of the interaction, was evident and shared
between the child and teacher. Delafield-Butt and Adie (2016) pointed out how it would be
easy to imagine the child repeating the same narrative alone at a later date, evoking the same
processes and form used in the initial interaction (a point that could be interestingly
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
considered alongside deferred imitation found in infants, where infants have been found to
imitate a modelled action up to 24 hours after the initial modelling (Meltzoff, 1988)). It is
through this process that infants and children at various stages of development learn socially
accepted patterns.
It is also evident from interactions such as these that for narrative structure to
successfully form it is necessary for each of the participants to be aware, mindful and
attentive to one another's movements, actions and vocalisations. Such expressions are always
intentional (Delafield-Butt & Gangopadhyay, 2013) so it is necessary that the sensorimotor
systems of each of the participants are appropriately attuned. This process of the participants
becoming attuned to one another is of paramount importance as it is only when this is
achieved that individuals are able to gain an understanding of another's expressive acts, and
respond appropriately. In the realm of neonatal imitation, Anifeld (1991) found that a key
component for successfully finding evidence of imitation is the length of time for which an
action is modelled. When an action is modelled for less than 60 seconds, many pre-1990
studies failed to find evidence for neonatal imitation. Such short periods of modelling could
prevent the attuning of neonate and experimenter, and hamper the development of a
narrative-based interaction, which ultimately leads to a lower probability of finding evidence
of neonatal imitation.
Debate surrounding the extent of infant awareness, and self-awareness is informed
by neonatal imitation. Evidence for the existence of neonatal imitation lends support to the
possibility that there exists in human beings an innate awareness of self and other long prior
to the development of language. In contrast to many earlier models of infant development,
those informed by evidence of imitation in early infancy tend to support the presence of
relatively complex cognitive concepts and mechanisms, including (to at least some degree) an
awareness of the self, but also intersubjective abilities and motor control. That is not to say
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
such theories argue in favour of a fully developed sense of selfhood, nor adult-like reflective
and conceptually-backed understanding of the other. Rather, it is proposed there exists in
infants the foundations onto which future reflective awareness is built. Meltzoff and Moore
(2000) proposed neonates have access to 'initial mental structures' that serve to develop more
advanced mechanisms and concepts. For them, neonatal imitation is a 'discovery procedure'
possessed by infants that aids in their understanding other persons. Gallagher and Meltzoff
(1996) followed a similar line suggesting that neonates are capable of a basic differentiation
between self and other, and have a rudimentary understanding that their own body is like that
belonging to another human being. More recently, Meltzoff and Marshall (2020) have
brought together neuroscientific and behavioural evidence to suggest that even very young
infants can represent their own bodily actions with those of others in 'commensurate terms'
(Meltzoff & Marshall p. 11). For Meltzoff, the self and other are linked (Meltzoff 2007,
2013), with infants being able to learn about the internal states of others through perceptual
representation of the bodily acts of others, and their internal monitoring.
Another key feature that appears to be required for narratives to successfully form is a
'rhythmic temporal pattern'; the common tempo or pulse between participants that structures
the organisation of an exchange, with actions, movements and vocalisations occurring on or
within a rhythm or beat (Malloch, 1999). This notion stems from the notion of
communicative musicality that identifies and maps the reciprocal exchange that shares and
reflects imitative acts within a common, shared time. It is important to note that the
definition of 'musicality' within communicative musicality differs somewhat from what
would be generally understood by the term. It does not refer to the songs or melodies that are
the output of musical artists. Rather it refers to a much more basic and foundational human
characteristic that underpins the production and appreciation of music (Blacking, 1969), and
that forms the basis of affective resonances in communication especially prevalent in infancy,
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
such as in the intonational emphasis of pitch and timing in infant-directed speech. This
musicality is defined by reciprocities of expressive quality and distinct timing that altogether
give narrative structures over the course of several seconds, or tens of seconds. The structure
of these interactions first identified within adult-infant protoconversational dyads follows the
formal definition of music (Malloch, 1999; Trevarthen, 1999). Within these engagements,
each partner adds creative flourish to enhance and contribute to the dialogue as two jazz
musicians might riff off each other’s expressive beat (Malloch & Trevarthen, 2009). In this
way, imitation forms a basic building block of the exchange, but it is never a mechanical
imitation devoid of affective and personal expression, but rather one that acts in mirror
reciprocity with creative reflection in each generative expression (Malloch, 1999; Trevarthen,
1999). Sharing a pulse also means this shared timing can be manipulated to create dramatic
effects, for example tension can be raised by withholding an expression on the beat, or
excitement increased by coming in early (Gratier & Trevarthen, 2008). Interestingly,
Trevarthen (1979) suggests that social interaction and communication can be achieved
through the imitation of such rhythm and musicality, and although subtle changes may be
more difficult to consciously detect than the traditional mouth opening or tongue protrusion
from the neonatal imitation paradigm, their role in creating a successful imitative trial could
be paramount.
The importance of movement in the embodied interactions of communicative
musicality highlights another important aspect of human communication: it is multi-modal.
To fully appreciate the narrative structures that underpin communication in infancy or
neonatal imitation, it is therefore necessary to consider not only the role of vocal expression
in their creation, but also that of movement (Trevarthen & Delafield-Butt, 2013; Delafield-
Butt & Trevarthen, 2015). Through a consideration of this modality within the neonatal
imitation paradigm, the role of shared rhythm of body and voice, their expressive qualities
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
and their reciprocal exchanges between partners, altogether generate a narrative form in
which the infant is able to parse and draw meaning from that interaction. This expected
narrative form and its intersubjective contact is important for psychologists to appreciate in
any assessment of an infant’s ability to imitate a ‘model’ action. It is our proposal that this
modelling is intrinsically a part of the infant’s attempt to form meaning, or understanding vis-
à-vis its adult modeller, through participation in the shared narrative.
3.0 Movement is communicative and the temporal nature of adult - infant interactions
Within the history of research into adult-infant interactions the role of bodily
movement has played a distant second fiddle to a predominant focus on vocalisations, facial
gestures, and eye contact (Adolph et al., 2010; Pérez & Español, 2016). However, the work
of researchers such as Beebe, Stern, Condon and Sanders serves to demonstrate the
importance of movement as a mode of communication within adult-infant interactions. For
example, in a landmark study, Condon and Sander (1974) demonstrated the sensitivity of
infants to the motor impulses of adult speech, and described the synchronised fashion in
which they found infants moved to their mother's rhythm and speech as being like an
interactive dance that preludes the development of language. Stern et al (1977) further
highlighted the importance of a multimodal analytical approach that considered the temporal
nature of an interaction. However, they found that the vocal units and movement units within
an interaction did not arise in synchrony but did share similarities in terms of frequency of
occurrence, their temporal structural form, and their occurrence in unison and independent of
one another. These findings demonstrate the need to consider movement units as independent
units of communication, and the necessity of measuring it when considering adult - infant
interactions.
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
It is not just the movements and actions of the infant that are worthy of attention
though. Other studies have highlighted the communicative nature of adult movements
alongside those of the infant (Beebe & Gerstman, 1980; Stern, 1974). It is in the movement
of both participants within the dyadic interaction (as much as within their vocal patterning)
that evidence of an underlying narrative structure can be found. In neonatal imitation studies
in particular there is (understandably) an overwhelming focus on the behaviours of the infant
(particularly upon their facial expressions), but by also including the temporal organisation of
the behaviours of the adult in analysis of these paradigms, a more complete understanding of
the imitative interaction can be discerned.
The focus on infant ability to imitate facial expressions within the neonatal imitation
paradigm stems from the assertions of Piaget that an infant’s ability to imitate actions they
cannot view themselves arises later in development than observable self-body movements
(Piaget, 1951). The analysis of neonatal imitative interactions has also primarily been focused
on the infant’s facial responses, with minimal attention paid to the infant’s body (other than
as an indicator of levels of arousal (Nagy et al., 2013)). However, the studies discussed in this
section provide a strong rationale for a focus not only on the vocal exchanges and facial
expressions that take place during adult-infant interactions, but also the role of movement
originating from the bodies of both neonate and adult. Beyond the vocalisations and facial
expressions of a parent and child there is rich and purposeful communication, and it is only
through a multimodal approach that it is possible to gain a complete picture of this and
appreciate the infants full and embodied response during the imitative exchange.
4.0 Neonatal imitation as primary intersubjectivity
The interactions outlined above can be described as intersubjective, with a form of
this (primary intersubjectivity) being present in humans from birth (evident in the proto-
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
conversations of mother and infant (Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen, 2015)). Primary
intersubjectivity is created within dyadic interactions in the earliest stages of postpartum life
(it is important to keep in mind that the communication between mother and baby is not
simply a one-way dialogue originating from the mother, but rather an interaction of joint
attention between two individuals that contains joint meaning). It is through a process of turn
taking and responsiveness to one another's emotions, bodily gestures, facial expressions as
well as vocalisations that intersubjectivity is achieved (Stern, 2000). Tronick (2005) argues
that it is through the back-and-forth responses of mother and infant, which build upon the
emotions and purpose of the partner, that joint meaning is established, a so-called ‘dyadic
state of consciousness’. In cases where individuals are unable to establish joint meaning and
experience primary intersubjectivity, development can be severely negatively impacted
(Trevarthen et al., 2015).
The importance of intersubjectivity stems from the narrative form that underpins its
structure and function. Delafield-Butt and Adie (2016) describe how the interactive processes
involved in intersubjectivity act as a mechanism for making sense of the world - " Meaning is
co-created within the organization of the interaction, structured by the agencies and power of
will with its expressions of interest and intention from both sides, constituting something
unique: a dyadic (or greater) unit that is more than the sum of its parts" (Delafield-Butt &
Adie, 2016, p. 118). Through the coming together of two independent beings with their own
agency, feelings and aims, something original and new is created in their narrative-based
interaction in a process that forms the foundation for learning. Just as this is true for the
proto-conversations of mother and baby or the exchanges of teacher and student, so it could
be true of the interaction of experimenter and neonate within the imitation paradigm.
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
4.1 Structures potentially responsible for the communicative nature of movement in
intersubjectivity
Alternative suggestions have been made regarding the underlying biological structures
responsible for intersubjectivity. One such structure believed to be influential is the mirror
neuron system. Initially discovered in Macaque monkeys, the system allows for the
organisation of actions whilst also producing 'reflective' firing patterns when observing
another individual's actions. The term reflective refers to the mirror neuron system's
activation in the same manner when a specific action is performed by an individual, and when
it is being observed. It can be argued this allows for the development of a rudimentary
understanding of the intentions of another individual. This would not require higher level
cognitive development nor executive functions, but through synchronicity between the motor
intelligence of two individuals and their nervous systems there would be the potential for an
understanding of another's motor intentions (Sinigaglia & Rizzolatti, 2011). The mirror
neuron system has also been highlighted as a possible candidate in the discussion surrounding
the underlying mechanisms of neonatal imitation. The immaturity of the prefrontal cortex in
the neonatal brain also raises the possibility of subcortical components of the mirror neuron
system, or other subcortical structures being at play in both neonatal imitation and early
forms of intersubjectivity. When discussing the role of the mirror neuron system in this
regard, it is important to think of it in the context in which it operates. It is within embodied
interactions that its true importance comes to the fore, and the link between action and
perception is most pronounced in the creation of social understanding (Fuchs and De Jaegher,
2009).
Another possible structure that might underpin the development of intersubjectivity is
the polyvagal system. Porges and Daniel (2017) outline this as a structure that allows for the
sharing of regulatory control of certain bodily functions (e.g. breathing and heart rate).
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
However, whilst the initial purpose of the system in evolutionarily more primitive organisms
was limited to autonomic physiology, it has evolved in mammals to play a much more
dynamic function (Porges & Furman, 2011). Through the brainstem, what was once a system
limited to autonomic physiology becomes a powerful social engagement system that
influences the intonation of actions made by our hands, our facial expressions and even our
voices. This link between autonomic physiology and expressive forms of communication
allows humans to socially demonstrate elements of our vitality, wellbeing and needs. This in
turn develops the basic form of mutual understanding seen in intersubjectivity.
The role of the brainstem in underpinning the development of narratives and
intersubjectivity potentially extends far beyond the polyvagal system, as it functions across a
variety of areas relevant for the development of sensorimotor activity and autonomic
functioning. In the realm of the sensorimotor, it has a role in the up-take of proprioceptive
sensory information in addition to hearing taste and touch (all of which play a part in the self-
regulation of communication and movement (Dadalko & Travers, 2018; Merker, 2005, 2013;
Panksepp and Northoff, 2009; Venkatraman et al 2017). The autonomic nervous system,
which is located in the brainstem, controls eating, alertness, sleep regulation, heart rate and
breathing (Ngeles Fernández-Gil et al., 2010). Moreover, principal responsibility for actions
that are responsive to rhythm lie with the brainstem (Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen, 2017). In
addition to these functions, the brainstem has an important role in some higher order
functions such as sensory processing, goal-orientated behaviour, the modulation of emotions
(Berntson & Micco, 1976; Venkatraman et al., 2017) and the regulation of social attention
(Geva et al., 2017).
Of the varied functions the brainstem is involved in, its impact on higher order
functions including sociability and attention is clearly important with regard to
intersubjectivity and communication, however, its role in regulating behaviour and emotion is
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
also hugely relevant in the creation of a basic form of consciousness. The integration of
sensory information that takes place in the brainstem is not a passive process, and it has been
argued this is what creates basic psychological experiences and ultimately leads to
Panksepp's (2005) notion of the primary, or ‘core self’. Indeed, Panksepp (2005) argues that
the same brainstem functions that are responsible for sensory and motor information
integration are responsible for the generation of basic conscious experiences. He calls these
'primary process functions' and they include core feelings as well as the desire and intention
to act through movement. This brainstem-based primary consciousness, that is able to
anticipate and perceive, represents an adaptable form of mental agency which generates
purpose and meaning (Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen, 2015). If human language and thought
are considered as deriving from the same neuro-anatomical systems that generate motor
actions in response to stimuli in the environment, the basis of this could be the brainstem
sensorimotor and affective integrative systems outlined here (Merker, 2007). Following birth
this primary self actively seeks to share and create meaning with social others and this desire
to build and share narratives is present in the earliest interactions of human life, and can be
seen, Kugiumutzakis and Trevarthen (2015) believe, in the infant’s power to imitate
expressive actions and co-operate in their temporal sequencing. The ability of the infant
neonate to imitate could be viewed as an expression of this primary consciousness to create
meaning through a narratively structured imitative dialogic interaction.
5.0 Neonatal imitation in light of narrative temporal structuring
The notion of a primary consciousness seeking to share and create meaning with
others links well with the idea of neonates being 'adapted' for narrative-based interactions
rooted in communicative musicality. New-born infants display sensitivity and awareness of
the purposeful movements and vocalisations of adults in relation to their own person (Condon
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
& Sander, 1974; Nagy, 2011). In the hours after birth human infants have been shown to
demonstrate an ability to take part in imitative exchanges with an adult (e.g. Kugiumutzakis,
1998; Meltzoff & Moore, 1983a, 1989), a conversation rooted in movement (Kugiumutzakis
& Trevarthen, 2015). These imitative exchanges are considered to be a foundation for social-
communication (Meltzoff, 2007) and even, as demonstrated by Nagy and Molnar (2004), a
communicative act in and of themselves. They can also be considered the first step in the
gradual development through infancy on the road to theory of mind (Meltzoff, 2007) and
intersubjectivity (Trevarthen, 2011). Indeed, these imitative exchanges represent some of the
first examples of cooperation between infant and adult, an initial form of the primary
intersubjectivity outlined above. The infant’s ability to engage in these exchanges is one of
multiple social skills (others include the ability to identify their mother's voice (Decasper &
Fifer, 1980) and face (Burnham, 1993) and a preference for humanoid faces (Valenza et al.,
1996)) that constitute what some consider an innate disposition for intersubjectivity (Nagy &
Molnar, 2004). These interactions help the development of cooperative endeavours involving
movement, which become more intricate and prospective in their nature (Nagy, 2011). Each
imitative act can be thought of as forming part of a larger, encompassing narrative, which
creates meaning over multi-second encounters in "mutually sustained expectation of a
rhythmic project of communication, engaging two persons in a nonverbal 'narrative'"
(Kugiumutzakis & Trevarthen, 2015, p. 487). The temporal architecture that frames these
imitative exchanges remains a topic that has received extremely limited academic attention
(where temporality has been considered, it is normally with a focus on the timing and
organisation of infant response (e.g. Heimann and Tjus, 2019; Meltzoff and Moore, 1983a)
and not the framework of the interaction as a whole), whilst the existence of the phenomenon
is itself still hotly debated.
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
5.1 Neonatal imitation in human infants
Whilst the study of neonatal imitation goes back over a hundred years it is only in the
last sixty that the phenomenon has received particular attention. It was Meltzoff and Moore's
(1977) seminal work which propelled neonatal imitation as a major topic, spurring multiple
studies clarifying its nature and supporting its existence (e.g. Field et al., 1982; Heiman et al,
1989; Heiman & Schaller, 1985; Heimann & Tjus, 2019; Kugiumutzakis, 1998; Meltzoff &
Moore, 1983; Meltzoff & Moore, 1989; Nagy & Molnar, 2004; Reissland, 1988). There have
also been many studies that have failed to find evidence of the phenomenon (e.g. Davis et al,
2021; Fontaine, 1984; Hayes & Watson, 1981; Koepke et al., 1983; Lewis and Sullivan,
1985; Oostenbroek, 2016); and these have in turn been critiqued for using procedures that
may have lacked sensitive conditions, both social and perceptual-cognitive, for eliciting
imitation in very young infants (e.g., Kugimutzakis, 1998; Meltzoff & Moore, 1983b;
Meltzoff et al., 2018). Additionally, imitation has not only been studied in human neonates;
numerous studies have also been conducted that have reported its presence in non-human
primates (e.g. Bard, 2007; Ferrari et al., 2006; Myowa-Yamakoshi et al., 2004).
Nagy and Molnar (2004), however, went further than to simply support the existence
of neonatal imitation in humans. Their study also reported an infant’s ability to initiate
interactions. In this study 45 neonatal infants, aged 2-54 hours, were found to both imitate
tongue protrusion, and initiate voluntary exchanges with an adult utilising the tongue
protrusion action. The study utilised both behavioural and psychophysiological measures in
order to differentiate initiation from imitation. The psychophysiological measure used was
heart rate in order to ascertain levels of arousal (increased heart rate was considered reflective
of increased levels of arousal) and of orientation, learning and expectance (decreased heart
rate was taken to be indicative of these during imitation). Following several cycles of
imitation, it was found that the neonates not only imitated the modelled action, but also
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
initiated an exchange and waited for the adult to respond, therefore demonstrating a
motivational desire to take part in the dialogue.
Such evidence suggests social motivation could underlie neonatal imitation. Several
examples of extended exchanges between neonate and experimenter, which were initiated by
the infant and grew into what the authors describe as reciprocal conversations, were reported
during the Nagy and Molnar’s study (Nagy, 2006). These exchanges were regarded as
experimental examples of “the first dialogue” (Nagy & Molnar, 2004; Nagy, 2006, 2011) and
allow us to consider neonatal imitation one of the foundation stones of primary
intersubjectivity. Given the presence of narratives in these early proto-conversations, and
evidence from Nagy and Molnar (2004) regarding the social and emotional motivations for
the infant in engaging with adults in imitative exchanges, the presence of a narrative structure
in the interactions of the neonatal imitation paradigm would be a logical extension to the
current state of understanding in intersubjectivity.
Indeed, it is within the paradigm utilised by Nagy and Molnar (2004) that narrative
structures seem most likely to be found. There are key methodological differences between
the work of Nagy and Molnar and other neonatal imitation studies, for example Meltzoff and
Moore (1977). In many such earlier studies the modelling by experimenters was very rigid
and experimentally controlled, with only limited consideration of the infant’s engagement
and response. In Nagy and Molnar (2004) the experimental design was more interactive and
representative of imitative exchanges that occur naturally between adults and infants. The
impact of this can be seen in the differences in response times of infants in such studies. In
Nagy and Molnar (2004) imitation occurred at a rate that enabled the infants to participate in
communicative exchanges with adults, with infants imitating in a shorter time frame than had
previously been demonstrated in other studies. The responsiveness of infants in the study, and
the ability they demonstrated to participate in these early forms of turn-taking dialogues and
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
primary intersubjectivity, make this experimental structure a prime place to search for
evidence of narrative structures within the neonatal imitation paradigm.
5.2 Non-human primates
As noted, neonatal imitation has not only been observed in human neonates - there is
also a body of evidence demonstrating the phenomenon's presence in chimpanzees (Myowa-
Yamakoshi et al., 2004; Bard,2007) and rhesus macaques (Ferrari et al., 2006; Ferrari et al.,
2009; Paukner et al., 2011). Myowa-Yamakoshi et al. (2004) and Bard (2007) both
demonstrated the ability of neonatal chimpanzees to imitate mouth opening and tongue
protrusion of a human modeller, believing that their results supported the notion of an innate
neonatal imitation ‘mechanism’ in chimpanzees as well as humans. With regard to macaques,
Ferrari et al (2006) utilised a sample of 21 of the animals, aged three days, and found
evidence of tongue protrusion and lip smacking were regularly imitated when presented by a
human model. Ferrari et al (2009) utilised this data and as well as collecting data from an
additional 20 neonatal macaques and found further evidence supporting the findings of the
2006 study (although the ability to imitate seemed to dissipate from age seven days).
Additionally, it was found that at one month of age macaques who were shown to be better
imitators demonstrated more developed motor skills in goal directed movements. This further
demonstrates the potential close link between movement, neonatal imitation and
intersubjectivity. The authors believed the mechanisms to explain this result lay in the
maturation of the motor and parietal cortices, which are close in proximity to parts of the
mirror neuron system.
Evidence has also continued to emerge from non-human primate studies linking
neonatal imitation with future social development. For example, neonatal macaques who
reliably and successfully imitate have been found to pay more attention visually to the eyes of
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
others later in the first month of life (Paukner et al., 2014). Simpson et al (2016) found
evidence that imitative ability in neonatal macaques predicted gaze following at 7 months,
therefore demonstrating the role of imitation in modulating a social cognitive skill later in
development. Additionally, Kaburu et al (2016) showed neonatal imitative ability to be a
predictor of social behaviour and temperament (in the form of greater dominance behaviour
and lower levels of anxiety among lip smacking imitators) at 1 year old. These studies are
beginning to highlight the importance of neonatal imitation not only as a neonatal
phenomenon, but also a predictor of other wider social behaviours, and point towards the
underlying links between social/motor development and neonatal imitation (possibly
stemming from shared underlying cognitive structures involving, for example, the brainstem).
Such non-human primate results are important as there are strong similarities between
the observed imitation in human and macaque neonates (Ferrari, Paukner & Suomi, 2013).
For one, imitation is recorded most prominently in the first few weeks of life in both humans
and macaques. Additionally, in more naturalistic paradigms the mother is found to imitate
their infant more than the infant does the mother. It has also been found that in both species
there is a large degree of individual difference with regard to the quality of imitation. This, it
has been suggested, could be the result of differing levels of social predisposition between
individuals (Paukner et al., 2014), or an infant’s sensitivity to social cues within the multi-
modal interactional flow between adult and infant (Heimann, 1998). Other factors linked with
individual differences have also been proposed such as levels alertness and activity, visual
acuity, temperament (Heimann, 2022) and expressiveness (Field, 1982).
As outlined earlier, the presence of narrative structures within chimpanzee pan hoot
chorusing already demonstrates the existing influence such temporal structures have on the
social interactions of some non-human primates, and how the temporal structure is actively
manipulated to enhance social bonding (Fedurek et al., 2013). It is such similarities between
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
human and non-human primates, and the potential links between imitation and potential
downstream social development, that make the investigation of narrative structure in primate
development an attractive area that could shed further light onto the development of human
social interaction, and neonatal imitation.
6.0 Theories behind neonatal imitation
From the varied findings in the field there continues to be a high level of debate
around the existence of neonatal imitation (e.g. Meltzoff et al., 2018; Oostenbroek et al.,
2016), as well as multiple theories to explain the mechanisms that underlie it. Some of these
theories attempt to explain neonatal imitation as a phenomenon that is not imitation per se,
but that is simply an associative reaction devoid of any social meaning, whilst others consider
it an innate ability. For the purposes of this paper a range of key theories will be discussed.
However, rather than simply providing a summary of the theories and explanations that exist,
we aim to contextualise them in light of intersubjectivity, and consider how they align with
the view of neonatal imitation as proto-dialogue between two actively engaged persons with
agency.
6.1 Imitation as a reflex
One explanation of the underlying causes of neonatal imitation proposes that there is
actually a relatively simplistic mechanism underpinning positive imitative results. This theory
argues that the imitative acts recorded in studies of neonatal imitation are in fact non-mental
reflexes (Anisfeld, 1996), a triggering of an involuntary motor response or a fixed action
pattern that is activated upon witnessing the demonstration of a particular behaviour. Anisfeld
(1996) believed that the only act where there was evidence of neonates imitating was tongue
protrusion, and claims of imitative abilities in early infancy were too “uncritically accepted”.
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
He took the view that such claims were actually facilitated by a trend to view infants as more
advanced than they were in reality (Anisfeld actually points the finger very clearly at Dan
Stern in this regard). It has been demonstrated in some studies that neonates will perform
tongue protrusion actions in response to other similar stimulus events (such as a ball or felt
tip pen being moved towards the face of the infant (Jacobson, 1979)), and such findings have
been interpreted as signifying the potential for multiple protruding objects to release a
sucking reflex which creates the illusion of an imitative response.
However, considering neonatal imitation results as reflex reactions does not entirely
remove communication from the paradigm. Another interesting adaptive function of such an
innate releasing mechanism, outlined by (Bjorklund, 1987), is that it facilitates social
interaction between an infant and adult. Bjorklund believed that neonatal imitation was an
example of a transient ontogenetic adaptation (Oppenheim, 1981) in that it serves a specific
survival purpose for the neonate, which becomes redundant later in development. For
Bjorklund, neonatal imitation helps maintain social interaction between adult and infant, but
this ability becomes less important when infants develop greater control of head and mouth
movements. Were the ‘imitation as reflex’ hypothesis an accurate explanation of neonatal
imitation, the role of narrative temporal structuring in its facilitation may still be compatible,
adding temporal detail to description. Despite this, the ‘imitation as reflex’ theory risks doing
the opposite to what Anisfeld accused Dan Stern of, by over-simplifying what is an apparent
complex interaction between infant and adult.
6.2 Imitation due to arousal
Another popular explanation of the apparent empirical evidence of neonatal imitation
relates to the excitation of arousal of the neonate in the paradigm. An example of this was
proposed by Anisfeld (1991), who described how attentional competition (originating from
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
the modelling adult) inhibits infant tongue protrusion during the modelling period. This
results in a build-up of what can be defined as arousal, which is released following the
completion of action modelling. A more recent examination of neonatal imitation which
employs the arousal hypothesis looks at the phenomenon in the context of aerodigestive
development (Keven & Akins, 2017). It is clear the arousal hypothesis remains a popular
account of neonatal imitation (e.g. Anisfeld, 2005; Jones, 2009; Keven & Akins, 2017;
Vincini et al., 2017), a fact not least due to continuing debate around the imitation of actions
beyond tongue protrusion (acceptance of neonatal imitation in actions other than tongue
protrusion makes it difficult to ascribe the behaviour of the infant to increased levels of
arousal) but also other key factors. These include the aforementioned findings that other
stimuli can also illicit tongue protrusion (balls and felt tip pens (Jacobson, 1979), lights and
toys (although only until the infant had developed the ability to reach, at which point the rate
of tongue protrusion was found to decrease significantly, leading to the suggestion that
reaching may have become the infants primary response to arousing stimuli) (Jones, 1996),
and music (Jones, 2006)), and neonates looking for longer at displays of tongue protrusion
than they do mouth opening (Jones 1996).
This leads to one of the key weaknesses in the arousal hypothesis: much of the
evidence given to support the theory stems from tongue protrusion, and it does not take full
account of infant’s abilities to imitate a variety of adult modelled actions. Additionally, Nagy
et al (2012) focused on infants’ ability to imitate tongue protrusion and found imitation of
this behaviour was not simply the result of arousal during the testing process. Her own
findings from Nagy and Molnar (2004) found increasing heart rate when an infant imitates
whilst decreasing heart rate was recorded during unprompted actions. As discussed above,
this would suggest there to be different mechanisms underlying imitation when compared to
infant initiated behaviours.
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
However, notwithstanding these limitations of the theory, as with ‘imitation as reflex’,
the arousal hypothesis is not necessarily a non-communicative theory that is incompatible
with the suggestion of underlying narrative patterns underpinning neonatal imitation. If adult
facial modelling prompts arousal in an observing infant, and this triggers a response, the
observing adult could be drawn into an exchange of facial expressions/movements which take
the form of a non-verbal dialogue. Such an arousal-driven dialogue could be underpinned by
the same narrative structures found to underlie other examples of early social interactions
between adults and infants, and it would not be necessary for adults to be aware of the
imitative nature of the interaction (indeed, Heimann (2002) suggested parents could be
affected by the imitative responses of their infants without actually being aware imitation was
taking place). One of the unanswered questions around the arousal hypothesis is exactly how
the stimuli affect levels of arousal, and while multiple factors could affect how social stimuli
effect the internal states of infants, one factor worthy of consideration is the temporal
structure within which the stimuli are presented. Indeed, narrative temporal structuring could
be a modulating factor on levels of infant arousal during these interactions.
6.3 Imitation through association by similarity
A relatively new theory put forward to explain neonatal imitation is the association by
similarity theory (AST) proposed by (Vincini & Jhang, 2018). Vincini and Jhang posit a
process through which current experiences of cognitive events are connected to past events
and experiences of a similar nature; in the words of the Vincini and colleagues “AST
hypothesizes that the same resources that represent those action features in action planning
and execution represent those features in perception” (Vincini et al., 2017, p9). Within AST,
the modelling that infants show an ability to imitate are part of an existing repertoire of
habitual and spontaneous actions which are ‘awoken’ when they witness the corresponding
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
action being modelled (Vincini & Jhang, 2018). AST can sit alongside an arousal account of
how infant reactions in the imitation paradigm are provoked, and in itself does not claim that
neonates have an in-built ability for imitation, nor that neonatal imitation has a foundational
role with regard to social cognition. The theory claims to neatly account for the varied
findings across neonatal imitation literature (both in terms of the mixed evidence for the
existence of neonatal imitation, and any variations in the weight of evidence for imitation of
particular acts), the fact it is more common in controlled laboratory than natural settings, and
for evidence of imitation falling away after 2-3 months of age (Vincini et al., 2017).
Whilst AST does not view neonatal imitation as acting as a foundation for social
cognition in the same way as some other theories of neonatal imitation, it does not disallow it
being a communicative exchange. Vincini and colleagues are of the opinion that the same
logic can be applied to AST as is applied to the arousal hypothesis with regard to social
interaction. Therefore, whatever role arousal plays in facilitating adult-infant interactions in
the arousal hypothesis, can also be true for AST. They also suggest AST supports the Direct
Social Perception hypothesis (Gallagher, 2015), and therefore Interaction Theory, as an
alternative to more traditional theories of mindreading.
6.4 Imitation due to associative learning
Associative learning provides another popular account for neonatal imitation. This is
based on the idea that infants can learn to associate their own actions with the movements of
other individuals, which then allows for the development of imitative abilities. A major
proponent of a version of this argument is Heyes, who in her Associative Sequence Learning
theory (Catmur & Heyes, 2019; Heyes, 2001, 2018) proposes that associations between
sensory and motor representations form during an infant’s development due to correlated
sensorimotor experiences. Heyes believes that as a result of these experiences, bidirectional
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
associative links are formed so that the action observation can result in action execution.
Such sensorimotor associations should be formed in everyday life, for example when an
infant is imitated by an adult or when adults and infants engage in synchronous activities
(Heyes, 2018).
A key issue with the associative learning account for neonatal imitation is the time
taken for sensorimotor associations to form within a child. Imitation has been demonstrated
in the first few hours of birth for a variety of actions and expressions, presumably too early in
the course of development for associative links to have formed in the manner described by
Catmur and Hayes (2019) and other proponents of the associative learning account. This
objection is equally valid with regard to macaque neonates, who are able to imitate before
they have experienced relevant facial interactions with carers (Ferrari et al., 2006). The rate at
which infants receive imitative feedback from carers is also not considered to be great enough
to build such learned associations (Watson, 1979). Were this not the case it would not be
impossible to imagine the bidirectional associations of ASL forming during the early
imitative based dialogues and proto-conversations of the neonatal imitation paradigm. There
is evidence of some infant attempts slowly building towards full imitative actions such as
tongue protrusion (Kugiumutzakis, 1998; Maratos, 1973; Meltzoff & Moore, 1977) , and the
progressive attempts before successful imitation could be indicative of associative learning
taking place. This could potentially indicate a social element to ASL, which could be
underpinned by a narrative temporal patterning ultimately leading to successful imitative
responses. Again, this theory is also compatible with our proposition, and proposes important
angles of consideration.
6.5 Imitation underpinned by an in-built cognitive mechanism
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
As well as the above explanations, there are others which consider neonatal imitation
to be a genuine phenomenon underpinned by an inbuilt cognitive mechanism that allows
imitative behaviours to be displayed from birth. One such hypothesis involves a direct
sensory-motor matching mechanism underpinned by mirror neurons (Ferrari et al 2006;
Rizzolatti et al, 1999; Rizzolatti et al, 2002). This theory outlines that within the neonatal
imitation paradigm the motor system of the observing infant is triggered by the process of
watching the experimenter model target actions. For example, when an infant observes an
experimenter opening and closing their mouth, the same mirror neurons are triggered in the
infant that would be activated were the action performed. This directly leads the execution of
the observed action. This hypothesis has not only been described on a theoretical level, but
also at the neuroanatomical level in neonatal macaques (Ferrari et al. 2012; Ferrari et al.
2017). This explanation of the underpinning mechanism for neonatal imitation has several
advantages when compared to other cognitive alternatives. For example, it requires relatively
few cognitive processes, and does not necessarily require the infant to have an understanding
of why they are performing an action as the process is seemingly largely automated (Vincini
et al, 2017). However, this does not remove social importance from neonatal imitation, as
imitation underpinned by mirror neurons promotes interaction between neonates and adults
(Heimann, 2002), which can become the foundation of future proto-conversations (e.g.
Malloch and Trevarthen, 2009). Despite the attractiveness of this cognitive explanation,
others have argued that such a resonance mechanism is insufficient to explain neonatal
imitation (Meltzoff & Decety 2003), with an alternative cognitive model being the active
intermodal matching mechanism (AIM) (Meltzoff & Moore, 1997).
Meltzoff and Moore’s AIM (1997) goes some way towards appreciating how the
underlying mechanism for neonatal imitation could link with the future development of
children’s understanding of the intentional actions of others, joint attention and theory of
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
mind (Meltzoff, 2007). It proposes that from infants’ self-generated movements,
proprioceptive feedback is produced which can be compared by the infant to the visual
representation perceived during modelling. Meltzoff and Moore proposed this comparison is
viable due to a supramodal action space, in which the observation and execution of human
movements are coded in a common framework, and that this coding in a common framework
forms the basis for the understanding of the intentional actions of others, joint attention and
theory of mind later in development (Meltzoff, 2007). Although AIM is one of the leading
theories to explain neonatal imitation as innately present in human infants, Kugiumutzakis
and Trevarthen (2015) propose that it is not enough to explain the phenomenon on its own.
They argue, it also "depends on matching organized intentional motor systems that seek
confirmation by different forms of reafference." For Kugiumutzakis and Trevarthen, there is
a two-way exchange of complementary affective states which involves the regulation of
motor impulses by a 'hierarchy of rhythms' created in the brains of those involved. It is this
element of musicality which directly parallels the underlying mechanisms of neonatal
imitation with those of other dialogues and exchanges in human beings. Indeed, as
mentioned, in naturalistic exchanges it is not only the neonates who imitate, but also their
parents, with both parties timing their expressive movements so as to achieve an
intersynchrony between intentions and experiences. This, Kugiumutzakis and Trevarthen
believe, is necessary for the construction of joint projects, and the creation of narrative
structures.
From this perspective, neonatal imitation is more than a stimulus-response exchange,
but rather an intersubjective phenomenon which is social in its very nature. Each imitative
exchange is not a single, isolated experience, but part of a developing ‘story’ that creates
meaning over the multiple seconds in which the overall interaction is maintained
(Kugiumutzakis & Trevarthen, 2015). This interaction takes place within a jointly created
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
intersubjective space in which the neonate is required to detect the adults intention and
motivation for communication, and respond reciprocally (Kugiumutzakis, 1998).
Kugiumutzakis believes the factors that allow an infant to discern an adult’s motivation for
communication lie within the acoustical and kinematic features of the modelled actions. It is
in this space that the temporal structure of the interactions becomes paramount. If the
modelled actions or sounds are presented as though they are introducing or developing a
narrative structure, this could form a key element of what Kugiumutzakis describes as the
critical invariants that signify to the infant a desire within an adult for communication.
By moving neonatal imitation beyond a physical process, it can become a coupling of
embodied agents, co-ordinated though bodily movement and vocalisation, facial expression
and timing.
Recent findings in infant neuroscience have also shown a specific neural pattern can be
detected when an infant performs an action and the adult imitates back to the infant. The imitative
“dialog,” exhibited through the turn-taking of matching of motor actions, causes a change in the
infant neural mu rhythm that is significantly different from that observed when the adult does a
nonmatching action, indicating there is something particularly noticeable or communicative about
These early
the baby being in a mutual imitative interaction with another person (Saby et al., 2012).
interactions, simplistic though they may seem, become imbued with affective meaning
underpinned by the patterns of the interaction. From the implicit experience of this co-created
meaning arises the foundation for social understanding and intersubjectivity (Fuchs & De
Jaegher, 2009). Reddy (2008) argues this is what makes imitation relevant for the infant, as it
allows a bi-directional interplay in which the two engaged parties influence one another in a
shared affective resonance within an interactional framework. We extend this argument,
proposing the specific underlying framework is narrative in form.
7.0 Conclusion
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
The potential communicative underlying nature of neonatal imitation makes it fertile
ground with regard to developing narrative structures. Imitation represents an effective
method of engagement for both young infants yet to develop language skills and slightly
older toddlers. It is this that suggests imitation has a function that runs deeper than being
purely reactionary to external stimuli. It enables infants to engage in meaningful and
purposeful interactions with adults long before the onset of language. Within such
interactions there is also the potential for an affective component resonating between neonatal
and adult participants. Kugiumutzakis (1998) suggests that a feeling of enjoyment may be
created as a consequence of the infant’s recognition of the adult as another ‘other’ entering
into a shared interactive unit. Indeed, the interactive unit, or intersubjective companion space,
acts as a “nest of emotions” (Kugiumutzakis, 1998, p 79) in which adult and infant can
potentially share emotions, and create basic acts of meaning. Whilst such an outlook runs a
risk of falling foul of the same criticism Anisfeld levelled toward Dan Stern (of imbuing
infants with levels of sophistication beyond their years), without considering the potential
affective outcomes of such interactions, and the infants innate desire for companionship, the
neonatal imitation debate becomes a poorer landscape.
Through considering neonatal imitation as innately dialogical (Kugiumutzakis &
Trevarthen, 2015; Nagy & Molnar, 2004) it is possible to further grasp its underlying
importance in human development, and why a temporal analysis of it, similar to that already
performed on other interactional exchanges (Delafield-Butt & Trevarthen, 2015) could help
us understand its underlying organisation and function. Arbib (2005) suggested that from an
evolutionary standpoint, imitation can be viewed as a foundation stone onto which language
development was laid, and Nagy (2006) proposed that the same could be true with regard to
human development from the neonatal period, through infancy and into childhood. The
intersubjective exchange becomes the template on which words and language form (Beebe, et
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
al, 2022). This foundational role is supported by the latest evidence stemming from infant
macaques linking neonatal imitation with future social development (Kaburu et al., 2016;
Simpson et al., 2016).
Building on the proposition that neonatal imitation is dialogical in nature and
function, we propose that successful examples of neonatal imitation are underpinned by a
narrative framework, in the same manner other adult-infant proto-conversations are (see also
Heimann, 2022, p 184). This narrative architecture would be expressed in a multimodal
format (involving movement, vocalisation, and facial expression), and would require a multi-
modal analysis to identify the peaks of intensity and arousal expressed in the precise
kinematics of movement and acoustic intensity. It seems most likely that narratives will be
found within imitation paradigms like that utilised by Nagy and Molnar (2004), in which the
neonate was allowed the potential for expressive agency and interest through provocation or
initiation. It was within such a paradigm that the role of the infant in creating lasting,
intimate, imitative exchanges was first established. However, the same narrative structure
could also be present in the model-response pattern utilised by other studies (especially when
the movements of the neonate are also considered as part of the response), demonstrating the
language-ready brain of the neonate.
The one-month period after birth, commonly referred to as the neonatal phase, is
hugely important in terms of development. Nagy (2011) argues that it deserved a specific
period of its own in development theory. Narrative structures in neonatal imitation could
represent the first part in a developmental trajectory that builds towards larger projects of
communication, through primary intersubjectivity and secondary intersubjectivity, and from
proto-conversations through to the fully developed dialogues of language in later childhood,
onwards.
NEWBORN DIALOGUES
Statements
Conflict of interest statement
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships
that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Funding Sources
Supported by an ESRC Scottish Graduate School of Social Sciences PhD studentship awarded to
TMcG and supervised by JDB.
Author Contributions
TMcG and JDB conceived and wrote the manuscript.
NEWBORN DIALOGUES