Running head: KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
Kaufman Domains of Creativity Scale: Relationship to Occupation and Measurement
Invariance across Gender
a a b
Kirill G. Miroshnik , Olga V. Shcherbakova , and James C. Kaufman
Faculty of Psychology, Saint Petersburg State University
Department of Educational Psychology, University of Connecticut
Author Note
We have no conflicts of interest to disclose. The data files are available at Open
We wish to acknowledge the help provided by Daria Makarova with back-translation
and Iana Bashmakova with the coding of data on occupations.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Kirill G. Miroshnik,
Faculty of Psychology, Saint Petersburg State University, Makarova emb. 6, Saint
Petersburg, 199034, Russian Federation. E-mail: cyril.miroshnik@gmail.com.
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
Abstract
Kaufman Domains of Creativity Scale (K-DOCS) is a self-report of creative behavior in five
distinct domains. The present study aims to translate K-DOCS into Russian and evaluate its
psychometric properties. The psychometric analysis was performed on a sample of adults
recruited through Yandex Toloka (N = 1011; M = 35.94, SD = 10.95) from various
age age
regions of Russia and Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries. Exploratory and
confirmatory factor analyses indicated that the model with five correlated factors showed the
best fit to empirical data. All factors demonstrated good internal consistency and moderate
test-retest reliability. The correlation and hierarchical regression analyses for K-DOCS
factors, creative achievements by CBI (Creative Behavior Inventory), and personality traits
by BFI–2 (Big Five Inventory – 2) yielded evidence for an adequate level of convergent and
discriminant validity. We also examined differences across K-DOCS factors among
occupations defined by Holland’s typology and attempted to investigate K-DOCS
measurement invariance across gender. As a result, we obtained evidence supporting the
construct validity of K-DOCS and established its partial measurement invariance across
gender. The current study shows that Russian K-DOCS has satisfactory psychometric
properties and can serve as a trusted guide into various manifestations of humans’ creative
behavior.
Keywords: creativity, creativity domains, self-assessment, Holland’s occupational
types, measurement invariance.
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
Kaufman Domains of Creativity Scale: Relationship to Occupation and Measurement
Invariance across Gender
A common approach to creativity measurement focuses on self-assessments of
creative behavior (Silvia, Wigert, Reiter-Palmon, & Kaufman, 2012; Snyder, Hammond,
Grohman, & Katz-Buonincontro, 2019). Although self-assessments are more prone to
subjective biases than actual creative performance, they provide useful information about
people’s beliefs and perceptions regarding their creativity (Kaufman, 2019). However, to gain
insights into creative self-perceptions, researchers should base their studies on
psychometrically solid instruments.
The Kaufman Domains of Creativity Scale (K-DOCS; Kaufman, 2012) is a widely
used self-report measure of creative behavior. Its theoretical premises are derived from the
Amusement Park Theoretical model of creativity (APT; Baer & Kaufman, 2005, 2017).
According to the APT, creative product results from the interaction of initial requirements
(such as intelligence, motivation, and environment) and the domain, which is hierarchically
represented by general thematic areas (e.g., science), specific domains (e.g., biology), and
micro-domains (e.g., biophysics). Further, K-DOCS focuses on everyday creativity and thus
provides an opportunity to examine creativity-related activities across varied populations
while avoiding bias toward eminent creativity (see Glăveanu, 2014).
The initial validation uncovered the five-factor structure of K-DOCS, with each factor
showing appropriate internal consistency and test-retest reliability as well as preliminary
support for construct validity (Kaufman, 2012; see also McKay, Karwowski, & Kaufman,
2017). The K-DOCS factors are Everyday (creative activities in everyday life), Scholarly
(intellectual and verbal creativity), Performance (creativity in literature and music), Scientific
(creativity in mechanics and mathematics), and Artistic (creativity in visual arts). Further
research conducted in China (Tu & Fan, 2015), Czech Republic (Dostál, Plháková, &
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
Záškodná, 2017), Malaysia (Tan, Tan, Cheng, Hashim, & Ong, 2019), Nigeria (Awofala &
Fatade, 2015), Poland (McKay et al., 2017), and Turkey (Kandemir & Kaufman, 2019; Şahin,
2016) not only largely confirmed previous results but also extended them.
The present study aims to expand the empirical evidence on psychometric properties
of K-DOCS by validating a Russian version of the measure. In particular, we focus on five
research objectives. First, we aim to resolve an inconsistency in results on the factor structure
of K-DOCS. Previous studies—relying on Kaiser-Guttman rule and scree test—have
established a five-factor structure (e.g., Dostál et al., 2017; McKay et al., 2017; Şahin, 2016),
yet recent evidence from a Turkish adaptation—based on the application of a more robust and
advanced technique of parallel analysis—have inclined towards a nine-factor structure
(Kandemir & Kaufman, 2019; see also Kapoor, Reiter-Palmon, & Kaufman, 2020). We
suggest that the analysis of 50 items from K-DOCS on a large sample of 1,260 participants
could have led to a more fine-grained factor structure because the parallel analysis is prone to
overestimate the number of factors to retain in case of a large number of observed variables
(Van der Eijk & Rose, 2015) and large sample sizes (Warne & Larsen, 2014). Supplementing
parallel analysis with other recommended methods may lead to different results. Hence, in
line with earlier evidence, we hypothesize the following:
Hypothesis 1 (H1). A model with five correlated factors will provide the best
description of empirical data for K-DOCS.
Second, although internal consistency reliability has been reported in every study of
K-DOCS, not so many studies have examined its test-retest reliability (Awofala & Fatade,
2015; Kaufman, 2012). For research purposes, we consider values of .70 and higher
indicating satisfactory reliability. Thus, we hypothesize the following:
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
Hypothesis 2 (H2): Total scores for each K-DOCS factor will demonstrate satisfactory
test-retest reliability (> .70).
Third, we are concerned with demonstrating further support for the construct validity
of K-DOCS, including convergent and discriminant validity. Convergent validity refers to an
examination of consistency in results obtained on a target measure and other conceptually
close measures. For this purpose, we have chosen a short version of Creative Behavior
Inventory (CBI; Dollinger, 2003). Hypotheses have been formulated with regards to different
subscales rather than a total score because the Russian CBI showed a good fit to a model with
several first-order factors and one second-order factor (Lebedeva & Bushina, 2015;
Lebedeva, Schwartz, Van de Vijver, Plucker, & Bushina, 2019), which stands in contrast to
evidence favoring one-factor solution (Dollinger, 2003; Silvia et al., 2012). Thus, we put
forward the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 3a (H3a): Artistic factor of K-DOCS will have moderate positive
correlations with CBI Crafts and Visual arts.
Hypothesis 3b (H3b): Performance factor of K-DOCS will have a moderate positive
correlation with CBI Literature.
To lend additional support for convergent validity, we planned to analyze the
relationship between K-DOCS factors and Big Five personality traits. For convergent
validity, openness to experience is the most relevant trait because numerous studies identified
it as one of the central characteristics of creative personality (Jauk, Benedek, & Neubauer,
2014; Kaufman et al., 2016; Silvia, Kaufman, & Pretz, 2009). Openness to experience
We also limited our focus to three instead of six subscales of CBI because we failed to
communicate with the authors of original adaptation to receive a full version of the
questionnaire. In this situation, we retrieved only 11 items translated to Russian that have
been available from Lebedeva and Bushina (2015).
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
encompasses two moderately related subdimensions—openness and intellect (DeYoung,
Quilty, & Peterson, 2007; see also Christensen, Cotter, & Silvia, 2019). Openness reflects
aspiration for gaining unusual sensory and aesthetic experience, while intellect reflects
aspiration for gaining intellectual information and thriving for learning and thinking over new
abstract concepts and ideas. Recently, it was found that openness—independently of
intellect—predicts creative achievements in arts but not sciences, whereas intellect—
independently of openness—predicts creative achievements in sciences but not arts
(Kaufman, 2013; Kaufman et al., 2016). Although results of previous studies are grounded in
real-life creative accomplishments, it has not been established yet if comparable results could
be obtained for self-reported creativity scales. Therefore, we address this issue and predict the
following:
Hypothesis 3c (H3c): Artistic factor of K-DOCS will have a moderate positive
correlation with openness.
Hypothesis 3d (H3d): Scholarly factor of K-DOCS will have a moderate positive
correlation with intellect.
Discriminant validity implies that measures of different constructs should not be
highly related unless a theory predicts so. To assess discriminant validity, we have made
predictions on the relation of K-DOCS factors to Big Five personality traits. Based on the
results of previous studies, we have no reason to propose high or even moderate associations
between Big Five personality traits—except openness to experience—and self-assessments in
science and visual arts. A more complex picture emerges for everyday creativity and
performative arts. Creativity in daily life, which embraces an aspect of interpersonal
communication, has been moderately linked to extraversion and agreeableness (Kaufman,
2012; McKay et al., 2017) but no other traits. In the domain of performative arts, which
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
encompass subdomains of music, literature, and acting, higher expression of creativity
corresponds to a higher level of extraversion (Kaufman, 2012; Silvia et al., 2009) but no other
traits. Hence, we formulate the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 4a (H4a): Artistic, Scholarly, and Scientific factors of K-DOCS will be
weakly correlated with all personality traits except for openness to experience.
Hypothesis 4b (H4b): Scientific factor of K-DOCS will be positively correlated with
agreeableness, while Artistic factor will be negatively correlated with agreeableness.
Hypothesis 4c (H4c): Everyday factor of K-DOCS will be weakly correlated with
conscientiousness and neuroticism.
Hypothesis 4d (H4d): Performance factor of K-DOCS will be weakly associated with
conscientiousness, agreeableness, and neuroticism.
Hypothesis 4e (H4e): Performance factor of K-DOCS will be positively related to
extraversion.
Fourth, valuable information about construct validity can be gathered by juxtaposing
results on the target measure with external criteria. Inasmuch as studies on creativity are
predominantly conducted on samples of university students (see Glăveanu, 2014), researchers
often sought to identify the relationship between various aspects of creative potential and
students’ majors (Silvia & Nusbaum, 2011). For example, Kandemir and Kaufman (2019)
compared students’ self-ratings on domains of K-DOCS among their majors. They found that
science and math majors had higher self-ratings regarding Scientific factor, whereas arts
majors rated themselves higher on Performance and Artistic factors. Briefly, established
trends lie in agreement with the general logic of the K-DOCS and support its constructive
validity.
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
construct validity of K-DOCS is generalizable to the adult population. To achieve our aim,
we plan to compare creativity self-ratings in various domains against professional
occupations outlined in Holland’s model (RIASEC; Holland, 1985): realistic (e.g., engineer),
investigative (e.g., biochemist), artistic (e.g., artist), social (e.g., teacher), enterprising (e.g.,
economist), and conventional (e.g., accountant). Holland’s RIASEC model has been already
implemented to determine how various occupations are linked to personality traits and
creative self-beliefs (Kaufman, Pumaccahua, & Holt, 2013) as well as creative problem‐
solving preferences (Puccio, Miller, & Acar, 2019). By matching occupational types and
creativity domains, we put forward the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 5a (H5a): Investigative types will score higher on K-DOCS Scholarly and
Scientific factors when compared to other types, while realistic type will have higher
scores only in Scientific factor.
Hypothesis 5b (H5b): Artistic types will score higher on K-DOCS Performance and
Artistic factors in comparison to other types.
Hypothesis 5c (H5c): Social types will score higher on Everyday factor of K-DOCS
than other occupational types.
Finally, we also want to establish measurement invariance of K-DOCS across gender
and investigate gender differences in self-assessment of creativity across domains. Kandemir
and Kaufman (2019) intended to shed light on gender differences applying K-DOCS but
failed due to disconfirmation of full measurement invariance. Conversely, a statistical
analysis performed later on a larger sample of American people (N = 22,031) established
gender invariance of K-DOCS for both five- and nine-factor models (Kapoor et al., 2020).
Some gender differences on creativity across different domains have been found in previous
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
studies. For instance, Kaufman (2006) collected data on creative self-perceptions in 56
domains on a sample of 3,553 students and community members and found that females
reported higher creativity ratings on social communications and visual arts, whereas males
reported higher creativity ratings on science and sports. Along the same line, Kaufman et al.
(2010) and Werner, Tang, Kruse, Kaufman, and Spörrle (2014) observed that female students
rated their creativity higher in arts while male students rated their creativity higher in math
and science (see also Diedrich et al., 2018). Taking into account the described trends, we
hypothesize the following:
Hypothesis 6a (H6a): Females will score higher than males on Performance and
Artistic factors of K-DOCS.
Hypothesis 6b (H6b): Males will score higher than females on Scientific factor of K-
DOCS.
Method
Power analysis
We performed a Monte-Carlo power analysis to determine the sample size needed for
factor analysis. The analysis was conducted in R version 3.5.2 using packages lavaan
(Rosseel, 2012) and simsem (Pornprasertmanit, Miller, & Schoemann, 2013). We defined a
population model based on the results of previous studies, varied the sample size from 300 to
600, and evaluated simulation results by criteria outlined in Muthén and Muthén (2002). As a
result, the minimal sample size was determined as 450. Since we planned to do both
exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses, the minimal sample size had to be doubled.
Besides, the sample size of 900 provided adequate statistical power for examining convergent
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
and discriminant validity. The R code for the simulation is available via the Open Science
Control for inattentive respondents
We intended to recruit participants on Yandex Toloka, which is a Russian analog for
Amazon MTurk, and thus needed to control for careless responding (e.g., McKibben &
Silvia, 2017). According to Fleischer, Mead, and Huang (2015), a proportion of inattentive
respondents can amount to up to 42% in online samples. Taking 42% as a reference point, we
redefined a minimal sample size as N = 1278 (900 × 1.42 = 1278). Inattentive respondents
were identified with a priori and post-hoc methods (Niessen, Meijer, & Tendeiro, 2016). A
priori methods included an instructed response item, whereas post-hoc methods incorporated
response time, maximum longstring, and Mahalanobis distance (Dupuis, Meier, & Cuneo,
2019; Meade & Craig, 2012; Niessen et al., 2016). The detailed description of how each
method was applied can be accessed via OSF
Participants
We gathered data from 1313 users of Yandex Toloka and compensated $0.24 per
person for their participation. However, 302 responses were discarded due to several reasons:
double submissions (n = 37), data not from Russia or CIS countries (Commonwealth of
Independent States; n = 2), and data from inattentive respondents (n = 263). The final sample
consisted of 1011 participants (549 females) aged from 18 to 70 (M = 35.94, SD = 10.95)
located in 315 towns and villages of Russia (82.4%), Ukraine (14.1%), Belarus (3.2%),
Uzbekistan (0.2%), and Kazakhstan (0.1%). The raw data is available via OSF
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
project was approved by the Ethics Committee of Saint Petersburg State University.
A smaller group of participants took part in the test-retest procedure for K-DOCS. We
shared the link to a Google Form with all who agreed to proceed with test-retest (N = 602).
As a result, we received responses from 168 people (27.9% from N = 602) during a period
from 14 to 33 days (M = 14.75, SD = 2.03) after the main study. We excluded duplicates (n =
4), data of unidentified (n = 2) and inattentive respondents (by post-hoc methods; n = 24),
and all responses that came later than 21 days (n = 8) since the main study. Therefore, test-
retest was carried out on a reduced sample of 130 participants (72 females; from 18 to 69
years, M = 36.89, SD = 11.18). All participants received detailed individual feedback
age age
about the results of the assessment.
Measures
Kaufman Domains of Creativity Scale. The Kaufman Domains of Creativity Scale
(K-DOCS; Kaufman, 2012) was administered as a self-report measure of creative behavior in
five broad domains: Everyday (e.g., “thinking of new ways to help people”), Scholarly (e.g.,
“analyzing the themes in a good book”), Performance (e.g., “making up rhymes”), Scientific
(e.g., “solving math puzzles”), and Artistic (e.g., “appreciating a beautiful painting”). The
participants were instructed to rate their creativity on a 5-point Likert scale (1 = much less
creative, 5 = much more creative), comparing themselves to people about their age and life
experiences.
For the translation of K-DOCS to Russian, we used a procedure of back-translation
with a monolingual test (Maneesriwongul & Dixon, 2004). First, two Russian-speaking
researchers fluent in English (first two authors) independently translated all items to Russian.
Then two versions of translation were compared and integrated into one. Next, the qualified
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
translator performed a backward translation. After that, the back-translated version was
checked against the original K-DOCS by two English-speaking researchers. All differences
between Russian and English versions were corrected during the second round of back-
translation. Finally, the revised version was piloted on a sample of ten Master’s students aged
21–23 (Russian monolinguals; 100% females). As a result, minor changes were introduced to
the wordings of instruction and three items.
Creative Behavior Inventory. The short version of Creative Behavior Inventory
(CBI; Dollinger, 2003) was employed to assess participants’ involvement in various creative
activities within the last year. The participants had to rate their engagement in creative
behavior on a 4-point scale (1 = never did this, 2 = did this once or twice, 3 = did this 3–5
times, 4 = did this more than 5 times). As mentioned earlier, we limited our focus to the
Russian-translated items that were provided in Lebedeva and Bushina (2015). The chosen
subset of items covered domains of Crafts (e.g., “made a ceramic craft”), Visual arts (e.g.,
“painted an original picture”), and Literature (e.g., “wrote a short story”). All subscales
demonstrated satisfactory internal consistency reliability: ω = .60 (for Crafts), ω = .87 (for
t t
Visual arts), and ω = .69 (for Literature).
Big Five Inventory–2. The Big Five Inventory–2 (BFI–2; Soto & John, 2017) was
used to measure the Big Five personality domains and their facets. The participants
responded to 60 items (e.g., “I am someone who is full of energy”) using a 5-point Likert
scale (1 = disagree strongly, 5 = agree strongly). Shchebetenko, Kalugin, Mishkevich, Soto,
and John (2020) demonstrated evidence for reliability, construct validity, and measurement
invariance across age and sex for domains and facets of the Russian BFI-2. Internal
consistency reliability for each personality domain was as following: ω = .85 (for
Extraversion), ω = .78 (for Agreeableness), ω = .83 (for Conscientiousness), ω = .81 (for
t t t
Openness to Experience), and ω = .87 (for Neuroticism).
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
Procedure
Data was collected via Yandex Toloka. First, participants read the informed consent
and clicked a button confirming they understood its content. Then they completed all
creativity measures in the following order: K-DOCS, CBI, and BFI-2. The order of items for
K-DOCS and CBI was randomized because these measures did not have a predetermined
order of items. Finally, participants provided information on their age, gender, and
occupation and could leave their emails to take part in the test-retest procedure. We had no
intention to set time limits for completion, but Yandex Toloka required doing so. The time
allowed was restricted to 45 minutes per person. After two weeks, we contacted all
participants who agreed to proceed with the test-retest and shared a link to Google Form that
led to the K-DOCS measure. Again, the order of K-DOCS items was randomized. No time
constraints were imposed.
Data analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 25 and R version 3.6.1. The R
code used for analysis is available via OSF
First, exploratory (EFA) and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) were conducted to
determine the dimensionality of K-DOCS (packages psych, GPArotation, lavaan; Bernaards
& Jennrich, 2005; Revelle, 2019; Rosseel, 2012). We randomly split the sample into two
halves to perform EFA and CFA on independent samples. The EFA sample consisted of 505
participants (55.4% females; 18–69 years, M = 35.93, SD = 10.94) whereas the CFA
age age
sample consisted of 506 participants (53.2% females; 18–70 years, M = 35.94, SD =
age age
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
10.95). To examine multivariate normality and identify the number of factors to extract in the
EFA, we used additional packages such as MVN, EFA.MRFA, and RGenData (Korkmaz,
Goksuluk, & Zararsiz, 2014; Lorenzo-Seva, Timmerman, & Kiers, 2011; Ruscio & Roche,
2012). For CFA analysis, global indices of χ , CFI, SRMR, and RMSEA with 90%
confidence intervals were used to estimate model fit. The following values were considered
acceptable: χ (p > .05), CFI (≥ .90), RMSEA (≈ .06, 90% CI ≤ .08), and SRMR (≈ .08).
However, predefined cut-off values should be regarded as useful orienteers rather than strict
criteria for making a dichotomous decision for either acceptance or rejection of a model
(Markland, 2005; Marsh, Hau, & Wen, 2004).
Second, internal consistency and test-retest reliability for K-DOCS factors were
estimated by omega total and intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC; packages psych and
MBESS; Kelley, 2018), respectively. We did not resort to calculating Cronbach’s alpha
because modern psychometrics accumulated sufficient evidence confirming serious
limitations of the latter (e.g., McNeish, 2018; Sijtsma, 2009). In addition to providing
reliability value, 95% confidence intervals associated with it were also calculated using the
BCa method (bias-corrected-and-accelerated; Kelley & Pornprasertmanit, 2016). We used
ICC(A,1) to assess test-retest reliability because it shows the absolute degree of measurement
agreement (Qin, Nelson, McLeod, Eremenco, & Coons, 2019) in contrast to the Pearson
correlation coefficient that reflects only the degree of measurement consistency (Zaki,
Bulgiba, Nordin, & Ismail, 2013).
Further, hypotheses about convergent and divergent validity were explored by
Pearson correlation coefficients with Holm’s adjustment and hierarchical regression analysis.
Data comparison on five domains of K-DOCS across RIASEC occupations was performed by
one-way ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey’s honestly significant difference (HSD).
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
Finally, analysis of measurement invariance was conducted as a prerequisite for
comparing latent means in creativity domains of K-DOCS among males and females. Testing
for measurement invariance required consecutive examination of four nested models with
progressively imposed equality constraints: configural, weak, strong, and strict. A more
stringent level of measurement invariance (e.g., weak invariance) was retained if imposing
additional equality constraints (e.g., equal factor loadings) did not correspond to a significant
decrease in data–model fit when compared to fit of a previously retained model (e.g.,
configural invariance). Model fit was assessed by Δχ , ΔCFI, and ΔRMSEA. Statistically
significant results for Δχ , ΔCFI ≥ –.010, and ΔRMSEA ≥ .015 were interpreted as indicating
non-invariance (Chen, 2007).
Results
Exploratory factor analysis
The preliminary analysis by Kaiser–Mayer–Olkin’s measure (KMO = .90) and
Bartlett’s test for sphericity (χ (1225) = 12653.28, p < .001) supported that the data is suitable
for EFA. Data were treated as ordinal. No missing values were present. The estimation
method of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) with promax rotation was used in a polychoric
correlation matrix. The rationale was that OLS is free from an assumption of multivariate
normality (Osborne, 2014), feasible for analysis of large models with ordinal data (Lee,
Zhang, & Edwards, 2012), and more accurate in estimation of model’s parameters and
corresponding standard errors than PAF (Principal Axis Factoring; Coughlin, 2013) and
DWLS (Diagonally Weighted Least Squares; Forero, Maydeu-Olivares, & Gallardo-Pujol,
2009) in a case with ordinal variables.
A number of factors to extract was determined by a set of criteria. First, we relied on a
parallel analysis (PA) that is a robust method with high performance (e.g., Fabrigar,
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
Wegener, MacCallum, & Strahan, 1999; Velicer, Eaton, & Fava, 2000). More concretely, we
conducted PA on Pearson’s correlation coefficients with both PCA (Principal Component
th
Analysis) and PAF and decided on a number of factors based on 95 percentile value.
Second, we accompanied PA with comparison data (CD; Ruscio & Roche, 2012), Hull
methods (Hull-CFI and Hull-CAF; Lorenzo-Seva et al., 2011), and scree-plot test built on the
Both on empirical and theoretical considerations, we ended with a five-factor
structure as most promising. Extraction of the sixth and seventh factors not only did not
improve the explained amount of variance but also obscured interpretation. For instance, the
sixth factor included only two variables (items 36 and 40) related to solving math puzzles and
could have emerged due to the high correlation between these items united by a general
context. Thus, it can be seen as an artificial division of a general factor (Lorenzo-Seva et al.,
2011). As for the seventh factor, it had moderate loadings on several variables that did not
allow for reasonable interpretation.
All extracted factors were similar in content to those of previous studies. Five items were
dropped due to either low loadings on all factors or comparable cross-loadings on two factors
with no adequate interpretation (items 14, 15, 18, 20, and 49). Moreover, items 16 and 22
from the Scholarly factor were incorporated in the Everyday factor because they had higher
loadings on the latter and their interpretation under this factor was theoretically permissible.
When assigning variables to specific factors, we carefully studied not only the matrix of
pattern coefficients but also the matrix of structure coefficients. Analysis of both matrices
found no significant contradictions between them. The five-factor structure explained 47% of
the variance in observed variables. Overall, the results of EFA provided preliminary support
for H1.
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
Confirmatory factor analysis
The CFA model was specified based on results of EFA. Given the high correlation
between items 36 and 40, we added a covariance path between their residuals. In our opinion,
such an approach is more theoretically justified than allotting these items to a specific factor.
The data contained no missing values. Distribution of variables did not meet the requirement
of multivariate normality (according to Henze-Zirkler test; HZ = 1.00, p < .001). All variables
were analyzed as if they were continuous. It was shown that if the number of response
categories is greater than or equal to five and the threshold values of categories are only
moderately skewed, the results for the robust maximum likelihood estimation method has to
be comparable to the results obtained with the robust categorical least squares estimation
method (Rhemtulla, Brosseau-Liard, & Savalei, 2012). The sample variance-covariance
matrix was analyzed by maximum likelihood estimation with robust standard errors (Satorra
& Bentler, 1994).
The proposed model did not agree well with empirical data: χ (934) = 3323.43, p <
SB
.001, CFI = .743, RMSEA = .071 (90% CI = .071–.074), SRMR = .091. We carefully
analyzed the matrix of standardized residuals and modification indices along with expected
parameter changes (EPC) to identify major sources of misfit. As a result, we drew attention to
discrepancy may lead to the elimination of others, we ensured that each identified
inconsistency persisted even after all others were excluded. In other words, we tried to avoid
the situation of over-fitting the model to the features of a particular sample. Moreover, all
from a theoretical point of view. Interestingly, a similar problem with residual correlations
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
was reported in the recent paper on the BICB (Biographical Inventory of Creative Behaviors;
Silvia et al., 2020).
The modified model contained seven new parameters and demonstrated better fit to
empirical data: χ (927) = 2681.92, p < .001, CFI = .811, RMSEA = .061 (90% CIs = .059–
SB
.064), SRMR = .087. Also, the modified model with five correlated factors achieved a better
fit than alternative models, including one-factor model (domain-general view), model with
five uncorrelated factors (domain-specific view), and model with one general second-order
the adopted model is not devoid of some inconsistencies, but, in our opinion, they are much
smaller in scope than those already eliminated. A statistically significant result for the χ
could be explained by the large sample size, model complexity and remaining model
inconsistencies. The low values of CFI could appear due to a variety of reasons. First, they
are to some extent related to remaining inconsistencies in the model. Second, CFI depends on
the number of variables analyzed, albeit to a smaller extent. For large structural models, CFI
values tend to decrease, which does not always mean that the model does a poor job (Ding,
Velicer, & Harlow, 1995; Kenny & McCoach, 2003). According to some methodologists,
CFI is more relevant in the context of exploratory rather than strictly confirmatory analysis
(Rigdon, 1996). In the context of CFA, RMSEA is more informative, which corresponded to
a satisfactory level of convergence in our study. Finally, contradictions between CFI and
RMSEA do not always indicate gross inconsistencies in the model but may be determined by
conceptual differences between indices (Lai & Green, 2016) and depend on the applied
method of factor analysis (Xia & Yang, 2019). In sum, CFA results supported H1.
Given the high consistency in results of EFA and CFA, we combined all data and
conducted further psychometric analysis on the entire sample (N = 1011). Analysis using the
maximum likelihood method with robust errors showed that the model was in acceptable
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
agreement with the data: χ (927) = 4200.10, p < .001, CFI = .824, RMSEA = .059 (90%
SB
CIs = .057–.061), SRMR = .085.
Reliability analysis
demonstrated acceptable point estimates for internal consistency with narrow confidence
intervals.
A satisfactory level of test-retest reliability was found only for three factors:
Scholarly, Performance, and Scientific. Test-retest reliability was low for Everyday factor
and had too much variability for Artistic. In this regard, we took a closer look at
corresponding effects. For Everyday, a large effect of error term was found while a minor
effect was associated with repeated trials. However, the wide confidence intervals for the
Artistic factor might indeed correspond to the effect of repeated trials. It means that a
satisfactory level of test-retest reliability (ICC(A,1) = .69) was achieved due to high inter-
individual variability that masked the statistically significant effect of repeated trials.
Therefore, Artistic factor is the only one that demonstrated low stability over time. It follows
that H2 received only partial support.
Construct validity
analyzed using the Pearson correlation coefficient because preliminary analysis showed that
the data did not violate its assumptions.
In most cases, convergent validity hypotheses were confirmed. In particular, we found
moderate positive correlations between the Artistic factor of K-DOCS and the Visual arts (r =
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
.54, p < .001) and Crafts (r = .30, p < .001) subscales of CBI. Additionally, a positive
correlation of similar magnitude was obtained between the Performance factor of K-DOCS
and CBI Literature (r = .43, p < .001). Equally important evidence in favor of convergent
validity was a moderate positive correlation between K-DOCS Artistic factor and aesthetic
qualities (i.e. openness; r = .38, p < .001) as a facet of openness to experience. Although the
association of K-DOCS Scholarly factor with curiosity (i.e. intellect) as a facet of openness to
experience was relatively weak (r = .24, p < .001), it was nevertheless the highest in
comparison with values for other K-DOCS factors. Thus, H3a, H3b, and H3c were fully
supported, and H3d was only partially supported.
Evidence on discriminant validity was mixed. While K-DOCS Artistic and Scholarly
factors were indeed related only to openness to experience, the corresponding association for
Scientific factor was significantly lower in magnitude than, for instance, its negative
association with neuroticism (r = –.19, p < .001). In line with our expectations, Performance
factor was unrelated to traits of agreeableness (r = .06, p = .445), conscientiousness (r = .02,
p = .061), and neuroticism (r = –.01, p = .693), but showed a weak positive association with
extraversion (r = .21, p < .001). It is worth noting that weak correlations between the
Everyday factor and conscientiousness (r = .15, p < .001) and neuroticism (r = –.23, p < .001)
were also in agreement with our predictions. However, the hypothesis that conscientiousness
would be positively related to the Scientific factor and negatively to the Artistic factor
remained unsupported. Thus, H4c, H4d, and H4e were fully confirmed, H4a was partially
confirmed, and H4b was incompatible with empirical evidence.
Further, we examined differences in K-DOCS domains among various occupations.
First, we divided participants into groups by their professions according to Holland’s
RIASEC model. Two researchers—the first author and a psychology graduate student of St.
Petersburg State University—performed this task independently. Results of coding showed a
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
high degree of agreement (Cohen’s kappa (κ) = .78, se = .016). All inconsistencies in coding
were resolved during a discussion session. Importantly, data from students, housewives,
unemployed and retired people, and women on maternity leave were excluded from the
analysis prior to coding. Also, we did not consider data of participants who defined their
occupation in broad terms (e.g., “specialist,” “freelancer”) or reported several different
occupations (e.g., “accountant and conductor”). Finally, we ended with data from 779
Before running a one-way ANOVA, we established the homogeneity of variance and
checked for outliers. Homogeneity of variance was tested using Levene’s test based on
median because it is more robust for asymmetric distributions (Brown & Forsythe, 1974).
The assumption of variance homogeneity was satisfied in all cases. All identified outliers
were excluded (criterion: Median ± 3×MAD; see for details Leys et al., 2013).
As to the results of ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey’s HSD, no significant differences
social type would have higher scores on everyday creativity than other types was not
confirmed (H5c). In a similar vein, investigative type did not stand out on K-DOCS Scholarly
factor when compared with other occupational types (H5a). However, investigative type
outperformed social and conventional types on Scientific factor. Artistic type obtained higher
scores on Performance factor than realistic and conventional ones and stood out significantly
from all other types on the K-DOCS Artistic factor (H5b). Thus, H5b was fully supported,
whereas H5a was partially supported.
In addition, we built a hierarchical regression model to find out significant predictors
of K-DOCS factors among Big Five personality traits, occupations, and measures of creative
hierarchical regression analysis were met. As expected, openness to experience served as a
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
major predictor of creative self-assessments across all K-DOCS domains. Extraversion
positively predicted the Everyday and Performance factors, whereas neuroticism
demonstrated negative associations with the Everyday, Scholarly, and Scientific factors. In
general, the entry of occupation types did not improve model fit. The only exception from the
rule is the Scientific factor, which was predicted by realistic, investigative, and social types.
Although it was unsurprising that CBI Literature served as a statistically significant predictor
for Scholarly and Performance factors, we did not expect to obtain a similar result for the
Everyday factor. In sum, these results only partially corroborated our hypotheses on construct
validity.
Measurement invariance across gender
Before examining gender differences, we had to establish measurement invariance for
factors showed an acceptable fit for both males and females. Multigroup CFA was used to
verify the configural, metric, scalar, and strict invariance. Given that strict measurement
invariance is hard to achieve, we confined to establishing scalar invariance in order to
proceed with the latent mean comparison. The results for the full model did not support scalar
measurement invariance (ΔCFI > .010). After close examination of modification indices (MI)
and their expected parameter change (EPC), we relaxed the constraints for the intercept of
item 37. The latter resulted in support for partial scalar measurement invariance (ΔCFI =
After establishment of the partial scalar invariance, we explored the latent mean
differences across gender. We constrained the males’ group latent means to zero and the
latent means of the females’ group were freely estimated. We used critical ratio (CR;
parameter estimate divided by its standard error) to assess latent mean differences. Effect
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
sizes were estimated by Glass’ delta (Steinmetz, 2011). It was found that females scored
higher than males on Everyday (CR = 2.12, p = .034, Glass’ Δ = .14), Scholarly (CR = 2.62,
p = .009, Glass’ Δ = .19), Performance (CR = 2.58, p = .010, Glass’ Δ = .17), and Artistic
factors (CR = 6.50, p < .001, Glass’ Δ = .59). At the same time, males significantly
outperformed females on Scientific factor (CR = –9.09, p < .001, Glass’ Δ = .76). Thus, H6a
and H6b were fully supported.
Discussion
The K-DOCS is a relatively new self-report creativity scale. In this regard, the
accumulation of empirical evidence on its reliability and validity is strongly needed. In the
present study, we investigated the psychometric properties of the K-DOCS on a Russian-
speaking population and tested hypotheses concerning its factor structure, test-retest
reliability, construct validity, and measurement invariance.
The model with five correlated factors demonstrated the best fit to empirical data.
These results are consistent with most previous studies (Awofala & Fatade, 2015; McKay et
al., 2017; Şahin, 2016). Hence, we did not find support for a nine-factor structure similar to
that reported in Kandemir and Kaufman (2019), even though our study also relied on the
method of parallel analysis. These differences could be due to several reasons. First, we used
a group of methods rather than a single one for identifying the number of factors in EFA.
This approach allowed us to compare results obtained by different methods and reach a more
balanced decision. Second, in contrast to Kandemir and Kaufman, we conducted a parallel
analysis based on PCA and not PAF. It is known that PAF—compared to PCA—is more
prone to overestimate the number of factors in a case of ordinal variables (Timmerman &
Lorenzo-Seva, 2011). Moreover, parallel analysis tends to overestimate the required number
of factors when a large set of variables is analyzed (Van der Eijk & Rose, 2015) and when a
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
sample size is large (Warne & Larsen, 2014). Interestingly, in our study parallel analysis
using PCA suggested extracting five factors, whereas parallel analysis using PAF suggested
seven factors. However, extraction of the seventh factor was not justified from a theoretical
point of view. The sixth factor, encompassing only two items from a mathematical domain,
could have resulted because both items shared similar content (“bloated specifics”; see Cattell
& Tsujioka, 1964). Overall, the described differences between five- and nine-factor structures
are most likely due to the functioning nuances of parallel analysis and has little to do with
substantial differences in creative self-expression across domains.
Internal consistency reliability for K-DOCS factors ranged from satisfactory to very
good, which closely matches the results of previous studies (e.g., Dostál et al., 2017;
Kaufman, 2012; McKay et al., 2017). Contrary to expectations, test-retest reliability was
lower than reported elsewhere (Awofala & Fatade, 2015; Kaufman, 2012). The application of
different statistical methods such as the Pearson correlation coefficient (relative agreement)
and ICC (absolute agreement) cannot explain this discrepancy (Koo & Li, 2016). Test-retest
reliability differed by two coefficients—ICC(A, 1) = .69 and r = .77—only for Artistic but no
other K-DOCS factors. However, it is necessary to take into account the differences in the
procedure between the current study and previous ones. First, we conducted test-retest online,
whereas previous studies collected data offline. Can we consider results on K-DOCS
obtained in online and offline formats to be equivalent? Unfortunately, it is an open question
deserving empirical testing. Second, in our study, two measures—test and retest—were
performed under contrasting conditions: the first one was conducted on Yandex Toloka under
time constraints, whereas the second one was performed via Google Forms without time
constraints. Finally, the impact of sampling error cannot be discounted, since only a small
group of participants agreed to proceed with test-retest.
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
Russian K-DOCS showed good convergent validity. Namely, the Artistic and
Performance factors moderately correlated with the comparable subscales of CBI, and almost
all K-DOCS factors were to some extent correlated with openness to experience. The latter is
not surprising because openness to experience is a well-known predictor of both creative
potential and creative achievements (e.g., Feist, 1998; Oleynick et al., 2017; Wolfradt &
Pretz, 2001). Yet it is worth noting that Scientific factor was poorly correlated with openness
to experience. Similar results were reported earlier for domains of science and mathematics
(see Kaufman, 2012; Silvia et al., 2009). Silvia and colleagues suggested that such a pattern
might reflect a stable stereotype that there is no room for creativity in science and
mathematics. These stereotypes could emerge from school experiences. For example, it has
been repeatedly shown that math teachers have limited conceptions on the role of creativity in
mathematics (Bolden, Harries, & Newton, 2010; but see Leikin, Subotnik, Pitta-Pantazi,
Singer, & Pelczer, 2013, for opposite findings). Consistently, science and math teachers
exhibit a stronger tendency toward art bias (Patston, Cropley, Marrone, & Kaufman, 2018).
Consequently, social stereotypes about mathematical abilities and math teachers’ implicit
theories of creativity could promote in children—and future adults—a shared belief that
mathematics and creativity are distinct dimensions having no common ground (Kaufman &
Baer, 2004).
In addition, we suggested that creativity self-ratings in the arts and science would be
differentially related to openness and intellect as facets of openness to experience. According
to some studies, openness predicts creative achievements in arts, but not in science, and
intellect predicts creative achievements in science, but not in arts (Kaufman et al., 2016;
Perrine & Brodersen, 2005). In our results, the Artistic factor was more closely related to
openness than to intellect, but the Scholarly factor was equally related to both facets. One
possible explanation is that in Russian K-DOCS, the Scholarly factor consists of items related
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
to analyzing and writing scientific papers rather than searching for information and designing
experiments. In this light, it becomes clear why CBI Literature explained so much variance in
the Scholarly factor. Writing scientific articles requires not only specialized knowledge and
the ability to locate relevant sources but also strong writing abilities to communicate findings
in an understandable and appealing fashion.
The Russian K-DOCS also had acceptable discriminant validity. As predicted, all K-
DOCS factors were weakly associated with neuroticism, agreeableness, and
conscientiousness. Importantly, low correlations were not an effect of the restriction of range.
Weak associations between self-reported creativity and neuroticism reinforce previous
findings (Kaufman, 2012; McKay et al., 2017; Wolfradt & Pretz, 2001). Still, K-DOCS
Scientific and Everyday factors showed small negative correlations with neuroticism. It might
mean that creative self-expression in science and everyday life implies higher emotional
stability. Likewise, Silvia et al. (2009) found a weak negative correlation between
neuroticism and math–science creativity and between neuroticism and empathic–
interpersonal creativity. Next, low correlations between agreeableness and all K-DOCS
factors is hardly surprising given that creative persons express their independence and defy
the crowd and socially accepted norms (Sternberg, 2018). To quote Torrance’s famous
“Manifesto for Children,” “don’t waste energy trying to be well rounded” (Torrance, 1995, p.
364). As for conscientiousness, we expected that it would positively correlate with Scientific
factor and negatively with Artistic factor. However, both correlations were close to zero.
There are several possible explanations. Conscientiousness sometimes is associated with a
suppression effect with creativity, in which some aspects of the factor are positively
associated and others are negative associated, leading to the appearance of no strong
relationship (Reiter-Palmon, Illies, & Kobe-Cross, 2009). Further, even though our sample
included people actually working in the relevant fields (as opposed to college students), this
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
does not mean that their creative metacognition was particularly high (e.g., Kaufman &
Beghetto, 2013). People working in the sciences may rate themselves lower on self-reported
creativity because they have seen genuine creative performance in science, whereas people
not in science may be using a different comparison point.
Considering construct validity, the present study compared creativity self-ratings in
K-DOCS among occupations in Holland’s model on a sample of adults. Although Plháková,
Dostal, and Záškodná (2015) undertook a similar analysis earlier, their evidence was limited
to university students. Studying adult samples is of special interest because it remains largely
unexplored to what extent previous findings on student samples (Kandemir & Kaufman,
2019) can be generalized to a population of adults. In line with our expectations, artistic types
received higher scores on Artistic and Performance factors, whereas investigative and
realistic types received higher scores on Scientific. The main limitation, however, is that in
most cases differences in creativity scores among occupations did not reach the level of
statistical significance. In particular, no statistically significant differences were found on the
Everyday factor. Surprisingly, artistic type scored higher on the Scholarly factor than
investigative type, although the difference was non-significant. As mentioned before, this
could reflect the limited scope of Scholarly factor (i.e. literature analysis and writing articles).
In total, we showed that K-DOCS construct validity is at least partially generalizable to the
population of adults.
Finally, yet importantly, we established a partial measurement invariance of K-DOCS
across gender. That allowed us to highlight differences in creative self-assessment between
males and females. It appeared that females surpassed males almost in all domains of K-
DOCS except for Scientific. In addition, the most prominent differences between groups
corresponded to Artistic and Scientific factors, which corroborates and extends previous
evidence (Diedrich et al., 2018; Elisondo, 2020; Kaufman, 2006; Kaufman et al., 2010;
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
Werner et al., 2014). These patterns, as with the more general findings on mathematics and
creativity, could reflect societal expectations. Girls tend to see themselves as having higher
abilities in the arts (and lowers in STEM-related areas), which then interacts with motivation
and potentially career pathways (Freedman-Doan et al., 2000; Lazarides & Lauermann,
2019). Thus, that the differences in self-reported creativity generally mirror broad stereotypes
may simply be a reflection of these stereotypes, and not evidence supporting their accuracy.
The findings of the study should be considered in light of its limitations. First, when
studying the factor structure, we modified the CFA model, which automatically shifted our
analysis from the confirmatory approach to the exploratory one. Therefore, the K-DOCS
factor structure adopted in this study requires further empirical examination in a confirmatory
manner. Second, we encountered difficulties in interpreting the results of test-retest for
Artistic factor. More specifically, it is not yet clear to what extent the results were
conditioned by specifics of test-retest’s procedure or instability of creative self-perception.
Further, conflicting results for comparing occupational types could arise because a person’s
profession did not perfectly correspond to their interests, personality profile, and ability level.
In other words, assigning a person to a particular occupation based only on their actual
profession could have led to a mixture of different types among themselves. It is highly likely
that many people are working in jobs that do not correspond with their passions or
personality. To overcome this limitation, it would be necessary to not only use actual
occupation but to assign respondents to an “occupational type,” based on such indicators as
interests, personality, self-beliefs, and others. Finally, this study relied on self-reported
measures, and, thus, creativity ratings reflected only the respondents’ self-perception on their
performance and involvement in various creative activities. In this regard, we agree with
Kandemir and Kaufman (2019) that one promising future direction would be to validate K-
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE
DOCS against objective indicators of creative achievements and performance (see also
Reiter-Palmon, Robinson-Morral, Kaufman, & Santo, 2012).
In summary, the present study contributes to the growing evidence on the
psychometric properties of K-DOCS by translating and validating a Russian version of the
measure. Online data collection coupled with control for careless responding allowed us to
achieve a wide coverage of different demographic groups and high internal validity, while
advanced statistical analysis conducted in view of the current psychometric and statistical
standards allowed us to take into account and overcome a number of limitations inherent in
previous works. Overall, our work supports previous evidence on the reliability and validity
of K-DOCS and extends it by demonstrating external validity with respect to occupations and
establishing partial measurement invariance across gender. It follows that self-assessment
methods, despite all their shortcomings, can indeed provide researchers with valuable
information about creativity, and, no less important, while meeting the high psychometric
standards.
KAUFMAN DOMAINS OF CREATIVITY SCALE