A Bayesian approach to reveal the key role of mask wearing in modulating
interpersonal distance during the COVID-19 outbreak
a,b* a,b b a,b
Matteo P. Lisi , Marina Scattolin , Martina Fusaro , Salvatore Maria Aglioti
Sapienza, Università degli Studi di Roma & CLNS@Sapienza, Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, 00142, Rome, Italy;
Social Neuroscience Laboratory, Fondazione Santa Lucia, 00142, Rome, Italy
*To whom correspondence may be addressed:
matteo.lisi@uniroma1.it
Abstract
Humans typically create and maintain social bonds through interactions that occur at close
social distances. The distance maintained from others is usually less than the one of at least
1.5 m recommended as a relevant measure for COVID-19 contagion containment. In a web-
based experimental study conducted during the first pandemic wave (mid-April 2020), we
asked 242 participants to regulate their preferred distance towards confederates who did or
did not wear protective masks and gloves and whose COVID-19 test results were positive,
negative, or unknown. Information concerning dispositional factors (perceived vulnerability
to disease, moral attitudes, and prosocial tendencies) and situational factors (perceived
severity of the situation in the country, frequency of physical and virtual social contacts, and
attitudes toward quarantine) that may modulate compliance with safety prescriptions was also
acquired. A Bayesian analysis approach was adopted. Individual differences did not modulate
interpersonal distance. We found strong evidence in favor of a reduction of interpersonal
distance towards individuals wearing protective equipment and who tested negative to
COVID-19. Importantly, shorter interpersonal distances were maintained towards
confederates wearing protective gear, even when their COVID-19 test result was unknown or
positive. This protective equipment-related regulation of interpersonal distance may reflect an
underestimation of perceived vulnerability to infection; this perception must be discouraged
when pursuing individual and collective health-safety measures.
A Bayesian approach to reveal the key role of mask wearing in modulating
interpersonal distance during the COVID-19 outbreak
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization described the COVID-19 outbreak as a
pandemic to signal that the new coronavirus disease had spread across continents, covering
large parts of the world. The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-
2), which is the virus responsible for the emergence of the COVID-19 disease, was found to
be transmissible during social interactions, when particles emitted from an infected person’s
respiratory system may enter another’s (Bahl et al., 2020). To limit gatherings and close-
range interactions, multiple governments imposed the closure of many public places. These
closures and other measures of transmission containment, such as handwashing and use of
face masks (World Health Organization, 2020), have been widely adopted in conjunction
with maintaining interpersonal distances of at least 1.5 m (Chu et al., 2020). The need to
regulate the minimum distance during in-person interactions is justified by the observation
that humans tend to keep themselves about 1 m from unfamiliar individuals (Hecht, Welsch,
Viehoff, & Longo, 2019), a distance less than the recommended one. Crucially, this distance
seems to hold across different countries (Sorokowska et al., 2017), suggesting that the
imposed governmental measures sought to change a globally established, everyday behavior.
While the reasons behind enforcement of such distancing rules are clear, it remains to be
clarified which dispositional and situational factors may impact adherence to interpersonal
distancing measures.
Research in proxemics, the study of interpersonal spatial behavior (VandenBos, 2007), has
defined interpersonal distance (IPD) as the separation zone that individuals keep between
themselves and others (Hayduk, 1978). IPD is shaped by situational factors such as social
threat (Vagnoni, Lewis, Tajadura-Jiménez, & Cardini, 2018) and interpersonal attraction
(Welsch et al., 2020), as well as individual characteristics such as morality (Iachini, Pagliaro,
& Ruggiero, 2015) and prejudice (Lisi, Fusaro, Tieri, & Aglioti, 2020). Ultimately, IPD
appears to be automatically regulated according to distance-related feelings of personal
comfort (Sommer, 2002). Although previous research has helped define IPD under normal
circumstances, insights on which factors influence the regulation of IPD during a pandemic
are lacking. A limited body of research suggests that greater distances are kept when others
are improperly perceived as contagious (i.e., people with AIDS) or as a threat to an
individual's health (Mooney, Cohn, & Swift, 1992; Toppenberg, Bos, Ruiter, Wigboldus, &
Pryor, 2015). Moreover, two studies conducted during the first COVID-19 outbreak (Cartaud,
Quesque, & Coello, 2020; Iachini et al., 2020) showed that a smaller IPD was preferred when
the other person was wearing a mask. One possible interpretation is that the sight of a person
wearing a face mask triggers a feeling of safety. It is important to note that, if not
accompanied by the appropriate IPD, wearing a mask is not in itself sufficient to prevent
contagion (World Health Organization, 2020b). Therefore, one crucial aspect to clarify is
whether wearing a mask can reduce the IPD even when the other person is contagious. If this
is the case, the erroneous belief that use of protective equipment is enough to prevent
contagion may have potentially dangerous effects.
It is worth noting that modulations of IPD during a pandemic may not only mirror self-
protective motives, but also affiliative (Dezecache, Frith, & Deroy, 2020) and cooperative
ones (Shim, Chapman, Townsend, & Galvani, 2012). Understanding which of these variables
are more influential on IPD behavior is crucial in the current global context, where policies
that effectively reduce contagion are fundamental.
Given the circumstances preventing in-person testing, we used the Interpersonal Visual
Analogue Scale (IVAS), a validated, self-report measure of IPD (Iachini et al., 2016). In the
IVAS, participants were presented with a silhouette and an avatar’s profile on a computer
screen. The silhouette represented the participant and the avatar represented a possible
unknown individual. Participants were asked to indicate the shortest distance between
themselves and the other person that they would feel comfortable maintaining. Both male and
female interactants were considered, and distance was indicated along a horizontal line. Since
the aim of this study was to investigate whether being at risk of infection modulates IPD, the
avatar representing the other person was associated with a negative, positive or unknown
COVID-19 test result. In addition, the avatar could be wearing protective equipment (i.e.,
mask and gloves) or not. Factors hypothesized to play a role included (a) the perceived
vulnerability to a disease, and (b) the perceived severity of the situation in the country, which
were relevant for evaluating attitudes towards the threat itself. We also explored (c) the role
of individual differences in levels of physical and virtual contact prior to participation.
Finally, we aimed to assess the possible role of different styles of (d) moral thinking
(individualization-oriented and binding-oriented), (e) attitudes toward quarantine, and (f)
altruism.
We expected participants to maintain a greater distance when others were not wearing
protective equipment and when they were identified as positive to COVID-19. The shortest
distance was expected to be observed when the other person was wearing a mask and gloves
and had received a negative diagnosis of COVID-19. We included a condition in which
COVID-19 test results were unknown. This was our control condition and was used to
estimate (i) how participants may react to strangers approaching them in everyday situations,
and (ii) how reactions may change when the other person is wearing protective equipment or
not. We expected higher levels of perceived severity of the situation in the country of
participants and their perceived vulnerability to a disease to be associated with greater IPD.
As to the affiliative domain, we expected our results to show one of the following two paths:
on the one hand, participants who engaged in fewer virtual and physical contact may display
a stronger tendency to distance themselves from others (Layden, Cacioppo, & Cacioppo,
2018) compared to participants with more frequent contacts. On the other hand, and in
accordance with the contact hunger hypothesis (Dezecache et al., 2020), the opposite pattern
of results could appear: people who had engaged in more frequent and recent social contacts
at the time of testing may not feel the need for closeness that people who had engaged in
fewer and less frequent contacts may feel. We expected that participants' positive attitudes
toward quarantine may be associated with greater IPD across all conditions. In addition, since
binding (vs. individualizing) moral intuitions are more strongly correlated with dispositional
germ aversion (Park & Isherwood, 2011), we expected binding moral thinking styles to
contribute to the tendency to maintain a greater IPD. Lastly, if prosocial motives play a role,
higher levels of altruism should predict greater distance. In order to avoid overfitting and to
select only the relevant variables, we used a model selection approach (Vehtari, Gelman, &
Gabry, 2017).
Materials and Method
Participants
A power analysis using MorePower (Campbell & Thompson, 2012) indicated that a sample
size of 238 participants was necessary to detect a small effect size (ƞ2 = 0.02) with a power
of 0.80. This analysis was performed for a repeated measure design 2 (Participant’s Gender:
Male/Female) x 2 (Other Avatar’s Gender: Male/Female) x 2 (Protective Equipment:
Worn/NotWorn) x 3 (COVID-19 Test Result: Positive/Negative/Unknown).
Participants were recruited through the online platform Prolific (Palan & Schitter, 2018) and
were compensated with $2.28 USD ($6.50 USD per hour) for their participation. Data
collection started on April 16, 2020, and ended on April 22, 2020.
Of the original 250 participants, eight were excluded due to failure in two or more attentional
checks. A total of 242 international participants (100 women) were included in the final
sample. Demographic characteristics of the sample, as well as a list of all countries of
had an average Government Stringency Index (a composite measure of the strictness of
contagion policies in each country, based on nine response indicators, ranging from 0 to 100;
Procedure
The experiment was conducted using PsyToolkit (Stoet, 2010, 2017). After reading general
information concerning the study, participants could check the informed consent page and
agree to take part in the study. Only those who gave their consent to participate could begin the
survey. Participants always completed the demographic information and the questionnaires
before the IVAS task. The silhouette representing participants in the IVAS task was selected
based on each participant’s gender (task version “Female-Self” and “Male-Self”). The
silhouette was pictured in a standing position on a marker at the left end of a line and facing
person’s virtual avatar were matched. The virtual avatars were realized using MakeHuman
were provided with the following instructions: “Imagine that you are the person on the left of
the line and that you cannot turn nor move. Then, imagine that the other person, depicted on
the line, begins walking toward you. You should indicate how close you would allow this
person to approach you while still being comfortable with that distance. To indicate where the
other should stop, click on the horizontal line. Then, press ‘Next’ to move to the following trial.
During the task you will be approached by men and women, that may or may not be wearing
masks and gloves. On the top center of the screen you'll read some information about the results
of their COVID-19 test: a red sign reporting ‘COVID-19 +’ indicates a person that tested
positive; a green ‘COVID-19 –’ indicates a person whose results were negative; a grey
‘COVID-19 ?’ indicates that the person was not tested or that results are unknown.” In each
trial, participants were reminded of these instructions by the sentence: “Click the position on
the line where you'd want the other person to stop.” This reminder was continuously displayed
For each condition (i.e., the combination of factors Other Avatar’s Gender x Protective
Equipment x COVID-19 Test Result), a total of three trials was presented. Three catch trials
were included to ensure that participants were paying attention during the task. In these trials,
participants were asked to place the other person’s avatar on the far-left end of the line. A
total of 39 trials were presented to participants. For each trial, the distance between the
participant’s silhouette and the other person’s avatar was calculated considering that the left
end of the horizontal line corresponded to 0 while the right end of the line corresponded to
100.
Measures
Perceived Severity of the Situation Relative to the COVID-19 Outbreak in the Country
Perceived Severity of the Situation concerning the COVID-19 outbreak was assessed through
participants’ answers to the following question: “In your opinion, how serious is the situation
related to COVID-19 in your country?” Participants rated this on a VAS ranging from 0
(labelled as not serious at all) to 100 (extremely serious).
Physical and Virtual Contact
Physical Contact was assessed by means of the question “How often did you have
PHYSICAL contacts (for instance, hugs, cuddling, handshakes, etc.) in the last two weeks?”
Participants provided their response on a 5-point Likert scale: never (1), rarely (2), sometimes
(3), often (4), always (5). Participants rated frequency of Virtual Contact on a single-item, 5-
point Likert scale: never (1), rarely (2), sometimes (3), often (4), always (5). The question
was the following: “How often did you have VIRTUAL contacts (for instance, through
Skype, Zoom, WhatsApp, etc.) in the last two weeks?”
Moral Foundations Questionnaire (MFQ)
MFQ is a self‐report questionnaire that contains 30 items related to harm, fairness, in‐group
loyalty, respect for authority, and purity (six items for each foundation; Graham et al., 2011).
We computed scores for the individualizing foundations (mean of the harm/care and
fairness/reciprocity subscales; Cronbach’s α = 0.77) and the binding foundations (mean of the
in-group/loyalty, authority/respect, and purity/sanctity subscales; α = 0.85); these values were
used in subsequent analyses since we were interested in individualizing and binding
foundations broadly. The focus on the well-being of individuals is observed in association
with individualizing approaches to moral thinking (Graham, Haidt, & Nosek, 2009). People
who rely on this style of moral thinking focus on protection of individuals from harm and
unfairness and consider individuals as the center of moral regulations (Graham et al., 2011).
On the other hand, binding foundations favor moral evaluations that are group-oriented and
value authority.
Perceived Vulnerability to Disease
Participants completed an adapted version of a questionnaire assessing individual differences
in perceived vulnerability to disease (PVD; Duncan, Schaller, & Park, 2009). Specifically, we
dropped one item (“I avoid using public telephones because of the risk that I may catch
something from the previous user”) because of its poor relevance to the contemporary
context, where the majority of people use cell phones. Consequently, a 14-item version PVD
was employed. The overall PVD score (Cronbach’s α = 0.75) was used for our analysis.
Public Attitudes Toward Quarantine
This is a 15-item questionnaire developed by (Tracy, Rea, & Upshur, 2009). Participants
were asked to rate each sentence on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from strongly disagree to
strongly agree. The Justification subscale (Cronbach’s α = 0.68) was entered in the analysis
to investigate the relationship between the agreement with the use of quarantine and the
interpersonal distance regulation.
Self-Report Altruism Scale
For assessment of participants’ altruism, the scale developed by Rushton and colleagues
(1981) was employed. This includes 18 items measuring helping or altruistic traits based on
the frequency of helping behaviors. Cronbach’s α was 0.84.
The full survey can be found in the Supplemental Information.
Results
Model Comparison
A Bayesian analysis approach was applied. This approach differs from the one used within
the standard framework of frequentist null-hypothesis significance testing (NHST) in that it
allows evidence to be obtained in favor of the null hypothesis and discrimination between
“absence of evidence” and “evidence of absence” (Keysers, Gazzola, & Wagenmakers,
2020).
Data analyses were computed using the programming language R (R Core Team, 2013) by
means of the RStudio interface (RStudio Team, 2015). Preparation and plotting of data were
performed using several tidyverse packages (Wickham et al., 2019); modeling and inference
were performed using the brms package (Bürkner, 2017), which is based on the probabilistic
programming language Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017). Packages emmeans (Lenth, Singmann,
Love, Buerkner, & Herve, 2018) and bayestestR (Makowski, Ben-Shachar, & Lüdecke,
2019) were employed for computing contrasts between posterior distributions, credible
intervals, and Bayes factors.
The score along the 0-100 Visual Analogue Scale was used as a measure of the distance that
participants preferred to keep between themselves and other person’s avatars. This measure
was set as the outcome of our analysis. We first graphically inspected the univariate and
bivariate distributions of outcome and predictor variables. This was done in order to (i) check
data distributions and identify potential errors/anomalies, and (ii) identify which models to
adopt for a better fit of our data.
To account for the nested structure of our sample, that is, participants nested within countries,
multilevel modeling was used (Raudenbush & Bryk, 2002). Multilevel models of increasing
complexity were fitted in order to select the most accurate one. A list of all models can be
of COVID-19 Test Result, Protective Equipment, Participant’s Gender and Other Avatar’s
Gender. The interactions between COVID-19 Test Result and Protective Equipment and
between Participant’s and Other Avatar’s Gender were also included as predictors. All
models presented here included the intercept over Participants and Countries as random
All continuous predictors were mean-centered. The two ordinal scales Virtual and Physical
Contact were dichotomized into “Frequent” (including “Often” and “Always'') and
“Infrequent” (including “Never,” “Rarely,” and “Sometimes”). Non-informative, normally-
distributed priors (M = 0, SD = 1000) were applied to all models, on all population-level
effects and t- distributed priors (df =3, M = 0, SD = 28) on the intercept and on the group-
level effects. Use of non-informative prior prevents results from being biased toward
alternative hypotheses (Weakliem, 1999) and respects the Laplacian principle of indifference
(de Laplace, 1825). All models were fitted using four independent Markov chains. Each chain
had 30,000 iterations, the first 15,000 of which were warm-up. This led to a total of 60,000
post warm-up posterior samples for inference. According to standard convergence
diagnostics (Vehtari, Gelman, Simpson, Carpenter, & Bürkner, 2020), all models converged
(Rhat < 1.05) with sufficient precision (effective sample size > 1000).
The models were compared through approximate leave-one-out cross-validation and using
Pareto-smoothed importance sampling (PSIS-LOO; Vehtari et al., 2017), which estimates
out-of-sample predictive accuracy adopting within-sample fits. Model comparison showed
that the model including the same structure of the Primary model plus the main effects of
Perceived Severity of the situation in the country, Perceived Vulnerability to Disease, and
Final Model
To visualize the probability of direction of the effect for each parameter included in the study,
between all levels of Protective Equipment and COVID-19 Test Result; a graphical
Analysis of the final model focused on posterior contrasts between all levels of categorical
predictors and the slope of continuous predictors. In order to quantify the uncertainty and
magnitude of effects, we computed the 95% highest density interval (HDI). Any parameter
value inside the HDI has higher probability density than any parameter value outside the HDI
(Kruschke & Liddell, 2018). However, the credible interval is conditional on H1 being true
and quantifies the strength of an effect, assuming it is present (van Doorn et al., 2020). To
quantify evidence for presence or absence of the effects, we computed the Bayes factors
(Keysers et al., 2020). The BF quantifies the relative predictive performance of two rival
hypotheses, and represents the degree to which data require a change in beliefs concerning
the relative plausibility hypotheses (van Doorn et al., 2020). A common rule of thumb is the
following: BF > 3 indicates support for the alternative hypothesis and BF < 0.333 suggests
10 10
support for the null hypothesis (van Doorn et al., 2020).
We found strong evidence that the preferred IPD was shorter for the Negative-diagnosed
avatar in comparison with the Positive-diagnosed (estimate= -27.90, HDI [-28.65, -27.11],
95% HDI [-12.13, -10.59], BF = 9.795e+42). The preferred IPD was larger for the Positive-
diagnosed compared to the Unknown-diagnosed (estimate 16.52, HDI [15.76, 17.30], BF =
1.458e+47). The preferred IPD was shorter for the Worn Protective Equipment condition
compared to the Not Worn Protective Equipment condition (estimate= -6.58, HDI [-7.67, -
5.50], BF = 1.08E+11). This effect was present when considering the Negative-diagnosed
avatar, (estimate= -6.58, HDI [-7.67, -5.50], BF = 2.68E+09), the Unknown-diagnosed
avatar (estimate= -6.41, HDI [-7.48, -5.30], BF = 8.81E+08) and Positive-diagnosed avatar
(estimate= -7.60, HDI [-8.69, -6.52], BF = 1.08E+13).
We also found non-zero effects for Participant’s Gender and Virtual Contact. However, in
both cases the Bayes factor indicated moderate evidence in support of the null hypothesis: the
preferred IPD was shorter for women compared to men (estimate= 5.08, HDI [.08, 10.06],
BF = 0.02) and for participants who had Infrequent Virtual Contact during the two weeks
prior to participation compared to participants who had Frequent Virtual Contact (estimate= -
8.71, HDI [-14.23, -3.07], BF = .28). No other credible effects were found.
Discussion
Interpersonal distance of at least 1.5 m is a fundamental measure of containment for the
spreading of SARS-CoV-2. Adherence to this measure represents a dramatic change from
people’s behavior under normal circumstances. As of now, the dispositional and situational
factors that impact adherence to this rule are under-investigated. In this study, we explored
the role of protective equipment, actual risk of infection, perceived vulnerability, severity of
the situation, physical and virtual contacts, morality, attitudes toward quarantine, and
prosocial tendencies in the regulation of IPD during the COVID-19 outbreak. Using a model
selection approach, we aimed to identify the most relevant variables to predict IPD behavior.
In line with previous studies that investigated the distance maintained from infected
individuals (Mooney et al., 1992; Toppenberg et al., 2015), we found strong evidence that
providing information regarding a positive COVID-19 test result increased IPD. In particular,
we found a continuous increase in the space that participants put between themselves and
another person, ranging from the shortest distance from a negative-tested individual to a
maximum distance when the other tested positive to COVID-19. These results may reflect the
notion of a “behavioral immune system” (Ackerman, Hill, & Murray, 2018), according to
which humans use behavioral avoidance of disease-causing objects and people as a disease-
management strategy in addition to their own immune systems.
We also found strong evidence that interacting with someone who was wearing protective
equipment was associated with reduced IPD. This result is consistent with the findings of
other studies conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic that used different methodologies
(Cartaud et al., 2020; Iachini et al., 2020). Specifically, Iachini and colleagues (Iachini et al.,
2020) used an 8-point Likert scale (ranging from 1= 0.5 m to 8 = 4 m) and found that the
comfort-distance from others wearing a mask was shorter than the one from others without a
mask. Cartaud and colleagues (Cartaud et al., 2020) used characters showing either positive,
neutral, or negative facial expression or wearing a mask (which was always associated to a
neutral facial expression). Characters were presented at different fixed distances from
participants. Results showed that shorter IPD was judged as more appropriate for the
character wearing a mask compared to the other conditions. It has been suggested that the
sight of a mask could induce a feeling of safety that facilitates a reduction of IPD. Enactment
of this tendency in real-life situations may constitute a potential threat, since the use of
protective equipment alone is not enough to prevent SARS-CoV-2 from spreading (World
Health Organization, 2020b). Therefore, one question that remained unanswered is whether
the reduction of IPD in response to the sight of protective equipment also occurs when there
is an actual risk of infection. Importantly, at variance with the previous studies, we observed
that the effect of mask wearing is present not only when participants are not provided with
information regarding the other person’s COVID-19 test result, but also when they are
provided with information of a positive diagnosis. In public settings, allowing a shorter IPD
to a person wearing protective equipment may create conditions for further transmission of
the new coronavirus.
Among the other predictors, only Virtual Contact had a non-zero effect: frequent virtual
contact led to larger IPD compared to infrequent virtual contact. However, it is worth noting
that the Bayes factor analysis did not reveal support for this effect. According to the contact
hunger hypothesis, the type of social isolation individuals may experience during the
pandemic could lead to an enhanced need for physical contact (Dezecache et al., 2020).
Indeed, affiliation and contact-seeking are core responses to perceived danger (Dezecache,
Grèzes, & Dahl, 2017; Mawson, 2017), and this may happen even in cases where contact
itself is a threat, as in infectious diseases. It is possible that engaging in frequent virtual
contacts may have modulated this evolutionary drive, leading to lower motivation for
interpersonal connection in comparison to those who experienced infrequent virtual contact.
Future studies should systematically investigate the effect of virtual contact’s quantity and
quality in modulating IPD during social isolation.
The present findings are limited by the projective nature of the task and must be replicated in
a more ecological context. Moreover, future studies are needed to clarify whether the
reduction of IPD following the sight of worn protective equipment is present across different
public context (i.e., hospitals, supermarkets) and whether this effect is dependent on the
social encoding of the other person. Finally, the results of our study must be considered in
light of recent neuroscientific evidence (Vieira, Pierzchajlo, & Mitchell, 2020), which shows
that the distance from other organisms (conspecific or not) is regulated by a common network
that includes the midbrain periaqueductal gray (a defensive region sensitive to threat
proximity) and frontoparietal structures representing peripersonal space (the multisensory
motor area within which it is possible to reach and interact with objects; (di Pellegrino &
Làdavas, 2015). Neuroimaging studies could investigate whether the reduction of IPD given
by the sight of wearing a mask reflects a modulation of the activity in this network, therefore
supporting the hypothesis of a reduced perceived threat.
Declarations
Funding
This work was supported by a European Research Council (ERC) Advanced Grant 2017,
Embodied Honesty in real world and digital interactions (eHONESTY) (to S.M. Aglioti) and
Avvio alla Ricerca (2019) awarded by La Sapienza University of Rome to M. Fusaro.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no financial or other conflicts of interest.
Ethics approval
All procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee of the Department of Psychology,
University of Rome “La Sapienza” (Prot. n. 0000612) and in accordance with the ethical
standards laid down in the Declaration of Helsinki (2013).
Consent to participate
Informed consent was obtained from all participants.
Availability of data
The raw data and scripts for the analysis will be available on a public data repository at the
moment of publication of the manuscript in a peer-reviewed journal.
Author Contributions
M.P.L., M.S., M.F., and S.M.A. conceived and designed research; M.P.L. prepared the virtual
avatars; M.S. prepared the Psytoolkit experiment; M.P.L., M.S., M.F. performed
experiments; M.P.L. analyzed data; M.P.L. drafted manuscript; M.P.L., M.S., M.F. and
S.M.A. edited and revised and approved final version of manuscript.
Open practice statement
The work reported here was not preregistered.