How does situational engagement vary between learners, situations, and classrooms? Findings
from the use of intensive longitudinal methods and cross-classified, multi-level models
Joshua M. Rosenberg1, Patrick N. Beymer2, Vicky Phun3, and Jennifer A. Schmidt3
1University of Tennessee, Knoxville
2University of Wisconsin, Madison
3Michigan State University
Author note. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Joshua M.
Rosenberg, Ph.D., 1122 Volunteer Blvd., Knoxville, TN 37919. E-mail: jmrosenberg@utk.edu.
Phone: 865-236-1445. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation under grant no. 1661064.
Highlights
• While learners’ situational engagement has been described as being context-sensitive and
varying from situation-to-situation, past research has often studied engagement using
methods that do not allow for situational sources of engagement (and situational factors)
to be studied.
• We used 12,244 reports collected using intensive longitudinal methods from 1,173 youth
in 50 science classrooms and outside-of-school STEM programs and cross-classified
mixed-effects models to understand how much of the variation in learners’ engagement
was at the individual learner, situation, and classroom levels.
• We found that individual sources or variation were larger than situational and classroom
sources, but that the magnitude of situational sources of variation, particularly, was still
substantial.
Abstract
Situational engagement is defined as context-sensitive, multi-dimensional, and dependent on
momentary factors, like instructional practices. Yet, this type of engagement is often studied
using data collection or analysis techniques that do not for the examination of the variation in
situational engagement that is presumed to exist within persons and across contexts. In this study,
we sought to determine the extent to which learners’ situational cognitive, behavioral, and
affective engagement varies at the situational, individual learner, and classroom levels. To do so,
we drew from three data sets suited to understanding the sources of variation in situational
engagement; together, these data sets comprised 12,244 reports collected using intensive
longitudinal methods from 1,173 youth in 50 science classrooms and outside-of-school STEM
programs. Through the use of multivariate, cross-classified mixed-effects models, we found that
the greatest source of variation in situational engagement was attributable to individual learners.
Situational and classroom-related sources of variation were smaller than for individual sources
but were each still substantia. Classroom-level variation was relatively low for all three
dimensions of engagement. There were differences across the three dimensions of situational
engagement, such that affective situational engagement was associated with greater variation at
the situational level relative to the other dimensions, cognitive engagement was associated with
more individual learner variability (and less situational variability). We discuss implications for
accounting for situational variability in studies of engagement and other dynamic constructs.
Keywords: Intensive longitudinal methods, engagement, science education, multivariate models,
mixed effects models
How does situational engagement vary between learners, situations, and classrooms? Findings
from the use of intensive longitudinal methods and cross-classified, multi-level models
A phenomenon that is likely familiar to educators is that small but defining moments can
make a notable difference for learners This sentiment is noted in many theoretical frameworks in
education research: Dynamic, moment-to-moment factors can be important. For example, interest
in science can be sparked (and sustained) by serendipitous occurrences (Azevedo, 2018; Hidi &
Renninger, 2006).
However, there is often a mismatch in regard to how dynamic constructs are discussed in
theory and how they are measured in research. The study of academic engagement is one area
where this mismatch between theory and measurement can be seen. Situational engagement is
defined as dynamic—situationally specific and varying in response to features of the context
(Appleton et al., 2008; Skinner et al., 2008; Skinner & Pitzer, 2012). While scholars have
underscored the importance of measuring engagement at multiple levels, such as in specific
situations as well as over a longer time period (Eccles & Wang, 2012; Reschly & Christenson,
2012; Sinatra et al., 2015), situational engagement is often studied using single time-point
surveys—which may not account for the dynamic nature of learners’ situational engagement.
Indeed, researchers such as Fredricks and McColskey (2012) reviewed how with extant measures
of engagement, “most current methods do not adequately capture the dynamic and interactive
nature of engagement” (p. 779). At the same time, scholars called for new data collection
approaches, such as intensive longitudinal methods, when measuring engagement (Sinatra et al.,
2015).
We use the term situational engagement to refer to involvement in a particular learning
task at a particular point in time (Fredricks et al., 2004; Schmidt et al., 2018; Sinatra et al., 2015;
Skinner & Pitzer, 2012), different from engagement at a much larger grain-size (Finn, 1989;
Finn, 2006; Finn & Zimmer, 2012; Gasiewski et al., 2012; Ladd & Dinella, 2009; Lawson &
Lawson, 2013), such as attendance in school over the course of the year (Anderson et al., 2004).
From this fine-grained perspective, situational engagement can be seen as a dynamic construct
that is a function of factors at multiple levels: a) learner characteristics and inclinations, b)
situational or momentary factors, and c) classroom factors (Skinner & Pitzer, 2012). Although
theory and past research suggest that engagement is a product of factors at these levels (Skinner
& Pitzer, 2012; Strati et al., 2017; Skinner at al., 2008), there has been limited empirical work
exploring the relative degree to which each of these levels contributes to situational engagement.
As a consequence, few studies have investigated the broader question of how much of learner’s
engagement can be explained by the particular learning situation they are in relative to who they
are and how their teacher, above and beyond particular situations, impacts how engaged they are.
Thus, there is now the opportunity to document the variation across particular situations
in learners’ engagement a way that parallels prior research on how much of the variation in
student achievement is between teachers (e.g., Nye et al., 2004). This question is now tractable to
answer through the use of new data collection and analytic methods, namely, the broad class of
intensive longitudinal methods (Bolger & Laurenceau, 2012; Hektner et al., 2007; Mehl &
Conner, 2013). Intensive longitudinal methods allow for situational engagement to be studied in a
way that accords with how it is conceptualized—as dynamic and sensitive to features of the
context. They also allow for the study of how engagement varies across multiple levels, including
not only the teacher and learner levels, but also the situation-to-situation levels. The present
study, then, is intended how much of learners’ situational engagement varies across multiple
levels, and across multiple dimensions of engagement. To do so, we use 13,716 reports of
situational engagement collected from 1,173 youth in 50 science classrooms through the use of
intensive longitudinal methods as well as a novel Bayesian analytic approach suited to the multi-
level nature of these data and the multivariate nature of engagement.
Sources of Variation in Learners’ Situational Engagement
There are many sources for learners’ situational engagement, including those related to
individual learners. Many studies of engagement study both individual-level effects upon
engagement (e.g., learners’ interest in the domain) and model individual-level effects with multi-
level models (with learners “nested” within the classes of teachers; Strati et al., 2017; Patall et al.,
2018). A key takeaway from past research concerns how science as a discipline and STEM
disciplines, in general, have typically encouraged male learners to see themselves as capable in
STEM, while discouraging women in implicit or explicit ways (Carlone, 2004, Hill et al., 2020).
Additionally, interest in the subject area has been shown to be a strong predictor of engagement,
especially in combination with learners being able to make choices about their learning (Beymer
et al., 2020; Patall, 2013). While research has not conclusively identified individual-level factors
that explain engagement, what has not been established is how much of the variation in
situational engagement occurs at the individual level.
Another source of variation in learners’ situational engagement is at the situational level.
One way to distinguish situational factors is whether they are internal or external to individuals.
Internal factors include how challenging the activity youth are engaged in is to them (Schmidt et
al., 2017), while external factors include the effects of certain instructional activities (Schmidt et
al., 2018; Schneider et al., 2016; Shernoff et al., 2000; Shumow & Schmidt, 2014) or the effects
of teachers through means other than guiding learners to be involved in specific activities, such as
the extent to which they support learners to work autonomously (Strati et al., 2017; Patall et al.,
2019).
These external factors, like teacher autonomy support and learning activity are especially
relevant to the present study as they can be experienced by all learners in specific moments. Each
learning experience that members of a classroom participate in together (e.g., Tuesday’s
scaffolded exploration of the permeability of cell membranes relative to Thursday’s test on cell
membranes), is likely to have some common effect on the engagement of students who share this
experience. In other words, when all learners in a classroom report on their situational
engagement at the same time, there is a dependency among those responses.
Situational sources of dependencies, like others (such as the dependency of responses
nested within learners), can be accounted for in analysis using multi-level models. Multiple
dependencies can be represented using cross-classified models, which account for the
simultaneous nesting of responses within learners and within particular instructional moments,
both of which are nested within classrooms. Especially if scholars have collected data with
situational dependencies—as is the case when multiple students in the same classroom respond to
reports at the same time—using models that account for the dependencies among learners who
experience the same external factors and who respond concurrently may be important
conceptually. Moreover, not doing so may bias inferences about effects (Raudenbush & Bryk,
2002; West et al., 2015). While these effects have been considered in a number of studies, only a
small number to date have modeled situational factors with a level in a multi-level model
(Beymer et al., 2020; Schmidt, Kafkas, Maier et al., 2019; Schmidt et al., 2020; Shernoff, Kelly,
Tonks et al., 2016 Strati et al., 2017). Though particular specific situational features have been
identified in past research, the extent to which these kinds of features matter in general (and
relative to individual learner sources) is not yet clear.
In addition to individual learner and situational factors that relate to engagement,
classrooms and the instructors (or informal learning environment educators) within them can
shape learners' situational engagement. Educators who express enthusiasm about the content they
are teaching provide a context in which learner engagement can flourish (Milne & Otieno, 2007;
Patrick et al. 2012). Educators are important not only during instruction but also during planning
and designing learning environments: Studies across grade levels have found that how instructors
organize the classroom has a considerable impact on learners’ learning and achievement
(Kyriakides & Creemers, 2008; Pianta et al. 2012; Uekawa et al., 2007). Reflecting the relative
importance of sources of variation in situational engagement at the classroom level, levels in a
multi-level model for teachers or classrooms are common; such models for the analysis of
intensive longitudinal data typically have three levels, with daily diary responses “nested” within
learners who are “nested” within classrooms (e.g., Patall et al., 2018). While studies have
explored how classrooms impact learner learning broadly, the extent to which they matter relative
to individual learner and situational factors has not been established.
Using Intensive Longitudinal Methods to Study Situational Engagement
To explore the extent to which situational engagement varies across situations, persons,
and classrooms requires particular data collection techniques and research designs. Intensive
longitudinal methods, a term that encompasses a variety of techniques with names that vary by
field (e.g., ESM [Experience Sampling Method], ambulatory assessment, daily diary studies, and
ecological momentary assessment), are needed to collect multiple reports of learners’ situational
engagement across a wide variety of situations (Bolger & Laurenceau, 2013; Mehl & Conner,
2013).
Intensive longitudinal methods have a number of affordances for studying situational
engagement. First, they allow for the within-learner dynamics of situational engagement—and
other constructs—to be studied (Hamaker, 2012; Zirkel et al., 2015). Second, they provide a
more ecologically valid means of assessing a construct because it can be difficult to recall
previous situations long after one was engaged in it (Schwarz, 2012). Thus, these intensive
longitudinal methods are both sensitive to changes in engagement over time and between
learners, allowing us to understand the nature of situational engagement (Sinatra et al., 2015;
Turner & Meyer, 2000; Zirkel et al., 2015).
Research has shown that intensive longitudinal methods can allow researchers to pose and
answer new questions. For example, Shernoff et al. (2003) examined engagement through the use
of ESM measures aligned with flow theory, namely, using measures of concentration, interest,
and enjoyment (Csikszentmihalyi, 1997). In a study using the same measures of engagement,
Shernoff et al. (2016) used an observational measure of challenge and control (or environmental
complexity) and found that it significantly predicted engagement, as well as self-esteem, intrinsic
motivation, and academic intensity. Schneider et al. (2016) and Linnansaari et al. (2015)
examined features of optimal learning moments or moments in which students report high levels
of interest, skill, and challenge. In a variant of the ESM, researchers have also used repeated End-
of-Class Reports, ESM-like surveys conducted at the end of specific classes—rather than
randomly selected moments as in ESM—to explore relationships between teachers’ instructional
practices during a lesson and students’ engagement during that lesson (Schmidt et al., 2019).
Similarly, scholars have used daily diary studies to examine situational engagement as a function
of autonomy-supportive classroom practices (Patall et al., 2015; Patall et al., 2017). Because
intensive longitudinal methods involve asking learners about their experience at the time they
were signaled in the moment, this technique may be especially useful when the goal is to
understand and model factors or variation at the situational level, for which traditional self-report
surveys yield limited insight, as well as the effects at the individual learner and classroom levels.
Modeling Variation in Learners’ Reports of Their Situational Engagement
Despite the large and growing body of research on student engagement, there are not
many other examples of studies that show that there is variation in students’ engagement at the
situational level, or how much of the variation in students’ engagement is attributable to sources
at this level, for a number of reasons. For example, many studies using intensive longitudinal
methods do not collect responses from students in the same situation; for instance, learners within
science classes may be asked to respond to ESM responses at different times that are specific to
each student. In such cases, there are not situational dependencies that can be modeled, which
may—for many research questions—be an appropriate condition. However, when situational
factors are included in a study (e.g., the instrumental and emotional support provided by
teachers), it is important to model these effects to obtain unbiased estimates (Strati et al., 2017).
Another issue concerns how situational sources of variation are identified and interpreted.
In some past research, scholars have considered the situational and residual sources of variation
to be combined, even though they are not analytically separable. In other words, while the
residual values can include variation due to specific situations, they may be entirely random
noise. In a recent study, van Braak et al. (2021) acknowledged this, but argued that given the high
reliability of coding and given the particularly malleable nature of behavioral engagement” (p. 7).
However, modeling situational variation as separate from residual variation would allow for
disentangling situational and unexplained sources of variation.
Finally, some studies have situational dependencies but do not model them. These studies
are characterized by students within classes responding at same time: for instance, 15 minutes
into their science classes. In such cases, there are unmodeled dependencies among all of the
responses that were generated in the same moment—which means that it is not possible to
quantify how much variation in situational engagement is between situations. This also
introduces bias into the estimation of other effects (Judd et al., 2012; Raudenbush & Bryk, 2001;
West et al., 2015). Example of a study (with many other methodological strengths) is Patall et al.
(2018), in which students within the same class responded to the same end-of-class report.
Another example is the work of Authors et al. (2018).
If data is collected from students at the same time, another consideration concerns how to
model them. When present, modeling situational sources of variation can be difficult as doing so
requires the use of cross-classified multi-level models (Raudenbush & Bryk, 2011), which some
software does not estimate (West et al., 2015). In addition, some analyses may be further
complicated by the presence of multiple dependent variables that may be correlated—such as
behavioral, cognitive, and affective engagement. In such cases, new methods can facilitate the
estimation and interpretation of both the sources of variation in outcomes as well as the effects of
particular predictors, Bayesian statistical methods, or methods that use Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) estimation (Hadfield, 2010).
One affordance of such methods is purely pragmatic: They can be used to estimate
highly-complex models, including, for instance, those with a cross-classified and nested
structure, and those with multivariate outcomes. In addition, these methods have some conceptual
and interpretive benefits, benefits that align with calls to understand variation in the constructs
we study first, before we study what relates to or impacts these constructs (Yarkoni, 2021). As
Levy (2016) describes in an overview of Bayesian methods in the context of educational
research, they “allow us to use the language of probability to directly discuss what is of
inferential interest—parameters, hypotheses, models, and so on—rather than indirectly as in
frequentist approaches” (p. 370). In the context of our interest in the variation in situational
engagement, these methods allow us to summarize how much variation in engagement can be
attributed to different levels (i.e., learner, situation, and classroom).
In sum, not all studies are designed to collect data between learners in the same situations,
and, for those that do, modeling and interpreting between-situation sources of variability presents
challenges. This study, then, is intended to explore how learners’ situational engagement varies
across the levels of individuals, situations, and classrooms using a collection of three data sets
that all involve dependencies in learners’ reports of their situational engagement—and which are
amenable to the kind of analyses using cross-classified, multi-level modeling that can be used to
understand where variation in learners’ engagement is. Two research questions guide this study:
1. How much of the variability within each dimension of situational engagement can be
attributed to individual, situational, and classroom sources?
2. How do the sources of variability differ across the behavioral, cognitive, and affective
dimensions of engagement?
Method
Data Sources
Three extant projects with intensive longitudinal datasets were used in this study. First,
the Moments in Science1 project (Authors, 2008) provided a descriptive account of learners'
subjective experiences in high school science classrooms. Data from this project were gathered in
2008-2009 from 244 learners in 12 regular-track high school science classrooms. A more
complete description is provided in Authors (2018) and in Supplementary Material A (which also
contains brief descriptions of the other two projects). The second project, Science Learning
Environments (Authors, 2011), tested whether classroom interventions targeting mindset and
utility value had measurable effects on learning and situational engagement. Data from the
second project were gathered in 2011-2012 from 726 learners in 7th-grade general science and
1 To protect the anonymity of participants, the names of the three projects are pseudonyms.
9th-grade integrated science classrooms (29 classrooms total). The third project, Out-of-School
Time (OST) STEM (Authors et al., 2014), examined how interest and situational engagement
developed for underserved youth during summer science programs, and created an educational
toolkit for youth leaders (see Authors et al. [2018] for a more complete description). Data for the
third project were collected during the summer of 2015 from 203 youth enrolled in nine different
four-week summer programs focused on science as well as broader STEM content (including
robotics and fieldwork).
Summary of Data Collection Procedures
comprise a large sample from which to examine the variation in learner engagement in science
learning environments. While two of the three sources involved signaling learners multiple times
within their classes, one used what we refer to as a daily diary approach (via the use of end-of-
class reports) and so is somewhat different than the other two. See Supplementary Material A for
a detailed description of the specific data collection procedures associated with each study. As we
describe later, we account for differences across studies in our data analysis by modeling the
unique effect of the data being associated with each of the three extant studies from which we
Summary of Datasets
Dataset Type of Data N N N N
Learning Collection Responses Individuals Moments Classrooms
Environment Method
Moments in Formal ESM 4,136 244 485 12
Science
Science Learning Formal End of 6,610 726 315 29
Environments Class
Report
OST STEM Informal ESM 2,970 203 248 9
Total 13,716 1,173 1,048 50
Participants
sex, ethnicity, eligibility for subsidized lunch programs, and parents’ highest level of education
attained. Learners were middle- and high school- aged, ranging from 10—18 years old, with most
being between 12 and 16.
Demographic Characteristics of Participants Across Studies
Science Learning Environments in OST
Moments Science STEM
(n = 244) (n = 726) (n = 203)
Sex
Male 53% 49% 50%
Female 47% 51% 50%
Race/Ethnicity
American Indian 1% < 0.5%
Asian/Pacific Islander 2% 2% 7%
Black 12% 12% 36%
White 37% 19% 6%
Hispanic 42% 61% 48%
Multi-racial 6% 6% 3%
Age
10 4%
11 < 0.5% 28%
12 39% 31%
13 12% 21%
14 32% 35% 12%
15 26% 13% 3%
16 29% 1% 1%
17 11%
18 2%
Free/reduced lunch
43% 71% 90%
eligible
Parental education
High school or below 34% 36% 79%
Some college 16% 12%
Graduated from college 20% 12% 21%
Advanced degree 15% 10%
Do not know 15% 30%
Note. Learners considered at least one parent’s degree attainment for parent education.
Measures
For the measures of situational engagement, we used items with four-point Likert-type
scales (Hektner et al., 2007) and created composite variables (comprised of two items each) for
each dimension. We note that many studies utilizing ESM or ESM-like techniques (i.e., end-of-
class reports) utilize shorter scales that are administered more frequently (Goetz et al., 2016;
Zirkel et al., 2015). The trade-off between the time it takes participants to respond and the
number of items in a scale represents a tension that must be balanced in research using intensive
longitudinal methods (Hektner et al., 2007; Yaeger et al., 2011).
Behavioral engagement. We operationalized behavioral engagement as hard work and
concentrated effort (Conner & Pope, 2013; Schmidt et al., 2018). Behavioral engagement was
computed by taking the mean of learners’ responses to the questions, “How hard were you
working?” and “How well were you concentrating?” (𝛼 = .82).
Cognitive engagement. We operationalized cognitive engagement as the value and
importance a learner places on the task he or she is completing (Conner & Pope, 2013; Schmidt
et al., 2018). Cognitive engagement was computed by taking the mean of learners’ responses to
the questions, “How important was what you were doing to you?” and “How important was it to
your future?” (𝛼 = .83)
Affective engagement. We operationalized affective engagement as a learner’s interest
and enjoyment in a given task (Conner & Pope, 2013; Schmidt et al., 2018). Affective
engagement was computed by taking the mean of learners’ responses to the questions, “Was this
activity interesting?” and “Did you enjoy what you were doing?" (𝛼 = .84)?
Data Analysis
To model the variation that occurs at the individual, situational, and classroom levels, we
used Bayesian mixed-effects (or multi-level or hierarchical linear2), models, wherein the groups
(each of the levels) are modeled with random effects (Gelman & Hill, 2007; West, et al. 2015).
The structure of the data, with responses cross-classified between individuals and situations, and
2 We used the term “mixed-effects model” for this use case because of the cross-classified nature
of the nature, whereas “multi-level model” suggests a hierarchical structure, though we note that
these can be and are used interchangeably, and they refer to the same underlying statistical model
(West et al., 2014).
Representation of the cross-classified, multi-level structure of the data used in this study
The model was also multivariate: the covariance between the three dimensions of
situational engagement was modeled. Thus, we used a multivariate, cross-classified mixed-effects
(or multi-level) model for the three dimensions (cognitive, behavioral, and affective) of
situational engagement as continuous outcomes.
We used the brms software package (Burkner, 2018), which provides an interface to the
Stan software (Carpenter et al., 2017) for estimating multivariate, multi-level models via R (R
Core Team, 2019).
To analyze the data for both research questions, a multi-level model with between-
individual, -situation, and -classroom variance components and a fixed effect for an indicator of
the dataset (one of the three drawn from for this study) was estimated. Using the notation
outlined by Gelman and Hill (2006), our model was specified as follows, where 𝛼, on the first
line, represents the model intercept, which randomly varied between individuals, situations, and
classrooms—and which was predicted by the fixed effect for the dataset.
The second line of the equation represents within-student variation, which was assumed
generated by a normal distribution; the third line of the equation represents between-student
variation, which was similarly assumed generated from a normal; and the fourth line represents
between-classroom variation. Finally, the random effects and the residuals were modeled with a
multivariate normal distribution and, as is common for multivariate multi-level models (Hadfield,
2010)., the correlations between the residuals at each level were estimated from the data.
After estimating the model, we used the region of practical equivalence (ROPE) method,
a hypothesis testing technique used as a part of Bayesian methods (Kruschke, 2015; Makowski et
al., 2019). The ROPE technique involves constructing an interval around a null hypothesis as the
ROPE, and then determining what proportion of the distribution for the parameter estimate
overlaps with the ROPE. If less than 5% of the distribution overlaps with zero, then it can be
concluded that the parameter differs from zero. We used a ROPE of 0.00 to 0.03, as we
considered a parameter value for an intraclass correlation (ICC) within this ROPE to represent an
ICC that may be considered to be practically and substantively equal to zero. Using the ROPE,
for RQ #1, we tested whether individual, situational, or classroom sources of variability differed
within the dimension of situational engagement; for RQ #2, we tested whether the sources of
variability differed between dimensions. We also accounted for any mean level differences in the
mean levels of the outcomes that might be present by including a fixed effect, dummy-coded
variable for the three studies.
Results
Descriptive Statistics
standard deviations, and correlations. These descriptive statistics show that learners’ engagement
across the dimensions was around the mid-point of the scale (1.5), and that learners generally
reported higher behavioral situational engagement than affective and cognitive, and that the
variables were moderately correlated, with behavioral and cognitive engagement demonstrating a
correlation smaller in magnitude than the other two correlations between the three variables.
Means, Standard Deviations, and Correlations with Confidence Intervals for the Dimensions of
Engagement
Variable M (SD) 1 2
1. Behavioral Engagement 1.96 (0.88) -
2. Cognitive Engagement 1.42 (0.99) .49** -
[.48, .50]
3. Affective Engagement 1.59 (0.95) .60** .57**
[.59, .61] [.56, .58]
Note. Each variable was measured on a four-point scale (0-3). Values in square brackets indicate
the 95% confidence interval for each correlation.
The Variation in Situational Engagement Explained by Source (RQ #1)
For this question on the proportion of the variation in learners’ situational engagement
explained by source, we interpreted the ICCs to understand the total amount of variability
row. This represents the estimated ICC—the proportion of the variability—for the individual
(learner) source of variation for the affective dimension of engagement. This estimate of .354
indicates that 35.4% of the variability in affective engagement can be attributed to individual
learner differences. This estimate is associated with a 95% credible interval that ranges from
.339-.369—therefore outside the range of the region of 0-.03 we used to determine the statistical
significance of each source. Thus, from this row, we can say that affective engagement varies
substantially between individual learners, and that this source of variation is statistically
significantly different from zero (using our ROPE Bayesian hypothesis testing approach).
Intraclass Correlations (ICCs) for Each Source of Variability for Engagement by Dimension
Outcome Source ICC [95% Credible Interval]
Affective Individual .354 [.339, .369]*
Classroom .049 [.032, .068]*
Situation .101 [.093, .109]*
Behavioral Individual .308 [.294, .322]*
Classroom .016 [.007, .027]
Situation .049 [.043, .055]*
Cognitive Individual .52 [.5, .54]*
Classroom .055 [.036, .076]*
Situation .036 [.031, .041]*
Note. Asterisk indicates that the credible interval does not overlap with the ROPE and can be
considered be to statistically significantly greater than zero. While other parts of the analysis—
namely, the correlation among the dimensions of engagement, and differences indicated by
intercepts for each of the three sites—are not included here because they do not directly inform
the questions we asked, they are presented in Tables A3 and A4.
The magnitude of the individual source of variation for the affective engagement
dimension compares to the magnitude of this source for behavioral (ICC = .308) engagement;
individual learners explain even more of the variation in the cognitive (ICC = .52) dimension.
Generally, the situation was associated with more modest ICC values, ranging from .036 for
cognitive engagement to .101 for affective engagement. In short, more variation in affective
engagement can be attributed to specific situations than for behavioral and especially cognitive
engagement. The classroom was, overall, the smallest source of variation for engagement, being
associated with ICC values that ranged from .016 for behavioral engagement to around .05 for
both affective and cognitive engagement. Indeed, the only ICC that we determined was not
statistically significant was that for classroom sources of variability for behavioral engagement,
which had a 95% credible interval that overlapped with our ROPE, indicating that this estimate
was not statistically significantly different from an ICC of 0.
In addition to determining whether or not the estimated ICCs for each source of variation
differed from zero, we also examined whether they differed from each other—doing so for each
variation differed in magnitude from the other source of variation, apart from situational and
classroom sources of variation for cognitive engagement.
Hypothesis tests for RQ #1 (differences in engagement by source of variation)
Outcome Hypothesis About Source M Difference in Variance (SE)
Affective Individual – Situation .257 (.017), p < .001
Affective Individual - Classroom .348 (.034), p < .001
Affective Situation - Classroom .091 (.032), p = 0.004
Behavioral Individual – Situation .31 (.016), p < .001
Behavioral Individual - Classroom .397 (.029), p < .001
Behavioral Situation - Classroom .088 (.028), p = 0.001
Cognitive Individual – Situation .494 (.018), p < .001
Cognitive Individual - Classroom .451 (.037), p < .001
Cognitive Situation - Classroom .043 (.033), p = 0.089
Differences Across the Dimensions of Engagement (RQ #2)
For this question, we compared ICCs for the sources of variation in engagement across
the three dimensions of engagement. In this way, while RQ #1 informed us about how the
sources—individual, situational, and classroom—differed in magnitude from the others within
each dimension of engagement, this analysis for RQ #2 informed us as to whether the magnitude
of each ICC (for the sources of variation in engagement) differed between each dimension of
variability in cognitive engagement is attributable to individual sources, these individual sources
account for only 31% and 35% of the variability in behavioral and cognitive engagement (with all
only dimension of engagement that did have an ICC that was different in magnitude between
sources was classroom sources of variability for affective (ICC = .049) and cognitive engagement
(ICC = .055).
Hypothesis tests for RQ #2 (differences in engagement by dimension of engagement)
Level Hypothesis About Source M Difference in Variance (SE)
Situation Affective-Behavioral 0.09 (0.011), p < .001
Situation Behavioral-Cognitive 0.03 (0.011), p = 0.003
Situation Affective-Cognitive 0.119 (0.013), p < .001
Individual Affective-Behavioral 0.037 (0.012), p = 0.002
Individual Behavioral-Cognitive 0.154 (0.017), p < .001
Individual Affective-Cognitive 0.117 (0.015), p < .001
Classroom Affective-Behavioral 0.087 (0.028), p = 0.001
Classroom Behavioral-Cognitive 0.101 (0.029), p < .001
Classroom Affective-Cognitive 0.014 (0.032), p = 0.323
In addition to the parameters interpreted using the ROPE strategy to answer RQs #1 and
#2, we provide the estimated correlations among the three dimensions of engagement
(Supplementary Material B) and the intercepts for each dimension of engagement
(Supplementary Material C). Next, we discuss these findings in light of past efforts to document
the situational nature of engagement and prior research on how and why engagement may vary.
Discussion
In this study, we sought to understand how situational engagement varies between
individual learners, situations, and classrooms, as situational engagement has been
conceptualized as dynamic and varying in response to features of the context (Appleton et al.,
2008; Skinner et al., 2008; Skinner & Pitzer, 2012). To do so, we drew on three data sets using
intensive longitudinal methods (one of which used end-of-class reports, and two of which used
the experience sampling method) which were uniquely suited to the aim of disaggregating the
three sources of variation in engagement that we sought to study. In the two sub-sections that
follow, we discuss the substantive and methodological implications of these findings.
How Does Situational Engagement Vary Between Learners, Situations, and Classrooms?
Across all three engagement dimensions, we found that systematic variability in
situational engagement was attributable to individual learners, specific situations, and broader
classroom context sources. These findings about the overall sources of variation for situational
engagement provides empirical support for theoretical conjectures that factors at multiple levels
that impact situational engagement (e.g., Reschly & Christensen, 2012; Skinner & Pitzer, 2012).
Data aggregated across three distinct studies suggested that learners’ situational engagement in
the behavioral, cognitive, and affective domains are a function of who they are (i.e., how inclined
they are to be engaged in a science class), what is happening in particular moments in the
classroom (i.e., what investigation-related activities they are engaged in), and the nature of the
classroom (i.e., classroom norms and the classroom community).
While our analyses and overall findings demonstrated that situational, individual, and
classroom factors all contribute in substantial ways to students’ engagement, it is also clear that
these levels of influence did not contribute in equal measure to the variation we observed within
or across the engagement dimensions. Within each of the three engagement dimensions,
individual sources of variation explained the greatest share of situational engagement, accounting
for 30-50% of the total variation observed – a significantly greater proportion than situational or
classroom sources of variation. The second greatest share of variation within each of the
engagement dimensions was attributable to the level of the situation – or what was “going on” at
the time the engagement collection took place. The smallest share of variation was observed at
the level of the classroom, though it’s important to note that for the cognitive dimension of
engagement the proportion of variance explained by the situational vs. classroom levels did not
differ significantly from one another.
That the largest share of variation in situational engagement was at the individual learner
level affirms claims made by both practitioners and researchers that learners bring with them a
host of abilities, beliefs, proclivities and orientations that together shape how they engage in class
across a variety of learning situations. Most recent research that uses intensive longitudinal
designs to study situational engagement attempts to model this dependency in the data,
accounting for the grouping of student responses within individuals (Schmidt et al., 2015; Mo et
al., 2015). Our finding that across multiple studies, such significant portions of variance are
observed at the person level reaffirms the merits of this approach. We note that this variation was
greatest for individuals—knowing the individual alone accounted for just over 50% of the
variation in engagement, whereas around 35% and 30% of the variation in affective and
behavioral engagement, respectively, were attributable to the individual student. This suggests
that cognitive engagement is more of a trait than a state for students than is affective and
behavioral engagement, which vary less between individuals and—as we discuss later—are more
variable at the situational level.
Situational variation has been much less commonly modeled in intensive longidudinal
studies of classroom engagement, and our results suggest that modeling this source of variation
may be important—and that it may be important for studies about situational engagement to
consider situational sources of variation. While less variance in engagement was explained at this
level than at the person level, our results show that the instructional choices that educators make
on a given day or in a given moment may have measurable and systematic influence on how
learners in their classroom engage at that moment. In addition to reporting that situational
sources of variation are notable, we also found evidence of variation in the dimension of
engagement that varies at the situational level. Cognitive engagement was the least dynamic,
varying little from situation-to-situation relative to the other two dimensions, while affective
engagement and behavioral engagement were more dynamic in that they varied more across
situations. This suggests that affective and behavioral engagement may be more malleable by the
particular decisions teachers make or the practices they deploy in their classrooms, while
cognitive engagement may be shaped over a longer period of time.
Finally, the classroom—more distal than the individual or moment (and modeled as such
in this and other studies, as level three)—still had a detectable bearing on learners’ engagement,
explaining between roughly 2-5% of the variation in learners’ engagement, with the least
associated with behavioral engagement. Behavioral engagement was associated with the least
classroom-level variation in engagement than affective and cognitive engagement. Across
dimensions, these amounts are smaller than teacher effects (comparable to our classroom effects)
on achievement, which have been estimated as ranging from around 6%-13% (Nye et al., 2004).
Why might variation in engagement at the classroom level be smaller than it is for achievement?
We think that one possibility is that some of the variation at the classroom level could be
attributable to the things that teachers do in particular situations and instructional episodes—
things such as providing support to students (Strati et al., 2017).
The Importance of Intensive Longitudinal Methods and Suitable Data Analytic Techniques
To address the challenge of studying engagement in a more dynamic way, and to establish
what the sources of variability in learners’ engagement are, we used intensive longitudinal
methods and advances from Bayesian statistical methods to study a large number of youth and
student responses to questions about their engagement. A key methodological implication of this
study is that situational factors can—and perhaps must for conceptual and statistical reasons—be
analyzed using suitable techniques. First, it is conceptually important to conceive of and measure
engagement at the situational level through a data collection method such as intensive
longitudinal methods. In addition, it may be worthwhile for future research to assess the impact
of situational factors that are both internal (e.g., how challenging the activity was for learners;
Schmidt et al., 2017) and external (e.g., how teachers support learners' autonomy in learning
environments; Patall et al., 2019; Strati et al., 2017). Learners' perceptions of their overall
challenge or the extent to which teachers supported their autonomy, in general, do not align with
how these factors—like engagement—are dynamic and changing from moment-to-moment.
Also, it may be statistically important to account for the cross-classified nature of a great
deal of data collected on learners’ engagement. As is well-established in the literature on
hierarchical linear or multi-level models, the failure to model the dependencies in outcomes that
result from the structure of the data can lead to bias (Raudenbush & Bryk, 2011; West et al.,
2015). As repeated measures data collected through ESM (Hektner et al., 2007; Zirkel et al.,
2015) and comparable techniques (e.g., Bolger & Laurenceau, 2013) have become more
common, scholars have also become more familiar with modeling responses "nested" within
learners; see Grimm et al. (2016) for numerous examples using multi-level or structural equation
models. These are not just statistical issues, but also substantive ones. By modeling the moment,
one can examine the impact of specific instructional activities on learner engagement, whereas
modeling the classroom allows you to test for effects of teacher characteristics like years of
experience, or broader classroom variables, such as features of the classroom environment.
What is much less established is the use of multi-level models for other sources of
dependency, especially those which are situational in nature. This may be because, in some cases,
it may not be necessary to model them. A contrast between ESM and longitudinal methods is
instructive for establishing when situational factors must be modeled. In the case of longitudinal
methods, patterns of change over time within individuals are of interest (Grimm et al., 2016), and
when and where participants respond are often not of interest: Learners responding to a survey
over the course of one week are very likely doing so at different time points and from different
contexts (e.g., in a study room and in their residence hall). In the case of intensive longitudinal
methods—particularly ESM—responses are often intended to be a random sample of participants'
experiences (Hektner et al., 2007), and, in classrooms, participants are often signaled to respond
to very brief surveys at the same time. The instructor, for example, was likely orchestrating
learners' involvement in similar (or the same) activity, and learners' peers were likely to affect
their experience in the period immediately before they were asked to respond.
For these reasons and based on our findings showing the substantial variation at the
situational level, even after accounting for variability at the individual learner and classroom
level, the rarity with which such factors are modeled in suitable ways is likely the result of what
Judd et al. (2012) refer to as a pervasive but largely ignored problem. Where Judd et al. described
the importance of modeling stimuli (in psychological experiments) using random effects in multi-
level models, we believe the same problem applies to research using intensive longitudinal
methods. We note that Judd et al. are far from the first to identify this problem: it is present
whenever cross-classification is present (e.g., Kadengye et al., 2014), and psychometricians
regularly model item effects (Levy & Mislevy, 2017). Until recently, much statistical software
has struggled to estimate data with cross-classified structures, though this is no longer the case
(West et al., 2015).
In sum, we think this approach has utility in the growing educational research using
intensive longitudinal methods; not modeling this dependency suggests that the effects of
situational factors—like the aforementioned internal and external situational effects that are often
of theoretical interest (e.g., Strati et al., 2017) may be estimated with bias, and researchers may
be more confident about their significance than were the dependencies modeled using a suitable
technique. The larger a source of variation from a group (such as the individual, moment, and
classroom) is, the more important it is to include the group in analyses (Raudenbush & Bryk,
2001; West et al., 2015). Were the amount of variation smaller, this may be less important, but
with the amount of variation at the situational level being substantial (between 4 and 10%),
analyses that do not account for this dependency may be associated with bias in their results. We
think this is particularly important as many studies do not recognize situational sources of
variability in engagement when it may be possible to consider students’ responses at concurrent
or near-concurrent times as being grouped within the same situation (e.g., Inkinen et al., 2019,
2020; Patall et al., 2016, 2018; Pöysä et al., 2018; Schneider et al., 2016).
Limitations
A strength of this study was our use of three large datasets that were highly similar (and
identical in most respects); but there were also some differences in these datasets, including in
how the data were collected, and how comparable items were worded. In addition, though the
three projects from which we utilized data were highly varied (comprising data collection in
science classrooms and informal STEM learning environments with participating learners with
substantial varying characteristics), our sample across all three datasets is not necessarily
representative of learners' engagement across all settings. However, we did model the effect of
the different datasets alone, to adjust for any mean-level differences in engagement attributable to
these different features and think that future studies can explore sources of variation in
engagement with other learners, contexts, and even data-generating processes (e.g., learners’
interactions with educational technology tools, which generate logs of their interactions that can
be studied; D’Mello et al., 2017; Gobert et al., 2015).
We recommend that future research consider exploring variation in learners' situational
engagement (and other motivation and learning-related constructs) with other datasets. Moreover,
we recommend exploring how differences in the overall data collection method (i.e., ESM versus
daily diary) and how differences in choices (e.g., regularly learners are signaled to respond to
questions about engagement or other related constructs) may have impact findings. Similarly, as
out-of-school-time becomes recognized as an important setting for learners to develop interests
(and capabilities) that may be challenging for them to develop in formal, school-based settings
(Azevedo, 2012), and ESM may be a useful approach for studying the development of such
outcomes. Finally, situational engagement among older (undergraduate) or younger (elementary-
aged) learners may be found to be more malleable—or fixed. Though the sample we used was
helpful for us to answer these questions, we do not see this work as the final word on the nature
of learners’ engagement, and so we encourage scholars to explore sources of variation in
situational engagement in other settings.
Conclusion
While engagement was traditionally studied as a relatively stable, individual learner
characteristic (Anderson, 2004; Finn, 1989), contemporary accounts emphasize its dynamic,
context-sensitive nature (Appleton et al., 2008; Fredericks et al., 2004; Pöysä et al., 2018;
Skinner et al., 2008; Skinner & Pitzer, 2012). However, research methods—including both how
data is collected and analyzed—have not fully kept pace with the assertion that the nature and
therefore the study of engagement is more complex than past research may have suggested.
In this study, we sought to build upon and formalize past efforts to document the
magnitude of and sources for variation in situational engagement, and to address some of the
methodological limitations of past research: namely, not modeling and interpreting situational
random effects as a source or variation (e.g., Patall et al., 2018; Pöysä et al., 2018), even when
situational engagement is at the focus (van Braak et al, 2021). In a way, this study’s primary
contribution can be considered to be modest: learner sources of variation matter the most,
followed by situational and then classroom factors. Yet, at the same time, this finding about
variation in engagement is foundational, aligning with calls in the wider field to understand
where variation exists using robust analytic methods prior to predicting or attempting to intervene
(Yarkoni, 2021). In doing so, this work establishes that theoretical ideas about the dynamic
nature of engagement have a strong empirical basis. Moreover, this study suggests that
engagement might not only be an idea that has purchase with teachers, but which—because it is
malleable at the situational level—may be a lever through which educators can engage their
students more meaningfully and in ways that impact their experiences in classrooms and the other
places in which they learn.