Burdens, Sludge, Ordeals, Red Tape, Oh My!
A User’s Guide to the Study of Frictions
Jonas Krogh Madsen, Roskilde University,
Kim Sass Mikkelsen, Roskilde University
Donald Moynihan, Georgetown University
Abstract
Recent years has seen dramatic growth to the study of frictions that individuals experience, especially
in their interactions with the public sector, creating both the potential for new research opportunities
and conceptual confusion. We seek to head off the latter by providing, in one place, a definition,
description of the development, and comparison of four dominant conceptions of frictions: ordeal
mechanisms, red tape, administrative burden, and sludge. In particular, we discuss the four concepts'
definition and use in terms of their objectivity, distributive effects, object and domain, and deliberate
design. The paper helps researchers to understand the overlap and distinctions between these
concepts, and the role of public administration in these different traditions. Comparisons of the
different approaches' thinking also suggest opportunities for mutual learning.
Pre-publication version of manuscript accepted in Public Administration,
Keywords: Red Tape, Administrative Burden, Sludge, Ordeal Mechanisms, Frictions
Acknowledgements: we are grateful to the following who provided constructive feedback on earlier
versions of this manuscript: Mary Feeney, Pamela Herd, Wesley Kaufmann, Lars Tummers, Sanjay
Pandey, Cass Sunstein, and the anonymous reviewers of Public Administration.
Introduction
In recent years, it has become increasingly popular to study how citizens and public employees
experience frictions in the delivery of public services. Frictions help us understand how well, and
legitimately, governments do their job, and are most often addressed through concepts such as red
tape and ordeal mechanisms, and – more recently - administrative burden and sludge (Carrigan,
Pandey, & Van Ryzin, 2020; Sunstein, 2020).
With this multitude of concepts – and one could include more - the study of frictions is potentially
hampered by conceptual clutter that challenges the accumulation of knowledge.1 Some researchers
appear to be using differing concepts interchangeably (e.g. Steijn & van der Voet, 2019) while others
contrast them and find some less useful than others for their research agendas (e.g. Heinrich, 2016;
Peeters & Widlak, 2018). Certainly, there are similarities that provide a basis for sharing of research
and ideas across fields of studies. But the four concepts are not equivalent. They feature significant
differences in definitions and underlying assumptions. Such basic differences meaningfully alter how
researchers approach the topic, affecting both the basics of how they measure key variables and the
types of explanations they pursue. This combination of overlap and substantive differences may cause
researchers studying quite different phenomena to be incorrectly grouped together. And it may cause
researchers studying similar phenomena to fail to communicate, or set up rival camps rather than
coordinating efforts and learning from one another.
It is therefore an opportune time to undertake a conceptual stock-take of the study of frictions. In this
article, we map out the conceptual landscape to not just provide a user's guide to a growing,
1 We do not mean for frictions to join the existing pool of concepts but use it simply as a convenient linguistic shorthand
to refer to the four concepts we discuss.
interdisciplinary attention to the broad topic of what we refer to as frictions, but to also address three
basic questions of interest to public administration scholars and other researchers: How are
administrative burdens, red tape, ordeals, and sludge similar? How do they differ? How might
researchers studying them learn from one another?
As public administration scholars, we focus the greatest part of our energy in the “home-grown”
concepts of red tape and administrative burden, searching systematically through their associated
literatures.2 We also examine sludge and ordeal mechanisms more briefly as useful contrasts for
lesson-drawing beyond the field. The four concepts do not form an exhaustive list. On the contrary,
as with any relatively broad social science concept, there are other potential constructs we could have
pursued. Some, such as formalization or transaction costs, do address potential frictions but are too
broadly conceptualized for our purposes of studying frictions within public services.
To secure the foundation of our discussion, we review relevant literature. Yet, the purpose of our
paper is not a systematic review. Instead, our focus is conceptual discussion and clarification. As a
result, we do not provide exhaustive overviews of the empirical literatures on any of our four types
of frictions, but focus instead on papers that provide the conceptual foundations, and investigate how
they are alike, how they differ, and what their similarities and differences teach us about them.
2 To identify the literatures, we searched the Journal of Public Administration and Theory, Public Administration Review,
Public Administration, Governance, and Public Management Review from 2012 to 2020 for “red tape” and
“administrative burden” in either title or abstract and added well-known or well cited papers to this list. Prior to 2012, we
rely on Bozeman and Feeney’s (2011) exhaustive review of the red tape literature. For administrative burden, our search
returned only a few sources, making it necessary to supplement with exhaustive reviews of all published papers citing
either Burden, Canon, Mayer, and Moynihan (2012), Herd and Moynihan (2018), or Moynihan, Herd, and Harvey (2014).
The appendix contains a complete list of reviewed papers and books. For “sludge” we focus on the only published papers
that present the concept, and for ordeal mechanisms, we draw heavily on Nichols & Zeckhauser’s (1982) canonical
introduction of the concept, and Zeckhauser’s recent review (2020).
Our basic criterion for inclusion is, therefore, to focus on papers that develop one of the four types of
concepts in public services that public administration scholars are likely to be exposed to. In doing
so, we aim to not only bring attention to other conceptualizations of frictions outside of public
administration, but also highlight the overall contribution that public administration has made to the
framing of frictions relative to neighboring fields.
We start out by outlining definitions, and discuss how they differ. We then analyze similarities and
differences between the concepts along four parameters: Whether the concepts describe objectively
existing or subjectively experienced phenomena (objectivity); whether they facilitate more targeted
provision of public services or inequality (distributiveness); who is typically analyzed as the object
and in what setting (object and domain); and to what extent the concepts theorize frictions as
deliberately imposed on their objects (intentionality).
The four parameters are chosen for their capacity to comparatively illustrate similarities and
differences between concepts. As such, our choice of parameters is inductive, and not deductive, an
inevitable function of trying to make sense of overlapping concepts, some relatively novel, without
pre-determined hypotheses about them. Our guiding framework is based on addressing the questions
mentioned above, exploring similarity, thematic divergence, and in the process drawing lessons and
identifying internal contradictions.
In doing so, we draw some notable implications. One is that the recent work on frictions is expanding
the purview of public administration to consider how members of the public experiences the state, as
opposed to focusing on the experiences of public employees and managers. Second, there is much
possible overlap between the approaches. Some of this overlap is revealed in contradictions between
formal concept definition and actual research practice. For example, while red tape is generally
defined in terms of rules, it usually focuses on individual experience. Another example is that both
red tape and ordeals literatures define frictions solely in negative terms, reflecting a very general
evaluative standard, but the sheer difficulty of identifying rules that in practice are inherently negative
should motivate studies to acknowledge the potential benefits of frictions relative to their costs. The
focus on frictions without benefits may blind researchers from addressing frictions where benefits
exist but do not exceed costs, or where costs more than justify the friction. Finally, despite the
potential for overlap, there are some real differences. For example, the ordeals approach assumption
that rational actors will weigh the costs and benefit of hassles is at odds with the administrative burden
emphasis on human capital differences, which implies that frictions have a disproportionate negative
effect on those with fewest resources.
We start with the following assumptions to demarcate our topics. Ordeal mechanisms emerge from
the study of economics in the early 1980s as a way to understand how public services might be
targeted (Nichols & Zeckhauser, 1982). The study of red tape finds its modern origins as a topic of
empirical study in public administration research in the early 1990s (Bozeman, 1993), though was
widely debated before then. Administrative burden, as we describe it here, mixes public
administration and policy studies, and is more recent (Herd, Deleire, Harvey & Moynihan, 2013).
The most recent conceptual newcomer, sludge, is articulated first by Richard Thaler in 2018,
expanded upon by Sunstein (2019, 2020), and extends Thaler and Sunstein's earlier joint work on
nudges (2008).
We do not advocate for any particular approach to frictions or claim that the included concepts or
parameters of debate exhaust all possibilities. Our goals are more modest: to compare a set of related
concepts to explain distinctions and offer some implications for learning. With that, let us begin at
the only place where such discussions can begin: with definitions.
Definitions
through the definitions, we add clarifying labels largely of our own devising.
Herd and Moynihan (2018) is the most widely used in this nascent literature. We refer to this as the
experience definition. The definition is comparatively simple. All it requires is “an individual” – who
can be either a citizen or an administrator (Burden et al., 2012, p. 741) – experiencing the
implementation of a policy as “onerous.” The individual is the main object of the definition, not the
burden. Moreover, the evaluative standard of the burden - what we will refer to below as the "locus
of evaluation" - reflects back on the individual, not on policy goals, organizational purposes,
evaluations of any designated stakeholders, or the public as a collective. This, we will argue, is an
important difference between the experience definition and the definition of other concepts. The
impositions definition (Heinrich, 2018) conceives of burdens as onerous demands imposed on entities
in their interaction with government. The most important difference to the experience definition is
the shift in main character from the individual to the burden itself, which moves it closer to the ordeal
mechanism and sludge definitions discussed shortly.
An important supplement to the simple experience definition comes with Herd, DeLeire, Harvey, and
Moynihan (2013), and Moynihan, Herd, and Harvey (2014), who present burdens as comprised of
three types of costs: the time and effort in finding out about public services and conditions (learning
costs), the effort and financial costs spent on completing forms, accessing services, or responding to
administrative demands (compliance costs), and stigma, stress, and autonomy loss arising from
interactions with the state (psychological costs).
The definition of ordeals comes from the original paper outlining the concept and a recent review,
both featuring Richard Zeckhauser. There are similarities to particularly the impositions definition of
administrative burden but it is also distinguished by the idea that ordeals constitute deadweight loss
to the user. We return to some conceptual difficulties this creates later. Sludge is articulated briefly
in Thaler (2018) and then in greater detail by Sunstein (2019, 2020), is defined as frustrating the
direction or goal that an individual seeks.
selection of definitions, though early work avoided operational definitions (e.g. Kaufman, 1977).
Among the most common definitions is Bozeman’s ‘rules, regulations and procedures that entail a
compliance burden without advancing the legitimate purposes they were intended to serve’ (2000, p.
12).3 We refer to it as the legitimate purposes definition. An earlier, and widely used, organizational
definition (Bozeman, 1993) is similar but refers to the function that rules serve for the organization
(their “functional object”) rather than their intended purposes. Bozeman (1993; 2000; 2012) also
introduced the less frequently used stakeholder definition and the related multidimensional definition
3 Bozeman’s definition is still used in studies of red tape today (e.g. Tummers, Weske, Bouwman, & Grimmelikhuijsen,
2016; Kaufmann & Tummers, 2017).
definition, they differ on their referents (their "locus of evaluation"). The former refers to costs to
“objective values by a given stakeholder group” (Bozeman, 1993, p. 284). The latter introduces the
notion that red tape is evaluated by “designated stakeholders” but perceives it as a balance of costs
and benefits rather than a rule that these stakeholders view as serving no purpose whatsoever
(Bozeman, 2012, p. 257).
These definitions share the idea that red tape frustrates functional objects, interests, or purposes being
served. However, a different strand of red tape research puts the emphasis on employee or managerial
define red tape as "impressions on the part of managers that formalization (in the form of burdensome
rules and regulations) is detrimental to the organization" (2000, p. 782). In many respects, this
definition best mirrors how empirical scholars have used the concept; as hassles that employees and
managers perceive in their job (cf. Kaufmann & Haans, 2020). Similarly, Van Loon, Leisink, Knies,
impressions of compliance costs and lack of functionality. Similar to administrative burden, these
perception-centered definitions place individuals at the locus of evaluating frictions in ways that other
red tape definitions do not. Unlike administrative burden, however, the evaluative dimension refers
to what the individual deems beneficial, detrimental, or functional for the organization (impressions)
or their job (job-centered); not what the individual deems personally onerous.
Parameters
We next build from the definitions and the conventions of research in these areas to identify basic
parameters of distinction and emphasize similarities and differences between the constructs. The list
of parameters is clearly non-exhaustive. However, it illuminates some core questions that may aid the
not give each concept equal attention, or address them in a consistent order – instead, we organize
the discussion around predominant areas of conflict or overlap.
Objectivity
Our starting point is the question of objectivity. Is red tape objectively red tape? Are administrative
burdens objectively onerous? Such questions relate to both conceptual understanding and
measurement. Particularly for the more subjectively oriented conceptions, the question of locus of
evaluation emerges: Who determines whether frictions are onerous (administrative burden), advance
their purpose (red tape), or are excessive and unjustified (sludge)? Assumptions of the locus of
evaluations are embedded in all four concepts.
Administrative burdens are first and foremost experienced: “the state can construct rules and
processes that give rise to the experience of burden, but the individual experience of burden is distinct
from rules and process” (Herd & Moynihan, 2018, p. 22). It is easy then, but incorrect, to assume that
experiences are inherently and exclusively subjective. To be sure, one way of examining burdens is
to ask people about their experiences. For psychological costs in particular, there may be few
alternatives (though see Hattke, Hensel, & Kalucza 2020).
The concept of administrative burdens is broad enough to allow both objective measures of
experience, as well as measures that capture subjective interpretation of that experience. An example:
Two people forced to wait one hour at an office can objectively have experienced the same
compliance costs. Yet, the two individuals might interpret that experience differently – for example,
the person trying to manage two small children might experience greater stress than their childless
counterpart. Such interpretative differences are relevant, and likely to be reflected in questions about
psychological costs. However, objective indicators of time, cost, and effort can be used to measure
frictions generally, and the experience of compliance costs in particular, such as “objective measures
of delays such as length of time to process applications, or wait times at offices” as well as number
of enrollment questions, documentation required, or financial costs (Herd & Moynihan 2018, p. 257).
Moynihan, Herd, and Ribgy (2016) illustrate such a technique by coding administrative forms,
calculating the difficulty an individual would have in completing the form based on the number of
questions, documentation demands and language complexity embedded in the process. It is therefore
reasonable to assume that while there will be variation in the experience of frictions, and while
subjective measures capturing this variation are useful, there are ways to capture experiences of
burdens that rely on objective measures.
For red tape, the answer to the objectivity question varies across definitions. To the proponents of the
stakeholder, multidimensional, impression, and job-centered definitions, red tape might not be red
tape objectively as even perfectly legitimate and effective rules can be viewed as cumbersome and
pointless by relevant stakeholders. Conversely, rules without organizational purpose can avoid being
red tape if relevant stakeholders perceive them as favoring their job-related values (e.g. Van Loon et
al., 2016). More broadly, the literature is split into a typically older branch studying rules and a newer
branch studying perceptions of rules (e.g. Pandey & Scott, 2002; Bozeman & Feeney, 2011). Similar
to administrative burden, of course, the two should be related: Red tape cannot have effects unless it
is experienced as red tape to stakeholders, thereby giving life to the effects (cf. Kaufmann & Feeney,
2012). For these reasons, much current red tape research does not in practice consider its subject
objectively given, in "sharp contrast" (Carrigan et al. 2020, p. 47) to widely used definitions -
particularly the organizational and legitimate purposes definitions – that denote objectively
illegitimate and pointless frictions.
The ordeal mechanisms literature and work that examines sludge generally avoid self-reports of
people’s experience, and instead rely on objective changes in rules, requirements, or demands posed
on people, preferably driven by exogenous shocks, changes, or spatial differences. Thus, for example,
Deshpande and Li (2019) examine Social Security field office closures as an indicator of ordeals (an
objective increase in demands), while tracking heterogeneous effects on people with different levels
of economic circumstances and health. Their study offers a model for how objective indicators can
document whether different groups – as reflected by socioeconomic differences – are more exposed
to or impacted by frictions than others. The locus of evaluation in both literatures appears to be at the
individual level. Ordeals see frictions as an individual “deadweight loss.” (Zeckhauser, 2019, p. 1),
but simultaneously assume it to be socially useful in its capacity to ensure efficient targeting of
services. Similarly, sludge is characterized by frustrating individuals who encounter it without
offering offsetting benefits to them (Sunstein, 2020, p. 7), yet elsewhere - with a different locus of
evaluation - Sunstein states that the social positives and negatives of sludge should be balanced up
against each other (Sunstein 2019, p. 1850). Sludge may be sludge for the common good even if it
frustrates individuals.
In contrast, administrative burden is clear about the locus of evaluation, placing it upon the individual.
Indeed, burdens are costs to the subjects experiencing them – as the concept’s core definition
suggests. Whether they are beneficial or detrimental from the perspective of the collective is an
entirely separate empirical question. Nevertheless, administrative burden shares with sludge the idea
that frictions may be justified when viewed from a social lens (see Linos, Quan & Kirkman, 2020).
In sum, we have some convergence between the different literatures concerning objectivity, but one
not easy to match with the definitions. Much of the red tape literature is based on subjective
assessments, even as the objectively oriented organizational and legitimate purposes definitions are
still popular. Despite this tension, for scholars interested in subjective assessments, the red tape
literature has gone far in terms of building and fine-tuning high-quality measures of perceived red
tape (e.g. Coursey & Pandey, 2007; van Loon et al., 2016). This empirical practice echoes rather than
contradicts the definition of administrative burden to focus on individual experience as distinct from
- but related to - actual rules and process. Some of the potential convergence emerges from more
recent behavioral approaches, which often employ experimental designs, and an examination of
behavioral responses, such as take-up (e.g., Braconnier, Dormagen, & Pons, 2017, Yasenov, Hotard,
Lawrence, Hainmueller, & Laitin, 2019). As the literatures stand, despite differences in emphasis in
locus of evaluation, the objectivity of frictions does not create a hard distinction between how the
concepts are or could be utilized and measured in practice.
Distributiveness
An extension of the notion that individuals' experiences with friction may vary is the socially
distributive outcomes that result from such variation. Here, distributiveness describes how frictions
affect the distribution of services, and, by extension, reduce or reinforce existing patterns of
inequality.
Given its focus on public employees (see below), the red tape literature investigates a fairly
homogenous population, and therefore seldom address questions of distributive effects of frictions.
By contrast, the potential for distributive effects is prominent in the administrative burden, ordeal
mechanisms, and sludge literatures, but with distinct perspectives and to varying degrees.
The clearest dividing line comes between the administrative burden and ordeal mechanism
perspectives. The ordeal mechanism approach argues that utility drives people’s willingness to forego
goods:
“The artist who is a child of affluent parents may opt not to go through tedious
procedures to get food stamps; the doctor may decide not to fill out forms if the value
of the procedure to the patient is not worth the administrative burden; an incapacitated
individual with an at-home caregiver may receive more comfortable but much less
subsidized home care; and a middle class individual may steer clear of any stigma from
care at the free-clinic” (Zeckhauser, 2019, p. 2).
Accepting the notion that the well-resourced avoid the hassles of receiving benefits because they have
less need allows the ordeals approach to assume that frictions act as a useful tool for targeting limited
resources to those that need them most. More efficient allocation of resources thereby become the
presumed indirect social benefits of ordeals.
The administrative burden framework relies on different assumptions. First, it argues that the political
economy of the distribution of goods means that the neediest are often most targeted by burdens. The
poorest face means-tested programs, and street-level bureaucrats may further discriminate against
disadvantaged groups (Nisar, 2018). Second, there are human capital differences: people with lower
cognitive and noncognitive skills will struggle more with burdens, even as they may be most in need
of the benefits public programs provide (Christensen, Aarøe, Baekgaard, Herd, & Moynihan, 2020).
Unlike the ordeals approach, these two assumptions suggest that frictions are not an efficient means
of sorting on need, but instead most hurt disadvantaged groups. Sunstein (2019, p. 1872) echoes this
point, noting both the rationing logic of ordeal mechanisms, but pointing out the inefficiency of sludge
for targeting.
The distributive effects of burdens is ultimately an empirical question. However, starting with an
ordeals or administrative burden approach may structure and guide how an analysis is designed to
test these competing assumptions. For policymakers looking to target services, the administrative
burden framework offers little direct guidance other than to suggest that using frictions is an
inefficient way of doing so. Starting with an ordeal mechanism framework, by contrast, focuses the
analysis less on inequality and more on whether service is claimed by groups who may not need it
(Alatas et al., 2016).
Taken together, the notion of distributive effects vary across the different concepts. Barely touched
upon in the red tape literature due to its empirical focus, administrative burden, ordeal mechanisms,
and sludge predict heterogeneous effects, yet with considerable differences. Ordeal mechanism
researchers may benefit from considering the political economy and human capital causal
mechanisms outlined in the administrative burden and sludge frameworks.
Object and Domain
Who is the object of onerous, detrimental, pointless, or irritating frictions? The object is conceptually
relevant as the red tape and administrative burden literatures seem relatively differentiated on the
relationship between frictions and their object (e.g. Heinrich, 2016; Peeters, 2020). A related question
is what is the domain or sector within which these objects operate? Is it the public or private sector
or both?
Studies of sludge and ordeal mechanisms overwhelmingly focus on members of the public. Most
studies of administrative burden do the same, with some exceptions (e.g., Burden et al., 2012;
Lavertu, Lewis, & Moynihan, 2013; Linos & Riesch, 2020). For example, implementing burdens may
have a negative effect upon employees’ motivation (Herd & Moynihan, 2018, p. 32-33). Conversely,
the object of red tape in the literature has overwhelmingly been public servants and managers
(Bozeman & Feeney, 2011). Indeed, Peeters (2020, p. 567) argues that a key distinction between
administrative burdens and red tape is that the former focuses on citizen’s experience, while the latter
is primarily focused on “paperwork and regulations that affect bureaucrat’s work.” (see also Heinrich
2016). Again, exceptions exist, where red tape is used to study citizens, firms, or countries (e.g.
Tummers et al., 2016; Kaufmann & Tummers, 2018; De Jong & Witteloostuijn, 2015; Kaufmann,
Hooghiemstra, & Feeney, 2018).
In practice, a division of labor between red tape and administrative burden may be emerging in terms
of the objects they study. The division of labor is not solely a matter of self-organization, but may
reflect a path dependency in how researchers develop concepts to fit certain needs. The administrative
burden framework can be seen as a project to focus public administration scholarship toward citizen-
state interactions in a way that red tape work had not. Moynihan and Herd (2010) originally used red
tape theory – and the legitimate purposes definition – to study the impact of rules and regulation on
democratic rights and participation. However, they concluded that red tape’s focus on public
employees’ experience of frictions had overlooked policy feedback processes central to citizen-state
relations. Such inattention to citizen experiences caused the field of public administration more
broadly to exclude “what should be core questions” (2010, p. 657), necessitating a novel conceptual
framework in the form of administrative burden. Yet this does not mean that red tape cannot have
citizens as its object, nor that administrative burdens cannot study public managers or employees.
Another related aspect to how scholars work with frictions is the domain in which they occur. Here,
definitional practices and research customs both offer insights, though they might be ultimately
misleading. For red tape, the definition does not specify public or private settings, but the research
customs have been to overwhelmingly situate it in public domains with the exception of studies
comparing red tape across public, private, and non-profit organizations (e.g. Feeney & Rainey, 2009;
Pandey & Kingsley, 2000). Ordeal mechanisms are also primarily situated in the domain of healthcare
or other public services. Sludge is explicitly applicable in both public and private settings, including
customers receiving purely private services (Sunstein, 2019). Administrative burdens presents itself
as related to public policy implementation, but includes private actors who help implement policies
or mitigate burdens. Some authors have pushed the application of the concept. For example, Carter,
Scott, and Mahallati (2018) use it in the nonprofit domain, where the object is voluntary
environmental programs.
Intentionality
By looking at the intentionality of frictions, we raise the question of how they come about. Do
frictions “just happen” as policies and organizations develop over time or are they deliberately
imposed on stakeholders? A novelty of the administrative burden framework is to characterize
burdens as a form of policymaking ‘by other means’ (Herd & Moynihan, 2018). Red tape scholarship,
by contrast, has largely not pursued questions of political intentionality in the creation of frictions
(Bozeman & Feeney, 2011). Different approaches therefore emphasize different potential sources of
frictions, but these sources are generally not mutually exclusive.
For example, Herd and Moynihan (2018) illustrate how policy actors use burdens to limit access both
to constitutional rights such as voting, and welfare and health services. Heinrich (2018) details how
policymakers use burdens to exclude immigrants from public services in Texas. Finally, Baekgaard,
Moynihan, and Thomsen (2020) find that policymakers’ willingness to support burdens in the welfare
system depend on their own personal experiences with the welfare system, ideology, and perception
of welfare claimants’ deservingness. Accepting the potential intentionality of burdens makes it easier
to grasp the puzzling paradox why they remain despite a broad interest in removing them.
Simultaneously, it allows normative discussions on the legitimacy of burdens and the question of who
should shoulder them if they prove impossible to eradicate. The deliberate imposition of burdens also
points to the possibility that burdens can be intentionally reduced or removed, by, for example,
targeted outreach of information, simplification of forms or other formal processes, or using
information technology. Of course, the attentiveness of administrative burden research to political
origins does not mean all burdens are intentionally imposed. Rather, burdens can have intentional
origins both in and outside politics, as well as be unintended by-products of political negotiations,
complex systems, or organizational change (Peeters, 2020).
The literature on sludge readily acknowledges that sludge may be the product of intentional action
(Thaler, 2018; Sunstein, 2019; 2020), or accumulate over time as a result of the bounded rationality
of institutional designers (Shahab & Lades, 2020). Ordeals are also constructed, but the product of a
rational and enlightened principal seeking to maximize social welfare with limited resources; “to
direct care to those who will benefit from it the most” (Zeckhauser, 2019, p. 3). The ordeal serves to
reveal information on who those people are, and to better serve them. Thus, ordeals are intentional,
but with a positive social goal. There is little consideration that the principal might be acting from
ideological interests, or at odds with the best interests of the population, although Zeckhauser (2019)
does acknowledge the possibility of rent-seeking by actors “who enjoy the current arrangements and
by the disproportionate influence of entities that are already in place.” (2019, p. 26)
In the classic red tape literature, politics and the quest for gaining political control and avoiding blame
are seen as an important determinant of red tape (e.g. Kaufman, 1977; Bozeman, 1993; 2000).
However, the dominant focus has been on organizational sources of red tape, such as rules that once
serve a useful function becoming outdated (Bozeman & Feeney 2011). When red tape researchers
have studied issues of control, they have largely focused on “managerial over-control” that can easily
be perceived as red tape by subordinates (e.g. Kaufmann, Borry, & DeHart‐Davis, 2019). Otherwise,
they have looked at non-political origins of red tape, though these may themselves, of course,
originate with policy. To give an example: Brewer and Walker (2010) argue that public service
professionals and employees in organizations more exposed to marketization are more likely to
perceive rules to be red tape. One partial exception is Kaufmann et al. (2018) who consider political
incentives as a link between rule enforcement, federalism, government ideology, and red tape (see
also Bozeman & Anderson, 2016).
Some frictions are rooted in politics, while others have roots in more mundane organizational
dynamics. While not going as far to present red tape as policymaking by other means, parts of the red
tape literature acknowledge the idea that frictions arise from a political environment, with politics
being one source of bureaucratic pathologies. Yet literatures on other frictions, notably administrative
burden, are more attuned - including in empirical studies - to how the impositions of burdens can be
a political process. Regardless whether they are a function of deliberate action, frictions are still a
function of political and administrative choices, including choices not made.
Discussion
What have we learned from comparing the different conceptualizations of frictions? We first consider
overlaps between the concepts, which are partly revealed by internal contradictions between how the
concepts are defined and how they are used in practice. Collectively, this reveals areas of potential
overlap, though these are largely unrealized. We also point to continuing areas of tension across the
different approaches.
How are the Concepts (Potentially) the Same?
In returning to our first question, we observe a number of existing overlaps in underlying definitions.
Perhaps surprisingly, much of the differences between conceptual approaches are not only rooted in
definitions but also the research customs and assumptions with which the concepts are applied in
practice.
First, all four concepts usually place the individual (rather than the organization) as the central unit
of analysis, as the object of frictions. At the very least, to take effect, frictions have to be experienced
by an individual. Moreover, all approaches describe frictions as onerous or costly to their object. The
idea of individual experience is, of course, central to the definition of administrative burden. But all
definitions of red tape we have discussed also either connote a “compliance burden” (legitimate
purposes, organizational, stakeholder, multidimensional) or that rules be perceived as “burdensome”
(impressions, job centered) that ultimately must be dealt with by individuals. Similarly, it is
individuals who face the, to them, unwelcome frictions described as sludge and ordeal mechanisms.
Second, research custom has established some differences in the objects and domain studied.
However, no conceptual hindrances prevent administrative burdens research from having public
servants as its objects. Similarly, nothing stops red tape research from choosing objects other than
public servants. Red tape, ordeals, and administrative burden all concentrate on public sector
examples, though with plenty of examples of private actors delivering those services. The framing of
sludge is the broadest in terms of domain, incorporating private practices such as mail-in rebates as
well as take-up of public programs. Ultimately, there are no inherent conceptual constraints limiting
the concepts to public employees and citizens, respectively, or public or private domains. While the
literatures we discuss are more focused on public sector frictions, they can easily move beyond these
domains to the non-profit or private spheres, which seem especially relevant for researchers interested
in non-governmental actors and policy tools for delivering public services. The differences are largely
a function of the research interests and training of those using the concepts originally, which over
time coheres into an identifiable set of research topic that sets the agenda for new researchers.
Finally, in terms of intentionality, it seems clear that different explanations of the sources of frictions
in public services are largely complementary, rather than competing. For example, red tape
researchers might take a note from the administrative burden framework to consider how some rules
were deliberately designed to generate political, or even partisan, outcomes. By the same token, it
would be a mistake for administrative burden, sludge, and ordeals researchers to ignore how basic
bureaucratic pathologies of the type highlighted in red tape research play a role in generating frictions.
Recent work by Peeters (2020) recognizes this point, focusing on the organizational base of burdens.
Peeters suggests that a useful way of understanding the origins of burdens is to organize them using
the variables of formal and intentional. This reveals some origins that have seen less attention. For
example, burdens which are formal and intentional in origin are “system architecture”, standardized
systems such as databases, which can pose as well as remove onerous demands (for an illustration of
burdens originating in system architecture, see Peeters and Widlak, 2018). Burdens that are informal
and imposed intentionally can include corrupt behavior and coping mechanisms by street level
bureaucrats. While some of these informal behaviors have received much scholarly attention - there
is a large literature on corruption, for instance - thinking about them as frictions open up avenues for
research which are certainly worth pursuing, not least since the classic red tape literature has tended
to focus on cumbersome formal rules (Peeters, 2020).
Internal Contradictions Reveal Overlap
Another way to engage in lesson learning is to examine how our comparative view across concepts
reveals internal contradictions within concepts. By internal contradictions, we mean differences
between claims inherent in the definition and practice of using the concept for research. Here, our
intent is not to criticize any particular approach, and we acknowledge that later approaches have the
benefit of observing these contradictions (while not being completely immune themselves). Rather,
we believe that doing so highlights further potential areas of overlap.
For both red tape and ordeals, a primary contradiction is between classic definitions that frame their
frictions of interest as having no redeeming value, which is clearly contradicted by empirical work.
Most red tape definitions contain a notion of inherent negativity of frictions as it does not advance
“legitimate purposes” (legitimate purposes); it has “no efficacy” for its functional object
(organizational); it serves “no objective” (stakeholder and multidimensional); it is “detrimental to the
organization” (impressions); or it is “not helpful” (job-centered). Yet red tape does not have offsetting
social benefits and the debate about whether red tape can serve a purpose goes on (Kaufmann &
Tummers, 2018). But empirical studies of red tape have not enforced the strict definitions
operationally (Kaufmann & Feeney, 2011; Pandey & Scott, 2002; Pandey, Coursey, & Moynihan,
2007). Pandey and Kingsley’s (2000) impressions definition, Bozeman’s (2012) multidimensional
definition, and Van Loon’s (2016) job centered definition move away from the assumption that red
tape has no benefit from any locus of evaluation, by centering the cost on the individual experiencing
those costs.
By definition, ordeals conceptualize frictions as a “deadweight loss" yielding "no direct benefits to
others” (Zeckhauser, 2019, p. 1-2). This creates a contradiction that bedevils the ordeal mechanism
concept: ordeals are assumed to be both negative, but also (indirectly) useful in at least one respect:
efficient targeting of services to the needy most willing to endure frictions to access services. Whether
ordeals actually generate efficient targeting of services is a separate empirical question. Our point is
simpler: if ordeals do facilitate efficient targeting, they cannot also be inherently negative and of no
benefit to anyone. Instead, their impact likely depends on the locus of evaluation: They may be a loss
to the individual but still be socially beneficial.
The ordeal mechanism literature appears to have largely agreed to interpret ordeals to mean a direct
cost placed upon an individual with the potential to more efficiently target collective resources and
proceed accordingly, even as this is at odds with the standard definition of the concept. Hence, the
debate within that literature centers on whether such frictions generate efficient targeting or not, rather
than core definitional problems.
Less dramatically, we see contradictions between competing definitions of sludge. In one version, it
is defined as a friction in a value free fashion (Sunstein, 2019), similar to administrative burden,
allowing the possibility of both costly and beneficial sludge. In another version, it is “excessive” and
“unjustified” (Sunstein, 2020) which moves it closer to the red tape and ordeals definition where
sludge is inherently negative. This raises similar questions about the locus evaluation: is it still sludge
if it serves a socially useful purpose? Given that sludge is the newest concept we consider, it may be
that such contradictions will be soon resolved. But it also may be the case that multiple definitions
emerge within sludge, as multiple scholars seek to elucidate the concept, similar to the evolution of
the red tape concept.
Two competing impulses seem to be operating at the same time that give rise to the contradiction
about whether frictions can have positive effects. On the one hand, declaring a friction to be
unambiguously negative offers crisp conceptual clarity. On the other hand, such unambiguously
negative frictions are hard to find. Most real-world examples are more complicated. They represent
trade-offs, where costs sometimes outweigh benefits, and sometimes not; where rules will lack
function for some purposes or groups but serve others. A definition that excludes frictions with some
benefits - because they serve no purpose or do not benefit anyone - therefore also excludes the vast
majority of frictions, even those where the net benefits are not justified. If the definition of a concept
cannot survive contact with real-world examples, it has limited utility for applied scholarship.
Perhaps the general study of frictions could benefit from the less rigid stance on negativity of the
administrative burden literature: what matters is not objective classifications of rules as frictions but
the causes and – often more importantly – consequences of burdensome or onerous experiences
among the objects of demands, requirements, rules, and practices. As we have noted above, it is
possible to measure these experiences using both objective and subjective indicators. For example,
Shahab and Lades (2020) propose that sludge be considered as a choice architecture that generates
different types of costs, while Kaufmann and Haans (2020) call for red tape research to engage further
with the role played by perceptions.
A second contradiction for red tape is between its focus on rules in classic definitions and its practical
reliance on subjective measures of public managers and employees’ experiences, which essentially
place those individuals at the locus of evaluation. Administrative burden work has almost the opposite
problem. By definition, administrative burden focus on experiences. Yet, much of the empirical work
cited in the administrative burden literature, as in the sludge and ordeal mechanisms literature, strives
to capture the objective effects of frictions on behavior despite the concept's definitional focus on the
individual as the locus of evaluation. While objective measurement of outcomes has obvious benefits
that all approaches could utilize, administrative burden researchers might look to red tape for
development of standard instruments that capture individual experiences of compliance, learning, and
psychological costs.
How are the Concepts Different?
The previous sections outlined that, in many cases, differences in research custom perhaps overstate
conceptual differences in the study of frictions, and differences between definitions and research
practice suggest greater potential similarity than first observed. This does not mean that there are not
real differences. We sketch out some of those here, while still seeking potential areas of mutual
learning.
First, we see a clear and marked tension between the ordeals and administrative burden literatures in
the degree to which frictions arise from differential utility models or differences in human capital,
respectively. These assumptions matter in shaping expectations about whether frictions will facilitate
efficient targeting or reinforce inequality. Even in cases where economists have found distributive
effects of ordeals inverse to efficient targeting of resources, they have presented them as puzzles
given the ordeal mechanism framework, rather than logical outcomes of human capital differences
(Gupta, 2017). Deshpande and Li (2019, p. 214) offer the most direct criticism of ordeal mechanisms
while working within that framework. They find that increasing compliance costs is especially
damaging to those who needed services, such as those with moderately severe disabilities, low
education, and low income. The ordeals therefore “exacerbate the very inequality that disability
programs are intended to reduce” (Deshpande & Li, 2019, p. 4) and generate social costs far in excess
of whatever social benefits arise from rationing. By contrast, such an outcome is entirely predictable
from an administrative burden framework (Christensen et al. 2020). At the same time, the
administrative burden emphasis on human capital, and warning that political principals will target
frictions for non-efficiency reasons creates a blind spot to the potential for efficient targeting.
Second, a real definitional difference is that administrative burden frames individual experiences of
frictions to be a burden, regardless of whether it is justified or not. As noted above, other research
approaches might relax the definitional assumption that red tape is without offsetting benefits, ordeals
is a deadweight loss, or sludge is excessive in practice. Allowing positive benefits of frictions has the
value of opening the possibility for the experience of frictions, even onerous and frustrating ones, to
be usefully deployed in solving policy problems. An example comes from Alpert et al. (2019), who
show that US states that required more compliance costs for doctors in prescribing opioids
experienced many fewer overdose deaths during the opioid crisis than states that made prescriptions
easier. This example is intriguing not least since the benefits of the increased compliance cost are not
simply social - though they are that - but individual. It would seem, then, that social gains are not the
sole viable justification for burdensome rules and requirements.
Conclusion
Citizens and employees regularly experience frictions in their encounters with public sector
organizations. This article has summarized basic overlaps and differences between concepts that
address such frictions. In response to our initial question – are these all really the same thing – the
answer is no. There are substantive differences between concepts, and in practice research traditions
further exaggerate those differences. Part of the goal of this paper is to emphasize potential, as yet
largely unrealized, connections and lessons sharing. For instance, we have highlighted the
advancements in subjective measurements of red tape; the potential for sorting according to need as
a social benefit of ordeal mechanisms; the utility of a steadfast individual locus of evaluation in the
administrative burden; and a domain of application beyond the public sector in sludge.
While our primary focus has been on building shared research agendas, we conclude with a practical
note. Much of the recent interest in frictions is motivated by the normative agreement to find and
reduce such frictions where their benefits cannot be justified. A consistent theme across the red tape
(Bozeman, 2000), administrative burden (Herd & Moynihan, 2018) and sludge (Sunstein, 2019)
literatures is that organizations should do more to identify and reduce frictions. Such a goal
presupposes a conceptualization flexible enough to acknowledge that many frictions a) have benefits,
and b) it should be possible to weigh the relative benefits and costs. This, in turn, requires more
detailed attention to the types of costs that people face, and their consequences.
A strength of administrative burden is its broadly applicable typology of costs. Indeed, Shahab and
Lades (2020) recently urge a similar approach for sludge. The ability to develop general approaches
to identifying the costs of friction is useful for three reasons. First, demarcating costs illustrate the
nature of frictions, from an abstract to a more identifiable concept. Second, they offer communicative
benefits – they show how specific types of frictions across different policy areas are part of the same
broader phenomena. Of course, all concepts discussed perform this task to some extent, but a more
specific consideration of types of costs deepens the potential to speak broadly of the role of the state.
This could, for example, help illustrate how the psychological costs experienced by the person trying
to vote, receive an abortion, apply for benefits, or start a business are related to one another. Third,
demarcating costs provide a diagnostic tool. Conceptualizing specific types of frictions makes it
easier to identify when they arise, and the nature of their effects. Rather than say “we need to cut
ordeals” we can say, for example, “the main bottleneck is the compliance costs.” For researchers,
these distinctions are important in terms of creating expectations about how frictions will reveal
themselves. For example, much of the red tape literature focuses on compliance costs (e.g. Coursey
& Pandey, 2007), neglecting learning and psychological costs. Of late, there is more attention to the
latter. For instance, authors have invoked self-determination theory to argue that lack of functionality
implied by red tape is costly to experienced basic human needs satisfaction (i.e. to relatedness,
competence, or autonomy) (e.g. van Loon, 2017).
Ultimately, how people use these concepts may reflect factors other than those discussed here, such
as disciplinary preferences, and dissemination of ideas within fields. Our hope is that researchers will
be at least cognizant of different frameworks and the substantive differences they imply. In the
interests of mutual learning, we have perhaps overemphasized potential areas of overlap, and
understated what we have described as research customs that serve to maintain separate communities.
Such customs reflect well-worn preferences and assumptions about what research is important and
valid, and may be resistant to change. Researchers may be told that their particular approach to
frictions is inadequate because it does not align with one or more of the concepts described here. But
even path dependent research streams are occasionally punctuated by moments of paradigmatic
change before resetting themselves. The study of frictions appears to be experiencing such a moment,
driven by the arrival of new concepts, new scholarly interest, and a practical interest in applied
solutions to public service problems. Our hope is that our effort to outline potential areas of overlap
emphasizes how some of differences between these streams are artificial, and that we need active
efforts to communicate across different approaches (e.g. Carrigan, Pandey, & van Ryzin, 2020). The
topic is large enough to allow multiple camps that can work together rather than ignore, or worse,
bicker with each another with few to no offsetting benefits.