System Justification in Authoritarian Regimes:
Theory and Evidence from Egypt
Elizabeth R. Nugent
This version: February 15, 2024
ABSTRACT
System justification is a well-established socio-cognitive motivation that conditions
individual beliefs and behaviors; however, research on its political effects has been
limited to democratic contexts. In this paper, I theorize and explore system justification
as an important component of political behavior in non-democratic contexts. The
motivation and empirical foundation of the paper come from Egypt, a contemporary non-
democratic regime that serves as an ideal case in which to test the effects of system
justification. In a context of mounting economic and security crises, standard rationalist
explanations fall short of explaining the persistent popularity of President Abdel Fattah
al-Sisi, even when measured through approaches that account for various social
desirability and reporting biases. In an original, nationally-representative survey of 2,000
Egyptian citizens, I included a battery measuring system justification, as well as
personality traits, political opinions, and political behaviors. Analyses reveal that
respondents’ level of system justification predicts their support for Sisi and his regime, as
well as their levels of participation in both pro- and anti-regime elections and protest. An
embedded experiment also reveals that different kinds of threats activate system
justification, strengthening its effect even as innate psychological traits remain constant.
This paper expands the scope of a small but growing literature on psychological
motivations for political behavior in authoritarian contexts. It builds on important
conceptual developments by scholars of system justification to argue that, for many,
supporting a non-democratic leader may satisfy central cognitive needs.
Assistant Professor of Politics, Princeton University. Contact: enugent@princeton.edu.
Introduction
On the whole, political scientists seek to rationalize support for non-democratic leaders
by proposing a strategic logic for individual behavior rooted in material interests. Existing
research contends that citizens can be bought off, prioritizing material stability over competing
concerns for democratic quality, bodily autonomy, and freedoms of choice. Underlying
rationalization is an assumption that most people want democratic government if they could only
actualize that preference, and thus most studies interrogate the conditions under which
individuals can express and act on preferences for democracy. However, as Przeworski (2023)
so astutely writes in his critique of assumptions underlying formal models of political behavior in
non-democratic contexts, “in the end, just assuming that autocrats cannot enjoy popular support
is pure ideology” (980). Moreover, while we might dismiss support for non-democratic regimes
as performative (Wedeen 2015), studies using various social science measurements to
differentiate between reported support driven by social desirability bias and more accurate
estimates of support find quite high levels of seemingly real support for non-democratic leaders
across the world, in contexts as diverse as Egypt, Russia, and China (Abadeer et al. 2019;
Brooke and Nugent 2020b, 2020a; Chen and Dickson 2008; Dickson 2016; Frye et al. 2017;
Li 2004; Truex and Tavana 2019).
Let us assume instead that support for a dictator is real, and let us dismiss the
framework of rationality. What if support for a non-democratic regime fulfills individuals’
cognitive needs? After all, psychology has long established that individuals have complex
relational, epistemic, and existential motives that the brain is constantly trying to balance.
Individuals simultaneously seek to fulfill the multiple and often competing needs produced by
those motives through a host of beliefs and behaviors. Underlying needs produce ego- and
group-justifying motivations, meaning that people want to hold favorable attitudes about
themselves and the groups to which they belong, respectively, so they seek information and
perform behavior that satisfies these needs (Deci and Ryan 2000; Jost 2019; Jost, Baldassarri,
and Druckman 2022).
Cognitive needs also produce system-justifying motivations. System justification theory
holds that people are motivated to defend, bolster, and justify aspects of existing social,
economic, and political systems (Jost and Banaji 1994). The process of system justification
primarily serves a palliative function by simultaneously increasing satisfaction with the status
quo – thereby decreasing sources of discomfort such as uncertainty, threat, and social discord –
and addressing underlying and often unconscious epistemic, existential, and relational needs.
The article provides a deeper dive into system justification in a later section, but in short, this
tendency means that people want to hold favorable attitudes about the overarching political and
social orders in which they live, even if that comes at the expense of their own individual and
collective interests.
To date, no study has explored whether and how system justification is related to
political behavior in a non-democratic context. In this paper, I incorporate established findings
from psychology to theorize how system justification functions in fully authoritarian contexts,
and to investigate whether and how system justification contributes to the popularity of one
particular dictator. Egypt’s current president, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, came to power in a July
2013 coup that decisively ended the country’s brief democratic experiment following the Arab
Spring uprisings. While the country has been ruled by consecutive authoritarian regimes for all
but two years since the establishment of the republic in 1952, Sisi has overseen authoritarian
retrenchment of domestic politics on a scale that dwarfs the abuses of all his predecessors. At the
same time, the country has faced successive economic and security challenges. And yet, despite
these significant and compounding issues that tend to undermine popular support for any ruler,
Sisi is genuinely popular (Abadeer et al. 2019; Truex and Tavana 2019) and has remained so
throughout almost a decade of being in power.
The empirical foundation of the paper was generated from an original survey, including
an embedded experiment priming different kinds of system threat, of a nationally representative
sample of 2,000 Egyptian citizens. The instrument included a battery measuring levels of
system justification as well as other personality traits, political opinions, and political behaviors.
Regression results demonstrate that system justification is significantly and positively correlated
with support for authoritarian government and the Sisi regime. Experimental results
demonstrate that those who rank higher on the system justification scale are also most affected
by the priming of system threat. Additional analyses referenced in the discussion section
demonstrate that system justification predicts pro- and anti-regime behaviors (i.e., participation
in protests and elections with difference meanings in terms of support for the regime or
opposition to it) that are immensely consequential for the regime’s survival.
The paper proceeds as follows. I first summarize existing literature on support for
authoritarian regimes as well as the literature on system justification, noting the concentration of
evidence from democratic political contexts and the importance of system threat in activating
system justification tendencies. I then extend these findings to generate hypotheses about
whether and how system justification helps to explain political behavior and beliefs in non-
democratic settings. Next, I provide additional background on the context of Egypt, not only the
motivation but the site of inquiry for this paper, as well as my data and research methods. I then
present results. I conclude by outlining the implications of my findings and returning to the
importance of challenging established interpretations in the literature about the meaning of
support for non-democratic regimes and leaders.
Support for Authoritarianism: Existing Explanations
Research on political behavior in non-democratic contexts has spent significant effort
rationalizing support for non-democratic leaders. As Truex (2022) astutely observed, these
studies begin with a puzzle: “almost all citizens living under authoritarian rule acquiesce to their
governments almost all of the time. The dominant action for the authoritarian citizen is not to
overthrow the regime, it is to do nothing.”1
A consistent hypothesis tested in the literature exploring political behavior in non-
democratic contexts is that individuals “with a personal financial, policy, or professional interest
in regime success support the system more” while “those that have been excluded from the
regime are prone to discontent” (Truex 2022). This is validated empirically by demonstrating
higher levels of support for non-democratic regimes by leaders’ coethnics, those in regime social
and financial networks, and members of institutions materially benefited by the regime
including political parties, labor unions, and civil society organizations (Blaydes 2010; Chen and
Dickson 2008; Gandhi 2008; Gandhi and Przeworski 2007; Kim and Gandhi 2010; Magaloni
2006; Mesquita et al. 2005; Posner 2005; Reuter and Robertson 2015; Svolik 2012; Treisman
2011). The majority of existing studies thus argue that citizens are bought off, prioritizing
material stability over competing concerns for democratic quality, bodily autonomy, and
freedoms of choice. Przeworski (2023) summarizes the quid pro quo nature of political
relationships in non-democratic settings: “autocracies do collect garbage, regulate traffic, issue
dog licenses, and fill street holes: they govern,” and so it should not be surprising that many
individuals do not chafe under non-democratic governance. Said differently, “life in
authoritarian states is mostly boring and tolerable” (Pepinsky 2017). As such, it is rational and
logical for the average citizen, of average intelligence, with average levels of political interest and
1 See also Kuran (1991) and Slater (2009).
involvement, to be just fine with a non-democratic regime that provides basic needs, stability,
and security.
Underlying these findings is a complementary fundamental assumption that is baked
into the puzzle of support for non-democratic government: the idea that most people want
democratic government if they could only actualize that preference. Many studies, then, look for
the conditions under which individuals can express a preference for democracy and act on it,
whether through protest participation, voting for the opposition or spoiling ballots in controlled
elections, or other subversive behavior. As Przeworski notes, “the very idea that autocracies may
enjoy popular support is hard to fathom for democrats.. [and a]utocracies are assumed to be
inherently brittle, surviving only because people are misled or repressed” (2022, 1). On the one
hand, the nature of the media environment (Geddes and Zaller 1989; Huang 2015, 2018; King,
Pan, and Roberts 2017; Reuter and Szakonyi 2015), education system (Cantoni et al. 2017;
Paglayan 2022; Pop-Eleches and Tucker 2014), or social pressure creates a façade of ubiquitous
support for the regime (Frye et al. 2017; Magaloni 2006; Mattingly 2019; Treisman 2011;
Wedeen 2015) that indoctrinates or socializes people into supporting the regime, at least at a
superficial level if not much deeper. Alternatively, fear of violence from the regime through its
coercive apparatus for any actual, perceived, or expected oppositional behavior (Davenport
2007) facilitates various public demonstrations of compliance and reduces engagement in anti-
regime action (Amat 2024; Davenport 2007; Fu 2018; Hassan, Mattingly, and Nugent 2022;
Pearlman 2013; Rozenas 2020; Young 2019).
Political psychology research has begun to explore how characteristics of individuals
interact with context to influence political beliefs and behaviors. Researchers have creatively
expanded the study of how immutable personality traits correlate with political attitudes and
behavior by testing established findings from democratic settings (Gerber et al. 2011;
Greenstein 2004) in authoritarian ones (Dollbaum and Robertson 2023, 20; Hasmath, Teets,
and Lewis 2019; Truex 2022). This is not an essentializing research agenda, in which there are
types of people or full populations that acquiesce to power, but rather it explores the natural
variation within populations in underlying characteristics that correlate with support for the
regime. In addition, scholars of political psychology have also begun to explore the implications
of findings on ego- and group-justifying motivations from democratic contexts (Achen and
Bartels 2017; Bernstein 2005; Condon and Holleque 2013; Druckman and Lupia 2000; Fiorina
2018; Huddy 2001) under non-democratic regimes (Manion 1996; Nugent 2020; Young
2019).2 Many findings speak to the generalizability of the underlying cognitive and social
psychological processes underlying various political outcomes across regime type.
System Justification in Politics
This paper seeks to further expand the political psychology literature by considering
system-justifying motivations. System justification theory holds that people are motivated to
defend, bolster, and justify aspects of existing social, economic, and political systems(Jost and
Banaji 1994). The theory was proposed as an alternative social psychology theory for why
disadvantaged individuals and groups participate in negative stereotyping of themselves and the
related phenomenon of outgroup favoritism. Theories rooted in ego- and group-justification did
not explain the phenomena; both would predict that members of lower status groups would
reject negative stereotypes and increase their hostility towards the out-group (Brewer 2001;
Brown 1986).
At its core, system justification argues that people seek to maintain or enhance the
legitimacy and stability of existing forms of socio-political arrangements, even if they are
harmful to an individuals’ personal or group-based interests. The theory draws heavily on the
socialist-feminist concept of “false consciousness,” defined as “holding beliefs that might sustain
one’s own oppression” (Jost 1995, 400).3 It leads to both conscious and nonconscious
rationalization of the status quo, even at the expense of individual and collective self-interests.
The process of system justification primarily serves a palliative function by simultaneously
increasing satisfaction with the status quo, decreasing sources of discomfort such as uncertainty,
threat, and social discord, and addressing underlying and often unconscious epistemic,
existential, and relational needs. These are things all people seek all the time in their daily lives,
even if unconsciously. System justification is what psychologists call motivated social cognition,
which assumes certain relationships between people’s beliefs and their motivational
underpinnings -- that psychological needs drive people’s beliefs and related behavior (Jost et al.
2003, 340). System justification, then, may directly capture individuals’ defense of the status
quo but ultimately measures a fundamental psychological need for certainty, security, and social
acceptance in people’s deep psyche.
Since the introduction of the theory nearly thirty years ago, system justification has been
found not only to explain negative stereotyping by oppressed groups (Jost 2001) but also to
predict whole sets of political beliefs and ideologies within larger populations (Jost et al. 2003,
2014; Jost, Banaji, and Nosek 2004; Jost, Federico, and Napier 2009).4 Of most relevance for
this study, the study of system justification consistently finds that individuals’ needs for order,
structure, closure, and stability predict holding politically conservative attitudes. In defining and
operationalizing the concept, Jost and coauthors differentiate between conservatism’s “stable
3 Citing Cunningham 1987, 255.
4 As Jost (2019) notes in his reflection on 25 years of system justification theory, citing dozens of
rigorous studies, this includes “appraisals of fairness, justice, legitimacy, deservingness, and entitlement,”
“attributions and explanations for poverty and inequality,” “spontaneous and deliberate social inferences
and judgements about individuals and groups,” “attitudes and opinions about social, economic, and
political issues,” and “rationalizations for certain sociopolitical outcomes or events.”
definitional core” and “set of more malleable, historically changing peripheral associations” (Jost
et al. 2003 342; emphasis in original). At its core, conservatism has to do with a preference for
traditionalism, a resistance to social innovation, and general resistance to various kinds of
changes (Conover and Feldman 1981; Greenwald and Banaji 1995; Muller 1997). It both takes
specific forms – such as supporting specific conservative politicians, parties, or policies – and
has more generalizable forms – such self-placement on a left-right scale, or finding various types
of inequality to be inevitable and not something that should be ameliorated or solved by
governmental intervention.
The finding that system justification significantly predicts conservativism is particularly
robust. One meta-study confirmed this in an analysis of over 22,000 respondents from 88
samples in 12 countries between 1958 and 2002 (Jost et al. 2003) and other studies
demonstrate the relationship holds in at least 19 countries (Jost 2019). These studies argue that
results tend to be more consistent with a system justification explanation, which prioritizes
accommodation and rationalization of the status quo over any individual or group experience of
it, than with identity- or interest-based theories, in which individuals optimize their own and
their group’s best interests which may not be benefited by conservativism. The samples capture
important variation in religion and culture, historical experience with socialism and communism,
and the formal representation of conservativism in politics and policies. And while the countries
from which these samples are drawn differ in the level of representativeness and the system by
which power is allocated, they are all democracies.
Observable variation in system justification across individuals stems both from
situational and dispositional factors. While system justification occurs often in daily life, there
are certain conditions under which it is heightened (Kay and Friesen 2011). Similar to ego- and
group-justification, system justification is triggered by system threat, defined as that which may
cause harm to the stability and legitimacy of the system. Experimental studies of system
justification have manipulated threat in ways as benign as criticism from outsiders (Kay, Jost,
and Young 2005) to priming reminders of terrorism and security threats (Ullrich and Cohrs
2007; Willer 2004). It can also include any social, economic, or political threat perceived to
challenge the establish order of the system. The mechanism behind this effect speaks to the
psychological need of individuals; admitting that the system has failed “conflicts with the basic
psychological need to believe one’s system is effective and legitimate” (Kay and Friesen 2011,
361). Instead, individuals double down on supporting the status quo (Napier et al. 2006).
System Justification in Authoritarian Regimes
Like most studies of psychology in politics, evidence on how system justification
correlates with different political attitudes and behaviors is overwhelmingly drawn from
democratic contexts.5 However, there are a number of theoretical reasons to think that the theory
of system justification could be helpful for understanding political attitudes in non-democratic
contexts.
First, underlying psychological needs seem pertinent to understanding near constant and
seemingly voluntary deference on the part of ordinary citizens to a non-participative and non-
responsive system. The central idea of system justification is that individuals’ psychological need
for stability is intimately connected with ideology and conservatism, conceptualized here as
openness to change or a preference for the status quo, whatever its nature or quality. This takes
support for non-democratic governments and governance out of the realm of rationality, instead
placing it within the realm of psychological dispositions and explaining it through the innate
5 See Jost (2019) for a comprehensive list of democratic contexts in which system justification has been
studied. I note an important exception in which system justification was explored in the context of
democratic backsliding; Szabo and Lonnqvist (2021) analyze the predictive effect of system justification
on vote choice in Hungary as the quality of democracy declined between 2002 and 2018.
human intolerance for instability. Strong idealogues, then, have these underlying dispositions,
rather than the many accounts that talk about the ‘rational,’ ‘strategic’, ‘transactional,’
‘instrumental’ models of popular support for authoritarian regimes.
Moreover, the notion of false consciousness, or “holding beliefs that might sustain one’s
own oppression” (Jost 1995, 400),6 seem particularly relevant. Why do individuals who could
plausibly stand to gain politically, socially, and economically from democratization support an
undemocratic, unequal, and unproductive regime? The possibility suggested by system
justification theory that that “there is an ideological motive to justify the existing social order”
(Jost, Banaji, and Nosek 2004) is a compelling one, and worth exploring in authoritarian
contexts.
In more specific terms, system justification might provide additional analytic leverage
over why Sisi maintains seemingly real levels of popular support despite the objective declining
quality of Egyptian democracy, its society, and its economy, as I detail in the following section.
Those who rank high on system justification are likely the strongest supporters of the regime,
providing positive evaluations of its policies and participating in its pro-regime rallies and
controlled elections. Moreover, those who rank high on system justification are likely highly
triggered by system threat and become even stronger, more ardent supporters in the face of
compounding crises such as those currently faced by Egypt and the regime.
Context: Authoritarianism in Sisi’s Egypt
Beyond being an important case in its own right as the most populous Arab state and
historical heart of pan-Arabism Egypt an ideal place to study the question of system
justification. The current regime faces a number of compounding crises, and yet remains very
popular, seemingly legitimately so.
6 Citing Cunningham 1987, 255.
Egypt has been governed by authoritarian regimes since its independence in 1952 but
experienced a brief moment of liberalization following the 2011 ‘Arab Spring’ uprisings.
Inspired by events in Tunisia, 18 days of sustained and growing protest by people from all ages,
classes, walks of life, and political persuasions (Beissinger, Jamal, and Mazur 2015) led to the
resignation of president Hosni Mubarak on February 11, 2011 after nearly 30 years in office.
Mubarak’s resignation initially ushered in a flurry of democratic and competitive political
activity, resulting in an elected and civilian-led government for the first time in Egypt’s history.
However, polarization between political elites, shaped by legacies of repression and competition
during the Mubarak era, quickly resurfaced and deepened (Nugent 2020). The Brotherhood
was exclusionary and heavy-handed in its rule, while secular and leftist politicians were
uncooperative. On the one-year anniversary of Morsi’s inauguration, the youth group Tamarod
(Arabic for “Rebellion") organized massive anti-Morsi protests with financial and logistical
support from elements of Egypt’s security apparatus. On July 3, 2013, the military announced
Morsi’s removal from power, also suspending the constitution and installing an interim
government. The coup brought former general Abdel Fattah al-Sisi to power.
Sisi has overseen authoritarian retrenchment on a scale that dwarfs the policies of his
predecessors. Economically, Egyptians’ living conditions are rapidly deteriorating due to chronic
mismanagement of public finance. Nearly 58% of public resources goes towards debt and loan
repayment, resulting in meager domestic spending on health, education, and other basic social
services for the country’s 100 million citizens. In 2019, the World Bank reported that 60% of
Egypt’s population was either poor or vulnerable (Work Bank Group: Poverty & Equity 2019).
Relatedly, Egypt’s rapidly aging infrastructure increasingly puts Egyptians at high risk due to
food insecurity, pollution, and poorly maintained roads and public transport systems (Khalil
2017). The current regime came to power by ousting democratically elected president Mohamed
Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood. Since 2013, the regime has paired mass arrests of tens of
thousands of members and accused supporters with a smear campaign against the Brotherhood
painting the organization as an existential threat to the country 7 Egypt regularly witnesses
terrorist attacks and large swathes of territory remain beyond government control. For the past
five years, the Egyptian military has conducted persistent counter-terrorism operations in Sinai
against an Islamic State affiliate with the help of billions of dollars in American aid, many of
which are broadcast on national television. The regime intentionally blurs the lines between
moderate Islamist organizations and violent militant ones, and often conflates the security and
identity threats they pose. In 2018, El-Sisi was reelected in a landslide victory against one hand-
picked opponent. Following his reelection, constitutional amendments were pushed through
parliament that could allow him to stay in power through 2030.
Despite these significant issues, Sisi remains quite popular, and much of this support
appears to be genuine. Direct questions measuring public approval for Sisi demonstrates a
rating of over 80 percent since 2013, and studies using different approaches to account for social
desirability and reporting biases similarly find high levels of support (Abadeer et al. 2019;
Brooke and Nugent 2020b). In their rigorous treatment of social desirability, Truex and Tavana
(2019) find that roughly 58% of a representative sample of Egyptians hold positive implicit
attitudes towards the president. The question that inspired this paper and experiment was what
might explain Sisi’s seemingly legitimate popularity while Egypt faces so many significant
economic, security, and political crises. When framed by officials and perceived by individuals as
threats to the system (Hatab 2020), these crises of governance may actually be driving support
7 As detailed by independent statistical database Wiki Thawra in a report titled “Report on the Detained
and Prosecuted during the Sisi/AdlyMansour Period.” Available in Arabic at
for Sisi rather than undermining it. Egypt is thus a “most likely” case for observing the effects
of system justification and system threat on support for authoritarian governance.
Data and Methods
I analyze data from a 2018 original survey of a nationally-representative sample of 2,000
Egyptian adult citizens.8 The instrument included questions measuring respondents’ political
behavior, policy preferences, emotions, personality traits, and demographic information.
Independent Variable of Interest
The main independent variable of interest (which serves as the dependent variable in the
first section of the results) is system justification. To measure system justification, I include the
eight-item battery developed by Kay and Jost (2003). Respondents are asked to what extent
they agree with statements about fairness, predictability, and the need for reform in Egyptian
society. Because this battery has not been widely used in Arabic-language public opinion
research, to my knowledge, I worked closely with my partner survey firm to carefully translate
the items and to confirm their validity to respondents during pretesting of the instrument.
Respondents are asked to what extent they agree with the following statements about fairness,
predictability, and the need for reform in Egyptian society:
1. In general, I find society to be fair.
2. In general, the Egyptian political system operates as it should.
3. Egyptian society needs to be radically restructured.
4. Egypt is the best country in the world to live in.
5. Most policies serve the greater good in Egypt.
6. Everyone has a fair shot at wealth and happiness in Egypt.
7. Our society is getting worse every year.
8. Egyptian society is set up so that people usually get what they deserve.
On each item, respondents could choose an answer of “strongly agree,” “agree,” “disagree,” or
“strongly disagree” in addition to “don’t know” and “refuse” answer options, which were not
8 See appendix for additional information on the survey and sample.
read by the enumerator. For questions 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 8, higher scores suggest higher levels of
system justification. Questions 3 and 7 are reverse coded and were recoded during analysis to be
consistent with this interpretation. Principle component analysis reveals that all eight questions
load onto one factor with high internal consistency (α = .8), as predicted by previous studies in
other contexts using the same scale (citations here). As such, individuals receive one score on
system justification which averages the score across eight questions, such that higher scores
consistently suggest higher levels of general system justification. The resulting index is normally
Dependent Variable (Observational Results)
My dependent variable of interest measures regime support. In the observational data,
the question reads, “On a scale from 0-10 measuring the extent of your satisfaction with the
current government’s performance, in which 0 means that you are completely dissatisfied with
its performance and 10 means you are completely satisfied, to what extent are you satisfied with
the current government’s performance?” In 2018, this measured respondents’ satisfaction with
the Sisi government.
Covariates
I include five covariates in the regression models. First, I control for age, gender, and
level of education, all of which have been theorized and found to be important in predicting
political behavior and attitudes in authoritarian regimes (Dollbaum and Robertson 2023;
Greene and Robertson 2017) and in Egypt.9 I account for whether respondents live in urban or
rural localities, which may influence their ability and thus their propensity to undertake certain
kinds of political activity. Finally, I account for economic stability by using a subject measure of
whether a respondent’s household income covers its expenses, a more reliable measurement of
financial precarity than direct questions about the amount of income a household earns.
Experimental Intervention: How Does System Justification Interact with Threat?
To test whether and how system justification is activated by different types of threats, I
included an experimental intervention towards the end of the survey instrument. As detailed
above, the literature on system justification demonstrates that different kinds of perceived
system-level threat activates system justification. The experiment was designed to prime four
different kinds of threats that are realistic and salient to the Egyptian context: economic,
security, infrastructure, and identity (plus a pure control).
I included these specific threats for a number of reasons. First, I sought to answer a
series of related questions: how is system justification activated? And when activated, does
system justification increase support for authoritarianism? To put the first question differently,
what kinds of threats active system justification? And to put the second one differently, is system
justification malleable in authoritarian contest, as suggested by existing literature drawn from
democratic contexts in which threat activates it? Second, Egyptians consistently rank these
9 See Brooke and Nugent 2020b, 10-11, for review.
issues highly when asked about challenges to their country on public opinion polls.10 The
experiment was intended to subtly and ethically prime different kinds of threats among
respondents in a conversational but thorough manner. I constructed treatments to be consistent
in how they described each threat, including quantitative statistics and qualitative descriptions
of the specific threat and how people might experience it, and similar in length. Respondents
were randomly assigned to one of the five treatment conditions, with each treatment group
totaling 400 individuals. The randomization of the treatments succeeded with respect to pre-
treatment covariates and observables.11
Respondents were read one of the following paragraphs:
Control: No text.
Economic Threat: As you may know, Egypt has experienced a national economic crisis
in recent years. Poverty rates have soared, reaching 60 percent in some governorates,
and inflation of the Egyptian pound rose as high as 35 percent in 2017. Unemployment
has remained very high at above 10 percent. In addition, prices for basic commodities
such as bread, oil, public transportation, and electricity have nearly doubled. This
economic crisis threatens the country.
Security Threat: As you may know, Egypt has experienced a national security crisis in
recent years. Terrorism rates have soared, reaching 1700 attacks in the Sinai, and 225
attacks and 877 civilian fatalities at the national level in 2017. Almost 1000 police
officers and soldiers have been killed while fighting extremists and insurgents. In
addition, the number of attacks in urban centers has increased dramatically. This
security crisis threatens the country.
Infrastructure Threat: As you may know, Egypt has experienced a national
infrastructure crisis in recent years. Infrastructure accidents have soared, reaching 11,098
incidents and 3,747 fatalities related to poor road conditions at the national level in 2017.
The number of collapsed buildings due to poor maintenance exceeded one per week. In
addition, the number of accidents involving the Egyptian National Railways increased by
nearly a third. This infrastructure crisis threatens the country.
10 In the fifth wave of the Arab Barometer, conducted in 2018, the same year as my survey, respondents
were asked to list the most important challenge facing Egypt today. The issues included in the primes
were the four highest-ranking concerns among Egyptians: 35.6 percent of respondents listed the economic
situation (indicating poverty, unemployment, and price increases), 18.4 percent named terrorism, 14.7
percent listed public services, and 6.1 percent listed religious extremism.
Identity Threat: As you may know, Egypt has experienced a national identity crisis in
recent years. Violent sectarian incidents have soared, reaching 77 major attacks in 2017.
While recent public opinion data suggests that the majority of the country acknowledges
Egypt as a civil-secular state that respects Islamic tenets, as many as one fifth of
Egyptians want the government to adopt more strict and literal interpretations of Islam.
In addition, the number of Egyptian citizens who use an adjective in their self-
description, such as Muslim or Christian Egyptian, has grown in recent years. This
identity crisis threatens the country.
I included two post-treatment questions, capturing political attitudes related to democratic and
non-democratic governance. Responses were coded as 1 for choosing the more illiberal option
(option a for both questions) and 0 for choosing the more liberal option (option b in both
questions). Answer order was randomized across respondents, and results use a dependent
variable that averages responses to both questions.
Which of the following two options is closer to your opinion?
a. “A non-democratic government can be preferable under some circumstances.”
b. “A non-democratic government is never preferable under any circumstances.”
Which of the following two options is closer to your opinion?
a. “During times of crisis, it is important to have a strong leader decide the best
policies.”
b. “During times of crisis, it is important to have the people vote to decide the best
policies.”
I pre-registered my expected outcomes of the study prior to data collection.12 My pre-registered
hypotheses stated that in all treatment conditions, respondents would demonstrate higher levels
of support for authoritarian policies in comparison with the control. With regards to system
justification, I took existing studies as my guide, likening more hawkish and conservative
positions in democratic contexts with support for illiberal and non-democratic governance in the
authoritarian context of Egypt. I hypothesized that respondents who rank higher on the system
justification indexes would be more likely to support authoritarian policies, and would be most
affected by the primes. I also expected that all threats would activate system justification (i.e.,
12 Available at xxxxxxx.
the interaction between an individual’s underlying system justification and their treatment
assignment would be statistically significant).
Results
Regression Results
First, I explore the relationship between system justification and satisfaction with regime
performance. Political attitudes are significantly predicted by system justification, reported in
government, its democratic quality, and its performance, even when controlling for other
covariates that significantly predict these attitudes. As I noted above, existing studies of system
justification find that those who are objectively most hurt by a system may also be the strongest
justifiers of it. The poor are universally the subpopulation most harmed by political crises, and
so in contemporary Egypt, one group that are plausibly most hurt by the Sisi regime is the poor,
system justification at different levels of economic stability. The results demonstrate that system
justification has its strong effects among the least economically stable (or most expressing the
most economic precarity). This further suggest that system justification may be at play here;
those respondents who are the most economically precarious, those most harmed or neglected by
the Sisi regime and potentially with the most to gain from a change to the system, that also score
high on system justification display the most support and satisfaction with the performance of
the government.
(1) (2) (3)
VARIABLES Regime Regime Regime
Support Support Support
System Justification Index 3.313*** 3.198*** 4.159***
(0.117) (0.126) (0.323)
Economic Stability 0.219*** 1.357***
(0.0811) (0.362)
System Justification Index x -0.494***
Economic Stability (0.153)
Age 0.00149 0.00274
(0.00439) (0.00439)
Female -0.133 -0.136
(0.114) (0.114)
Education 0.0546* 0.0554*
(0.0329) (0.0328)
Urban 0.0262 0.00453
(0.114) (0.113)
Constant -1.967*** -2.387*** -4.584***
(0.272) (0.349) (0.765)
Observations 1,490 1,490 1,490
Adjusted R-squared 0.350 0.354 0.358
Standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
(95% confident intervals)
Experimental Results
Recall that in the experimental set up, respondents were randomly assigned to one of
four treatment groups (priming economic, security, infrastructure, and identity threats) or to a
pure control group. Results reveal, first, that respondents were significantly more supportive of
authoritarian positions in the economic, infrastructure, and identity threat treatment groups.
Those in the security threat treatment group were indistinguishable from the control.
(95% confidence intervals)
Second, additional analyses reveal that for three of the four primes, there was a significant
interaction between system justification and treatment assignment: respondents with higher
system justification scores were most affected by the security, infrastructure, and identity
primes, though there was no significant interaction with the economic treatment. Additional
justification is activated by the treatments. The instrument I fielded in Egypt included questions
measuring the big 5 personality traits among respondents in a series of pre-treatment questions.
While personality traits do seem to have some predictive power in explaining levels of support
for an authoritarian regime, they were not similarly activated by the primes when analyzed in
interaction with the treatment, as expected by the conceptual literature distinguished between
tendencies and traits.
(95% confidence intervals)
VARIABLES Support for
Authoritarianism
Economic Treatment 0.202
(0.216)
Security Treatment -0.536***
(0.202)
Infrastructure Treatment -0.237
(0.208)
Identity Treatment -0.366*
(0.209)
System Justification Index 0.0509
(0.0654)
Economic Treatment x -0.0314
System Justification Index (0.0923)
Security Treatment x 0.257***
System Justification Index (0.0863)
Infrastructure Treatment x 0.160*
System Justification Index (0.0883)
Identity Treatment x 0.223**
System Justification Index (0.0894)
Age 0.00276***
(0.00105)
Female -0.0208
(0.0274)
Education 0.00852
(0.00796)
Urban 0.0351
(0.0271)
Economic Stability -0.0340*
(0.0192)
Constant 0.167
(0.158)
Observations 1,342
Adjusted R-squared 0.051
Standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Discussion
The regression results presented in the previous section demonstrate that system
justification is significantly correlated with pro-regime attitudes. These findings challenge us to
think carefully about how we interpret support for non-democratic regimes and leaders. Most
existing studies assume that anyone living under non-democratic governance is complicit , in
that they actually prefer non-democratic regimes for a host of rational reasons, or duplicitous, in
that they may actually want to resist but cannot for a number of reasons (Przeworski 2023).
However, it may be that the average individual, of average political interest and participation,
gains psychological benefits from the stability of keeping the status quo in place, regardless of its
democratic quality.
The experimental results presented above also demonstrate the utility of testing system
justification in non-democratic contexts, and that there may be something about the nature of
the authoritarian political context that trigger and activate system-justifying motivations. In the
words of Jost, Federico, and Napier (2009), citing Tyler (2006), “from the point of view of
political elites, system justification is beneficial insofar as it contributes to the stability of the
social system and increases voluntary deference on the part of ordinary citizens.” While all
political systems rely on compliance from the populace, a non-democratic regime relies on
compliance without robust accountability or participation. There are also less checks on what an
authoritarian leader can say and how he can say it. If all leaders seek to maximize mass
compliance, perhaps certain rhetorical devices that are prevalent in non-democratic contexts
(approximated by what I incorporated into the experimental treatments) help them to do so.
Sisi consistently invokes system threat in his official rhetoric and to explain away his
regime’s mistakes, failed policies, and the difficulties it could reasonably be held responsible for
within Egyptian society. Under Sisi, references to conspiracies involving bad actor foreign
countries like the United States, Iran, Qatar, and Turkey, the Muslim Brotherhood, and general
“terrorists” as the reason for various infrastructure, economic, and security problems in Egypt
have significantly increased in the state-run Al-Ahram newspaper (Koehler-Derrick, Nielsen,
and Romney n.d.). The way in which the regime describes the Muslim Brotherhood is
particularly illuminating. Successive Egyptian regimes have linked the Muslim Brotherhood
with terrorist organizations, conflating a political opponent with the very real security threats
posed by Jihadi groups in the Sinai, and Sisi has “revived Mubarak’s rhetoric about the danger
the Muslim Brotherhood poses to Egyptian security” (Zollner 2019). In 2021, Sisi said the
Brotherhood had eaten away at “the mind and body of Egypt for 90 years” and “warned against
allowing countries to be destroyed from within, creating millions of refugees and generations of
extremists, releasing untold damage on the wider region for decades to come” (Abu Zaid 2021).
Moreover, while promising reforms that are rarely implemented, Sisi asks Egyptians to bear
austerity measures and to make individual-level solutions. For example, as inflation has made
healthy food prohibitively expensive for poor Egyptians and international loans have required
the government rollback subsidies on food staples, Sisi called on obese Egyptians (who tend to
be concentrated among the poor) to diet and exercise to address a problem ultimately rooted in
the system, as articulated by his opponents (Associate Press 2018). In this way, Sisi has been
direct about the challenges facing the country under his leadership. A theoretical framework
focused on individual and group interests would predict that this combination of identifying
threats and lambasting Egyptians would diminish his support, which it has not. Instead, his
rhetoric may be activating system justification and shoring up support among those who are
most system-justifying.
Beyond system-supporting preferences, underlying system justification motivations also
predict system-supporting behaviors – namely, participation in protests and elections. These are
important for the survival of authoritarian regimes (Brooke and Nugent 2020b; Geddes 1999;
Hellmeier and Weidmann 2020; Martinez i Coma and Morgenbesser 2020). Within recent
history in Egypt, regimes have been forcibly changed twice following large protests, from an
authoritarian regime in 2011 and back to one in 2013. The brief political liberalization following
the 2011 uprising and the precipitous decline in democratic quality since the 2013 coup means
that Egypt has displayed important variation in whether protests and elections can be
interpreted as pro- or anti-system in a fluctuating but overwhelmingly non-democratic system.
variable is participation in different political protests and elections.13 Because of the time-varying
nature of protest and elections in Egypt since 2011, I am able to parse what kinds of protest and
voting behavior system justification predicts in an authoritarian context. For example, the 2011
revolutionary protest and 2011-2012 parliamentary and presidential elections (columns 1 and 3)
could easily be interpreted as anti-regime; the 2011 protests ousted long-serving president Hosni
Mubarak and the 2011-2012 multiparty elections were perhaps the most – and perhaps only --
competitive, democratic, and free and fair contests ever held in the country. System justification
is significantly and negatively correlated with participation in both events. In contrast, the 2013
counterrevolutionary protest (column 2) demanded the removal of a democratically elected
president and the intervention of the military into politics, while the 2014-2016 elections were
uncontested, as will any future elections likely be (columns 4 and 5). As such, these events may
be considered pro-regime. System justification is significantly and positively correlated with self-
reported participation in elections in all three questions.
13 See appendix for question wording.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
VARIABLES 2011 2013 Counter- 2011-2012 2014-2016 Vote in Future
Revolutionary Revolutionary Elections Elections Elections
Protest Protest (Competitive) (Non- (Non-
Competitive) Competitive)
System Justification -0.0254* 0.0297** -0.0818*** 0.141*** 0.240***
Index (0.0131) (0.0136) (0.0119) (0.0211) (0.0271)
Age -0.000307 0.000305 0.000234 0.00482*** -0.000224
(0.000456) (0.000474) (0.000417) (0.000739) (0.000946)
Female -0.0471*** -0.0401*** 0.00877 -0.0346* -0.0698***
(0.0118) (0.0123) (0.0108) (0.0191) (0.0245)
Education 0.00845** 0.0109*** 0.00457 0.0153*** 0.0202***
(0.00342) (0.00354) (0.00311) (0.00551) (0.00706)
Urban 0.0340*** 0.0542*** 0.000796 -0.0673*** -0.0428*
(0.0118) (0.0122) (0.0108) (0.0191) (0.0244)
Economic Stability -0.00360 0.0106 0.0179** 0.00440 0.0662***
(0.00840) (0.00872) (0.00767) (0.0136) (0.0174)
Constant 0.102*** -0.0927** 0.163*** 0.295*** -0.0844
(0.0362) (0.0376) (0.0331) (0.0585) (0.0749)
Observations 1,496 1,499 1,511 1,511 1,511
Adjusted R-squared 0.022 0.031 0.029 0.077 0.091
Standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Substantively, these effects are large and complementary, depending on how the
behavior and event relates to the current regime (i.e., whether it indicates support or
opposition). For example, predicted values demonstrate that moving from the lowest to the
highest scores of system justification in the sample decreases participation in 2011 revolutionary
protest from 9 to 2 percent and increases participation in the 2013 counterrevolutionary protest
from 2 to 10 percent. In the realm of voting, system justification is also highly consequential.
Moving from the lowest to the highest observed scores of system justification decreases the
likelihood of having protested in the 2011-2012 competitive elections from 15 percent to
indistinguishable from 0, increases the likelihood of having participated in the non-competitive
2014-2016 elections from 65 percent to nearly 100 percent, and increases the likelihood of
prospective voting from 31 percent to near certain participation in future contests.
Conclusion
This paper began from the assumption that support for non-democratic governance and
leaders satisfies a cognitive need, building on systematic evidence that system justification leads
people to support maintain existing systems, even at the expense of their own self-interest.
System justification serves a palliative function by simultaneously increasing satisfaction with
the status quo, decreasing sources of discomfort such as uncertainty, threat, and social discord,
and addressing unconscious epistemic, existential, and relational needs. In democratic political
contexts, this often means individuals and groups who are hurt by systems like capitalism or
racism and score high on system justification may continue to support these systems. I
hypothesized that in a similar dynamic is present in non-democratic political contexts, with
system justification predicting attitudes towards the regime.
Results from an original survey, including an embedded experiment priming different
kinds of system threat, demonstrate that system justification does indeed predict support for the
regime in contemporary Egypt. Those who rank higher on the system justification scale are
more supportive of Sisi, and are also most affected by the priming of system threat. Additional
analyses referenced in the discussion section demonstrate that system justification predicts pro-
and anti-regime behaviors (i.e., participation in protests and elections with difference valence
positions towards the regime) of immense consequence for the regime’s survival.
While political scientists have incorporated the rich literature in psychology on ego- and
group-justifying motivations into studies of political behavior, additional research is needed into
how system justification motivations function in different contexts, not only the many different
cultural contexts explored in existing literature but rather non-democratic political contexts.
This study is intended to be a first step towards that goal. System justification helps to explain
the current Egyptian president’s seemingly unfaltering popularity in the face of compounding
political, economic, and security crises. The primes included in the experiment mimic much of
Sisi’s language surrounding these, suggesting that even crises can be appropriated for shoring
up support. The question remains of what level or type of threat might turn system justifiers
into revolutionaries, or whether different types of people, whose cognitive needs are different,
will have to do that.
Perhaps of most importance beyond the case of Egypt, these findings challenge us to
think carefully about how we interpret support for non-democratic regimes and leaders, inspired
by Przeworski’s recent critique. Political science, like any science done by human beings, is not
devoid of normative commitments, and many studies either explicitly or tacitly assume that
individuals living under non-democratic governance are either complicit, in that they actually
prefer non-democratic regimes for a host of rational reasons, or duplicitous, in that they may
actually want to resist but cannot for a number of reasons. What a study of system justification
in authoritarian contexts reveals suggests something different. Rather, the average person, of
average political interest and participation, may be served psychologically by the stability of
keeping the status quo in place, regardless of its democratic quality.