Trends in Interactional Competence: Targeting Engagement and Explicit Utterances
Yumei Li
Foreign Language Publications, Higher Education Press, Beijing, China.
Abstract
This paper aims to examine how an IELTS candidate keeps himself engaged in communication
and conveys his ideas clearly to the examiner in the speaking section. Despite very occasional
errors, the candidate shows fluency and a good mastery of vocabulary and grammatical
knowledge. His performance demonstrates his abilities in interactional competence, a construct
of speaking pedagogy that highlights dynamics of interaction between participants of a
conversation. The nature of interactional competence requires the speaker to make utterance
explicit to the listener and actively respond to the conversation partner. Influencing factors of
interactional competence include speaking skills, communication abilities, cognitive skills and
contextual factors. Issues might arise from unmanageable factors in some occasions, which
requires the test taker to adapt to changes and adjust utterances as an engaged listener. Thus,
contingent responses reflect comprehension and engagement in interactions. In this case, the
speaker responds to the examiner by expanding information with a flexible use of vocabulary,
grammatical structures and pronunciation skills. Examples show that major contributors to
errors might be inattentiveness and lack of context awareness. If he fixes the problems in his
speech, he can improve his rating on the marking rubric in future tests.
Keywords
Interactional Competence, Meaningful Output, Engagement, Explicit Utterances, Contingent
Responses, Contextual Factors
1. Introduction
Many mountain hikers have an experience of making echoes roar in a valley—it seems like a
conversation between you and yourself. This turn-taking process features a strong sense of
engagement due to the interactional response generated within the process. The echo effect
inspires test takers to proactively communicate with partners in speaking proficiency tests, which
helps them better achieve in paired speaking activities. They may report a sense of ease, a high
level of self-efficacy and a deep engagement in communication. In some cases, IELTS test takers
report a significant disparity on the speaking scores between different tests. The underlying
reasons are complex due to a variety of influencing factors, among which engagement and
competent responses are considered important factors that affect a test taker‘s performance. In
other cases, some test takers complain that in computer-delivered speaking tests they tend to
perform not as well as in face-to-face interview tests, which is largely due to lack of genuine
response from a conversation partner. This means that it is essential to examine the effect of
engagement and linguistic choices on the achievement of test takers, especially in what ways a
speaker can achieve to make utterance explicit and unambiguous. Based on comments from the
examiner, this paper attempts to explore the successful strategies that a particular speaker applies
to achieve a 7.5 band score in an IELTS speaking test.
A rich body of literature shows that paired speaking tests are commonly used in classroom
assessments and high-stakes language tests (May, 2011; Roever & Kasper, 2018). This test format
features interactions between co-participants. To enhance the effectiveness of interactions, a test
taker needs to demonstrate communicative abilities and make appropriate linguistic choices.
Literature shows that Interactional competence (IC) exerts a great influence on speaking
performance. Galaczi and Taylor (2018) introduce that IC was first defined as a construct of
―dynamic process of communication‖ (p. 220), giving prominence to the dynamics of
conversation. Specifically, interaction not only entails negotiating intended meanings but also
involves adjusting speech to serve a purpose. They further point out that IC was later redefined
as a construct distributed across individual test takers that varies in different scenarios (Galaczi &
Taylor, 2018). This definition stresses the ability to engage in interaction in a meaningful and
purposeful manner, highlighting the social and contextual dimensions. Roever and Kasper
(2018) focus on contextual implications of IC for extended response of a polar question and for
turn-taking skills to address misunderstandings. In addition, IC has implications for developing
interactional skills, offering attractive user experiences and cutting-edge pedagogies (Galaczi &
Taylor, 2018). This study aims to provide a preliminary analysis into how an IELTS candidate
constructs the responses and maintains the engagement. In the following section, the construct
of IC will be introduced, followed by an analysis into linguistic evidence that could justify the
effectiveness of IC from the aspects such as fluency and linguistic choices.
2. Literature Review on Interactional Competence
2.1. The Conceptual Framework
The focal constructs of IC include meaningful output, engagement and listener response
(LR). Roever and Kasper (2018) point out that IC is a key construct in assessing language
proficiency that highlights L2 users‘ ability to interact with the co-participant and to make
meaningful output. Plough (2018) concludes that influencing factors of IC include listener
responses, testing formats, tasks, rating scales and content knowledge. The study by Hall,
Hellermann and Doehler (2011) emphasizes that IC refers to the ability to accomplish
meaningful interactions, particularly on how the speaker responds to the co-participant and how
to maintain a competent engagement in interactions.
May (2011) examines salient features of IC that are explicit to raters in a paired speaking test,
elaborating interactional competences from a variety of perspectives such as turning taking,
initiating topics and engaging in extended discourse. Based on the evidence of rater discussions
and rater notes, the analysis indicates that mutual achievements have a significant impact on
individual contributions (May, 2011). Similarly, Green (2016) emphasizes that although scores
are awarded to individuals, talk is a product of interactions.
2.2. A Sociolinguistic Perspective
Hall et al. (2011) point out that competent interaction is based on socially constructed
knowledge. Hence IC relates to sociocultural theory in terms of focused attention, cognitive
functions, metacognition of intersubjectivity and other self-regulatory aspects (Hall et al.,
2011; Cai, 2015). The shift of focus from linguistic features to sociolinguistic perspectives sheds
light on enhancing L2 speakers‘ linguistic competence. Roever and Kasper (2018) discriminate
between the psycholinguistic-individualist and sociolinguistic-interactional perspectives of IC,
elaborating on how linguistic choices affect effectiveness of interaction with a keen focus on
situational and social dimensions of language use. Notably, Douglas (2010) points out that
authenticity relates to appropriate response through conveyed information. In a sense, an
effective response helps maintain a deep engagement in communication. The engagement in turn
can make communication smoother and more interactive. In language assessments, to some
extent, an engaged speaker can make a relaxed delivery and feel like talking with an acquaintance.
Thus, the effect of IC could be examined from the perspectives of situational and social
dimensions.
2.3. Historical Background
Galaczi and Taylor (2018) point out that the role of IC in language assessment could be traced
back to speaking pedagogy in the 1880s with a focus on fluency, phonetics and pronunciation in
classroom settings. They argue that this focus formed a basis for L2 assessment in the early
th
20 century. Further, they point out that the pedagogical changes over the past century fostered
language learning of L2 speakers. The 1970s saw a significant change in the impact on interaction
in L2 speaking assessment. The change is largely due to the contributions by Hymes (1974) on
the relationship between performance and competence, Halliday (1975) on the Systemic
Functional Linguistics (SFL) and van Dijk (1977) on context and discourse. Particularly, Hymes
(1974) highlights speech situation, speech act, speech event and contextual factors. In
addition, Plough (2018) introduces the advancement of speaking test formats from dictations to
face-to-face interviews, from telephone-delivered interviews to computer-based interviews, from
semi-direct speaking tests to the cutting-edge fully automated testing. Galaczi and Taylor
(2018) point out that due to technological innovations, there is scope to examine computer-
mediated interactions and automated assessment systems. In addition, there is scope to explore
interdisciplinarity in research such as computational linguistics, behavioral and linguistic studies,
linguistic ethnography and cross-cultural studies.
2.4. Challenges and Controversial Issues
Galaczi and Taylor (2018) point out that construct-related issues involve: 1) whether it is
sufficiently specific and comprehensive for pedagogical purposes; 2) fairness affected by the
relationship between IC performance and rating scales or examiner training materials; and 3)
mediation in terms of translating from one language to another during the processes of
reception, interaction and production. Galaczi and Taylor (2018) point out that test reliability
issues may arise from broadness and comprehensiveness of the construct particularly on multiple
choices of variance. Specifically, language testers may encounter problems in assessing students
in pairs or groups due to uncontrollable variables and unknown consequences. These
unmanageable factors may have a negative effect on test validity in terms of interpreting scores.
Given this Galaczi and Taylor (2018) conclude that improving task control and narrowing
construct coverage could potentially reduce the risk of test reliability. In addition, when
examining the relationship between test authenticity and performance, Galaczi and Taylor
(2018) state that there is a difficulty in capturing interactional features in terms of unpredictability
of co-constructed interactions in speaking tests. To address the dilemma, they argue that test
developers could use scoring models and test design to optimize the effects of the interactional
construct and to reduce the reliability concerns. Roever and Kasper (2018) state that one
particular challenge of IC has to do with the examiner-induced issues, particularly disfluencies or
misunderstandings by test takers, emphasizing that these issues are primarily associated with IC
rather than language proficiency. Additionally, May (2011) states that fundamental challenges of
IC involve task design, rating scales and decision-making on individual contributions of
IC. Plough (2018) points out that IC overlaps with pragmatics with regard to meaningful and
purposeful communication. Nevertheless, IC distinguishes from pragmatics in terms of building
and maintaining relationships.
2.5. Incorporating Interactional Competence into Language Assessments
Plough (2018) points out that incorporating IC into speaking assessments allows for a better
representation of the construct. She explains that listener responses are dependent upon the
speaking task and upon the examiner frames. In particular, Plough (2018) stresses that listener
responses are considered ratable features of IC and reflect language proficiency on judging
accuracy, fluency and coherence. She examines the role of listener response in a commonly used
assessment format Oral Proficiency Interviews (OPI), concluding that listener response is a
stable and salient indicator of speaking proficiency. More specifically, listener response requires
the task taker to comprehend the co-participant‘s contributions to respond effectively and
productively in the turn-taking in a paired speaking task.
Responses are constructed based on contributions and interactions of both co-participants in a
paired speaking test. From the test taker‘s point of view, there are a range of strategies that can
make responses more productive: 1) paraphrasing or summarizing previous speakers‘
contributions to demonstrate understandings; 2) expressing agreement or disagreement with co-
participants; and 3) expanding information based on previous speakers‘ contributions. Lam
(2019) focuses keenly on the relationship between the production of listener responses and IC
proficiency, particularly on the quality of response production, arguing that contingent responses
can be more effective than formulaic backchannels in terms of reflecting comprehension and
engaging in interactions.
3. A Case Analysis on Building Interactional Capacities
The case to be analysed is posted by IELTS Official, retrieved from the website of YouTube
(IELTS Official, 2015). In this case, the candidate receives a 7.5 band score in speaking as he
shows a high conversational involvement and interacts with the examiner actively. He expands
the information when he gives the answer to each question, and occasionally he repairs his
answer and hesitates to search for information. Test designers and test givers acknowledge that
self-correction is natural and understandable in any conversation. Hence the comments on his
performance suggest the candidate is highly proficient and his utterances show no obvious
effort. It could be concluded that his performance of IC indicates a high level of fluency (see
marking criteria in Appendix). The analysis on his performance highlights how he succeeded in
demonstrating a competent interaction from a variety of perspectives. The specific strategies and
the salient language features will shed light on language learning, training and testing practices in
future. The analysis will fall into two parts. Discussion in each part will focus on a particular
aspect that represents an indicator of IC performance.
3.1. Building Engagement
The candidate successfully maintains a deep engagement with the examiner throughout the test.
His engagement in communication is strengthened by the fluency in speech delivery and active
response to each question. Although he occasionally hesitates, repeats and corrects himself, he
demonstrates competent speaking skills in this test by responding to each question with ease
topic. This is in line with the theoretical explanation of Plough (2018) that listener responses are
dependent upon the examiner‘s frame. In addition, according to Hall et al. (2011), the candidate‘s
performance is based upon socially constructed knowledge. This means that the frame of the
candidate‘s social knowledge determines the degree of familiarity with the topic and in turn it
affects fluency and engagement. In other words, the level of fluency is to some extent topic
specific, especially for second language learners. This accounts for the occasional fluency
disorder on certain topics. In addition, Fulcher (2010) argues that in speaking tests, support from
proficient interlocutors help scaffold the speech of the examinee. In this case, the support from
the trained and certificated examiner assists the candidate in building engagement and developing
fluency.
3.2. Making Utterance Explicit
Fulcher (2010) stresses on the importance that contingent responses should be assessed
qualitatively rather than quantitatively. In what sense can a speaker construct appropriate and
competent responses in a test? In this example, the candidate‘s responses provide linguistic
evidence for the effective strategies including lexical choices, grammatical use and pronunciation
skills. The candidate makes utterances clear to the examiner with a flexible use of vocabulary,
including markers, idioms and collocations, yet he makes a few inappropriate choices such
lack of contextual awareness of the speaker. The candidate should keep in mind that a formal
test requires a formal speech style. With regard to grammatical use, the candidate mostly makes
error-free sentences, which demonstrates a good mastery of grammatical knowledge. The
grammatical errors only occur when the candidate is less attentive. Hence the candidate needs to
keep alert and avoid use of illogical sentence structures. In addition, it is the diverse
pronunciation features supplemented with an effective use of stress and intonation that make his
utterances unambiguous to the examiner. To perfect his speech, he needs to avoid inadvertent
omissions and poorly formed sounds such as bot for ―both‖ and vent for ―went‖.
*Source: Comments from examiner are selected from posts by IELTS Official on YouTube via
*Source: Comments from examiner are selected from posts by IELTS Official on YouTube via
4. Implications
Lin (2015) points out that IC has pedagogical implications for student motivation and self-
efficacy in classroom learning. IC can facilitate students in adjusting learning behaviours and
developing communication skills to make a better learning environment. It can also enhance
knowledge accumulation, confidence building, and partnership establishment (Lin, 2015). IC also
helps students enhance risk-taking ability and reduce speaking anxiety. Furthermore, Lin
(2015) points out that IC facilitates self-diagnosis and self-regulation in terms of awareness of
progress, performance level and individual contribution. Drawing on experiences from this case,
learners can practise more to improve their performance on fluency, engagement, vocabulary,
grammatical use as well as pronunciation. For example, they can analyse a recorded speech of a
paired speaking activity. They can ask for comments both from their partners and the instructor.
Based on the comments, they can evaluate their strengths and weaknesses, and further perfect
their speech in a simulated test.
Literature also shows that as a significant predicator of oral achievement, IC enables students to
engage more in learning and to overcome psychological barriers (Lin, 2015). For example,
reducing the level of anxiety can avoid underrepresentation of a test taker‘s speaking abilities
such as fluency and vocabulary use. If a learner is well-prepared and makes a relaxed delivery in
practice tests, it will be the same case with a real test. More importantly, test takers need to bear
in mind that occasional illogical sentence structures and inappropriate vocabulary choices will
not affect the overall performance. The examiner will judge upon the majority of utterances
rather than minor errors as long as the errors do not detract from meaning.
IC assists students in developing cognitive skills such as critical thinking, logical thinking and
holistic thinking. A speaker deeply engaged in the communication is likely to think logically,
communicate smoothly, and organize the ideas coherently. When expanding information, the
speaker needs to structure the sentences in a logical way. Meanwhile the speaker needs to stay
alert for appropriateness all the way through the delivery. Considerations of appropriateness
include contextual factors such as the examiner‘s follow-up questions, time control and other
constraint factors.
From the test giver‘s perspective, exploring IC has implications for test and scale development in
terms of designing appropriate and meaningful rating scales and rater training (Galaczi & Taylor,
2018; May, 2011; Cai, 2015). For example, the case discussed above has been evaluated based on
the examiner‘s comments in accordance to the IELTS marking rubric. Developing marking
criteria for raters to use is important not only for ensuring the validity, reliability and fairness of
the assessment but also for reducing disfluencies and misunderstandings by test takers. This will
help scaffold the delivery of speech of the test takers. Given that the examiner in this case is
expertly trained, the analysis shows that the candidate has received support from the examiner in
developing a competent listener response.
5. Conclusion
The construct of IC relates to the speaking sub-skills such as fluency, pronunciation, grammatical
range and lexical resources. The learners are required to make utterance explicit and respond to
the co-participant effectively. Research to date shows that individual performance of IC is
contingent on the context. In addition, there are a variety of factors such as examiner frames and
contributions of co-participants that can affect the effect of IC. In high-stakes assessments
examiner-induced responses of candidates are constrained within the examiner‘s frame, while in
classroom contexts individual contributions in paired speaking practices are contingent on
understandings of prompts or contributions of coparticipants. The analysis of this case suggests
that language learners can improve their performance of IC through self-diagnosis and self-
regulation in practice tests. They can identify their strengths and weaknesses in speaking with an
evaluation of their former performance so that they can target on specific skills to perfect their
speech. In particular, targeting engagement and utterances is key to the development of
interactional capacities. From this perspective, we can conclude that effective speech delivery can
be realized by enhancing engagement and improving the quality of utterances. Given that IC is
significantly impacted by individual cognitive and contextual factors, it is essential that test
designers attend to social dimensions of IC.