Webcam-based online eye-tracking for behavioral research
Xiaozhi Yang1, Ian Krajbich1,2,*
1Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University
2Department of Economics, The Ohio State University
*Correspondence to: krajbich.1@osu.edu
Abstract:
Experiments are increasingly moving online. This poses a major challenge for researchers who
rely on in-lab techniques such as eye-tracking. Researchers in computer science have developed
web-based eye-tracking applications (WebGazer; Papoutsaki et al., 2016) but they have yet to
see use in behavioral research. This is likely due to the extensive calibration and validation
procedure, inconsistent temporal resolution (Semmelmann & Weigelt, 2018), and the challenge
of integrating it into experimental software. Here, we incorporate WebGazer into a widely used
JavaScript library among behavioral researchers (jsPsych) and adjust the procedure and code to
reduce calibration/validation and improve the temporal resolution (from 100-1000 ms to 20-30
ms). We test this procedure with a decision-making study on Amazon MTurk, replicating
previous in-lab findings on the relationship between gaze and choice, with little degradation in
spatial or temporal resolution. This provides evidence that online web-based eye-tracking is
feasible in behavioral research.
Introduction
How people allocate attention is a crucial aspect of human behavior. It dictates the degree to
which different information is weighted in guiding behavior. Attention is sometimes measured
indirectly by inferring it from choice data or response times (RT). But increasingly, attention has
been measured more directly using eye-tracking. Eye-tracking makes use of the eye-mind
hypothesis: people generally look at the information that they are thinking about (Just &
Carpenter, 1984) (though not always).
The use of eye-tracking has become an important tool in decision science, and behavioral
science more generally, as it provides a detailed representation of the decision process (Mormann
et al., 2020). It has been used to understand the accumulation of evidence in sequential sampling
models of choice (Krajbich, 2019), context effects in multi-attribute choice (Noguchi & Stewart
2014), strategic sophistication in games (Polonio et al., 2015), selfish vs. pro-social tendencies in
altruistic choice (Teoh et al., 2020), and simplification strategies in multi-attribute choice (Reeck
et al. 2017). In addition to applications in decision research, eye-tracking is widely used in other
areas of psychology such as emotion recognition (Pell & Kotz, 2011) and reading (Rayner,
2009), as well as areas outside of psychology such as driving behavior (Miyoshi & Nakayasu,
2011).
A challenge to the continued growth of eye-tracking research is the shift of behavioral
research from brick-and-mortar labs to the internet (Goodman & Paolacci, 2017). This shift has
been accelerated dramatically during the COVID-19 pandemic. While online data collection has
many advantages (e.g. speed, affordability), it has, so far, not been used to collect eye-tracking
data in behavioral research.
However, there is reason for hope. Eye-tracking has garnered a lot of interest in the
domain of human-computer interaction. For example, gaze-aware games can improve the
gaming experience by providing timely effects at the gazed location (Majaranta et al., 2019).
Consequently, researchers in computer science have been working to improve the algorithms to
determine gaze location (e.g., WebGazer, Papoutsaki et al., 2016; Smartphone eye-tracking,
Valliappan et al. 2020; TurkerGaze, Xu et al., 2015).
Here, we capitalize on these recent advances to investigate the possibility of bringing
eye-tracking research online. We start with WebGazer, a JavaScript toolbox that was developed
to monitor peoples’ eye movements while on the internet (Papoutsaki et al., 2016). Until now, it
has not been used in behavioral research, except in one methods article demonstrating some
basic gaze properties (Semmelmann & Weigelt, 2018). In that article, the authors used an
extensive calibration and validation procedure that occupied approximately 50% of the study
time. That article also found that WebGazer’s temporal resolution is relatively low and
inconsistent, but left it unclear what caused these problems and whether they can be solved.
Here, we show that these temporal aspects of WebGazer can indeed be substantially improved.
Another set of issues with online eye-tracking are the requirements on the
user/participant’s side. In the lab, researchers control the computer and camera quality, the
lighting, the participant’s positioning, etc. Online, researchers have little control over these
things. Therefore, we seek to establish basic requirements and develop simple procedures for
participants to follow in order to maximize data quality. It is also important that participants
understand that they are not being recorded and so there are no privacy violations as the images
and video do not leave the participant’s computer.
An advantage of online eye-tracking is that it lowers the bar for researchers to use eye-
tracking in their own work. To further improve accessibility, we seek to ease the programming
requirements for using WebGazer in behavioral experiments. To that end, we integrate
WebGazer into a user-friendly, open-source psychology toolbox called JsPsych (De Leeuw,
2015). JsPsych is built on JavaScript, includes a library of commands for behavioral
experiments, and also allows for integration of JavaScript-based libraries such as WebGazer.
This addresses potential concerns about the difficulty of incorporating WebGazer into existing
behavioral paradigms.
To illustrate these issues and our solutions, we conducted a simple online value-based
experiment on Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk). We aimed to replicate the robust links
between gaze and choice that have been documented in the literature (i.e., Amasino et al., 2019;
Ashby et al., 2016; Fisher 2017; Ghaffari & Fiedler, 2018; Gluth et al., 2020; Krajbich et al.,
Pärnamets et al., 2010; Sepulveda et al., 2020; Sheng et al., 2020; Shimojo et al., 2003; Teoh et
al., 2020). Notably, this experiment took just a couple of days to run, in contrast to standard eye-
tracking experiments which typically take several weeks to run. In the supplementary material
we provide a template experiment and our experimental materials.
We also note that online eye-tracking is potentially a useful tool for all online
researchers, as it can be used to ensure that study participants are humans and not computer
algorithms, i.e. bots (Buchanan & Scofield, 2018; Buhrmester et al., 2011). We hope that this
work will help facilitate the continued growth of both eye-tracking and online behavioral
research.
Methods
Participants
125 participants from Amazon MTurk participated in this study. Of these, 49 successfully passed
the initial calibration + validation and completed the study. The Ohio State University
Institutional Review Board approved the experiment and participants provided informed consent
prior to the study. Participants received $7 for completing the study. We required participants to
be located in the United States and have a 95% or higher HIT approval rate. In addition, we
required participants to have a laptop with a webcam.
Privacy
Given that WebGazer uses participants’ webcams to monitor their gaze location, privacy
concerns naturally arise. Therefore, it is important to note, and to highlight for participants, that
the webcam images are processed locally and never leave the participants’ computers. What
leaves their computer is the output of the WebGazer algorithm, namely horizontal (x) and
vertical (y) coordinates of where WebGazer thinks the participant is looking at a given point in
time.
Experimental Software/materials
The experiment was programmed in JavaScript, based on the jsPsych and WebGazer libraries.
To improve WebGazer’s temporal resolution we removed some seemingly unnecessary
computations that occur in each animation frame of a webpage. The original code calls the
getPrediction() function at every animation frame to load the measured gaze location. This step
is necessary when providing gaze-contingent feedback, but otherwise just consumes
computational resources. These extra computations appear to gradually degrade WebGazer’s
temporal resolution.
To deal with this, we modified the loop() function for each animation frame to avoid the
getPrediction() call when possible (for the case we just need face tracking data to draw face
overlay, the CLM tracker is called separately, and similarly for pupil features needed in the face
feedback box). In addition, we also used the recently added ridge thread regression method,
which reduces computational demands.
support for the experiment
Task
The study included three parts:
1). Recruitment and initial preparations
We asked participants to close any unnecessary programs or applications on their computers
before they began. Also, we asked them to close any browser tabs that could produce popups or
alerts that would interfere with the study (see Fig. S3). Once the study began, participants
entered into full-screen mode.
Before participants began the calibration/validation process, we provided detailed
instructions about how to position themselves. We first showed them instructions from
Semmelmann & Weigelt (2018). For example, they should sit directly facing the webcam to
ensure full visibility of their face. We also added several tips we learned from the pilot study. In
detail, we asked participants to 1). use their eyes to look around the screen and avoid moving
their head; 2). keep lights in front of them rather than behind them so that the webcam could
clearly see their faces; 3). avoid sitting with a window behind them (Fig. S2).
After reading the instructions, participants saw a screen where they could position
themselves appropriately using the live feed from their webcam. Once they were properly
positioned, they could advance to the calibration and validation stage.
2). Calibration + validation
Participants next had to pass an initial calibration + validation task (Fig. 1A). At the beginning
of the calibration, a video feed appeared in the top left corner of the screen. Participants could
use this video feedback to adjust their position and center their face in a green box in the center
of the video display. Once properly positioned, participants could press the space bar to
advance to the next step.
Next, participants saw a sequence of 13 calibration dots appear on the screen, each for
three seconds (Semmelmann & Weigelt, 2018). The task was simply to stare directly at each dot
until it disappeared.
Next, participants entered the validation procedure. The validation procedure was
essentially identical to the calibration procedure, except for the following differences. Each
validation dot lasted for two seconds. Within those two seconds, WebGazer made 100
measurements (one every 20ms). Measurements within first 500ms were removed to account for
gaze transitions. Each measurement was labeled as a hit if it was within X pixels of the center of
the dot (X increased with each failed calibration/validation attempt, see below). If at least 80%
of the measurements were hits, we labeled the dot as valid, and it turned green. Otherwise, the
dot turned yellow (in the validation instructions, we told participants to try to make every dot
turn green). Out of 13 validation dots, if the valid dot proportion was at least Y, the experiment
proceeded.
Participants had three chances to pass this initial calibration + validation task. With each
new attempt, we increased the pixel threshold (X) for a hit and the valid-dot threshold (Y). In
particular, the pixel thresholds (X) were: 130px, 165px, and 200px; the valid-dot thresholds
were: 80%, 70%, and 60%. If a participant failed the calibration + validation three times, we
compensated them with 50 cents and ended the experiment.
We adopted this procedure to give poorly calibrated participants a chance to reposition
themselves and try again, while also acknowledging that some participants might not be able to
sufficiently improve their setup to pass the most stringent requirements. This also allowed us to
assess if initial calibration attempt(s) predicted any of the later results (see Supplementary Note
1).
3). Hypothetical food choice task.
After passing the initial calibration and validation, participants proceeded to the choice task (Fig.
1B). This paradigm was initially used in Krajbich et al. (2010) to study how gaze influences
value-based decisions. Participants first rated their desire for 70 snack food items on a discrete
scale from 0 to 10. Participants were told that 0 means indifference towards the snack, while 10
indicates extreme liking of the snack. They could also click a “dislike” button if they didn’t like
a food item. Participants used the mouse to click on the rating scale.
After the rating task, participants were recalibrated and validated. They were eye-tracked
for the remainder of the study.
A).
20% of top
20% of left
Invalid
Valid
B).
Recalibration
Initial Calibration
+ +
Validation
Validation
Recalibration
Validation
Participants would only see one dot at a time. During calibration only, the participant’s face was
present at the top left corner of the screen, along with a green box for positioning. During
validation only, the dots would change color to indicate a valid or invalid measure. B). Overview
of the experiment. There was an initial calibration + validation phase to screen out problematic
participants. Next, participants rated how much they liked 70 different food items. Then there
was another calibration + validation. This was followed by 100 binary-choice trials where
participants chose which food they preferred; there was a recalibration + validation halfway
through these trials.
Next, participants began the binary choice task. 100 trials were randomly generated using
pairs of the rated items, excluding the disliked items. Participants were told to choose their
preferred food in each trial. They selected the left option by pressing the left arrow key and the
right option by pressing the right arrow key.
Between trials, participants were either presented with a fixation cross at the center of the
screen or, every ten trials, with a sequence of three red validation dots. In the latter case, the first
two validation dots appeared randomly at one of 12 possible positions, while the last dot always
appeared at the center of the screen. For each of those validation dots, the pixel threshold was set
at 130px with a threshold of 70%, and the presentation time was 2 seconds. A recalibration
would be triggered if participants failed more than four validation dots in two successive
intertrial validation.
After 50 trials, participants were given the option to take a short break. After the break,
they were recalibrated and validated.
Data cleaning
Out of 49 participants, 48 participants’ data were fully received. One participant’s data were only
partially received, with 32 choice trials.
To ensure good data quality for the analysis linking gaze to behavior, we checked the
intertrial validation pass rate and excluded participants who failed too many. As mentioned
above, the pixel threshold was set at 130px with a threshold of 70% for each validation dot. A
participant’s pass rate was their fraction of valid intertrial dots. There were 35 participants with
pass rates higher than 0.45, eight participants with pass rates between 0.3 and 0.4, and six
participants with pass rates below 0.2. For those participants with pass rates between 0.3 and
0.4, we identified the longest intervals that did not include two consecutive complete validation
failures (six consecutive missed dots). If those intervals contained at least 20 behavioral trials,
we included those trials in the analysis (see Fig. S5). In particular, we included 50, 40, and 20
trials from three additional participants. Thus, 38 participants were included in total.
We also excluded individual trials based on RT and dwell times. We removed trials with
RTs shorter than 0.4s or longer than 10s, and trials with potentially problematic fixation data as
follows: 1). The gaze measurements were always at the center of the screen. 2). The sampling
interval was higher than 200ms (10 times larger than expected). After these exclusions, the mean
number of trials was 80 (SD = 27).
Stimuli and ROI definition
Each food image was 450px by 320px. We defined AOIs in terms of the percentage of the screen
size. Gaze within 25 to 75 percent of the screen height and 5 to 45 percent of the screen width
were considered the left AOI, while gaze within 25 to 75 percent of the screen height and 55 to
95 percent of the screen width were considered the right AOI.
As a robustness check, we also tried defining AOIs in pixels, adding 90px horizontal buffers and
54px vertical buffers to the edges of the images. There were no qualitative differences using this
alternative AOI definition.
Computer resolution/browser usage
Participants’ screen widths ranged from 1280px to 2560px and screen heights ranged from
719px to 1440px. Out of 49 participants who passed the initial calibration, 45 of them used
Chrome (33 used version 85; 10 used version 84; 1 used version 77; 1 used version 75), and 4 of
them used Firefox (version 80).
Results
Basic setup and data quality
To begin, it is worth briefly describing a standard eye-tracking procedure in the brick-and-mortar
lab. Typically, the eye-tracking camera is situated either below or above the computer screen,
between the screen and the participant (Schulte-Mecklenbeck, Kühberger, & Johnson, 2019).
The participant is seated, often with their head immobilized in a chinrest (though not always).
Participants are instructed to try to keep their heads still during the experiment. Before the
experiment begins, participants go through a calibration procedure in which they stare at a
sequence of dots that appear at different locations on the screen (Fig. 1A). A subsequent
validation procedure has the participant look at another sequence of dots, to establish how well
the eye-tracker’s estimate of the gaze location aligns with where the participant is supposed to be
looking (i.e. the dots). During the experiment, validation can be repeated (to varying degrees) to
ensure that the eye-tracker is still accurate.
With WebGazer we used a similar procedure, with some qualifications. First, before
signing up for the experiment, we required participants to be using a laptop with a webcam, and
to be using an appropriate web browser (see Methods). We also asked them to close any
applications that might produce popups. We had no control over the participant’s environment
and we could not immobilize their head, but we did provide them with a number of suggestions
for how to optimize performance, including keeping their heads still, avoiding sitting near
windows, keeping light sources above or in front of them rather than behind them, etc. (see
Methods). Participants had three chances to pass the calibration and validation procedure,
otherwise the experiment was terminated, and they received a minimal “showup” fee (see
Methods).
During the experiment, we incorporated a small number of validation points into the
inter-trial intervals, rather than periodically having a full procedure with many validation points.
This step allowed us to evaluate data quality over time; in future experiments this step could be
skipped or replaced with ongoing calibration points. We did recalibrate halfway through the
choice task. The time interval between the calibration at the beginning of the choice task and the
second calibration was 5.39 minutes on average (SD = 2.66 mins).
Prior work has documented the spatial resolution of WebGazer (Semmelmann & Weigelt,
2018). They established that, shortly after calibration and validation, online precision is
comparable to, but slightly worse than that in the lab (online: 18% of screen size, 207px offset;
in-lab: 15% of screen size, 172px offset). However, an unresolved issue is whether that spatial
resolution persists as time goes on.
To assess spatial resolution over time, we examined the hit ratio for validation dots as the
experiment went on. For each measurement, we calculated the Euclidean distance (in pixels)
between the recorded gaze location and the center of the validation dot. If this distance was
below a critical threshold (see Methods), we labeled the measurement a hit, otherwise we labeled
it a miss. The hit ratio is simply the proportion of hits out of all the validation measurements (see
Methods). Aside from an initial drop shortly after each calibration/validation, the hit ratio
remained quite steady over time (Fig. 2A; mean hit ratio as a function of trial number: 𝛽 = –
intertrial validation.
A second, potentially more serious issue is temporal resolution over time. Eye-tracking
setups often come with dedicated computer hardware due to the required computations. With
online eye-tracking, there is no second computer and we have little control over participants’
hardware. If the computations overwhelm the participants’ hardware, the temporal resolution
may suffer dramatically.
To assess temporal resolution over time, we examined the average time interval between
gaze estimates made by WebGazer as the experiment went on. As we feared, an earlier pilot
experiment revealed that the time interval between estimates increases dramatically over time,
from 95ms (SD = 13ms) in the first ten trials, to 680 ms (SD = 64ms) by the halfway point
(13.20 min (SD = 3.55 min)). This decreased back to 99ms (SD = 12ms) after recalibration but
then increased to 972ms (SD = 107ms) by the end of the experiment. This kind of time
resolution is unacceptable for most behavioral work.
However, with some modifications to the WebGazer code (see Methods) we were able to
reduce computational demands. As a result, the time interval between estimates in our main
experiment remained steady at 24.85 on average (SD = 12.08ms) throughout the experiment
(Fig. 2B). This time resolution is comparable to many in-lab eye-trackers currently on the
market and in scientific use (Carter & Luke, 2020).
To further quantify spatial resolution, we also examined the initial validation data from
another WebGazer study using the same calibration and validation procedure (N=83, details
reported elsewhere1). Here, we summarize the sample mean and sample deviation for each
1 This project used WebGazer in political decision making. The timeline of the study was similar to the food choice
study presented here. Participants first completed an initial calibration and validation stage. Participants who
successfully passed the initial stage went on to make political choices while they were eye-tracked. This dataset
includes only those participants who passed the calibration, using the same criteria as in the food study.
calculated a confusion matrix to examine how often WebGazer estimated the incorrect validation
dot (Fig. 3). These results indicate that the spatial precisions are mostly consistent across the
validation dots, with some exceptions at the corners of the screen (as is also common in the lab).
In particular, the validation dots at the corners of the screen had significantly larger offsets than
the other dots (mixed-effects regression of offsets on the validation dot position (at the corner vs.
not at the corner): 𝛽= 29.10, p = 0.023).
ratio, namely the proportion of successful intertrial validation points, as a function of number of
validations completed. 10 intertrial validation trials were included per participant. The vertical
orange line represents the recalibration halfway through the experiment. (B) The gaze sampling
interval, namely the delay between gaze measurements, as a function of the number of choice
trials completed. The white circles indicate the median values. The black bars in the center of
the violins represent the interquartile range. The blue violins represent all of the observations.
0.1
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Validation trial
oitar
tiH
10 30 50 70 90
Choice trial
)sm(lavretni
gnilpmas
ezaG
A) B)
(X; Y) Mean distance (px) SD distance (px)
20%; 20% 156.08 142.20
20%; 50% 143.26 135.35
20%; 80% 170.78 155.13
50%; 20% 132.63 125.44
50%; 80% 140.23 132.44
80%; 20% 144.86 140.91
80%; 50% 132.55 142.44
80%; 80% 154.74 138.71
35%; 35% 141.35 138.56
65%; 35% 125.69 130.94
35%; 65% 128.46 126.81
65%; 65% 117.60 125.01
50%; 50% 126.79 121.27
study (reported elsewhere). Each row represents a validation dot position, with the horizontal x-
coordinate followed by the vertical y-coordinate, relative to the top left corner of the screen. For
example, 20%;80% represents a dot at the bottom left corner of screen, 20% of the way right and
80% of the way down. Each validation sample represents a single gaze measurement produced
by WebGazer. Ideally, WebGazer would give a measurement every 20ms in the experiment.
Mean distances represent the average Euclidean distance between the measured gaze location
and the center of the validation dot. Standard deviations are calculated for each condition using
all validation samples for that condition.
Dot position
validation dots and examined the spatial distribution of observed gaze samples for each of those
dots. Ideally, we would only observe gaze samples at the current dot position, as would be
indicate by solid black along the diagonal and light grey everywhere else. The location of the
gaze sample was calculate using Euclidean distance. If the Euclidean distance between the
sample and a dot position was within 15% of the screen width (192 pixels for a laptop with
1280px screen width), then the sample was assigned to that dot. For instance, if the Euclidean
distance between a sample and dot (20%; 20%) is smaller than 15% of the screen width, then the
sample is assigned to (20%; 20%). The coordinates (X,Y) of the validation dots are displayed
along the diagonal.
noitisop
elpmaS
(0.8,0.8)
0.6
(0.8,0.5)
0.5
(0.8,0.2)
0.4
(0.5,0.8)
(0.5,0.5)
0.3
(0.5,0.2)
0.2
(0.2,0.8)
0.1
(0.2,0.5)
0.0
(0.2,0.2)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Analysis of the dataset
To verify the quality of online eye-tracking, we sought to replicate the robust links between gaze
and choice that have been documented in the literature (e.g., Krajbich et al., 2010; Krajbich &
Rangel, 2011; Shimojo et al., 2003). We used Krajbich et al. (2010)’s binary choice experiment
as a basis for comparison (Fig. 1B). This experiment was originally run with an eye-tracker with
comparable time resolution of 20ms. In that version, participants first rated 70 snack foods, then
in 100 trials decided which of two snack foods they would prefer to eat. Our online version of
that experiment was identical except for the particular stimuli, the number of trials, and the fact
that the decisions were hypothetical.
In the original experiment, accuracy rates for rating differences of {1, 2, 3, 4 ,5} were
{0.65, 0.76, 0.84, 0.91, 0.94}; in the MTurk study they were {0.65, 0.79, 0.87, 0.90, 0.92}.
Thus, despite being hypothetical, decisions in the MTurk study were very similar in quality.
Response times (RT) in the original study declined with absolute value difference from
2.55s to 1.71s. Similarly, RTs in the MTurk study declined from 1.42s to 1.17s, though they
were significantly shorter than the original study, as indicated by a mixed-effects regression of
log(RT) on absolute value difference and a dummy variable for the online study (𝛽 = -0.91,
se(𝛽) = 0.03, two-sided p = 10-16). While MTurk respondents were considerably faster in their
decisions, they still exhibited the expected relationship between difficulty and RTs (mixed
" "
effects regression of log(RT) on absolute value difference: 𝛽 = -0.026, se(𝛽) = 0.004, two-sided
p = 10-9 ). Other behavioral analyses can be found in Supplementary Note 2.
Next, we turn to the eye-tracking data. Key relationships that we sought to replicate here
include correlations between dwell times and choice, and between the last fixation location and
choice.
The first analysis models the choice (left vs. right) as a function of rating difference (left
– right) and total dwell time difference (left – right) over the course of the trial, using a mixed-
effects logistic regression. We found a strong significant effect of relative dwell time (𝛽= 0.57,
se(𝛽) = 0.14, two-sided p = 10-5), even after accounting for item ratings (Fig. 4A).
We also examined heterogeneity in this relationship, using individual-level logistic
regressions. Twenty-six (68%) participants exhibited positive coefficients (12 were significant at
two-sided p < 0.1). This is comparable, though somewhat less consistent than in the original in-
lab dataset (Fig. 5).
The second analysis examines the effect of individual dwells. Here we model the choice
(first-seen vs. other) as a function of the rating difference (first – other) and the duration of the
first dwell, again with a mixed-effects logistic regression. We again find a significant effect of
" "
the initial dwell time (𝛽 = 0.43, se(𝛽) = 0.22, two-sided p = 0.04), even after accounting for the
item ratings (Fig. 4B).
The third analysis examines the effect of the final fixation location. Here we model the
choice (last seen vs. other) as a function of the rating difference (last seen– other), again with a
" "
mixed-effects logistic regression. We find a strong significant intercept term (𝛽 = 0.24; se(𝛽) =
0.06, two-sided p = 10-5), indicating a bias to choose the last-seen item (Fig. 4C). However, this
last-fixation effect is smaller in this dataset compared to the original dataset.
One noticeable difference between this dataset and the original in-lab results (Krajbich et
al., 2010) is in the duration of the average dwell (lab: 576 ms (SD = 380 ms), MTurk: 380ms
(SD = 291ms)). However, this may reflect that RTs were considerably shorter in this experiment
than in the lab experiment. The average dwell time, as a fraction of RT, was comparable
between the lab (M = 0.25, SD = 0.15) and MTurk (M = 0.29, SD = 0.19) experiments.
−500 0 500
difference between the left option and the right option in a given trial. B). Choosing the first seen
item as a function of the first gaze dwell time. C). Choice as a function of the value differences
between the two options, split by the location of the last fixation. In each plot, the red line/dots
represent the results in Krajbich et al. (2010)’s dataset; the blue line/dots represent the results in
the online MTurk study. The error bars represent the mean ± standard errors. The blue circles are
data from individual participants in the MTurk data.
0.1
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
Dwell advantage (L − R)[ms]
)tfel
esoohc(P
MTurk
In−lab
200 400 600 800
0.1
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
First dwell time [ms]
)nesohc
nees
tsrif(P
MTurk
In−lab
−4 −2 0 2 4
0.1
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
Left rating − right rating
)tfel
esoohc(P
A) B)
C)
MTurk
In−lab
value distributions from the online MTurk study. (C) Coefficients and (D) p-value distributions
from Krajbich et al. (2010)’s dataset. (A-C) Dwell-time coefficients are extracted from the
individual-level logistic regressions of choice on dwell time difference; each bar represents one
participant. p-values indicate the significance of those coefficients. Negative p-values are for
individuals with coefficients less than zero.
tneiciffeoc
emit
llewD
2−
p−values
ycneuqerF
−1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5
tneiciffeoc
emit
llewD
p−values
ycneuqerF
−1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
A) B)
C)
D)
Discussion
We have presented our attempt at online eye-tracking in behavioral research. Online data
collection is increasingly common, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. This should not
be a barrier to studying visual attention.
Although there are some options available for online eye-tracking, none have been
adopted by behavioral researchers. Some software (e.g., TurkerGaze) requires extensive
source and can be very expensive to use. In general, when trying to build an online eye-tracking
experiment there are several features to consider: 1). The flexibility of stimulus presentation (is it
possible to adjust the paradigm/software for different experiments?) 2). The difficulty of the
experimental programming (does the implementation of the paradigm/software require extra
expertise?) 3). The retrieval of the eye-tracking data (can the data be retrieved and stored in a
useable format?) 4). The accessibility of the resources (is the software/paradigm open-source?).
We assessed these dimensions with our toolbox and found that it performs well on all
these dimensions, as it provides total flexibility, is integrated in user-friendly jsPsych, stores the
eye-tracking data with the other behavioral measures, and is open-source.
An important issue that we addressed in this study is the amount of calibration and
validation required to run a successful experiment. In prior work, calibration and validation has
taken up to 50% of the experiment time (Semmelmann & Weigelt, 2018). However, with our
modifications, we found that it is possible to get by with less, as there appears to be little to no
degradation in spatial or temporal precision over time, at least on the time scale of our
experiment. In our study, the mean fraction of the time participants spent in calibration or
validation was 40%, but we likely could have gone lower. Moreover, we found that most
participants were able to pass the initial calibration in their first attempt, minimizing the time that
they spend on calibration and validation (see Supplementary Note 1). Going forward, we would
suggest assigning a single calibration + validation phase at the beginning of the study (to screen
out unusable participants). Occasional inter-trial validation dots may also be useful as a measure
of data quality, or alternatively inter-trial calibration dots may be useful to improve data quality.
Of course, the amount of calibration should depend on the spatial precision required. If there are
more areas of interest (AOI) then more calibration may be necessary.
Along those lines, one unresolved issue is how many distinct AOIs can be effectively
used online. Here we used a simple design with two AOIs. Based on WebGazer’s spatial
precision, we estimate that one could use six AOIs without any degradation in data quality
Presumably, better data analysis methods could be used to filter out spurious data points, if one
needed more AOIs.
Another issue is how far the time resolution can be pushed. Here we went with 50 Hz,
which seemed to work well. Most common webcams have a sampling rate of around 50Hz (e.g.,
Logitech C922 camera with 60Hz sampling rate) and so that is likely the limit on temporal
resolution.
Notably, visual angle, which is one common measure reported in eye-tracking studies, is
not available with the current toolbox. However, WebGazer does detect users’ faces using the
clmtrackr library (a face fitting library; Mathias, 2014) and then extracts the eye features (Robal
et al., 2018). It should therefore be possible to calculate a participant’s distance to the screen, and
from that estimate visual angle. Future research should attempt to address this issue.
Previous research has documented the advantages and disadvantages of conducting
behavioral research online (i.e., Mason & Suri, 2012). We would like to highlight several
benefits of online eye-tracking compared to in-lab eye-tracking. First, tasks on MTurk allow
many participants to participate in the study simultaneously. In contrast, in-lab eye-tracking
studies typically are one-on-one sessions, with one participant and one experimenter in the
laboratory (but see Hausfeld et al. 2020). Therefore, collecting data in the lab is time and labor
intensive. We completed data collection in three days, while it would take weeks to collect the
same amount of data in the lab. Second, the low cost of online eye-tracking is also another
distinct advantage, as it requires no special hardware on the experimenter’s side and the software
involved is all free and open access.
On the other hand, there are some limitations to the online approach (e.g. Ahler, Roush,
& Sood, 2020). One issue is with the number of participant exclusions. In a typical lab study,
only a small number of participants are excluded. For example, our in-lab comparison study
(Krajbich et al. 2010) only excluded 1 participant out of 40. Meanwhile, in the online study, we
excluded over half of the participants. However, this comparison is somewhat misleading.
Online, most exclusions were done before the experiment even began; participants could not
begin the experiment until they passed hardware checks and then the calibration/validation. In
the lab, participants who cannot be calibrated or who simply fail to show up to their scheduled
session would normally not be counted as “exclusions”, they would simply not be mentioned.
So, while we might be concerned about potential selection effects where we are only studying
people who have good laptops, are able to position themselves properly, and follow directions,
there are also similar concerns in lab experiments where we are only studying college students
who are motivated enough to sign up for a study, show up to their session, and follow directions.
Additionally, online studies in general suffer from higher rates of attrition. Researchers have
found that up to 25% of MTurk respondents are suspicious or fraudulent, e.g. bots (Ahler et al.,
2020). Given that we cannot observe our participants nor control their environment or hardware
(aside from requiring a laptop with a webcam), it is not surprising that we have lots of
exclusions. We would argue that what matters is the final number of participants, rather than the
fraction of recruited participants.
On a related point, one common issue with online studies is ensuring that participants are
human and not computer “bots”. Researchers have developed ways to filter out bot data after the
fact (Dupuis et al., 2019; Permut, Fisher, & Oppenheimer, 2019) or to use extra items to screen
out bots during the study (Buchanan & Scofield, 2018). The problem with the former approach is
that it requires assumptions about how these bots will respond. Savvy Mturk users might be able
to program bots that violate those assumptions. The latter approach is more similar to ours, but it
typically requires participants to exert extra effort that is irrelevant to the task, and these extra
measures may also be defeated by savvy programmers. WebGazer provides a simple way to
ensure that participants are human beings, without any additional questions or statistical tests.
While it is surely not impenetrable, faking eye-tracking data would be no small feat.
In summary, we see a lot of promise for online eye-tracking, even beyond the COVID
pandemic. While it is by no means perfect, it provides a fast, accessible, and potentially more
representative way to study visual attention in behavioral research. We look forward to seeing
the ways in which researchers take advantage of this opportunity.