Running Head: PRESTIMULUS CUES BENEFIT RECOGNITION MEMORY
Informative and uninformative prestimulus cues at encoding benefit familiarity and source
memory
Nicholas Yeh and Joshua D. Koen*
Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame, IN
*Corresponding Author:
Joshua D. Koen
University of Notre Dame
Department of Psychology
Notre Dame, IN 46556
Email: jkoen@nd.edu
Abstract
Previous research has shown that neural activity elicited by informative prestimulus cues during
encoding differ with respect to subsequent memory outcomes. These findings have been taken as
evidence that prestimulus cues benefit processes associated with successful encoding and,
ultimately, subsequent memory performance. However, previous studies have not included the
conditions necessary to appropriately test this assumption. We address this shortcoming by
examining how informative and uninformative prestimulus encoding cues affect memory
accuracy for upcoming stimuli compared to a no cue condition. At encoding, participants made
one of two semantic judgments on words preceded by an informative prestimulus cue that
identified the upcoming semantic judgment, an uninformative prestimulus cue that signaled an
upcoming trial but no information about the semantic judgment, or no cue. Dual process
estimates of familiarity, but not recollection, demonstrated a graded pattern with the
informativeness of the prestimulus cues (i.e., informative > uninformative > no cues). Moreover,
both informative and uninformative prestimulus cues enhanced subsequent source memory
accuracy for the encoding task compared to the no cue condition. These findings suggest that
prestimulus cues can strengthen the processes that support successful memory encoding and
benefit subsequent familiarity and source memory.
Keywords: Recognition Memory, Dual Process Theory, Encoding, Attention, Prestimulus
Subsequent Memory Effects
Introduction
Efforts to understand how new experiences are encoded into memory have focused on the
cognitive and neural processes elicited in the period immediately after the experience of an
event. Most studies examining the neural correlates of successful encoding have used the
subsequent memory procedure (Wagner et al., 1998) to investigate differences in neural activity
elicited by stimuli that are later remembered or forgotten (Kim, 2011). However, there is now
compelling evidence that ongoing neural activity elicited by a prestimulus cue in the seconds or
so prior to the presentation of a stimulus is associated with subsequent memory outcomes (e.g.,
de Chastelaine & Rugg, 2015; Gruber & Otten, 2010; Otten et al., 2006, 2010; for review, see N.
Cohen et al., 2015). In other words, neural activity elicited by prestimulus cues at encoding
differs in magnitude when the stimulus following the cue is remembered or forgotten (i.e.,
differences in subsequent memory outcomes). An interesting implication from these findings is
whether prestimulus cues enhance memory accuracy of the upcoming stimulus. This has not
been directly tested because prior EEG and fMRI studies have focused on the neural activity
elicited by a single prestimulus cue that conveys something informative about the upcoming
stimulus, but not how informative prestimulus cues benefit subsequent memory performance.
Additional prestimulus cue conditions, such as an uninformative prestimulus cue or a no cue
condition, are needed to understand so-called pre-stimulus subsequent memory effects more fully
and how prestimulus cues affect subsequent memory performance (e.g., memory discriminability
on subsequent tests). Therefore, our aim here is to expand on these neuroimaging findings to
examine if prestimulus cues during encoding enhance later memory performance.
Research examining prestimulus subsequent memory effects – differences in neural
activity preceding the onset of a to-be-remembered stimulus as a function of subsequent memory
– have concentrated on neural activity elicited by prestimulus cues at encoding that conveyed
something informative about an aspect of the upcoming trial (Adcock et al., 2006; Addante et al.,
2015; Bollinger et al., 2010; de Chastelaine & Rugg, 2015; Fellner et al., 2013; Galli et al., 2012;
Gruber & Otten, 2010; Koen, Horne, et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2021; Mackiewicz et al., 2006; Otten
et al., 2006; Park & Rugg, 2010). For instance, Otten and colleagues (2006) recorded event-
related potentials elicited by informative prestimulus cues that instructed participants to make a
semantic or orthographic judgment about an upcoming word. Using the Remember/Know
procedure (Tulving, 1984), the authors observed negative going event-related potentials at
frontal scalp electrodes elicited by cues preceding words that attracted subsequent Remember
responses relative to words attracting subsequent Know and New responses (also see Otten et al.,
2010; for related fMRI findings, see de Chastelaine & Rugg, 2015; Park & Rugg, 2010). These
findings were taken to suggest that prestimulus subsequent memory effects are associated with
recollection. Additional studies have provided converging evidence that prestimulus subsequent
memory effects are associated with subsequent recollection, including tasks using more objective
measures of recollection such as source (Koen, Horne, et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2021) and
associative memory (Addante et al., 2015). Moreover, prestimulus subsequent memory effects
have been observed in the hippocampus (Addante et al., 2015; de Chastelaine & Rugg, 2015;
Guderian et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2021; Merkow et al., 2014; Park & Rugg, 2010; Uncapher et al.,
2011), a region that plays an important role in recolleciton (for reviews, see Diana et al., 2007;
Eichenbaum et al., 2007; Yonelinas et al., 2010). While these data provide a link between
prestimulus subsequent memory effects and subsequent recollection (see also Salari & Rose,
2016), it remains an open question as to whether informative prestimulus cues during encoding
are associated with selective increases in behavioral estimates of recollection or broader effects
on recognition memory.
The findings discussed above predict that providing informative prestimulus cues during
encoding will benefit the processes supporting successful memory encoding and, in turn, benefit
measures of subsequent memory performance such as memory discrimination or estimates of
recolleciton and familiarity. However, this prediction has not been directly assessed by the
nueroimaging literature. First, simply observing prestimulus subsequent memory effects in
neural activity in a single condition (i.e., informative prestimulus cues) does not indicate that
such activity will lead to better (or worse) levels of memory performance. Second, and more
imporantly, neuroimaging studies have typically not included the conditions necessary to test the
above hypothesis. For instance, most studies have included informative prestimulus cues (e.g.,
cues indicating a semantic or orthographic judgment about a word) but have not included a
critical comparison condition that includes either an uninformative cue (e.g., neutral cues
signaling a trial is upcoming but provides no information about performing a semantic or
orthographic judgment about a word) or no prestimulus cue at all. The few studies that have
included multiple types of cues have found that informative cues enhance memory compared to
uninformative cues (Bollinger et al., 2010; although see Lin et al., 2017) and no prestimulus cues
(Lin et al., 2015). However, these studies did not parse out different mnemonic processes,
namely recollection and familiarity, which might be critical to understanding how different types
of prestimulus encoding cues influence subsequent memory performance. Another related body
of work examining the role of schemas and expectations on memory encoding have
demonstrated that valid cues that accurately predict a feature of the upcoming stimulus (e.g., a
natural or manmade object) facilitate familiarity whereas invalid cues enhance recollection
(Kafkas, 2021; Kafkas & Montaldi, 2018; but see, Uncapher et al., 2011). The above studies also
differ from prior neuroimaging work in that the prestimulus cues were not required to
successfully complete the encoding task (but see, Galli et al., 2012; Gruber & Otten, 2010; Otten
et al., 2006, Experiment 2). The findings discussed above provide some evidence that
prestimulus encoding cues benefit memory performance in some conditions. However, it remains
an open question if these behavioral findings extend to paradigms that have been shown to elicit
prestimulus subsequent memory effects observed in EEG and fMRI data, and if the memory
benefits associated with informative prestimulus cues are more strongly associated with
recollection and familiarity.
Additionally, identifying when and under what circumstances different types of
prestimulus cues at encoding benefit later memory accuracy will provide valuable theoretical
insights about prestimulus subsequent memory effects observing EEG and fMRI studies, which,
as discussed above, have only included informative prestimulus cues. Of relevance to the present
investigation are two hypotheses of prestimulus subsequent memory effects from the
neuroimaging literature initially proposed by Otten and colleagues (2006; see also, Adcock et al.,
2006; Park & Rugg, 2010). One possibility is that informative and uninformative prestimulus
cues relative to no prestimulus cues enhance memory accuracy with no memory differences
emerging between the two prestimulus cues. This finding would align with a general attention
hypothesis that prestimulus cues recruit general attentional resources that benefit memory
encoding processes. A second possibility is that informative prestimulus cues, relative to both
uninformative prestimulus cues and no prestimulus cues, enhances memory accuracy with no
differences between uninformative and no prestimulus cues. If informative prestimulus cues
proactively engage in task specific preparatory processes, this finding would align with a task set
hypothesis. This hypothesis argues that prestimulus cues orient individuals to adopt an optimal
task set through conscious, flexible, and strategic processes, which in turn benefits encoding of
trials for which the task set is more effectively deployed in the prestimulus interval. It is
important to point out that the general attention and task set hypotheses are not mutually
exclusive.
The present investigation examined whether informative and uninformative prestimulus
cues during encoding benefited recognition memory performance relative to when no
prestimulus cues were presented. For the purposes of improving our ability to relate these
findings to the prestimulus subsequent memory effect literature discussed above, we used a
modified version of an experimental procedure from our prior work (Koen, Horne, et al., 2018;
Liu et al., 2021) that included informative cues, uninformative cues, and no prestimulus cues
using a 6-point confidence that allowed for multiple measures of memory to be computed. We
included the analysis of corrected hit rates for comparison with prior behavioral work (e.g.,
Bollinger et al., 2010; Lin et al., 2015, 2017). Moreover, old/new recognition decisions were
acquired using a 6-point confidence scale to allow us to measure of recollection and familiarity
with the dual-process signal detection model (Koen et al., 2017; Yonelinas, 1999; for reviews,
see Yonelinas et al., 2010; Yonelinas & Parks, 2007). This allowed us to examine whether
prestimulus cues differentially affected these two qualitatively distinct mnemonic processes. In
addition, for Experiments 2-4, we included an objective measure of recollection (i.e., source
memory for the semantic judgments made during encoding) to further explore whether
prestimulus encoding cues affect recollection. Source memory was chosen because prestimulus
subsequent memory effects have been shown to vary with source memory outcomes (e.g., correct
vs. incorrect) in the neuroimaging work motivating this investigation (Koen, Thakral, et al.,
2018; Liu et al., 2021).
Given the similarity in the experimental designs and measures across all four
experiments, we collated the data across relevant measures in each of the experiments and
performed a linear mixed effects regression analysis. This approach helps to maximize the
statistical power by pooling the data from all four experiments, while also accounting for error
variance across experiments and participants. While this across-experiment analysis was not pre-
registered, and thus should be considered exploratory, it closely follows the pre-registered
analysis plan from each experiment.
Methods
Ethics statement
These studies were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of
Notre Dame. All participants provided informed consent before participation.
Preregistrations and Data Availability
We pre-registered the exclusion criteria, hypotheses, and analyses for each of the four
experiments on the Open Science Framework. The pre-registrations, sample size justification,
and data (both raw and derived) for each individual experiment, and for the across experiment
Participants
A total of 560 individuals were recruited to participant in one of four experiments. A total
of 424 participants (234 females, 187 males, 3 preferred to not answer, M = 22.71, 18-30 years
age
of age) contributed data to the across experiment analyses reported here. This sample comprised
64, 82, 130, and 148 participants from Experiments 1-4 respectively. Note that data from an
additional 136 participants were collected and excluded from the analysis due to meeting one of
the pre-registered exclusion criteria. Exclusionary criteria included failing to respond on 20% or
more of either the encoding trials or test trials, low item memory (<.10), low source memory
(<.05), and responding with the middle range of the confidence responses (i.e., 2-5 bins) on
fewer than 10% of all valid test trials (collapsed across all trial types). For full breakdown of the
All participants were young adults fluent in English with no reported history of color
blindness. In Experiment 1, participants also reported no history of memory disorders or severe
head injuries. Participants were recruited for in-person testing (Experiment 1) and online testing
(Experiment 2) from the University of Notre Dame’s online recruitment system (SONA).
Additionally, fourteen participants in Experiment 2, and all participants in Experiment 3-4, were
recruited from Prolific had an approval rating of 90% or greater (e.g., participant’s performance
metric for completing Prolific studies). This Prolific guideline is consistent with previous work
(Peer et al., 2014). In addition, individuals who participated in one of the studies were ineligible
to partake in the others. Participants for the four experiments were compensated either with
course credit or $10.00 if they were recruited through the University of Notre Dame or through
Prolific, respectively.
Materials and Apparatus
The stimuli comprised of 384 nouns for Experiments 1-2 and 450 nouns for Experiments
3-4). The words were obtained from the MRC Psycholinguistic Database (Coltheart, 1981) with
the following characteristics: 4-8 (M = 5.37, SD = 1.20) letters in length, ranged from 1-40 (M =
12.81, SD = 10.05) in written frequency (Kučera & Francis, 1967), and had concreteness ratings
in the range of 500-662 (M = 582.94, SD = 31.83). An additional 45 words with similar
characteristics were used to make practice encoding and test lists.
For Experiment 1, we created a randomly generated stimulus list for each participant
comprised of 256 words the encoding phase (128 words the informative and uninformative
conditions) with the remaining 128 words (new) being presented during the recognition test. For
Experiment 2, the stimuli were the same as in Experiment 1 with the exception that 8 stimulus
sets were pseudo randomly generated to match informative vs. no cue conditions (128 words in
each condition) on the same word characteristics (length, frequency, and concreteness.) In
Experiments 3 and, 66 additional words were added to the words from Experiments 1 and 2 and
were used to create 4 stimuli sets with 300 words assigned to the study phase and 150 words
assigned to be new items at test. The lists were created pseudorandomly matching the
informative, uninformative, and no cue conditions (100 words in each condition) on the same
word characteristics.
The stimuli for Experiment 1 was presented using PsychoPy v3.0.3 (Peirce, 2007; Peirce
et al., 2019). The words were presented in Helvetica font at a height of 1.5 degrees of visual
angle (using PsychoPy degFlat units). For Experiments 2-4, the stimuli were presented via
Pavlovia.org using PsychoPy v2020.1.3 (Peirce, 2007; Peirce et al., 2019). Words were
presented in white, teal, or red Arial font with a letter height of .05 (using height units) on a grey
background.
Procedure
Across the four experiments the participants completed an incidental encoding task and
recognition test. Experiments 2-4 included a source memory judgment for words attracting an
old response. The recognition test occurred either immediately (Experiments 2-4) or 10 minutes
(Experiment 1) following the encoding phase.
Encoding phase
During the incidental encoding phase, participants made one of two semantic judgments
(shoebox, manmade) for each word. For the manmade judgments, participants responded ‘yes’ if
the word denoted a manmade object, and ‘no’ if the word denoted a natural object. For the
shoebox judgment, participants responded ‘yes’ if the object denoted by the word fit inside a
shoebox, and ‘no’ otherwise. Participants were instructed to enter their keyboard responses (i.e.,
“j” yes and “k” for no) quickly and with high accuracy.
There were three different prestimulus cue conditions across the four experiments
(informative, uninformative, or no cues). Informative cues signaled whether participants should
make a manmade judgment (blue shape) or shoebox judgment (red shape) for upcoming words.
Uninformative cues consisted of a white shape which signaled an upcoming trial without any
semantic judgment information to be performed on the word. In this case, the semantic judgment
was signaled simultaneously with the word (e.g., inside a blue or red box). The no prestimulus
cue trials did not provide any information about the upcoming trial or the semantic judgment.
The semantic judgment was signaled in the same way as in the uninformative cue trials.
In general, each trial was comprised of the presentation of a prestimulus cue (informative,
trial timing for each experiment). The response window included the time between the onset of a
word and the final fixation cross. Participants completed a short practice phase before the critical
encoding phase.
Experiment 1 presented informative and uninformative cues pseudorandomly and
intermixed such that no more than 3 trials with the same cue condition or semantic judgment
occurred consecutively. Experiment 2 presented informative and no prestimulus cues in a
blocked design (2 informative, 2 no cue) with an ABBA/BAAB counterbalance scheme (A-
informative, B- no cue). Experiment 3 presented all three cue conditions with a blocked design
using an ABCCBA/BCAACB/CABBAC counterbalance scheme (A-informative, B-
uninformative, C-no cue). Experiment 4 presented all three prestimulus cue conditions randomly
intermixed in the same phase.
Participants made semantic judgments (shoebox, manmade) about words preceded by either
informative, uninformative, or no cues. Informative cues indicated ahead of time what semantic
judgment to make for the words, with red and blue shapes signaling a shoebox and manmade
judgment respectively. Uninformative cues, which were signaled by a white shape, indicated that
a trial was upcoming but contained no information regarding the semantic judgment to make.
Instead, the semantic judgment was signaled simultaneously with the word by either a red/blue
font (Experiment 1) or red/blue box containing the word (Experiment 2-4). No cues contained no
information about the upcoming trial or semantic judgment to make. For these trials, the
semantic judgment was signaled in the same manner as the uninformative cue trials. The
response window for the semantic judgments began with the word presentation and for the
duration of the fixation cross following word presentation. Note, Experiment 4 included a 1-2s
jitter following the response window time. Experiment 1 and 4 presented prestimulus cues
intermixed. Experiment 2 and 3 presented prestimulus cues in individual blocks.
Recognition test
Following the encoding phase, participants completed a recognition memory test in
which they identified studied words as “old” and words not presented in the encoding phase as
“new” using a 6-point confidence scale (i.e., “1-sure new”, “2- maybe new”, “3-guess new”, “4-
guess old”, “5-maybe old”, “6-sure old”) (Yonelinas & Parks, 2007). Participants were instructed
to use the full range of confidence scale responses to accurately report their confidence in their
memory judgment. In Experiments 2-4, following an old response (i.e., a 4, 5, or 6 confidence
response), participants made a source memory decision by reporting their memory for the
semantic judgment performed on the word during the encoding phase (i.e., shoebox, manmade,
or don’t know). Participants were instructed to select the shoebox or manmade judgment
response if they could remember which semantic judgment was paired with the word during the
encoding phase, otherwise they were instructed to respond with a “Don’t Know” response. A
“new” response (i.e., a 1, 2, or 3 confidence response) progressed the task to the next test item. In
Experiment 1, the words were presented pseudorandomized (i.e., so that no more than three trials
from the same condition occurred consecutively) with the old/new responses being self-paced
keyboard responses. In Experiments 2-4, the words were presented randomly with both the
old/new and source memory touchpad/mouse responses having a 10 sec time limit. There was a
.5 second inter-trial interval of after the last response (item or source memory response).
Participants completed a practice test phase prior to the main recognition test to ensure they
understood the instructions.
Dependent variables
Corrected hit rates (i.e., hits – false alarms) were computed for each condition to
comparable measures to previous studies (Bollinger et al., 2010; Lin et al., 2015, 2017). The hit
rates were determined as the proportion of ‘old’ responses, regardless of confidence, to old
items. The false alarm rate was computed as the proportion of ‘old’ responses to new items. Note
that there was only a single new item condition. Thus, any differences between corrected hit
rates across the different cue conditions must be driven by differences in the hit rates. We report
the data as corrected hit rates for consistency with prior work.
Recollection and familiarity were estimated by fitting the dual-process signal detection
model to receiver operating characteristics from confidence responses. Model fitting was carried
out using the ROC Toolbox for Matlab (Koen et al., 2017) using the dual-process signal
detection model. Our choice to use this model (Yonelinas, 1994, 1999) was driven by findings
linking prestimulus subsequent memory effects to recollection (e.g., Otten et al., 2006, 2010;
Park & Rugg, 2010) and based on prior work demonstrating that the parameters of the dual-
process signal detection model behave in a theoretically meaningful way (Koen et al., 2013;
Koen & Yonelinas, 2010, 2011; Yonelinas, 1999, 2001). The dual-process signal detection
model estimates recollection as a probability ranging from 0 to 1 and familiarity as a
discrimination index (d'); familiarity estimates were constrained to be positive (i.e., > 0). For
Experiments 1 and 2, the model fitting routine estimated a total of 9 parameters: two estimates of
recollection (informative and uninformative cues in Experiment 1; informative and no cue in
Experiment 2), two estimates of familiarity, and five parameters modeling the location of
response criterion. For Experiments 3 and 4, the model fitting routine estimated a total of 11
parameters: three estimates of recollection (informative, uninformative, no cue), three estimates
of familiarity (informative, uninformative, no cue), and five parameters modeling the location of
response criterion. The number of criterion parameters for confidence-based receiver operating
characteristics is always N-1, where N is the number of confidence bins. The same criterion
parameters were used for the informative, uninformative, and no cue conditions because there
was only a single set of new items.
Additionally, source memory performance was computed for Experiments 2-4 accounting
for the “guess rate” using a single high threshold model (Mattson et al., 2014; Snodgrass &
Corwin, 1988). For correctly recognized old words (i.e., old words attracting a ‘sure old’, ‘maybe
old’, and ‘guess old’ response), the proportion of correct source memory responses (Hit) and the
proportion of “don’t know” (DK) source responses were used to calculate source memory
accuracy (i.e., probability of source recollection; pSR) with the following formula:
𝐻𝑖𝑡 − .5 ∗ [1 − 𝐷𝐾]
𝑝𝑆𝑅 =
1 − .5 ∗ [1 − 𝐷𝐾]
Statistical Analyses
The statistical analyses comprised of a series of linear mixed effects regression models
conducted on the dependent measures extracted from the four experiments. The linear mixed
effects regression approach has several advantages over traditional ANOVA analyses, such as
modeling a nested structure (e.g., participants within experiments), handling missing
observations (e.g., experiments not including all cue conditions or all memory measures), and
appropriately accounting for random effects (e.g., participants varying in memory performance
for the cue conditions across experiments). The mixed effects analyses were conducted in R
(version 3.6.3) with the mixed function in the afex package (Singmann et al., 2021) and follow up
post hoc tests being carried out with the emmeans package (Lenth, 2021). These models had a
single fixed effect factor of cue condition (informative, uninformative, no cue). There were also
two random intercepts for participants and experiment, with participants nested within
experiments. The mixed effects model formula was:
𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑦 = 𝛽 + 𝛽 𝑐𝑢𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 + >z / 𝑢 A
!" ## #$ !" %&’()!*(+, ./),!0!’/+,
! "
In the above equation, 𝑀𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑦 , represents the predicted memory measure for
"!
Participant j and Experiment i, 𝛽 is the model intercept, the beta coefficient (β ) represent the
##
fixed effect of cue condition, z / 𝑢 represents that Participant j is nested
%&’()!*(+, ./),!0!’/+,
! "
within Experiment i. A separate mixed effects analysis was carried out for each of the four
dependent measures: corrected hit rates, familiarity estimates, recollection estimates, and source
memory (pSR). Degrees of freedom for the fixed effects were estimated with the Kenward-Roger
method. We report effects sizes of partial-eta squared (𝜂 ) for the main effects of cue condition
and, where appropriate, Cohen’s d for post-hoc comparisons(J. D. Cohen, 1988). The 95%
confidence interval of the effect sizes are also reported.
Results
The analyses reported below focus on corrected hit rates, the familiarity and recollection
estimates derived from receiver operating characteristics curves, and on estimates of source
memory accuracy. The proportion of responses in each confidence bin and source memory
cue) and new words.
Confidence Bin
Item Type
Sure New Maybe New Guess New Guess Old Maybe Old Sure Old
Informative .05 .09 .10 .09 .15 .52
(.07) (.08) (.09) (.08) (.11) (.23)
Uninformative .05 .09 .10 .08 .15 .53
(.07) (.07) (.09) (.08) (.11) (.23)
No cue .07 .10 .11 .10 .15 .47
(.08) (.08) (.10) (.09) (.11) (.22)
New .29 .29 .23 .07 .06 .05
(.21) (.14) (.16) (.06) (.06) (.06)
Note. Item responses were made on a 6-point scale (1 = sure new, 2 = maybe new, 3 = guess
new, 4 = guess old, 5 = guess old, 6 = sure old). Item responses proportions were calculated for
each item response category. The sample size contributing to these means were 424, 342, 360,
and 424 for the Informative, Uninformative, No cue, and New item types, respectively.
trials (Informative, Uninformative, and No cue) receiving a correct ‘sure old’, ‘maybe old’, or
‘guess old’ responses.
Source Memory Classification
Item Type Source Correct Source Incorrect Source Don’t know
Informative 0.53 0.13 0.09
(.18) (.07) (.10)
Uninformative 0.53 0.13 0.09
(.17) (.07) (.10)
No cue 0.50 0.13 0.09
(.17) (.07) (.10)
Note. For the source memory judgments participants responded with whether the old item was
encoded with a shoebox or manmade response, and a Don’t know response if they were not sure
what semantic judgment they made. Proportions were collapsed across the semantic judgment
trial types and responses. The sample size contributing to these means were 360, 278, and 360
for the Informative, Uninformative, No Cue trial types, respectively.
The conclusions we reached based on the analyses reported below were unchanged with
an exploratory analysis that used the reverse Bonferroni method (Francis & Thunell, 2021) with
the analysis of each experiment individually. This approach controls for Type 1 and 2 error rates
by adjusting the alpha criterion level upwards (α = .051/k; k = number of tests within a family of
comparisons) when drawing conclusions that require consistent results across direct and
conceptual replications (i.e., all results are significant in each experiment) to support a
hypothesis. This exploratory analysis, as well as the pre-registered planned analyses of memory
performance and encoding reaction times for each experiment, are reported in the Supplemental
Materials.
Corrected hit rates
The linear mixed effects regression analysis on the corrected hit rates revealed a
significant cue condition effect, F(2, 700.86) = 27.94, p < .001, 𝜂 = .07 [95% CI: .04, .11] (see
informative, t(701.59) = 7.42, p < .001, d = .56 [95% CI: .41, .71], and uninformative
prestimulus cues, t(701.45) = 4.68, p < .001, d = .35 [95% CI: .20, .50], relative to no
prestimulus cues. Corrected hit rates were also higher for words preceded by informative relative
to uninformative prestimulus cues, t(701.66) = 2.27, p = .024, d = .17 [95% CI: .02, .32]. These
results demonstrate a ‘graded’ pattern with informative prestimulus cues being associated with
the highest corrected hit rates and no prestimulus cues being associated with the lowest corrected
hit rates.
show the median, notches (95% confidence intervals), and the interquartile (IQR) with lower and
upper whiskers (1.5 * IQR min and max). The means of the left panel reflect the model implied
mean and 95% confidence interval. The right panel displays the violin plots for corrected hit rate
difference scores between the three cued conditions along with the model implied mean
differences and 95% confidence interval.
Dual Process Signal Detection Model Parameter Estimates
Familiarity
The results from the linear mixed model conducted on familiarity estimates also
demonstrated a significant effect of cue condition, F(2, 703.90) = 20.27, p < .001, 𝜂 = .05 [95%
conditions (i.e., informative > uninformative > no cue). Specifically, familiarity estimates were
significantly higher for words preceded by informative, t(705.87) = 6.37, p < .001, d = .48 [95%
CI: .33, .63], and uninformative prestimulus cues, t(703.91) = 3.28, p = .001, d = .25 [95% CI:
.10, .40], relative to no prestimulus cues. Familiarity estimates were also higher for words
preceded by informative prestimulus encoding cues relative to uninformative prestimulus
encoding cues, t(704.20) = 2.73, p = .007, d = .21 [95% CI: .06, .35].
show the median, notches (95% confidence intervals), and the IQR with lower and upper
whiskers (1.5 * IQR min and max). The means of the left panel reflect the model implied mean
and 95% confidence interval. The right panel displays the violin plots for corrected hit rate
difference scores between the three cued conditions along with the model implied mean
differences and 95% confidence interval.
Recollection
There was no significant effect of cue condition on estimates of recollection derived from
the dual process signal detection model, F(2, 700.81) = 27.94, p < .001, 𝜂 = .01 [95% CI: .00,
show the median, notches (95% confidence intervals), and the IQR with lower and upper
whiskers (1.5 * IQR min and max). The means of the left panel reflect the model implied mean
and 95% confidence interval. The right panel displays the violin plots for corrected hit rate
difference scores between the three cued conditions along with the model implied mean
differences and 95% confidence interval.
Source Memory (pSR)
The results from the linear mixed effects regression analysis on source memory (i.e.,
pSR) revealed a significant effect of cue condition, F(2, 637.77) = 6.72, p < .001, 𝜂 = .02 [95%
for words preceded by informative, t(636.09) = 3.14, p = .002, d = .25 [95% CI: .09, .41], and
uninformative prestimulus cues, t(638.62) = 3.11, p = .002, d = .25 [95% CI: .09, .40], relative to
the no prestimulus cue condition. The difference in source memory accuracy between
informative and uninformative prestimulus cues was not significant, t(638.62) = .27, p = .788, d
= .02 [95% CI: -.18, .13]. These results suggest that source memory for the semantic judgment
was enhanced for words preceded by both informative and uninformative prestimulus cues.
median, notches (95% confidence intervals), and the IQR with lower and upper whiskers (1.5 *
IQR min and max). The means of the left panel reflect the model implied mean and 95%
confidence interval. The right panel displays the violin plots for corrected hit rate difference
scores between the three cued conditions along with the model implied mean differences and
95% confidence interval.
Discussion
The present study investigated whether informative prestimulus cues, uninformative
prestimulus cues, or no cues influenced overall recognition memory performance as well as
measures of different mnemonic processes. The primary finding from the across-experiment
analysis was that both informative and uninformative prestimulus cues compared to the no cue
condition enhanced memory performance in a graded fashion. Specifically, words encoded with
an informative prestimulus cue had the highest corrected hit rates compared to both
uninformative and no prestimulus cues, and words encoded with uninformative prestimulus cues
had higher corrected hit rates compared to the no prestimulus cue condition. The pattern of
memory enhancements for informative and uninformative cues also appeared to depend on the
mnemonic process. First, like corrected hit rates, familiarity estimates accuracy showed a graded
effect with the informativeness of the prestimulus cues. Second, although there was no effect of
prestimulus cues on estimates of recollection derived from the dual process signal detection
model, we observed that, relative to the no cue condition, informative and uninformative
prestimulus cues benefited source memory performance, which can be considered an objective
measure of recollection. Source memory, however, did not differ between informative and
uninformative prestimulus cues.
To our knowledge, the present work is first to simultaneously examine potential memory
enhancements of informative, uninformative, and no prestimulus cues on multiple memory
measures (i.e., corrected hit rates, familiarity, recollection, and source memory). Our findings
expand on prior studies examining the influence of prestimulus cues on memory with at most
two types of cues, such as informative vs. no prestimulus cues (Lin et al., 2015) and informative
vs. uninformative prestimulus cues (deBettencourt et al., 2021; Kafkas, 2021; Kafkas &
Montaldi, 2018). For example, Lin and colleagues (2015) had participants encode scenes that
were preceded by either an informative prestimulus cue that signaled the valence of the
upcoming scene (i.e., X = negative, O = neutral) or no prestimulus cue. The authors found that
informative prestimulus cues compared to no prestimulus cues enhanced recognition memory
(i.e., hit rates for scenes) on an old/new recognition test. Our inclusion of informative,
uninformative, and no prestimulus cues go beyond these prior studies to show a graded effect on
memory performance as a function of the informativeness of the prestimulus cues. Taken
together, the findings suggest that all prestimulus cues may not be associated with the same
memory enhancements and that degree to which prestimulus cues can enhance memory may be
related the informativeness of the prestimulus cue.
Our results also converge with prior studies and demonstrate the graded effect of cue
informativeness may depend on the specific mnemonic processes being measured. Here, we
found the graded effect of prestimulus cue type on estimates of familiarity. Prior research by
Kafkas and colleagues (Kafkas, 2021; see also Kafkas & Montaldi, 2018) compared estimates of
familiarity between valid and invalid prestimulus cues that signaled whether participants should
expect to see an image of a natural or manmade object. A subsequent memory test revealed that
objects preceded by valid cues (i.e., cues that signaled the correct category) at encoding were
associated with higher familiarity estimates relative to objects preceded invalid cues (i.e., cues
that incorrectly signal an upcoming image category). It is important to point out that while the
valid cues used by Kafkas and colleagues were like our informative prestimulus cues, the invalid
cues differ from the uninformative cues used in our study. Specifically, the invalid cues in
Kafkas and colleagues signal something incorrect about the upcoming trial, whereas our
uninformative cues simply signaled the trial was about to appear but did not carry any additional
information. It remains an open question if invalid cues like those used by Kafkas and colleagues
would also enhance familiarity estimates relative to a condition with no prestimulus cues. Such a
finding would converge with our results reported here and provide additional evidence that the
informativeness of prestimulus cues during encoding is associated with a monotonic increase in
familiarity estimates (and likely overall memory performance) on a subsequent memory test.
Our findings also provide valuable context for EEG/ERP and fMRI studies (de
Chastelaine & Rugg, 2015; Koen, Horne, et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2021; Otten et al., 2006)
typically correlated the neural activity elicited by an informative prestimulus cue prior to
encoding with subsequently remembered or forgotten responses. As discussed in the
Introduction, the predominate assumption from these neuroimaging findings is that the
prestimulus neural activity elicited by the informative prestimulus cues reflect encoding
processes that support subsequent recollection. Our findings here can more readily speak to prior
neuroimaging studies as we used a variation of a task used to examine prestimulus subsequent
memory effects in neural activity (Koen, Horne, et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2021). The reported
results are not fully consistent the proposal that prestimulus subsequent memory effects are
selectively associated with subsequent recollection-based memory. First, we only observed that
prestimulus cues enhanced objective (source memory), but not subjective, measures of
recollection. In other words, the recollection effect we observed appeared to be selective to the
cued information (i.e., the encoding judgment) and not more general. Second, and more
importantly, we found that prestimulus cues also affected estimates of familiarity (for related
findings, Kafkas, 2021; Kafkas & Montaldi, 2018). Prior neuroimaging research may have
missed the relationship between prestimulus subsequent memory effects and familiarity because
they have not clearly isolated recollection from familiarity. For example, previous findings have
contrasted neural activity associated with subsequent Remember responses from that associated
with a combination of subsequent Know and New responses (e.g., Otten et al., 2006). Although
some work has, arguably, more clearly linked prestimulus subsequent memory effects to
recollection (e.g., de Chastelaine & Rugg, 2015; Otten et al., 2010; Park & Rugg, 2010), the
links to familiarity have not been thoroughly investigated. These findings provide evidence the
prestimulus cues are associated with both recollection and familiarity and motivate future
neuroimaging that more thoroughly investigates prestimulus subsequent memory effects
associated with familiarity.
Our results also have implications for two accounts of prestimulus subsequent memory
effects reported in neuroimaging studies, namely the task set and general attention hypotheses.
The results from the analysis of familiarity estimates are most consistent with the task set
hypothesis. This hypothesis proposes that prestimulus cues orient individuals to engage an
optimal task set through conscious, flexible, and strategic processes. Adoption of these proactive
processes are proposed to benefit encoding of trials for which the task set is more effectively
deployed in the prestimulus interval (Otten et al., 2006, 2010). We argue the task set hypothesis
predicts that more informative cues will increase the likelihood of adopting the appropriate task
set, and thus will have the largest benefit to subsequent memory performance, which is broadly
consistent with the pattern of results we observed for familiarity estimates. However, familiarity
showed a graded relationship with the prestimulus encoding cue condition (i.e., informative >
predicts that only informative cues would benefit subsequent memory performance. Thus, it is
unclear if this finding is actually consistent with the task set hypothesis. However, the task set
and general attention hypotheses are not mutually exclusive. One way to reconcile the
prestimulus subsequent memory findings with respect to our familiarity findings is to assume
that the effects of activating a task set and general attention resources are additive. Given this
assumption, one would expect a graded effect whereby informative prestimulus cues benefit
memory encoding compared to uninformative prestimulus cues which, in turn, leads to better
memory performance compared to trials with no prestimulus encoding cues. Future work is
needed to examine the implications of these findings more fully.
The source memory findings are most consistent with the hypothesis that prestimulus
cues recruit general attentional resources that are beneficial for memory encoding. In the context
of the present study, this account predicts that both informative and uninformative (i.e., neutral)
prestimulus cues will benefit memory performance compared to a no cue condition. This is the
pattern of findings we observed with the source memory measure here. We argue that these
results converge with those from a recent report by deBettencourt and colleagues (2021).
Participants in this study studied sets of 4 images displayed at a specific (circular) location on a
screen in a working memory task. Some trials contained prestimulus encoding cues that directed
participants to covertly attend to the spatial location of one of the objects that was likely to be
probed. Other trials contained neutral prestimulus encoding cues with all 4 locations cued. These
conditions roughly correspond to our informative and uninformative cued conditions,
respectively. Participants’ working memory and long-term memory for the location of the
objects were tested with a continuous report task (cf. Brady et al., 2013; Harlow & Donaldson,
2013). The results revealed that prestimulus cues during a working memory task were associated
with more precise recollection of a stimulus-specific feature (e.g., location). Of interest to the
present work, deBettencourt and colleagues (2021) found that prestimulus spatial cues also
enhanced sustained attention (working memory performance over time) which was positively
associated with the precision of recollecting stimuli features (e.g., location). Applying these
findings to the present work, we speculate that informative and uninformative prestimulus cues
may have affected sustained attention mechanisms during encoding (also see deBettencourt et
al., 2018). For instance, both prestimulus cues may have increased sustained attention by
reducing the likelihood of attentional lapses occurring during encoding, which benefited
subsequent source memory performance (and potentially familiarity, as discussed above).
Additionally, if prestimulus cues modulated more task specific opposed to sustained attentional
processes, then we might have been more likely to observe increased source memory
performance for informative prestimulus cues compared to uninformative and no prestimulus
cues (as predicted by the task set hypothesis). Future studies are needed to examine how
prestimulus cues modulate different attentional processes and how their relationship contributes
to subsequent memory effects.
It is unclear why the effects on recollection were only observed on the source memory
measure and not on estimates of recollection derived from the dual process signal detection
model. This was surprising, as these two measures are thought to capture the same underlying
mnemonic process (Yonelinas, 1999). Consistent with supposition, recollection estimates derived
from the dual process signal detection model were more strongly predictive of source memory
than were familiarity estimates in the present experiments (see Supplemental Materials). Second,
this lack of a concurrent effect on both indices of recollection was surprising given that prior
neuroimaging work has observed prestimulus subsequent memory effects using both objective
(Addante et al., 2015; de Chastelaine & Rugg, 2015; Ezzyat et al., 2017; Galli et al., 2012; Koen,
Horne, et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2021) and subjective (Galli et al., 2012, 2013; Otten et al., 2006,
2010; Park & Rugg, 2010) recollection tasks. One way to reconcile the present findings with
prior research is to argue that the subjective measures of recollection in previous EEG and fMRI
research relied primarily on retrieval of criterial source details, such as stimulus modality (e.g.,
auditory versus visual) or semantic judgments (e.g., deep versus shallow), that were included in
those studies. Additional research will be needed to identify if prestimulus cues differentially
affect objective and subjective measures of recollection, and if so under what conditions.
Importantly, if our finding that prestimulus cues at encoding benefit objective, but not subjective,
measures of recollection hold, then this provides an important constraint on theories of
prestimulus subsequent memory effects.
There are a couple possibilities for why we observed differences between our source
memory and subjective recollection estimate. First, ‘non-criterial’ recollection' may have
contributed to the diverging pattern of results for subjective and objective measures of
recollection (Parks, 2007; Toth & Parks, 2006; Yonelinas & Jacoby, 1996). That is, participants’
high confidence old/new judgments may have been support by recollection of additional details
(e.g., a random thought that came to mind when seeing the word) that provided no diagnostic
information about which semantic task they performed on the word during the study phase. If
true, then the informative and uninformative cues simply provided a shift in the relative
proportion of recollection events that comprised the detail about the encoding task that was
captured by the source memory measure, but not the dual-process estimate of recollection. A
second possibility is that the null effect on subjective measures of recollection resulted from
mismodelling of the receiver operator characteristic curves (for a discussion of this issue, see
Jang et al., 2012; Klauer & Kellen, 2015; Koen et al., 2013; Koen & Yonelinas, 2010, 2013;
Spanton & Berry, 2020; Starns et al., 2012; for reviews of signal detection models of memory,
see Wixted, 2007; Yonelinas & Parks, 2007). For instance, the results might be different if
recollection were modeled in a more continuous manner (e.g., deBettencourt et al., 2021; Harlow
& Donaldson, 2013; Onyper et al., 2010). However, it is unclear how the criterial source memory
detail in the present study would be best modeled in a continuous manner.
The discussion and conclusions draw from the data thus far rests on the assumption that
the dual-process model is the best characterization of recognition memory. However, there has
been substantial debate as to whether a single-process or dual-process signal detection model
provides a better account of recognition memory (e.g., Jang et al., 2012; Klauer & Kellen, 2015;
Koen et al., 2013; Koen & Yonelinas, 2010, 2013; Spanton & Berry, 2020; Starns et al., 2012;
for reviews of signal detection models of memory, see Wixted, 2007; Yonelinas & Parks, 2007).
It is, therefore, necessary to consider if a single-process account might provide a better
explanation of our findings. We believe it possible that a single-process model can readily
accommodate the present data, particularly the graded increase in overall recognition memory
performance. A single-process model, however, does not easily account for the non-graded effect
of prestimulus cues on subsequent source memory performance. One way to reconcile the
findings with a single-process model is to argue source memory effects were quite small overall,
and thus might be too small to have a meaningful impact on overall recognition memory.
Importantly, regardless of whether one adopts a single-process or dual-process interpretation of
the present, the primary conclusion that prestimulus cues enhanced overall subsequent
recognition memory performance in a graded manner is unchanged.
Critically, the present study does not distinguish between single-process and dual-process
models of memory because it was not designed to do so. Neither theoretical account, to our
knowledge, makes predictions about how different prestimulus cues will influence subsequent
memory. Our choice to adopt the dual-process signal detection model (Yonelinas, 1994, 1999) as
a measurement model was driven by findings from the neuroimaging literature linking
prestimulus subsequent memory effects to recollection (e.g., Otten et al., 2006, 2010; Park &
Rugg, 2010). As discussed previously, the conclusions associating prestimulus subsequent
memory effects to recollection were derived from contrasts thought to isolate recollection related
neural activity, such as associative and source memory tasks (Addante et al., 2015; Koen, Horne,
et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2021) and subjective reports of recollection (de Chastelaine & Rugg,
2015; Otten et al., 2006, 2010; Park & Rugg, 2010). Another factor that contributed to our
decision to adopt the dual-process signal detection model is a set of findings demonstrating that
the parameters in this model behave in theoretically meaningful way whereas the parameters of
the unequal-variance signal detection model, the most prominent single-process signal detection
model, do not (Koen et al., 2013; Koen & Yonelinas, 2010, 2011; also see Yonelinas, 1999,
2001).
There are several other limitations about the present study. First, we did not directly
compare the effects of cues on source memory and familiarity estimates. These measures are on
different scales that require different assumptions, which precludes a direct comparison of the
measures. Thus, any discussion of differences between mnemonic processes should be taken
with caution as we do not demonstrate an interaction between mnemonic process and
prestimulus cue type. Second the source memory detail in the current task was either inherently
contained within the prestimulus cue (informative cue trials) or not (uninformative and no cue
trials). Thus, it is unclear if prestimulus cues may benefit other source memory details beyond a
semantic judgment that was required to successful complete the encoding task. One potentially
interesting future direction is to examine whether prestimulus cues differentially influence source
details that are not required for the encoding task, such as the location or color of the word on the
screen.
Third, one could argue that the effects of prestimulus cues on subsequent memory
performance were overall quite low (small to medium). The effect sizes observed here might be
low due to additional noise caused by collecting most of the data through online means.
Alternatively, we may have underestimated the prestimulus cue effect on memory performance
because our no cue condition still contained some information that the participants may have
found beneficial for encoding. The absence of an explicit cue in the no cue condition could have
also served as a prestimulus cue due to the passage of time. Specifically, the longer a trial went
on without a cue, the more likely the next trial would be a no cue trial. Participants may have
picked up on this aspect of the design and used this information as another form of an
uninformative prestimulus cue.
Lastly, there are many other factors that might systematically influence the extent to
which prestimulus encoding cues affect subsequent memory performance. One factor, which
varied across our four experiments, is whether the cue types are presented in an intermixed in a
single list or blocked across multiple lists. It is possible that presentation that intermixed versus
blocked presentation of the three prestimulus cue types influenced our results. For instance,
intermixing the prestimulus cue types increases task difficulty which, in turn, might minimize the
benefits of prestimulus cues on subsequent memory (Galli et al., 2013). However, the present
experiments varied across numerous factors, including the participant recruitment pool used, in-
person vs. online experiment format, the memory measures collected, prestimulus cue conditions
included, and other design differences (e.g., timing) that existed across experiments precludes a
systematic comparison of such issues in the present data. These design decisions are a limitation
of the present investigation, and future research is needed to systematically examine how
intermixed and blocked lists, as well as other variables (e.g., short vs. long cue-stimulus-
intervals, short vs. long delayed test), influence how prestimulus encoding cues affect subsequent
memory performance.
The present work suggests that prestimulus encoding cues affect multiple encoding
processes that are differentially associated with subsequent recollection and familiarity. The
informativeness of prestimulus encoding cues increased familiarity in a graded manner.
Additionally, relative to no prestimulus cues, both informative and uninformative prestimulus
cues enhanced source memory performance while leaving estimates of recollection unaffected.
Future research is needed expand upon these findings to examine if prestimulus cues affect other
types of memory (e.g., priming, Düzel et al., 2005). Furthermore, future work using
electrophysiological and neuroimaging techniques may uncover multiple processes that
contribute to the influence of prestimulus cues on memory encoding through a systematic
comparison of different types of cues with contrast that can better isolate recollection and
familiarity.
Acknowledgements
The results reported here were presented at the 2020 Psychonomic Society Virtual Meeting. We
would like to thank Dr. Jessica D. Payne, Dr. Michael D. Rugg, Morgan Munsen, and Rachelle
Pichot for providing comments on a previous version of this manuscript. The authors report no
conflict of interest.
Joshua D. Koen was supported by grant R56AG068149 from the National Institute on Aging
during the preparation of this manuscript. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors
and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.