Be there on time: Spatial-temporal regularities guide young children’s attention in
dynamic environments
1,2 1,2 1 1 1,2
Nir Shalev *, Sage Boettcher *, Hannah Wilkinson , Gaia Scerif , Kia Nobre
* authors contributed equally
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Oxford Centre for Human Brain Activity, Wellcome Centre for Integrative Neuroimaging,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Corresponding author:
Nir Shalev
University of Oxford
Department of Experimental Psychology
Brain & Cognition Lab
Oxford Centre for Human Brain Activity
Mail: nir.shalev@psy.ox.ac.uk
Keywords:
Visual search; Cognitive Development; Attention
Acknowledgments:
This research was funded by a Wellcome Trust Senior Investigator Award (104571/Z/14/Z)
and a James S. McDonnell Foundation Understanding Human Cognition Collaborative
Award (220020448) to A.C.N., and by the NIHR Oxford Health Biomedical Research Centre.
The Wellcome Centre for Integrative Neuroimaging is supported by core funding from the
Wellcome Trust (203139/Z/16/Z).
Abstract
It is believed that children have difficulties in guiding attention while facing
distraction. However, developmental accounts of spatial attention rely on traditional
search designs using static displays. In real life, dynamic environments can embed
regularities that afford anticipation and benefit performance. We developed a
dynamic visual-search task to test the ability of children to benefit from spatio-
temporal regularities to detect goal-relevant targets appearing within an extended
dynamic context amidst irrelevant distracting stimuli. We compared children and
adults in detecting predictable vs. unpredictable targets fading in and out among
competing distracting stimuli. While overall search performance was poorer in
children, both groups detected more predictable targets. This effect was confined to
task-relevant information. Additionally, we report how predictions are related to
individual differences in attention. Altogether, our results indicate a striking capacity
of prediction-led guidance towards task-relevant information in dynamic
environments, refining traditional views about poor goal-driven attention in
childhood.
Significance statement
We present unique evidence for goal-driven guidance of spatial attention in young
children. Using a new dynamic-visual-search task, we show that five-year-olds are
comparable to adults in their ability to use prediction to guide spatial attention in a
dynamic visual-search task. We dissociate prediction-led behaviour, which remained
invariant across age groups, from search performance which varied. Prediction-led
behaviour was confined to task-relevant information, providing further evidence for
goal-driven behaviour across ages. Finally, we report an association between task
markers and individual differences in attention. Altogether, we propose a refined
perspective of current views on attention control in young children. The new
experimental approach provides a platform for systematically investigating how
goals, distractions, predictions, and their interactions guide behaviour across
development.
Introduction
Many tasks in real-life situations require us to manage multiple dynamic sources of
information successfully. However, even for neurotypical adults, it is impossible to
process all concurrent stimuli in complex and dynamically changing environments in
their entirety. Instead, to behave adaptively, it is necessary to prioritise and select
task-relevant information according to our goals and to reject irrelevant, distracting
information. For example, crossing a busy road requires paying attention to a
changing and hazardous environment while selectively prioritising critical signals at
different locations and timings (traffic lights, car signals, etc.) and ignoring equally
salient signals (advertisement boards, flying birds, etc.).
Avoiding hazards can be particularly challenging for children. Thus, we would
be alarmed if a 5-year-old were to cross a busy street on her own, given children’s
proposed reduced capacity to ignore distraction and to focus on relevant information
efficiently (Amso & Scerif, 2015; Colombo, 2001; Johnson, 2001; Scerif, 2010). Salient
events tend to capture children’s attention (e.g., a noisy motorbike) and divert them
from goal-relevant streams of information (e.g., the traffic on the road) (Gaspelin,
Margett-Jordan, & Ruthruff, 2015). The presence of multiple competing perceptual
events is likely to exacerbate the problem (Kim & Kastner, 2019).
When studying selection, competition, and distraction, visual search tasks are a
popular choice (Wolfe, 2020). In a typical visual search task, observers search for a
target appearing among a static display of distractors. It is widely recognised among
developmental researchers that children perform poorly in visual search tasks
compared to adults (Donnelly et al., 2007; Trick & Enns, 1998). Proficiency in
searching for targets among distractors with different combinations of the same
features develops gradually into adolescence, with a marked improvement at around
6-7 years (Hommel, Li, & Li, 2004; Lobaugh, Cole, & Rovet, 1998; Merrill & Lookadoo,
2004; Ólafsdóttir, Kristjánsson, Gestsdóttir, Jóhannesson, & Kristjánsson, 2016;
Whitebread & Neilson, 2000). These age-related differences are often attributed to
the interaction between immature top-down attention-control mechanisms and
developing sensory processes (Donnelly et al., 2007; Kim & Kastner, 2019).
Therefore, studies of visual search in children highlight a core limitation of the
developing mind in controlling attention endogenously. However, interestingly,
children have been proposed to display a relative strength in absorbing new
information, compared to adults. This complementary ability has been proposed to
result from an inherent trade-off between top-down cognitive control vs. exploratory
cognitive flexibility (Gopnik et al., 2017). According to this view, gaining life
experience alters the way we interact with the environment. Improvements in
cognitive control into adulthood are coupled with a tendency to be less exploratory
and, as such, to rely more heavily on prior experience to exploit and maximise utility
in a given context. In contrast, during childhood, exploratory behaviour may be more
adaptive, serving to amplify learning about the environment, which may take
precedence and help shape subsequent knowledge structures that come to guide
behaviour in the future. Consequently, children outperform adults in tasks requiring
the extraction of unusual causal patterns, for example in learning how to operate a
machine based on counterintuitive rules (Lucas, Bridgers, Griffiths, & Gopnik, 2014),
and are also more likely to encode task-irrelevant information (Plebanek & Sloutsky,
2017; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004).
Poor visual search performance in childhood sits well with the notion of poor goal-
directed behaviour and elevated exploration during structured but challenging tasks
that benefit from maximum exploitation. However, when deploying attention in novel
and dynamic environments, learning and exploration may be equally beneficial.
Ultimately, in order to understand how the different qualities of children’s cognition
guide adaptive behaviour it is necessary to upgrade visual search tasks to capture the
ecological aspects of real-life situations. In extended dynamic contexts, the
anticipation of events based on previous experience plays a fundamental role in
guiding attention proactively to the right place at the right time. In a series of
experiments, we recently demonstrated that when performing a visual-search task
that extends over time, young adults can implicitly learn spatial and temporal
regularities about the appearance of task-relevant items and then use these
predictable patterns to improve performance (Shalev, Boettcher, & Nobre, 2019). Our
experimental framework differs from typical studies using informative cues to study
event anticipation; instead, we embed spatial and temporal predictions implicitly
within multiple dynamic, competing and temporally extended events.
Interestingly, in contrast to visual-search studies, in which children (and even
adolescents) often perform poorly when compared with adults (e.g., Donnelly et al.,
2007; Trick & Enns, 1998), cueing tasks reveal that children have adult-like capacity
to orient attention in space (e.g., Johnson, Posner, & Rothbart, 1991) and time (e.g.,
Droit-Volet & Coull, 2016). Indeed, the ability to anticipate a stimulus based on
implicit temporal regularities has been noted as early as infancy, as babies react to
the omission of a regular, predictable stimulus (e.g., Brackbill & Fitzgerald, 1972;
Colombo & Richman, 2002; Mento & Valenza, 2016). In older age groups, four- and
five-year old children can extract task-embedded temporal properties to anticipate
upcoming events (e.g., Droit-Volet & Coull, 2016; Johnson, Burrowes, & Coull, 2015;
Mento & Granziol, 2020; Vallesi & Shallice, 2007). These studies indicate that young
children can control attention in time. However, the tasks used so far are restricted to
testing responses to single targets occurring alone within temporally confined trials,
and do not yet address the ability of using temporal orienting to select targets among
competing signals in dynamic and temporally extended contexts.
Additional evidence for children’s ability to control temporal attention comes from
studies of statistical learning, in which they exhibit the capacity of encoding highly
complex structures that extend beyond discrete cue-interval associations (see Saffran
& Kirkham, 2018; Thiessen, 2017). However, the statistical learning literature in young
children is normally focused on auditory and linguistic signals (e.g., Estes, Evans,
Alibali, & Saffran, 2007; Saffran, 2001). Visual studies have examined probabilistic
learning of spatial (e.g., Bertels, San Anton, Gebuis, & Destrebecqz, 2017;
Tummeltshammer, Amso, French, & Kirkham, 2017), or sequential (e.g., Fiser & Aslin,
2002; Kirkham, Slemmer, & Johnson, 2002; Wu, Gopnik, Richardson, & Kirkham,
2011) relations between successive items in a stream. In contrast, here we target
children’s use of spatio-temporally extended regularities in complex and competitive
environments.
In unfolding real-life tasks, neither spatial nor temporal structures are held
constant (as in laboratory search or cueing tasks), and prior experience of
environmental regularities contributes to all aspects of guidance. Whereas previous
studies on spatial cueing, control of temporal attention, and statistical learning
provide a promising foundation, it remains unclear whether children can extract and
utilise concurrent spatial and temporal predictions about the occurrence of relevant
events occurring within dynamic contexts and amongst competing task-irrelevant
distractors. Traditional views, rooted in developmental studies of visual search,
emphasise the reduced capacity for goal-directed attentional guidance early in
development. This view would be critically challenged if children were shown to utilise
spatio-temporal structure in a goal-driven manner when facing competing sensory
inputs.
In the current study, we build on the foundations of static visual search, temporal
orienting, and statistical-learning tasks to develop an experimental framework for
investigating whether children can use anticipation to guide attention in complex and
dynamically changing contexts. This is akin to natural environments changing in space
and time – like a busy street. We aim to learn whether spatial-temporal regularities
can benefit young observers performing a dynamic visual search. In our task,
regularities are embedded within a succession of visual stimuli occurring over
extended trials, in principle allowing observers to predict when and where some of
the targets will appear but not others. We hypothesised that, while children may find
fewer targets overall compared to adults, they may nevertheless learn temporal and
spatial regularities to guide attention in a goal-driven way. In addition to looking at
age-related differences between young children (5-6 years old) and adults, we also
tested whether the capacity to form predictions was associated with children’s age or
with behavioural markers of typical attention development.
Methods
All experimental procedures and protocols were reviewed and approved by the
University of Oxford Central University Research Ethics Committee.
We adapted the Dynamic Visual Search (DVS) task we recently developed to
investigate whether children and adults use task-embedded spatial and temporal
regularities to guide selective attention within extended contexts. The experimental
approach was developed and validated in a series of experiments testing more than
a hundred young adults (Shalev, Boettcher, et al., 2019).
Participants performed a visual search in a dynamic display in which all stimuli
faded in and out over extended trials. On every trial, they were requested to indicate
where they detected the pre-designated target stimuli (e.g., aeroplanes) among a
competing dynamic array of distracting stimuli (e.g., butterflies). The central within-
participant experimental manipulation involved the spatiotemporal predictability of a
subset of target stimuli: Half of the targets consistently appeared at predictable
quadrants and onsets, whereas the other half were unpredictable. The experimental
task allowed us to compare performance (i.e., hits and false alarms) in different age
groups (children vs. adults) as well as their ability to use spatiotemporal predictions
to benefit performance. To make the task more engaging, pictures of an aeroplane,
dragonfly, and birds acted as targets and distractors. The identical task and
parameters were used to test both children and adults.
Participants
Adults: The adult sample consisted of 25 undergraduate students (20 female) with
mean age 20.08 years (SD = 1.66 yr). We recruited healthy adults with normal or
corrected-to-normal vision through advertising on student Facebook pages and
college noticeboards. They gave informed consent and were compensated for their
time (rate of £10 per hour).
Children: The child sample consisted of 80 children (41 male, 39 female) with mean
age 5.58 yr. (mean age in months was 67; SD = 4.03 mo.). After a primary state school
agreed to participate, information letters with opt-out forms were sent to parents of
children at their first year of primary education (‘Year 1’). Children were included
unless parents submitted opt-out forms.
Cognitive Task: Dynamic Visual Search
Apparatus. Children were tested in a dedicated room at their school. Young adults
were tested in a testing booth within the Department of Experimental Psychology,
University of Oxford. In both cases, participants sat in a quiet, dimly-lit room, near a
desk with the tablet on it. The tablet, a 10” Microsoft Surface tablet (28 X 17 cm; 60Hz
refresh rate) running Linux, was placed within comfortable reach of the participant’s
cover. The experimental script was generated using Psychophysics Toolbox (Brainard,
1997) in MATLAB (version 2014b, The Mathworks Inc., Natick, NA, USA).
each trial. Trials lasted approximately fourteen seconds, and consisted of eight
targets and sixteen distracting stimuli fading in and out of the search display
independently over its duration. The search display consisted of four unique 1/F static
noise patches that were generated for each trial. The four quadrants of the display
° °
were clearly separated, and each extended approximately 11 (horizontal angle) X 7
(vertical angle) (98 mm x 61 mm). Three different object stimuli were used as targets
and distractors: an aeroplane, a dragonfly, and a bird. All stimuli were black with
transparent backgrounds.
At the beginning of the experiment, each participant was randomly assigned
a target (e.g., an aeroplane) and was told to ignore distractors (e.g., dragonfly and
bird). Stimuli faded slowly in and out of view, but did not move. Fade-in time was set
to 1.3 seconds (gradually becoming visible over 80 refresh-rate cycles until reaching
maximum visibility). The target stayed on the screen for another 1.3 seconds, and
then faded out over 1.3 seconds. Each stimulus was about 2cm in length and width,
which roughly translates to ~2.5 (assuming a mean distance of 45 cm) and could
appear anywhere in one of the four quadrants as long as it did not overlap with
another stimulus. Participants tapped on the location of the target using the touch
screen to indicate when they detected a target.
tim
b) t
a) Assign 4 predictable r
target bins
Eight targets on each trial
c)
T T T T
1 2 3 4
Time in trial
• 4 predictable targets appear in the same quadrant at the same time in each trial
• 4 unpredictable targets randomly distributed in time and space throughout each trial
appeared in each trial, pre-assigned in four of the six bins. b) The coloured dots represent predictable targets,
which always occurred at the same time-point within their assigned bin across a block of trials. The grey dots
represent the four random targets, which were randomly distributed over time. c) The four predictable targets
were assigned to four different quadrants, which were kept constant throughout a block of trials. The quadrants
in which random targets appeared were completely randomly determined.
Target predictability. Of the eight target stimuli, four were predictable. On every trial,
they appeared with the same temporal onset from the start of the trial and within the
same quadrant. Location within the quadrant, however, remained variable. The onset
times for predictable targets were pre-assigned as follows: we created six time
windows of ~1 second, with a gap of ~660ms between each neighbouring window
(440 – 1440, 2100 – 3110, 3800 – 4800, 5470 – 6480, 7140-8140, 8810-9810 ms;
times are relative to the onset of the trial, and rounded to the nearest ten
milliseconds). Each window was then sub-divided into four equally spaced onsets. At
the beginning of the experiment, each participant was allocated four different
predictable onsets by first picking four bins out of six possible ones; and then
choosing one onset (out of four) within each bin. Once these intervals and their
quadrant association were selected, they remained fixed for that participant
throughout the experiment. Different participants had different interval-quadrant
pairings for predictable targets. The four unpredictable targets were distributed
pseudorandomly, by assigning each to an onset derived from a uniform distribution
across the full trial length. These constraints were set such that the targets were
roughly evenly distributed throughout the trial, and to avoid too many target events
occurring at one time.
Distractor predictability. In order to test for sensitivity to spatio-temporal regularities
in unattended stimuli, half the distractors were also made predictable for one of the
distractor categories (e.g., within the dragonfly but not bird category). Predictability
for these distractors was assigned in the same way as for the target category, but
independently (allowing some targets and some distractors to overlap in time, in
some cases). Thus, there was no systematic relationship between target and distractor
predictability.
Experimental procedure. Participants completed 10 practice trials to familiarise
themselves with the game before completing a single block of 45 trials. Each trial
contained 8 targets (4 predictable and 4 unpredictable). Overall, there were 360
targets (180 predictable and 180 unpredictable) per participant (excluding practice
trials) and 720 distractors (180 predictable and 540 unpredictable). After each trial,
observers received feedback in the form of a visual illustration: The screen depicted
eight targets in a horizontal row that were coloured black for each target found and
light grey for each target missed. These eight figures rotated, and a cheering sound
was played when all the targets in a trial had been found. The feedback remained on
the screen until tapping. When testing adults, they tapped to proceed at their own
pace. When testing children, the experimenter tapped when the child was ready. The
experimental block lasted approximately 15 minutes.
SWAN Questionnaire. Teachers completed the Strengths and Weaknesses of ADHD-
symptoms and Normal-behaviours (SWAN) rating scale for each (Swanson et al.,
2012). This is a well validated scale with 18 items measuring ADHD symptoms, with
each item scored from -3 to +3 (below average to above average). Lower scores
correspond to higher ADHD characteristics.
Analyses
Dependent variables: Our main dependant variable was hit rate. We focused on hit
rate, rather than reaction times, because we did not instruct our participants to
respond quickly, in order to avoid placing pressure on children and because hit rates
proved a reliable and sensitive measure of benefits of spatiotemporal predictability
in young adults in our previous study (Shalev, Boettcher, et al., 2019). In addition, to
assess the effect of predictability on distractors, we also considered false alarm rates
(i.e., tapping on distractors rather than targets).
Group Differences in Performance – Hit Rate: Hit rate was evaluated as a function of
group (children vs. adults) and target predictability (predictable vs. unpredictable) to
learn whether children and/or adults utilised regularities to improve performance,
whether they differed in their overall performance, and whether there was an
interaction between group and predictability. In addition, we modelled ‘target order’
to estimate behavioural effects over time on trial. This way, we could verify whether
predictions influenced performance differentially for the first, second, third, or forth
predictable vs. random targets.
Responses to target, classified as ‘hit’ or ‘miss’, were fitted using a generalized
linear mixed-effects models (GLMMs) with a binomial distribution. Data were
modelled using four fixed effects: Group (children vs. adults); Target Predictability
(Predictable vs. Random targets); and Target Order (First/Second/Third/Forth
position in the sequence, for each Predictable vs. Random targets). In the random-
effects structure, we included intercepts for each participant, as well as by-participant
slopes for the effects of Target Predictability, Target Order, and their interaction.
Our model used the default ‘logit’ link function to map the relationship
between the mean response and the linear combination of the predictors. The
continuous Target Order factor was centred around zero by subtracting the grand
average from each value (Aiken & West, 1991; Enders & Tofighi, 2007; Park, 2008).
The GLMM was fitted with the maximum likelihood criterion, and we report the t-
statistic for a hypothesis test contrasting each fixed-effects coefficient to a null
hypothesis that the coefficient is equal to zero.
Group Differences in Performance – False Alarms: We applied a comparable analysis
approach to false alarms, by quantifying the rate of tapping distractors. Here, we
tagged each distractor as belonging to one of three categories, to distinguish
distractors that appeared predictably (‘Structured category – Predictable’), distractors
that appeared randomly but were from the same category as the predictable
distractors (‘Structured category – Random’), and distractors that appeared randomly
and belonged to a different category (‘Unstructured category – Random’). We used
GLMM, with the Distractor Category and Group (children vs. adults) as the fixed-
effects. In the random-effects structure we included intercepts for each participant,
as well as by-participant slopes for the effect of Distractor Category and their
interaction.
Individual differences: We applied a series of analyses to identify whether our
dynamic visual search task was sensitive to individual differences within the group of
children. In these analyses, we focused on the hit-rate variable, which can reveal an
interesting dissociation between ‘predictions’ and overall hit rate. Two continuous
variables were used to mark individual differences: chronological age (in months) and
the combined SWAN score. These variables were added to a GLMM as fixed-effects
covariates, alongside Target Predictability. The random-effects structure included
intercepts for each participant, as well as by-participant slopes for Target
Predictability and their interaction. As in the previous section, the model used the
default ‘logit’ link function. The continuous variables (Age and SWAN score) were
centred around zero by subtracting the grand average from each value (Aiken &
West, 1991; Enders & Tofighi, 2007; Park, 2008). The GLMM was fitted with the
maximum likelihood criterion, and we report the t-statistic for a hypothesis test
contrasting each fixed-effects coefficient to a null hypothesis that the coefficient is
equal to zero.
Data exclusion
Two children did not complete the experiment and were excluded. Altogether, our
final sample included 78 children and 25 adults.
Results
Contrasting group performance
Our first analysis focused on the contribution of target predictability and serial
GLMM indicated a main effect of Target Predictability (t(37072)=3.99; p<.001;
95%CI[.05;.16]), a main effect of Group (t(37072)=16.33; p<.001; 95%CI[.75;.96]), and
a main effect of Target Order (t(37072)=-4.80; p<.001; 95%CI[-.16;-.06]). There were
no interactions between factors. Group did not interact with Target Predictability
(p=.38) or with Target Order (p=.23). Target Order did not interact with Target
Predictability (p=.65), and there was no three-way interaction among the factors
(p=.87). Altogether, these results reflect a higher hit rate when targets appeared
predictably, a higher hit rate in the group of adults, and differences in the mean hit
rate at different time points along the trial. Critically, there were no interactions,
meaning there were no evidence that either the group or the ordinal position of the
target influenced performance benefits.
(coloured bars) vs. unpredictable (grey bars), splitting the trial into four equal time-windows, to observe the
benefit of predictions at different time-points along each trial. Error-bars, in all bar plots, represent standard error
of the mean; (B) shows the same contrast among children; (C) overall hit-rate for predictable (red) vs.
unpredictable targets (grey); the data in (D) depicts the difference between hitting predictable and unpredictable
targets at the individual level, using a violin plot. The width represent the number of observations; The circle
represents the group mean; horizontal dashed line represents the group median; bold vertical line is the
interquartile range, and the thinner vertical line represents the range between higher and lower adjacent values;
figures (E) and (F) depict the same as (C) and (D) among the group of children.
The next analysis used comparable modelling to contrast the rate of false alarms in
of false alarms indicated a main effect of Group (t(74152)=3.64; p<.001;
95%CI[.51;1.71]), reflecting a significantly higher rate of false alarms for children.
There was no main effect of Distractor Type (p=.85) and no Group X Distractor Type
interaction (p = .89).
Adults
groups. Distractors that were belong to the “Structured category – Predictable” (red) are four distractors that
appeared regularly, similar to the predictable targets; The “Structured category – Random” (light coral) were four
distractors of the same category as the predictable ones (either aeroplanes, birds, or bugs) however they were
randomly distributed in time and space; the “Unstructured category – Random” were the other eight targets, of
a different category, and were all distributed randomly. Error bars represent standard error of the mean.
Individual differences among children
We tested for individual differences in overall hit rate and benefits of predictions in
the group of children. The data are presented in figures 4a-d, in which scatter plots
depict the relationships between the SWAN and Age factors as predictors of overall
hit rate and of ‘prediction benefit’ (defined as the difference between hit rate for
predictable and unpredictable targets).
The statistical analyses tested for significant linear relationships between
Target Predictability (Predictable vs. Random), age (in months), teachers’ scores on
the SWAN questionnaire, and the hit rate as the dependant variable, using a single
smrala
eslaf
Structured category - Predictable
Structured category - Random
Unstructured category - Random
Children
GLMM. The results replicated the main effect of Target Predictability when focusing
exclusively on the group of children (t(27712)=4.09; p<.001; 95%CI[.04;.11]). There
was also a main effect of the Age (in months) covariate (t(27712)=2.26; p=.02;
95%CI[.00;.04]), with a positive coefficient (.025; SE=.01) indicating a positive
relationship between advancing age and overall hit rate. Whereas there was no main
effect of SWAN score (p=.56), there was a significant interaction between the SWAN
and Target Predictability (t(27712)=2.59; p=.009; 95%CI[.000;.005]). Age did not
interact with Target Predictability (p=.75), and there were no other significant
interactions (all p’s >.1). To interpret the interaction between SWAN and Target
Predictability, we calculated a composite score for Prediction Benefit by subtracting
the hit rate for random targets from predictable ones. We then carried a confirmatory
analysis to estimate the linear correlation between the two variables, which was
positive and significant (r(77)=.23; p=.047), indicating a greater benefit of
predictability for individuals with higher SWAN score (lower ADHD symptoms).
Importantly, Age and SWAN score did not correlate (p=.25).
shows relationships involving overall mean hit rate. Overall hit rates correlated significantly with age but not
SWAN score. Bottom row shows relationships involving prediction benefit. Prediction benefit
correlated/covaried significantly with SWAN (.047) score but not age (.25).
Discussion
Although young children showed lower overall ability of detecting targets and
ignoring distractors compared to adults in our extended dynamic visual search task,
they nevertheless benefited from spatiotemporal regularities as much as adults. Our
results suggest a more nuanced interpretation of the relationship between learning
and top-down control than has previously been suggested. In the context of our task,
the learning and utilisation of regularities were selective and used adaptively to guide
tih
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
60 62 64 66 68 70 72
Age (months)
tifeneb
noitciderP
-50 -25 0 25 50
SWAN score
goal-driven behaviour just as well in children as in adults. Children, like adults, did
not show any bias towards task-irrelevant regularities, while at the same time they
learned relevant regularities that served anticipation-based guidance.
Differences in spatial attention were reflected in the overall lower hit rate and
higher false-alarm rate in children when compared to adults. We also identified a
significant correlation between hit rate and age within the group of children. This
provides further, more fine-grained, evidence of how spatial search develops during
childhood. This pattern may suggest particular difficulty with competition and
distraction among children, in line with existing literature (Kim & Kastner, 2019). We
observed that lowest performance levels occurred in the middle of trial (reflected in
the main effect of Target Order), when overall the likelihood of distractors peaked.
As a tentative explanation, this may result from the maximum potential for overlap
among stimuli at different stages of appearance is in the middle due to the dynamic
nature of the task, in which stimuli appear and disappear over extended time.
However, it is of note that, even during this period, both children and adults exhibited
a benefit for predictable compared to unpredictable targets. In the current
experiment, we did not manipulate the parameter of number of co-occurring
distractors systematically. However, the experimental approach we used is suitable
for designs that specifically control the degree of competition across or within trials,
which should prove informative in future studies.
In contrast to age differences in overall hit rate in visual search, children
showed reliable and persistent benefits of spatiotemporal expectation, which did not
differ in magnitude from those we found in young adults. This pattern extends
previous reports on the ability of children to learn patterns and utilise predictions.
Previous work focused on discrete stimulus-interval associations in cueing tasks as a
source of anticipation (e.g., Droit-Volet & Coull, 2016; Johnson, Burrowes, & Coull,
2015; Mento & Granziol, 2020; Vallesi & Shallice, 2007). In the statistical learning
literature, learning of visual regularities is normally confined to single objects and
shape co-occurrence, while temporal intervals are kept constant (e.g., Fiser & Aslin,
2002; Kirkham, Slemmer, & Johnson, 2002; Wu, Gopnik, Richardson, & Kirkham,
2011). Here we demonstrate that children can learn patterns of task-relevant spatio-
temporal information presented among dynamic distractors, and utilise anticipation
to benefit performance in that context.
Another important addition we make to the current literature on anticipation-
led behaviour in children pertains to the nature of structures that are learned and
utilised. In our dynamic task, the behavioural benefit resulted from encoding temporal
intervals (in contrast to serial order, as often used in studies of statistical learning).
Furthermore, the regular temporal intervals were embedded within, and had to be
extracted from, the context of many intervening unpredictable stimuli occurring
across time and space. Learning single simple temporal associations would therefore
be insufficient to confer any behavioural advantage. Instead, to benefit performance,
participants had to abstract the timing and location of predictable relevant events
from the unfolding succession of unpredictable targets and distractors. In addition,
orienting of attention combined the temporal and spatial dimensions, in contrast to
most previous studies on temporal attention in which target location is equated
across trials – i.e. the discrete events occurring at a consistent location.
Interestingly, even though children were overall worse than adults, task
irrelevant, yet predictable stimuli did not yield more erroneous responses compared
to their unpredictable counterparts. This is in contrast to previous reports of
automatic capture by regularities (Zhao, Al-Aidroos, & Turk-Browne, 2013). In our task
such an effect would have been manifested by a larger false-alarm rate for predictable
distractors. If children were particularly susceptible to predictions, their capture by
predictable distractors might be even stronger. This was not observed. We cannot
completely rule out the possibility that our pattern of predictability was either too
subtle or too complex to induce capture by task-irrelevant information. However,
overall our findings accord with studies in adults showing that effects of predictions
are strongly modulated by task goals (Boettcher, Stokes, Nobre, & van Ede, 2020;
Shalev, Nobre, & van Ede, 2019; Stokes, Myers, Turnbull, & Nobre, 2014). What is
somewhat surprising is that we observed these patterns in young children. In our task,
instead of sensitivity to patterns working against focused, goal-oriented behaviour
(Gaspelin et al., 2015), expectations only benefitted performance.
The benefit of expectations was tested within the group of children, in whom
we modelled the data with two potential covariates: age and SWAN questionnaire
(an ADHD symptom scale, used as a proxy of typical age-appropriate attention
development). The model results revealed a dissociation between task markers
related to age (overall hit rate) vs. with typical attention development (prediction
benefits). Our findings suggested the ability to form predictions does not change
much with age (at least within the range between 5 to 6 years of age), but instead
follows a proxy for age-appropriate manifestation of attention. While in the current
study we did not target behavioural syndromes as ADHD, the data is in line with a
recent report showing a selective deficit in temporal preparation among adults
diagnosed with ADHD (e.g., Dankner, Shalev, Carrasco, & Yuval-Greenberg, 2017;
Hasler et al., 2016; Johnson et al., 2008; McAvinue et al., 2015; Vallesi et al., 2016).
However, direct implications of our data for an understanding of ADHD should be
treated with caution. Our sample included relatively young children who had no
reports of any clinical diagnosis, and therefore this point can be addressed further in
future studies with more diverse samples.
In conclusion, here we tested for the first time how children guide spatial
attention in a dynamic, continuous context, based on complex task-embedded
regularities amidst distraction. Whereas in line with previous studies children were
less efficient in finding targets when compared to adults, they used predictability to
guide attention very effectively. This effect was robust and consistent throughout
extended trials, revealing a marked capacity of encoding complex temporal
structures, and sustaining goal-driven guidance of selective attention in time.
Moreover, we did not find capture by regularities embedded in task-irrelevant
information (predictable distractors), providing further evidence to support highly
controlled behaviour by young children. These robust effects were observed using a
short, playful task, which can be a useful method for future explorations. One fruitful
avenue could be investigating individual differences, which we managed to reveal
within a single cohort of neurotypically developing 5 to 6 year-olds. We believe that
our design provides a step forward towards understanding selective attention in
ecological settings, in which the temporal dimension is inseparable from spatially
oriented behaviour.