FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 1
**THIS PRE-PRINT IS A WORKING PAPER THAT HAS NOT BEEN PEER-REVIEWED**
Fatalism in the Fight against COVID-19: Implications for Mitigation and Mental Health
Joseph Hayes and Laura Clerk
Department of Psychology, Acadia University
Author Note
This study was not preregistered. De-identified data and analysis script are posted at
the study, as well as supplemental data analyses are also publicly available at the same link. The
study received approval by the Research Ethics Board of Acadia University (REB 19-29). We
have no known conflict of interest to disclose. Financial support for this project was provided by
a Harrison McCain Emerging Scholar Grant awarded to the first author.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Joseph Hayes, Acadia
University, Department of Psychology, 18 University Ave, Wolfville, NS, B4P 2R6, Canada.
Email: joseph.hayes@acadiau.ca.
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 2
Abstract
This research assessed fatalism toward COVID-19 and its role in behavioral intentions to support
mitigation efforts (e.g., social distancing) and mental well-being. A COVID-19 fatalism measure
was developed, and a messaging manipulation (fatalistic vs. optimistic vs. no message) was
created to causally affect fatalism scores. Support for mitigation efforts and negative affect
(anxiety, fear, depression, and insecurity) were measured to examine the consequences of
fatalism toward COVID-19. Results showed that the fatalistic messaging condition increased
fatalism whereas the optimistic message reduced it. The effects of the messaging manipulation
were also apparent in the downstream measures of support for mitigation and negative affect
through the mediator of fatalism toward COVID-19. Specifically, fatalism negatively predicted
intentions to support mitigation. Regarding mental health, fatalism was positively associated
with depression but negatively associated with fear and insecurity. Implications for COVID-19
mitigation efforts and mental health in the face of the coronavirus pandemic are discussed.
Keywords: COVID-19, Fatalism, Social Distancing, Mental Health
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 3
Statement of Relevance
This research examined two critically important issues arising from the novel coronavirus
pandemic: adherence to mitigation efforts (e.g., social distancing) and mental health. The key
psychological factor assessed in relation to each of these issues is fatalism toward the pandemic.
Fatalism is a response to overwhelming threats that appear uncontrollable. The response entails
withdrawing efforts to control the threat due to feelings of powerlessness. This withdrawal may
function to reduce fear and anxiety stemming from the uncontrollable threat, but it increases
depression. Our research examined how fatalism toward COVID-19 affected self-reported
negative emotions and behavioral intentions to support mitigation efforts. A messaging
manipulation aimed at either increasing or decreasing fatalism toward COVID-19 was found to
influence support for mitigation and emotional well-being, but only indirectly by influencing
fatalism. These results have important implications for ongoing mitigation efforts and for
understanding the mental health fallout of the pandemic.
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 4
Fatalism in the Fight against COVID-19: Implications for Mitigation and Mental Health
th
Since March 11 , 2020, the world has been gripped by a deadly pandemic (World Health
Organization, 2020). At the time of writing, over three million people have been infected
th
worldwide, and more than 200 thousand people have died (Worldometer, 2020; April 27 ).
Mitigation efforts aimed at reducing the spread of the virus have been in place for more than a
month. Schools and businesses are closed, and people are asked to practice social distancing by
staying at home, avoiding crowds, and maintaining a minimum distance between themselves and
others while in public (Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020). Yet the global spread
of COVID-19 shows little sign of abatement.
As if the death-toll of the pandemic is not enough, the mental toll of the pandemic—
including that associated with mitigation efforts—cannot be ignored. Millions of people have
lost their job and are now facing unprecedented financial strain (Mutikani, 2020; Department of
Labor, 2020). People are isolating at home, often in closed quarters, and are lacking many of the
things that usually offer meaning and purpose to life (e.g., social contacts, freedom of movement,
sports and entertainment). Domestic violence is on the rise (Taub, 2020). Parents are struggling
to manage childcare and homeschooling while also trying to work from home (Cooney, 2020).
The list goes on. To make matters worse, it appears that this may be the new normal until a
vaccine is developed, which will likely take a year or more (Boyle, 2020).
Under such dire circumstances, it can be difficult to carry on. For many, the strain of the
new normal appears impossible to manage. Rather than continue to struggle with mitigation
efforts, many people may be willing to give up and submit to the deadly pandemic or risk their
health and safety by attempting to return to the “old” normal. Given that most cases appear to be
relatively mild, the appeal of letting go, and allowing the virus to wash through the population
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 5
may seem more attractive than maintaining efforts to mitigate its spread, especially where the
effects of mitigation efforts are slow to materialize. The purpose of the current research was to
assess fatalism toward COVID-19 at a pivotal point in America’s efforts to fight the virus.
Moreover, aimed to examine the effect of different media messages on feelings of fatalism, and
sought to gauge the consequences of COVID-19 fatalism on support for continued mitigation
efforts and mental well-being.
Fatalism toward COVID-19
Fatalism is the belief that one’s actions have little or no significant impact on important
outcomes (Zimbardo & Boyd, 1999). People who are high in fatalism tend not to engage future-
oriented planning, expend little effort in trying to achieve desirable goals, and are generally
resigned to fate. In other words, they are willing to let external forces take over.
Mental Health. Fatalism is strongly associated with depression and hopelessness
(Seligman, 1975; Zimbardo & Boyd, 1999). However, it can also function to reduce fear and
anxiety stemming from insurmountable threats (Hayes et al., 2016). Struggling to control
outcomes that appear intractable triggers anxious motivational conflict (Carver & Scheier, 1998;
Gray & McNaughton, 2000), while choosing to let go of them can reduce this anxiety by
eliminating the tension produced by wanting to control something uncontrollable (Hayes et al.,
2017). Fatalism in the fight against COVID-19 may be especially likely given that mitigation
efforts are difficult, costly, have no clear end-date, and do not show clearly discernible causal
effects. Thus, becoming fatalistic in the fight against COVID-19 can be an attractive way of
reducing concerns about the pandemic. Importantly, however, this method of palliation has
broader negative consequences for mental health by promoting depression and generalized
disengagement from life (Hayes et al., 2016).
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 6
Commitment to Mitigation Efforts. Another trouble with fatalism is that it reduces
motivation and planful self-regulation (Hayes et al., 2016), which may be especially problematic
vis-à-vis COVID-19 because it may undermine the principal means of addressing the
pandemic—namely, social distancing. Becoming fatalistic about COVID-19 may lead people to
ignore public health recommendations (e.g., “we’re all going to get this virus anyway, so why
stay at home and suffer?”), which is dangerous for the general public as well as the fatalistic
individual as it increases the risk that they will become infected and spread the virus by not
taking proper precautions. Understanding factors that contribute to COVID-19 fatalism, and how
we can reduce these factors, is therefore imperative if collective mitigation efforts are to be
successful.
Media Messaging. One factor that may be particularly important in creating fatalism
toward COVID-19 is the way in which it is presented in the media. Indeed, nearly every news
story currently being disseminated to the public appears related to the pandemic in some manner
or another, and the information is often dire or shocking. While many of these messages seek to
affirm the importance of collective action and the ironic sense of community that can come from
social distancing for the well-being of others (e.g., #AloneTogether; Harrop, 2020), other
messages often directly promote fatalism by claiming that the spread of the disease is inevitable
(Slaughter, 2020). These messages often voice concern about the long-term economic impact of
staying at home and shuttering businesses, suggesting that the cost associated with continued
mitigation efforts is far greater than the cost of the virus (Hilton, 2020; Singer & Plant, 2020).
rd
U.S. President Donald Trump appears to share these concerns, tweeting on March 23 “WE
CANNOT LET THE CURE BE WORSE THAN THE PROBLEM ITSELF” (Trump, 2020).
Although these messages are very clearly anti-mitigation, we suspect they may be most effective
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 7
in reducing support for mitigation efforts when they instill a sense of fatalism toward COVID-
19. Indeed, fatalism and inaction go hand-in-hand.
Study Overview
The purpose of the current research was to assess levels of fatalism toward COVID-19, to
understand what factors influence this construct, and to examine the consequences of fatalism for
mental health and support for COVID-19 mitigation efforts. Accordingly, we developed a self-
report measure of fatalism toward COVID-19 and collected an online survey. To assess how
COVID-19 fatalism can be causally influenced, we designed a fatalistic message arguing that the
pandemic is unstoppable and that mitigation efforts may do more harm than good (cf., Hilton,
2020; Singer & Plant, 2020; Slaughter, 2020; Trump, 2020). The fatalistic message intended to
mimic those presented in the media or shared by prominent figures that the general public has
been exposed to throughout the pandemic. For comparison, we created an optimistic message
that emphasized the effectiveness of mitigation and the connectedness that can come from
tackling the pandemic collectively. We expected the fatalistic message to increase fatalism and
the optimistic message to reduce it.
To assess the consequences of COVID-19 fatalism, at the end of the study we assessed
support for mitigation and negative emotionality. Regarding support for mitigation efforts, we
expected fatalism to be associated with reduced support for these efforts. Moreover, we
hypothesized that our fatalistic and optimistic messaging conditions would influence support for
mitigation by virtue of affecting fatalism (i.e., mediation). Regarding negative emotion, we
expected fatalism to be positively associated with depression (Zimbardo & Boyd, 1999), but
negatively associated with anxiety given evidence that fatalism in the face of insurmountable
threats can reduce anxiety (Hayes et al., 2016).
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 8
Method
Participants and Design
In keeping with open science practices, we report all measures and manipulations
explain how sample size was determined and report all data exclusions.
To determine minimum sample size requirements to confidently test our hypotheses, we
conducted an a priori power analysis using G*Power (Faul et al., 2007), and sought at least 80%
power (with an alpha of .05) to detect a small effect (i.e., f = .10 to .24; d = .20 to .49). The
number of participants required to detect the lowest end of this range (f = .10; d = .20) using
these criteria in a one-way ANOVA with three conditions yielded the highest estimate (N = 969),
so we strove to obtain a sample size that approximated this number.
Participants were 1025 people recruited online through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk.
They were randomly assigned to one of three conditions in a between-subjects design. The only
requirement for participation was United States residence. Exclusions included 149 participants
who failed an attention check item asking them to leave a question blank (i.e., Please do not
answer this question, it is here to see if you are paying attention.), 19 who did not correctly
answer at least two (of four) multiple-choice questions about the contents of the article that they
read, and six others for failing to complete all dependent variables for our main analyses. The
total number of participants after exclusions was 851 (fatalistic n=274, optimistic n=291, no
message n=286), which fell short of our sample size goal. Nevertheless, a post-hoc sensitivity
analysis revealed that we retained 80% power to detect small effects (f = .11, d = .21; and 95%
power to detect f = .13, d = .27), so we were confident in proceeding with our analyses without
collecting more data.
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 9
Participants ranged in age from 18 to 78 (M = 41.0, SD = 14.0), and gender balance
age age
was roughly equal (female = 443, male = 391, other = 5, prefer not to disclose = 6).
Measures and Procedure
th
The study was conducted on March 27 , 2020, eleven days into the initial mitigation
period aimed at providing 15-days to slow the spread of the novel coronavirus. The study was
reviewed by an institutional research ethics board and was deemed to pose no more than minimal
risk, as the messages used in the manipulation were comparable to those appearing in the popular
media and public discourse. Participants were informed that the study was an investigation of
personality, attitudes, and opinions. They were not told that the purpose of the study was related
to COVID-19 until the debriefing. Upon consenting to participate, respondents began by
complete a series of demographic questions, followed by three brief personality questionnaires.
Demographic and Personality Variables. Demographic items included age, gender,
household income, education, and political orientation (among others, see online supplement for
complete list of demographic items). We measured three personality factors that seemed like
plausible candidates for influencing fatalism. Specifically, we assessed self-esteem (Rosenberg,
1965) and trait sensitivity to rewards and punishments (BAS and BIS; Carver & White, 1994)
given that these variables influence reactions to threat (see Jonas et al., 2014; Pyszczynski et al.,
2004). Exploratory analyses controlling for demographic and personality factors and exploratory
tests of moderation are presented in the Supplementary Online Material (SOM; see
Messaging Condition. Participants were randomly assigned to one of three messaging
conditions. In the control condition, participants read no message and simply proceeded to a
series of questions related to their attitudes and opinions about the COVID-19 pandemic. By
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 10
contrast, those in the fatalistic and optimistic messaging conditions read a brief opinion piece
before proceeding to these questions. The essays began with a threatening paragraph outlining
the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic:
COVID-19 is a killer. It has already killed more than 25,000 people worldwide and will
likely kill many hundreds of thousands more. Making things worse, it is an invisible
killer. We cannot see it, and we cannot even know when we have it on our hands. The
only way that we know to keep it at bay is to stay away from each other. Social (or
physical) distancing measures have been in place across the Western World for nearly
two weeks. But the spread of COVID-19 rages on.
For participants in the fatalistic condition, the essay went on to describe how social distancing
can only be a temporary fix, and that the virus will remain problematic until we develop a
vaccine, which will not happen for 18-24 months. The article then struck a fatalistic chord by
asking whether people are truly willing to engage social distancing for two years. The author
indicates that the virus is unstoppable and that he would rather let it run its course so that we can
get back to normal sooner than later.
Participants in the optimistic condition read an article that began with the same opening
paragraph but then proceeded to argue that social distancing is effective. The author pointed
toward China and South Korea as examples of its effectiveness. The message is optimistic but
nevertheless realistic, suggesting that social distancing will not eradicate the virus but will buy
time so that a vaccine can be developed within 18-24 months. The author concludes by
indicating that he is willing to do his part to prevent the spread of the virus. Finally, he appeals to
the togetherness that collective social distancing can offer (see SOM for the full text of both
messaging conditions).
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 11
Participants in the fatalistic and optimistic conditions then proceeded to complete five
simple reading comprehension questions that were included to ensure adequate processing of the
message. Four of these questions were multiple-choice, whereas one was an open-ended item
asking participants to indicate the overall theme of the article. Only participants who correctly
answered at least two of the four multiple choice questions were retained for data analyses.
Specific Worries. Next, participants completed a 7-item scale assessing their specific
worries related to the COVID-19 crisis. These items were included for exploratory purposes.
They assessed worries about death and finances for the self, close others, and strangers. The final
item assessed concern for the economy (see SOM for exploratory analyses of these items).
Fatalism toward COVID-19. Participants then completed a 16-item scale assessing
dependent variable, and consisted of seven positively keyed items (“Since whatever will be will
be, it doesn’t really matter what I do to try to stop COVID-19”) and nine negatively-keyed items
(indicative of self-efficacy; e.g., “It is within my power to help reduce the spread of COVID-
19”). Participants rated their agreement with each item using a 7-point Likert scale (1 = strongly
disagree; 7 = strongly agree).
Behavioral Intention to Support Mitigation Efforts. Immediately after the fatalism
questionnaire, we included an 11-item scale assessing behavioral intentions to support mitigation
efforts (α = .86, see SOM for complete item-details). Participants again responded using the 7-
point scale. The items were geared predominantly toward intentions to engage social distancing
(e.g., I plan to keep my distance from others) and to remain isolated (e.g., I plan to stay isolated
for as long as it is required), but also assessed support for mitigation efforts more broadly (e.g., I
support lockdown efforts aimed at reducing the spread of COVID-19).
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 12
Emotional Distress. Finally, after rating their support for mitigation efforts, participants
completed a brief emotion measure to gauge their emotional well-being. The measure consisted
of 20 items assessing four different emotions (5-items each): anxiety (α = .84), fear (α = .95),
depression (α = .93), and insecurity (α = .87; see SOM for complete item-details). Although our
hypotheses were specifically related to anxiety and depression, we included items assessing fear
and insecurity for exploratory purposes. Participants rated the extent to which they were
currently experiencing these emotions using a 7-point scale (1 = not at all; 7 = very much). Upon
completion, participants were thanked for their participation and fully debriefed.
Results
Deidentified data and analysis script for all analyses reported below are available online
accompany the main findings can be found by following the same link.
Fatalism toward COVID-19
To test our hypothesis about the effect of messaging condition on fatalism toward
COVID-19, we conducted a one-way ANOVA on the fatalism scores. Results showed a
with hypotheses, pairwise comparisons revealed that the fatalistic message increased fatalism
relative to the no message control condition, t(848) = 2.04, p = .041, d = .17, whereas the
optimistic message reduced fatalism relative to no message, t(848) = -2.68, p = .007, d = .22.
Behavioral Intentions to Support Mitigation Efforts
Our next analysis examined the consequences of COVID-19 fatalism for behavioral
intentions to support mitigation efforts. First, a bivariate correlation between these variables
showed a highly significant association, r(851) = -.78, p < .001. Thus, higher levels of fatalism
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 13
toward COVID-19 were associated with lower behavioral intentions to support mitigation
efforts. We then examined the effect of our messaging manipulation on support for mitigation
efforts. A one-way ANOVA on support for mitigation with message condition as the
2). Pairwise comparisons revealed that whereas the optimistic message increased support for
mitigation efforts relative to no message, t(848) = 2.57, p = .010, d = .21, the fatalistic message
had no effect on support for mitigation, t(848) = -.00, p = .997, d = -.00. However, our main
hypothesis regarding the effect of messaging condition on support for mitigation was that it
would be mediated by fatalism toward COVID-19. Thus, we tested the indirect effect of our
messaging manipulation on support for mitigation efforts through the hypothesized mediator of
fatalism.
Accordingly, we used Hayes’ (2018) PROCESS macro to regress support for mitigation
on messaging condition (dummy-coded to compare the fatalistic message with control in code 1
and the optimistic message with control in code 2) through the mediator of COVID-19 fatalism
(Model 4, 5000 bootstrap resamples). This analysis showed that the fatalistic message reduced
support for mitigation indirectly by increasing fatalism toward COVID-19, b = -.13, 95%
confidence interval (CI) [-.266, .003], whereas the optimistic message increased support for
mitigation by reducing fatalism, b = .17, 95% CI [.051, .299]. After accounting for these indirect
effects, messaging condition still exerted a significant direct effect on support for mitigation
efforts, F(2, 847) = 3.31, p = .037, η = .003. Interestingly, pairwise comparisons showed that
whereas the direct effect of the optimistic message was not significant, t(847) = .77, p = .443, d =
.04, the fatalistic message now revealed a significant direct effect, t(847) = .2.52, p = .012, d =
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 14
.13, such that participants increased their support for mitigation efforts after reading the fatalistic
Emotional Distress
Finally, we examined the emotional consequences of fatalism toward COVID-19.
Bivariate correlations between fatalism and each of the negative emotions measured in the study
and anxiety and depression when these highly correlated negative emotions are covaried for each
other in statistical analyses (see Hayes et al., 2016; Hayes & Hubley, 2017), we also examined
partial correlations between fatalism and each negative emotion controlling for the others in
association between fatalism and depression, the partial correlations also show significant
negative associations between fatalism and fear and insecurity.
To examine the effect of messaging condition on negative emotionality, we first
conducted four separate ANCOVAs on each emotion while controlling for the other three
(removing the covariates did not affect these analyses, but see SOM for results without the
covariates). These analyses revealed a significant effect on insecurity, F(2, 845) = 3.21, p =.041,
η = .01, such that the optimistic message increased insecurity relative to no message, t(845) =
2.52, p = .012, d = .21, but the fatalistic message did not, t(845) = 1.43, p = .155, d = .12. There
were no overall effects of condition for anxiety, F(2, 845) = 1.33, p =.266, η = .00, fear, F(2,
2 2
p p
Nevertheless, given the significant effect of condition on fatalism and the significant partial
correlations between fatalism and three of the four negative emotions, we tested for indirect
effects of messaging condition on each emotion through the mediator of fatalism using Hayes’
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 15
(2018) PROCESS macro (Model 4, 5000 bootstrap resamples). A full path model is displayed in
covariates). Overall, this analysis showed that by increasing fatalism toward COVID-19, the
fatalistic message indirectly reduced fear and insecurity, but increased depression. The opposite
pattern emerged for the optimistic message. By reducing fatalism toward COVID-19, the
optimistic message indirectly increased fear and insecurity, but reduced depression.
Discussion
The results were generally consistent with our hypotheses and offer insights into the role
of fatalism in the fight against COVID-19. First, as anticipated, the fatalistic message increased
fatalism towards COVID-19 while the optimistic message reduced it. Results for behavioral
intentions to support mitigation efforts were partially consistent with hypotheses. As predicted,
the optimistic message increased support for mitigation, and fatalism toward COVID-19
mediated this effect. However, the fatalistic message showed no overall effect on support for
mitigation. Nevertheless, consistent with hypotheses, this message reduced support for
mitigation indirectly by increasing fatalism toward COVID-19. Interestingly, after accounting for
this indirect effect, we found that the fatalistic message increased support for mitigation directly
effect on support for mitigation—suggesting that the message produced two opposing effects.
Whereas some people became fatalistic and thus less supportive of mitigation efforts, others
reacted against the message by increasing their support for mitigation. This pattern may be
indicative of reactance (Brehm, 1966), wherein people respond to external pressure by asserting
their freedom and control.
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 16
Fatalism toward COVID-19 also showed associations with emotional distress, and
messaging condition evinced significant indirect effects on negative emotionality by influencing
fatalism. First and foremost, fatalism was positively associated with depression. However, when
controlling for the other negative emotions assessed in the study, fatalism was also negatively
associated with fear and insecurity. These associations are only partially consistent with
expectations. We hypothesized a positive association for depression given the withdrawal-
oriented nature of fatalistically abandoning efforts to engage personal control (which was
supported), but a negative association with anxiety given that fatalism can offer defense against
intractable threats (Hayes et al., 2016). Results showed no associations between fatalism and
anxiety (with or without the covariates). But the associations of fatalism with fear and insecurity
may be consistent with our hypothesis that fatalism is an attempt to cope with the intractable
nature of the pandemic. In retrospect, anxiety may be more likely when examining distant or
abstract threats, whereas clear and present dangers should be more likely to trigger fear-related
emotions (McNaughton & Corr, 2004; Greenberg et al., 1997). These results would need to be
replicated to ensure that they are reliable, but the associations with fear and insecurity appear to
be consistent with our expectation that fatalism toward COVID-19 offers a means of reducing
concerns about the pandemic.
Implications for COVID-19 Mitigation
The results of the current study have important implications for ongoing efforts to
mitigate the spread of COVID-19 by suggesting a pivotal role for fatalism. People are unlikely to
adhere to mitigation protocols unless they believe COVID-19 can be eradicated and that their
actions (e.g., social distancing, staying at home) are effective in stopping the virus. Messages
that paint a bleak picture of the pandemic, or suggest that it may take years to stop if it can be
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 17
stopped at all, may undermine support for mitigation efforts by promoting fatalism (cf., Briscese
et al., 2020).
Our results also suggest that messaging about the virus can be an important means of
reducing fatalism and thereby increasing support for mitigation. Consistent with this idea, pro-
mitigation messages that are inherently anti-fatalistic by drawing clear connections between
individual actions and the spread of the virus have been shown to increase intentions to practice
social distancing (Lunn et al., 2020). Moreover, messages that promote a duty to care for others
(Everett et al., 2020) have also been found to be effective in promoting adherence to mitigation
protocols, and these too may function in part by reducing fatalism (see SOM for associations
between concern for others, fatalism, and support for mitigation).
Implications for Mental Health
The current research also has implications for understanding the mental health
consequences of the pandemic. Primarily, we found that fatalism toward COVID-19 is positively
associated with depression, and that media messaging can influence depression by affecting
fatalism. In fact, our fatalistic message was inspired by extent media messages, including
Trump’s tweet about the cure being worse than the disease. At the time of data collection (March
th
27 ), the possibility that Trump would relax restrictions and allow the virus to go unmitigated to
save the economy appeared real. We reasoned that this anti-mitigation rhetoric may be effective
in reducing support for mitigation, but suspected it would also promote depression and despair
by causing many people to feel fatalistic about the pandemic. Our results support this reasoning.
However, the data also show that optimistic media messaging can reduce feelings of depression
by reducing fatalism toward the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus, the mental well-being of people
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 18
who consume media related to the pandemic hinges in part upon the extent to which the message
makes them feel fatalistic (vs. powerful and effective) toward the virus.
Although our sample of online participants is not fully representative of the American
public and we could not assess clinical levels of depression, the data nevertheless support
growing concerns for the psychological toll of the pandemic (Galea et al., 2020; Garfin et al.,
2020). Moreover, whereas stress related to the pandemic may increase depression and anxiety-
related mental health issues (e.g., posttraumatic stress; Bo et al., in press), our data add
complexity to the mental health picture by showing that fatalism toward the pandemic can reduce
feelings of fear and insecurity. After all, if one concludes that nothing can be done to stop the
virus, then there is no sense in worrying about it. Indeed, we maintain that this is the inherent
appeal of fatalism in response to intractable threats such as the COVID-19 pandemic. However,
fatalism should not be viewed as a healthy solution to the problem. Although additional research
is needed to fully understand the ramification of COVID-19 fatalism, it is possible that fatalism
toward a pandemic that has completely upended one’s life can trigger corresponding feelings of
fatalism regarding all life-sustaining activities (see Hayes et al., 2016). If so, fatalism may
become a key factor in producing post-pandemic depression and suicide. While mitigation
efforts are currently being directed toward saving lives from the physical ravages of COVID-19,
these efforts may soon need to pivot toward saving lives from the psychological aftershocks of
the crisis.
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 19
Author Contributions
J. Hayes and L. Clerk developed the study concept. J. Hayes designed the study, and L. Clerk
provided critical feedback. Data collection, analysis, and interpretation was performed by J.
Hayes. L. Clerk performed an extensive review of the literature. J. Hayes drafted the manuscript,
and L. Clerk provided critical revisions. Both authors approved the final version of the
manuscript for submission.
FATALISM TOWARD COVID-19 20