STONE CENTER ON SOCIO-ECONOMIC INEQUALITY
WORKING PAPER SERIES
No. 28
Homoploutia: Top Labor and Capital Incomes
in the United States, 1950—2020
Yonatan Berman
Branko Milanovic
December 2020
Homoploutia: Top Labor and Capital Incomes in the United States,
1950—2020
Yonatan Berman1 and Branko Milanovic2
December 2020
Abstract
Homoploutia describes the situation in which the same people (homo) are wealthy (ploutia)
in the space of capital and labor income in some country. It can be quantified by the share
of capital-income rich who are also labor-income rich. In this paper we combine several
datasets covering different time periods to document the evolution of homoploutia in the
United States from 1950 to 2020. We find that homoploutia was low after World War II,
has increased by the early 1960s, and then decreased until the mid-1980s. Since 1985 it has
been sharply increasing: In 1985, about 17% of adults in the top decile of capital-income
earners were also in the top decile of labor-income earners. In 2018 this indicator was about
30%. This makes the traditional division to capitalists and laborers less relevant today. It
makes periods characterized by high interpersonal inequality, high capital-income ratio and
high capital share of income in the past fundamentally different from the current situation.
High homoploutia has far-reaching implications for social mobility and equality of
opportunity. We also study how homoploutia is related to total income inequality. We find
that rising homoploutia accounts for about 20% of the increase in total income inequality
in the United States since 1986.
Keywords: income inequality, homoploutia, political economy
1 Berman: London Mathematical Laboratory and Stone Center on Socio-Economic Inequality, The Graduate Center,
CUNY; y.berman@lml.org.uk
2 Milanovic: Stone Center on Socio-Economic Inequality, The Graduate Center, CUNY and International Inequalities
Institute, London School of Economics; bmilanovic@gc.cuny.edu
We thank seminar participants at the Stone Center on Socio-Economic Inequality for helpful comments and
suggestions.
1 Introduction
In classical political economy, and often implicitly in functional income distribution studies, it is
assumed that the people who receive most of their income from ownership (capital) are different
from those who receive most of their income from working (labor). In classical political economy,
this was very clear: capitalists were not only assumed to be richer than workers, but to have their
entire income come from property. Similarly, few workers were thought as deriving a part of their
income from ownership of property. Under such “classical capitalism”, workers and capitalists (or
rentiers) were two separate groups of people with the composition of their personal income
reflecting their positions in the process of production. Typically, of course, capitalists were at the
top of the income distribution and workers in the middle or at the bottom.
In recent functional income distribution studies that have documented the increase in the capital
share in many countries (Elsby, Hobijn and Şahin (2013); Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014); Dao
et al. (2017)) that assumption is implicit. A concern these studies express with the rising capital
share is that it is likely to lead to higher interpersonal income inequality (Piketty (2014); Wolff
(2017); Kuhn, Schularick and Steins (2020)). This is so because capital income is more unequally
distributed than labor income and is highly concentrated in the hands of the rich. If capital and
labor income shares were similar across the income distribution (i.e. across poor and rich
individuals), a rising overall capital share would not affect the interpersonal income distribution.
New findings on the United States show, however, that the dichotomy between capitalists and
workers may no longer hold (Atkinson and Lakner (2017); Milanovic (2019)). In fact, an
increasing percentage of people who are capital-income rich are also labor-income rich. Using data
from US household surveys over the past thirty years, Milanovic (2019)[Ch. 2] shows that the
percentage of people in the top decile of capital income who are also in the top decile of labor-
income recipients has steadily increased in the United States from around 15 percent in 1980 to
almost 30 percent in 2017.
This is clearly a very different capitalism (from classical): people at the top of the income
distribution are simultaneously top capitalists and top wage-earners. Milanovic (2019) called this
phenomenon homoploutia, from the Greek word homo for equal, and ploutia for wealth or
“richness”. In this paper we define the phenomenon, and document and analyze the evolution of
homoploutia in the United States over the past 70 years. We also study the link between the rising
homoploutia and the rising interpersonal income inequality.
Homoploutia breaks the strong capital-labor segregation that exists under classical capitalism. If
it were to spread to the rest of the distribution, it would also break the link between the rising
capital share and rising interpersonal inequality. It thus poses at least two new problems. First,
having the rich who are rich in terms of both property and skills (human capital) may enable them
to create an upper class that has little in common with the rest of the population and that is able,
through significant investment in offspring (Markovits 2019), to transmit these advantages across
generations. Thus, social mobility will likely be reduced. Second, from an ethical point of view,
high taxation of a homoploutic upper class becomes more difficult: the rich are not mere passive
coupon-clipping rentiers of the classical capitalism, but hard, and often excessively hard, working
wage-earners.3
To quantify homoploutia we use the intersection between the top decile of capital-income
recipients and labor-income earners (top10K-top10L or H ). Under classical capitalism, we
10,10
would expect top10K-top10L to be very small, and even close to zero. The more different it is
from zero, the more we move away from the capital-labor dichotomy, at least at the top of the
income distribution. We then estimate H in the United States since 1950 by combining three
10,10
datasets which allow covering different time periods: the Luxembourg Income Study (2020), the
US Distributional National Accounts (Piketty, Saez and Zucman 2020) and early versions of the
Survey of Consumer Finances (Kuhn, Schularick and Steins 2020). We find that homoploutia was
low after World War II, has increased by the early 1960s, and then slightly decreased until the
mid-1980s. Since 1985 it has been sharply increasing: In 1985, about 17% of adults in the top
decile of capital-income earners were also in the top decile of labor-income earners. In 2018 this
indicator was about 30%.
We also look at the relationship between H and overall capital share, and the relationship
10,10
between H and marginal distributions of capital and labor incomes. These relationships are
10,10
3 Kuhn and Lozano (2008) find that in 2002 the best-paid ventile (20 percent) of workers were twice as likely to work
long hours (defined as more than 50 hours per week) as the bottom ventile of workers. This is the reversal of the
relationship that existed twenty years earlier.
contingent on what happens elsewhere. For example, marginal distributions of capital income and
labor income may have become more unequal, leading to increasing overall inequality (given some
positive rank correlation between capital and labor incomes), while leaving H unaffected.
10,10
Similarly, if there is an increase in the capital share, raising, for example, all capital incomes
proportionally (so that the marginal income distribution of capital incomes does not change),
homoploutia may be unaffected. The composition of the capital top 10% will in that case remain
the same (the same people would be in the top 10% by capital income), and whether H will go
10,10
up or down will depend on the changes in the top 10% of labor-income recipients. The latter can
go either way and so could H . In conclusion, for homoploutia to increase it is not sufficient
10,10
that one of several factors (correlation between capital and labor incomes, marginal distributions
of capital and labor incomes, or the capital/labor share) move in a given direction, regardless of
what happens to the other factors. Yet, in practice, we find a strong and robust positive relationship
between homoploutia and labor income inequality, especially after 1985. This will lead us to
formulate a hypothesis about the forces that drove US homoploutia up in the recent period.
The understanding of these relationships allows us to study the link between rising homoploutia
and the rising interpersonal income inequality in the US during the past 35 years. The income share
of the richest decile in the US increased between 1986 and 2020 by 10 percentage points, from
37% to 47% (Piketty, Saez and Zucman 2020). We find that, ceteris paribus, the increase in
homoploutia has contributed 2 percentage points, or 20%, to this increase.
This paper contributes to different threads of literature. First, from an empirical perspective, its
primary contribution is describing how homoploutia evolved in the US between 1950 and 2020.
This allows a better understanding of the dynamics of income inequality over that time period.
Studying homoploutia is also important for political economy and social mobility and studies of
capitalistic systems. It is relevant for economic theory more generally, as many models in various
subfields of economics assume a strict division to capitalists and workers, which may not be
realistic anymore. Furthermore, pointing out the increase in homoploutia has practical relevance
when estimating top income shares while making assumptions on how missing income is
redistributed.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines homoploutia and describes how it
can be measured. Section 3 specifies our data sources and presents the main results. Section 4
discusses the link between homoploutia and interpersonal income inequality. We conclude in
Section 5.
2 What is Homoploutia?
We first discuss how homoploutia is defined and measured. There are various ways in which it
could be defined. One could look at how many of the top one-percenters by capital income are
also top one-percenters in terms of labor income (we denote this by top1K-top1L or H ). This
1,1
definition would focus on the very narrow sliver at the top (see Appendix A). In this paper, our
focus will be on a somewhat wider group, the intersection between the top decile of capital-income
recipients and the top decile of labor-income earners (top10K-top10L or H ). Under classical
10,10
capitalism, we would expect H to be small; the more different it is from zero, the more we
10,10
move away from the capital-labor dichotomy, at least at the top of the income distribution.
Other partitions are possible. One could be interested in “asymmetric intersections”, e.g., the
percentage of top 1% capital-income earners who are also in the top labor income decile (top1K-
top10L). The advantage of H , and similar symmetric intersections, is that the percentage of
10,10
such (top) capital-income earners in such (top) labor-income earners will be, by definition, the
same as the reverse, the percentage of top labor-income earners among the top capital-income
earners.
To highlight the changes in the distribution, it is also possible to look at homophtocheia (phtocheia
is poverty in Greek), that is, at the percentage of people who are poor in both capital and labor
income terms. For example, those that may be in the bottom decile of labor income but also in the
bottom decile of capital income. For our present purposes, however, and in order to better
discriminate between classical and homoploutic capitalism, it may be more interesting to look at
the presence of rich capitalists among poor wage earners (top10K-bottom10L). This is an analog
of the top10K-top10L because high values of top10K-bottom10L should be characteristic of
classical capitalism. On the other hand, absence of such intersection may be expected in
homoploutic capitalism. As we will see in the next section, the evolution of top10K-bottom10L
indeed mirrors that of top10K-top10L over the past 50 years.
We focus on the top or bottom shares, yet it is possible to define homoploutic capitalism in a more
expansive way, as the situation where capital and labor shares are the same throughout income
distribution, that is, where the poor receive the same percentage of their total income from capital
as do the rich. Such an approach to homoploutia was recently studied by Ranaldi and Milanovic
(2020). The difference between these approaches is similar to the difference between studying the
inequality of the full distribution using synthetic measures like Gini coefficient, and studying the
same income distribution by focusing on the top, as in works that look at the top 1% or 10% shares
only. Our paper, in terms of its approach to homoploutia, belongs to the second category.
It is also possible to consider the joint distribution of labor income ranks and capital income ranks,
or the copula of labor and capital incomes. The copula is commonly used in intergenerational
mobility studies to describe the probability of children to end up in the jth income rank as adults,
conditional on their parents occupying the ith income rank at a similar age. This concept is also
used, though less commonly, in the context of the joint distribution of labor and capital incomes
(see, e.g., Atkinson and Lakner (2017), Aaberge, Atkinson and Königs (2018) and Alvaredo,
Atkinson, et al. (2020)). We use the copula for the purpose of studying the link between
homoploutia and interpersonal inequality in Section 4. Technical details on copulas are thoroughly
discussed in Appendix B. Copulas are linked to the rank correlation, also a possible way to quantify
homoploutia. When the correlation between labor and capital income ranks is close to 0, we expect
H to be around 10%. When the rank correlation is close to 1, i.e. perfect correlation, H will
10,10 10,10
be very high, and close to 100% (see also Appendix B).
Homoploutia needs, however, to be distinguished from capital-labor correlation ρ , whether that
KL
correlation is measured by nominal amounts of capital and labor income, or by ranks. The capital-
labor correlation looks at the entire distribution while homoploutia (in the sense it is studied here)
has a more specific and narrow focus on correspondence of high labor and high capital incomes
among the same people. In general, we may expect that as the correlation between capital income
and labor income increases, homoploutia would tend to go up. But this is not guaranteed. For
example, we can imagine that the correlation between capital and labor incomes (by amounts)
increases throughout and even within the top of the distribution, but that nobody who was in the
top decile by capital, nor in top decile by labor, drops from those two groups (and nobody new
comes in). Then, rising ρ may not affect H .
KL 10,10
3 The Evolution of Homoploutia in the United States, 1950—2020
The main empirical result of this paper is the characterization of homoploutia in the US since 1950.
The primary indicator we use for this purpose is the share of top decile capital-income earners in
the top decile of labor-income earners, the top10K-top10L, which we denote for brevity as H .
10,10
The estimation of H requires individual or household income microdata that cover the top
10,10
decile of both labor and capital income.
We use three data sources:
• Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) (2020): A cross-national harmonized database based on
household surveys (in the case of the US it is based on the Current Population Survey (CPS
2020)). The data are available for the US for the years 1974, 1979, 1986 and 1991—2018.
• The US Distributional National Accounts (DINA) Micro-Files (Piketty, Saez and Zucman
2020): The US DINA combine tax, survey, and national accounts data, and capture 100%
of national income in the US. The data are available for 1962, 1964 and 1966—2020.
• The SCF+ (Kuhn, Schularick and Steins 2020): The SCF+ is an augmented version of the
Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), a household survey conducted every three years by
the Federal Reserve. In the SCF+ archival data were added to the SCF and harmonized to
account for the years that precede 1983. For our purposes, the data cover the years 1950—
1971 (every three years), 1977, 1983 and every three years between 1989 and 2016.
The income definitions and the units used in the three datasets are not identical. For example, in
LIS and SCF+ the unit, i.e. the income recipient we consider, is a household. In the US DINA it is
an equal-split adult.4 These differences are relevant for the interpretation of the results and they
may also explain some of the differences in the results between the sources described below.
4 This means that individuals in tax units that are composed of more than one income-contributing individuals are assumed to
contribute each an equal part to the total income (see Alvaredo, Atkinson, et al. (2020) for more details).
Appendix C details the income definitions and the units used in each of the datasets. Appendix C
also describes several robustness tests showing that including capital gains, pension income and
insurance payments in the income definitions matters little to the homoploutia estimates.
Using the three data sources allows both covering a period of 70 years and testing the robustness
of the estimates by comparing between them. To estimate H we detect in each year the income
10,10
threshold above which units are to be included in the top decile of labor income and of capital
income. Then we simply count the number of capital-income earners in the top decile who are also
included in the top decile of labor income. This methodology cannot be applied when income
tabulations are available but requires microdata.
after World War II, when H was about 10%. H =10% is indeed what we would expect in
10,10 10,10
the case of absence of positive correlation between capital and labor incomes at the top. With a
purely random distribution of labor incomes among the top decile of capital-income recipients
H would be 10%. Homoploutia increased by the early 1960s, rising to about 25%, and then
10,10
slightly decreased until the mid-1980s. Since 1985 it has been sharply increasing: In 1985, about
17% of adults in the top decile of capital-income earners were also in the top decile of labor-
income earners. In 2018 this indicator was about 30%.
decile capital-income earners in the top decile of labor-income earners, based on three data sources: The US DINA
(Piketty, Saez and Zucman 2020), the SCF+ (Kuhn, Schularick and Steins 2020) and Luxembourg Income Study
(2020).
the major differences between their methodologies and original raw data. Excluding one year in
which the SCF+ seems to significantly underestimate homoploutia (1971, in which the SCF+
sample size was uncommonly small (Kuhn, Schularick and Steins 2020)), the various estimates
are always within less than 5 percentage points from one another and follow a very similar trend.
This is especially the case after the mid-1980s when all three sources move in unison.
In particular, we can see that the current levels of homoploutia are the highest to be recorded. This
is indicative, among other things, of how the American capitalistic system has evolved over time.
Not only that “capital is back” (Piketty and Zucman 2014) in the sense that the capital-income
ratio and the capital share of income have increased in the past few decades, but also the traditional
division to capitalists and laborers, which may have been relevant when H was low, is much
10,10
less relevant today (Milanovic 2019). Thus, periods characterized by high interpersonal inequality,
high capital-income ratio, and high capital share of income in the past are fundamentally different
from today, despite the clear similarities.
The currently high homoploutia has far-reaching implications for social mobility and equality of
opportunity, as explained above.
10% capital-income earners changed from 1974 onward. Until the early 1990s the average rank
was limited within percentiles 45—48, meaning that on average, top 10% capital-income earners
had below median labor income. The average rank had increased since to percentile 63 in 2018.
capital-income earners in the US, 1974—2018, based on LIS data; Right: The top10K-top10L and top10K-bottom10L
in the US, 1974—2018, based on LIS data.
The data do not only allow describing the evolution of homoploutia using the share of top decile
capital-income earners in the top decile of labor-income earners. It is also possible to consider the
share of top decile capital-income earners in the bottom decile of labor-income earners, the
top10K-bottom10L. Such individuals or households are closer to the traditional definition of
of top10K-top10L and top10K-bottom10L using LIS data and shows that the two measures
roughly mirror one another. While the top10K-top10L increased from 17% to about 30% between
1985 to 2018, the top10K-bottom10L decreased from 19% to 10% during the same period.
3.1 Drivers of Homoploutia
The increasing homoploutia and the falling share of top capital-income earners in bottom labor
income decile may indicate that an older generation of capitalists was replaced by another,
characterized by much higher labor income ranks. What is driving this evolution of homoploutia?
In part, the rising homoploutia may be driven by the abundance of individuals who earned high
wages, saved a large share of their wages, invested it, and after some years began receiving large
capital incomes. It might also be driven by an increasing importance of inheritance, received
predominantly by individuals in the higher labor income ranks. Moreover, whatever the cause of
the original movement toward higher homoploutia, it is likely that in the next generation
homoploutia would even increase. This is because individuals born to capital-rich families that can
invest heavily in children's education would likely command high wages. In this sense, high
homoploutia is an important mechanism that limits social mobility.
To disentangle the different effects rare detailed longitudinal microdata, which include information
on inheritance and saving, are required. Nevertheless, we can shed light on such effects in the
absence of these data by considering four key variables:
• Marginal labor income inequality (quantified, e.g., by the top 10% labor income share)
• Marginal capital income inequality
• The capital share of income
• H (top10K-top10L)
10,10
These variables are a priori independent in the sense that there is no clear mechanical relationship
between them. For example, there is no reason for a change in labor income inequality to
mechanically lead to a change in any other variable. Therefore, robust statistical links between the
variables may be indicative of deeper mechanisms at play.
To map these relationships we use the US DINA, which cover the years 1962, 1964 and 1966—
2020. We regress H on the other three components for the entire period and for the years
10,10
1986—2020, in which the changes in all of them were most visible. We also regress H on the
10,10
that there is a strong and robust positive relationship between homoploutia and labor income
inequality, especially after 1985. There is no robust positive or negative association between H
10,10
and the other variables before 1986.
10,10
labor income share (L) and the top 10% capital income share (K). The values in brackets represent p-values.
Full model (1962—2020) Full model (1986—2020) Lab. income only (1986—2020)
H = a + bS + bL + b K + e H = a + bS + bL + b K + e H = a + bL + e
10,10 S i L i K i i 10,10 S i L i K i i 10,10 L i i
0.18 0.71
(0.067) (< 0.001)
0.66 1.53 1.74
(< 0.001) (< 0.001) (< 0.001)
28.5 22.0
(0.310) (0.084)
R2 0.72 0.97 0.96
Obs. 57 35 35
The strong association between H and the top 10% labor income share is further demonstrated
10,10
share and the top 10% capital income share. The black line is the baseline estimate of H from the US DINA. The
10,10
dotted line is the estimate of H when using the linear model H = a + bS + bL + b K , using the capital share
10,10 10,10 S i L i K i
of income (S), the top 10% labor income share (L) and the top 10% capital income share (K) for the period 1962—
2020. The gray line is the estimate of H when using the linear model H = a + bL for 1986—2020.
10,10 10,10 L i
The robust association demonstrates that there are two mechanisms for the increase in homoploutia
supported by the data. First, as described, it is possible that following the increase of income
inequality over the 1970s and early 1980s high-wage earners were able to save a large share of
their wages, invest it, and then begin receiving large capital incomes. Another possible mechanism
is that the growing labor income inequality made top labor incomes more attractive for the capital-
rich, who were less incentivized to engage with the labor market while labor income inequality
was relatively low. This can be reinforced by higher bargaining power that such workers may have
due to their high capital incomes. This mechanism is also related to mechanisms suggested for the
increase in wage inequality (Katz and Murphy 1992) and executive compensation (see, e.g.,
Piketty and Saez (2003) and Philippon and Reshef (2012)).
We also note that the observed trend in homoploutia is not mechanically driven by structural
changes in the compensation structure of executives in the past decades. While executives are paid
more through stock options and shares today than a few decades ago (Piketty and Saez (2003);
Philippon and Reshef (2012); Smith, et al. (2019)), this change does not lead to higher top10K-
top10L. First, bonuses and exercised stock options are accounted for as labor income. In addition,
capital gains are excluded from our capital income definitions in all datasets (even when included
they have a small impact on the estimates, see Appendix C). Most importantly, executive pay is
only relevant for a small group within the top labor income decile, mostly restricted to the top
percentile, so it cannot be a dominant factor in the top10K-top10L trend.
4 Homoploutia and Income Inequality
In addition to the possible causal relationship between labor income inequality and homoploutia,
there is also a clear mechanical link between homoploutia and interpersonal or total income
inequality. Intuitively, as the association between labor and capital incomes becomes stronger, i.e.
higher homoploutia across the entire distribution, we should expect total income inequality to be
higher as well. This is because both types of incomes are at least somewhat unequal. Therefore, if
the highest incomes of any type (labor or capital) would be more likely to go to the same
households or individuals, then the sum of those incomes, or the total income, will be more
unequally distributed than in the case of low homoploutia. Thus, the increase in homoploutia in
the past several decades may have played a role in the rising income inequality in the US.
Specifically, the recent 35 years have seen a rise in the US in all four variables discussed above:
labor income inequality, capital income inequality, the capital share of income, and homoploutia.
Keeping all the others constant, an increase in each of these indicators may mechanically lead to
an increase in total income inequality. While the literature has focused so far on the first three, in
this section we attempt to describe the relationship between the rise in homoploutia in the US since
1985 and the rise in total income inequality. Moreover, we can compare the relative importance of
changes in homoploutia with the importance of the capital share of income, both as factors
contributing to the increase in income inequality.
4.1 Homoploutia and Inequality: Static Analysis
To test the impact of homoploutia on total income inequality, we assume that the joint rank
distribution of labor and capital incomes follows a Gumbel copula. This has been shown as a good
approximation used in the inequality literature in recent years (Alvaredo, Assouad and Piketty
(2019); Piketty, Yang and Zucman (2019); Alvaredo, Atkinson, et al. (2020)). Appendix B
presents a discussion of this assumption and demonstrates the differences between realistic copulas
and the approximated Gumbel copulas. Given marginal labor and capital income distributions (and
implicitly the capital income share) we can use the copula to match together the two distributions
and obtain a joint distribution of labor and capital incomes. This allows, by summing the two
components together, obtaining the total income distribution.
Thus, repeating the matching procedure systematically, each time with a different parameter for
the copula, allows showing how inequality reacts to changes in homoploutia. This is demonstrated
shows how the top 10% total income share mechanically depends on homoploutia. As
hypothesized, total income inequality increases with homoploutia. The dependence of the top 10%
share on H is concave, and is steepest for realistic H values, between 10% to 30%.
10,10 10,10
homoploutia. We match the labor income and capital income distributions (from the US DINA) using a Gumbel
copula, each time with a different parameter, equivalent to changing H (see Appendix B for details on how H
10,10 10,10
is related to the Gumbel copula). We then obtain a joint distribution of labor and capital incomes, which allows, by
summing the two income components, obtaining the total income distribution, and estimate how unequal it is.
100%, the top 10% total income share is limited. This limit depends on the marginal capital and
labor income distributions and on the capital income share. For 2018 it is about 54%, a level
classified as “very high inequality” (Piketty 2014).
4.2 Inequality Effects of Homoploutia and Capital Share Increase Over Time
We are interested in further exploring the impact of homoploutia on total income inequality in
practice. Specifically, we are interested in understanding how it interacts with the changing capital
US in 1985 and 2018). In practice, however, both variables — homoploutia and the capital share
of income — are changing and have been increasing in the past few decades. We will try to answer
what is the contribution of each of them to the increase in total income inequality. This question
is central in current discussions on inequality (see, e.g., Piketty (2014) and Milanovic (2019)), and
has importance for policy aiming to impact total income inequality.
For this analysis we look at two counterfactual scenarios from 1986 to 2020. In the first scenario
we fix homoploutia to its 1986 level but let the capital share change according to its historical
evolution (using the US DINA data). In the second scenario we fix the capital share to its 1986
level but let the homoploutia change. In both scenarios we let the marginal labor and capital income
distributions change according to their historical evolution. In each scenario we calculate the top
10% total income share every year. The first scenario neutralizes the impact of rising homoploutia
on inequality. The second scenario neutralizes the impact of rising capital share.
somewhat similar evolution. This demonstrates that the changes in the marginal distributions are
the biggest contributors to the increase in total income inequality. In the first scenario (dashes in
from the baseline, reaching about 2 percentage points in the late 2010s. Thus, we can say that the
rising homoploutia mechanically led to an increase of 2 percentage points in the top 10% income
share. This is about 20% of the entire increase in the top 10% income share between 1986 and
2020. The direct impact of the rising capital share on the top 10% total income share (as indicated
entire time period.
2020. The baseline result shows how the top 10% total income share has changed between 1986 and 2020. The other
lines show counterfactual calculations in which homoploutia is fixed (dashed black) and capital income share is fixed
(dotted gray).
These results show that homoploutia works as an independent factor in raising inequality. Even if
the capital share were fixed (while allowing marginal capital and labor income distributions to
evolve as they did), homoploutia would make the income distribution more unequal. The direct
mechanical impact (i.e. regardless of a causal relationship) of homoploutia on total income
inequality in the US in the past 35 years has been substantial. We have thus shown first, that
statically (in a one-year analysis) greater homoploutia is leading to higher inequality, and second,
that over the recent past, homoploutia has played a bigger role in increasing US inequality than
the aggregate capital share.
5 Conclusion
A typical assumption made explicitly and implicitly in classical political economy and in studies
of income distributions is that an economy can be thought of as divided into workers and
capitalists. Capitalists receive their income from ownership (capital) whereas workers receive their
income from working (labor). However, the percentage of people in the top decile of capital
income who are also in the top decile of labor-income recipients has steadily increased in the
United States from around 15 percent in 1980 to almost 30 percent in 2017. Milanovic (2019)
called this phenomenon homoploutia. In this paper we formally define homoploutia and the ways
in which it is quantified. More importantly, we describe the evolution of homoploutia in the United
States from 1950 to 2020.
To quantify homoploutia we use the intersection between the top decile of capital-income
recipients and labor-income earners (top10K-top10L). Combining three datasets we find that
homoploutia was low after World War II, has increased by the early 1960s, and then slightly
decreased until the mid-1980s. Since 1985 it has been sharply increasing: In 1985, about 17% of
adults in the top decile of capital-income earners were also in the top decile of labor-income
earners. In 2018 this indicator was about 30%.
To better understand what drove the rise in homoploutia we then study its relationship to the capital
share of income and the marginal distributions of capital and labor incomes. We find a strong and
robust positive relationship between homoploutia and labor income inequality, especially after
1985. This suggests that the increasing labor income inequality in the US during the 1970s led to
an increase in homoploutia later on. A possible mechanism for this relationship is that the growing
labor income inequality made top labor incomes more attractive for capital-rich, who were
previously less incentivized to engage with the labor market. This can be reinforced by higher
bargaining power that such workers may have due to their high capital incomes. In addition, it is
possible that wage-stretching, which started in the 1970s made it possible for top earners to save
large shares of their wages and to acquire capital assets, receiving high income from those assets
later on.
We also study the link between rising homoploutia and the rising interpersonal income inequality
in the US during the past 35 years. The top 10% total income share in the US increased between
1986 and 2020 by 10 percentage points, from 37% to 47% (Piketty, Saez and Zucman 2020). We
find that ceteris paribus, the increase in homoploutia has contributed 2 percentage points, or 20%,
to this increase. These results suggest that homoploutia may have played a bigger role in increasing
income inequality in the US than the aggregate capital share. This complements the recent
literature on the role of the capital share in the evolution of inequality in the past few decades
(Piketty (2014); Milanovic (2017); Wolff (2017)).
The current trend of rising homoploutia is potentially unprecedented in modern times. It has far-
reaching implications for social mobility. Having the rich who are rich in terms of both property
and skills may enable them to create an upper class that has little in common with the rest of the
population and that is able, through significant investment in offspring, to transmit these
advantages across generations. This, in turn, may lead, as explained, to even higher interpersonal
income inequality.