Memorable navigation: Assessing the influence
of way-finding in spatial clustering
A. Pastor
Information Technologies, Multimedia and Telecommunications Department,
Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain
alvaropastor@uoc.edu
Abstract. Navigating around an environment and remembering the
events that took place within it are crucial cognitive abilities that have
been linked to the Hippocampus and medial temporal lobes (MTL).
Scene Construction Theory (SCT) has proposed that a function of the
10 A
Hippocampus is the implicit and continuous construction of scenes to
help prediction of upcoming environment. Scenes, as highly efficient
means of packaging information, underpin in coordination with other
brain regions, episodic memory (EM), spatial navigation, future think-
ing and perhaps even dreaming and mind-wandering. We inquired the
conditions in which spatial contiguity of stimuli influences the organi-
zation of memory by examining spatial clustering (SC) phenomenon. In
this research,Ran augmented reality (AR) system was used to test 14 par-
ticipants in a spatially dependent memory task which assessed the SC
differences between active navigators and passive spectators. We con-
firmed our hypothesis that navigators use spatial information as part of
the retrieval process in free recall, as they tended to sequentially recall
any two neighboring otherwise unrelated items. We also found a signifi-
cant correlation between SC and correct recall performance supporting
our second hypothesis. These results may be valuable for design of learn-
ing applications, especially dealing with large amounts of data. Research
on Alzheimer’s and other neurodegenerative diseases may also benefit
from our approach. Future studies may assess the role of encoding and
retrieval modality and participant’s use of mnemonic strategies.
· ·
Keywords: Episodic memory Spatial clustering Scene Construction
· ·
Theory Free Recall Augmented Reality
1 Introduction
As described in Hume’s Principles of Association [1], ideas enter into association
with one another when they are contiguous in space and time. In the study of
human memory, this contiguity effect has been found in studies of free recall,
suggesting that a person is more likely to recall words together that are closer
together in a list [2]. The contiguity effect appears relatively constant, and has
been predicted to have long-term effects on memory according to researchers[3].
Whereas a massive body of experimental work has demonstrated the potent
2 A. Pastor
influence of temporal contiguity on the association of ideas, we know little about
the conditions in which spatial contiguity of stimuli influences memory.
This study examined whether and how spatial navigation influenced the or-
ganization of memory by examining spatial clustering (SC) phenomenon and
overall recall performance (ORF), using an ecologically valid experimental envi-
ronment. Previous research has shown that the neural mechanisms of EM and
navigation in real and mental space are fundamentally the same. It has been pro-
posed that mechanisms of EM have evolved from mechanisms of navigation in
the physical world. A clear parallel between allocentric navigation strategies and
semantic memory, on one hand, and egocentric strategies and EM on the other
has been suggested. Importantly, studies have confirmed that the brain systems
involved in guiding navigation, the Hippocampus and entorhinal cortex, are the
same that are activated in declarative memory tasks [4], and that the same mech-
anisms that define unique positions and their relationships in a map can be used
to mediate memory for events, objects and living things [5]. Also, the Hippocam-
pus – entorhinal cortex system has the anatomical and physiological properties
to account for temporally evolving structures of unrelated data. Recently, Scene
Construction Theory (SCT) has pointed that a function of the Hippocampus is
the implicit and continuous construction of scenes, a highly efficient format for
packaging information, to help prediction of upcoming environment [6–9]. There-
fore, we found reasonable to expect that, when spatial information is available
at encoding, Hippocampus would form a scene associating the encountered item
and spatial context, and that this composite scene would tend to be reinstated
at recall. This reinstatement would not only provide the phenomenological expe-
rience of remembering, but also help to cue other memories experienced within
the same or related spatial contexts.
From this literature overarching questions emerged: Can we derive learning
strategies that profit from the mechanisms of scene dependent memory? Can
scenes, the highly efficient information-packing method of Hippocampus, inform
design criteria for learning applications? We based our approach on prior studies
that show how the human memory system associates each new experience within
a spatiotemporal context and that this context becomes reactivated when the
experience is recalled [2, 10–12]. In this sense, this study aimed to advance our
understanding of the conditions in which spatial contiguity of stimuli influences
organization of EM, and if spatial organization of memory correlates to increased
performance.
If spatial navigation was essential for the formation of the spatiotemporal
context of memory for a given stimulus, we hypothesized that, subjects who nav-
igate an environment would exhibit a significant tendency to consecutively recall
neighboring items presented therein. We compared these active performances to
that of passive spectators of the same journey of presentation of target items.
We also hypothesized that participants showing higher rates of spatial clustering
(SC) for a navigation task would present enhanced memory performance.
Memorable navigation 3
This article summarizes the findings and updates the interpretation of the
second pilot experiment of the Master Thesis Assessing the influence of spatial
84 T
clustering in free recall [13].
Following a between subjects design we conducted a pilot experiment in which
participants were presented with items in two spatially dependent conditions:
Way finding group in which participants were presented via Augmented Reality
(AR) with visual items upon arrival at various real-world locations, compared
to a guided navigation group in which participants passively spectated the navi-
gation recording of a corresponding matched-pair, featuring a 3D representation
of the traversed environment.
To explore the conditions in which spatial contiguity of stimuli influences
the organization of memory, we assessed the performance differences between
active navigators and passive spectators in a spatially dependent memory task,
using behavioral data, spatial clustering factor (SCF), and overall recall factor
(ORF) as scores in Immediate (IFR) and delayed free recall (DFR) 24 hours
after trial. Regarding the first hypothesis, this study found significant differences
in SC between navigators and guided participants. We also found a significant
correlation between SC and correct recall performance supporting our second
hypothesis.
Our AR framework helped to evidence functioning of recall dynamics in both
the guided and way-finding conditionsin a ecologically valid and systematic way.
We suggested further studies to clarify participants’ use of mnemonic techniques
104 R
and the role of stimuli modality at encoding and retrieval. Advances in this
field may benefit the design of AR learning applications and spatial data inter-
action paradigms, as well as research on cerebral aging and neurodegenerative
conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease.
2 Background
2.1 Episodic memory
Episodic memory [14] refers to autobiographical memory for events constructed
from its what, when, where components, linked together in a coherent spatiotem-
poral experience. A key feature of episodic memory is its unique role to allow
the individual to mentally travel back into her personal past [15, 16]. The precise
details that characterize episodic memory have been debated, but there is con-
sensus that time, space and sense of self are key elements [17–21]. From research
carried out using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) we know that
a distributed and highly consistent network of brain regions supports memory
for past experiences [21, 22]. It has been suggested that episodic memory in the
Hippocampus is formed by combining spatial information from the medial en-
torhinal cortex [23, 24] with non spatial information from the lateral entorhinal
cortex [25, 26]. Imaging studies have also illuminated the contributions of dis-
tinct prefrontal regions to encoding and retrieval [27–29]. Episodic memory is
affected by aging processes [30], and there have been findings of sex differences
4 A. Pastor
in its performance [31, 32], but results are still inconclusive [33]. Recent studies
have helped to establish that these neural systems also support the capacity to
126 T
imagine and to simulate episodes expected to occur in the future [15, 34–36].
The ability to pre experience future events has been referred by some authors
as prospection [37] and by others as episodic future thinking [38–40]. Consistent
with this approach, neuroimaging studies focused on the brain activity during
the construction of past and future events, have revealed regions exhibiting com-
mon activity, which included the left portion of the Hippocampus and the right
occipital gyrus, especially during the elaboration phase, when participants are
focused on generating details about the remembered or imagined event [41, 42].
2.2 Theories of hippocampal function
For decades, the Hippocampus and MTL of the mammalian central nervous sys-
tem have been structures closely associated with memory [43–46]. Indeed, studies
on Amnesiac and hippocampal excised patients has shown that the Hippocampus
is essential for acquiring and consolidating new knowledge about events, people,
and places. Several theories regarding the role of the Hippocampus in memory
have been proposed over the years. All regard the Hippocampus as being critical
for EM, but there are key differences between its mediator or storage roles.
Declarative Theory [47, 48] The Hippocampus, acting together with other me-
dial temporal lobe regions, is crucial for all forms of consciously accessible mem-
ory processes (episodic and semantic, recollection and familiarity) for a time-
limited period. Ultimately all memories are consolidated to neocortical sites.
Multiple-Trace Theory [49] The Hippocampus, together with other medial
temporal lobe regions, is crucial for the acquisition of episodic and semantic
memories. The recollection of episodic memories remains dependent on the Hip-
pocampus for the duration of one’s life and becomes more resistant to partial
damage with repetition and/or rehearsal, whereas semantic memories become
independent of the Hippocampus and are stored in other brain regions over
time.
Dual-Process Theory [50, 51] The Hippocampus is crucial for episodic recollec-
tion of the contextual details of an event. Familiarity-based recognition processes
are subserved by other medial temporal lobe regions. Recollection is required for
the associative recognition of non-unitized items.
Cognitive-Map Theory [52] A primary role of the mammalian Hippocampus
is to construct and store allocentric representations of locations in the envi-
ronment to aid flexible navigation, for example, from a new starting position.
In humans these predominantly spatial processes have evolved to support the
spatio–temporal context of episodic memories.
Relational Theory [53, 54] Attempts to unify the declarative and spatial func-
tions of the Hippocampus, suggesting a broader characterization including both
functions: that the Hippocampus encodes relational information that can be
flexibly applied to new situations. Thus it claims that the Hippocampus allows
Memorable navigation 5
the flexible association of information in neocortical modules that could not oth-
erwise communicate. This enables the relations between elements of a scene or
168 T
event to be retrieved or used for inference in novel situations, in addition to re-
trieval of the elements themselves. The Cognitive-Map Theory can be subsumed
as a special case of spatial relational processing.
Scene Construction Theory (SCT) [6–8] SCT suggests that a function of the
Hippocampus is the implicit and continuous contruction of scenes to help pre-
diction of upcoming environment. It does not suggest that the Hippocampus is
solely responsible for EM, future thinking, and spatial navigation, but rather that
the Hippocampus supplies the crucial ingredient of scene construction. SCT was
originally proposed following the observation that patients with hippocampal
damage and amnesia are unable to imagine scenes. Scenes are a highly efficient
means of packaging information, that underpin and support -in coordination
with other brain regions- EM, spatial navigation, future thinking and perhaps
even dreaming and mind-wandering. EAvidences from this hippocampal scene con-
struction activity come from Boundary extension (BE) studies. BE is a robust
and consistent cognitive phenomenon where we erroneously remember seeing
more of a scene than was present in sensory input [55]. Accumulating evidence
obtained by a variety of paradigms [56, 57] has shown that BE depends on the
hippocampal ability to construct scenes. Predictive scene extension processes
have been shown attenuated in hippocampal damaged patients, as they signifi-
cantly reduced BERrelative to matched controls across a number of independent
measures. These data in addition to the original scene construction findings [6–
8], support the idea that the primary function of the Hippocampus may not be
mnemonic [58] but may instead be to predict the nature of the world beyond
the immediate sensorium [9].
3 Navigation
Navigating is the cognitive process of planning and following routes to travel from
the current location to a target location. It involves way-finding, a fundamental
human cognitive function, and motoric functions. Way-finding in complex envi-
ronments relies on complex multisensory perceptual processes, from idiothetic
and allothetic sources, and on memory [59–61]. When humans navigate, learn
about the environment, by receiving spatial information from multiple sensory
cues which are to be stored and used to guide subsequent navigation behavior.
Consistent with Tolman’s description of a cognitive-like map of the environment,
the conception common to O’Keefe [52] and most researchers on cognitive maps,
is that the Hippocampus mediates a holistic representation of space [62]. It has
been shown that the spatially selective firing properties of rat hippocampal place
cells are controlled by the salient sensory cues in the environment [63]. Research
by Siegel and White [64] has provided a description of the process of the con-
struction of a cognitive map as a person becomes familiar with an environment.
A cognitive map begins as a set of landmarks, then it is followed by a repre-
sentation of the routes, meaning the sequence of actions needed to get from one
6 A. Pastor
location to another. Finally, these sequences of actions or routes are united into
an internal representation of the environment that is similar to a map, called a
survey representation, which is useful because it can be used to generate novel
routes between two locations within the environment. The resulting map would
be Cartesian in that it provides metrics for the representation of distances and
angles between the relevant stimuli. At the physiological level, a place cell reflects
as a pointer, the occurrence of the organism at a particular coordinate position
within the map. The formation of numerous independent maps in the Hippocam-
pus has obvious advantages for memory formation, as it allows the network to
store new representations in a manner that minimizes interference with previ-
ously stored memories. The orthogonal nature of hippocampal representations
is expressed in its ability to remap between experiences and environments. Even
minor changes in the configuration of landmarks or the motivational context
can completely alter the firing pattern of the hippocampal cell population. As a
result, each environment can be represented by a unique combination of active
224 A
cells.
3.1 Navigation Strategies
Human navigation is based on two interlinked strategies for encoding and rep-
resentation of the Rspatial environment [65, 66].
Allocentric Allocentric navigation is a mechanism that uses the spatial relation-
ships among landmarks in order to define actual location in the environment and
to provide static position information in a reference frame. Space representations
in this system, may be updated frequently by changes in the configuration of
multi sensory inputs.
D Egocentric navigation A system which requires active movement of the body,
and computes the distances and coordinates based on integration of motion
and knowledge of previous positions, thus producing the spatial metric needed
for the estimation of distances between landmarks [67]. To that end, egocen-
tric navigation system relies on locomotion speed, elapsed time, head direction
and the initial reference position. Allocentric and egocentric navigation always
work together, but the availability of external landmarks may determine whether
allocentric or egocentric strategies dominate.
3.2 Way-finding
A goal-seeking behavior, using allocentric and egocentric mechanisms, where
the navigator must explore and fix the coordinates of his actual location, and
compute the difference between his present coordinates and the goal coordinates
to obtain the difference vector specifying the direction and distance to move
from its current location to its goal [68, 69].
Memorable navigation 7
3.3 Neural substrate supporting spatial navigation
Navigating around an environment is a crucial cognitive ability that has been
linked to the Hippocampus and medial temporal lobes. While processing of spa-
tial scenes involves the paraHippocampus, the right Hippocampus appears par-
ticularly involved in memory for locations within an environment, with the left
Hippocampus more involved in EM, context-dependent autobiographical mem-
ory [70, 71].
Place Cells [72]. Fire selectively when the animal is in F one particular region of
the environment. It doesn’t depend on the direction the animal is facing [62].
Firing persists in the dark [73], ruling out an explanation based on simple visual
stimuli correlated with place. Different place cells fire in different environmental
locations. The place cells are driven by a combination of perceptual inputs and
self-motion information, either of which can individually update the place-cell
representation. Once established, place cells can have the same firing pattern for
months [74]. The firing patterns can persist even when all of the spatial cues
are removed. Besides responding to incoming perceptual information, place cells
are also driven by self-motion signals (proprioceptive, vestibular and reafferent
signals from intended movements), which indicate the location of the animal
on the basis of its own movements. There is an extensive literature describing
characteristics of place cells in dorsal hippocampal area CA1 [5, 75]. Less is
known about the place code in other medial temporal lobe structures. It is
268 R
known that there are place cells in the entorhinal cortex [76, 77], a region of
cortex that provides input to the Hippocampus proper.
Grid cells [23, 78]. Grid Cells do not represent particular locations in the envi-
ronment. Instead, they tile the environment, and are re-used over and over, like
the intersections on graph paper. Grid cells have different periodic spacings, and
it is believed that collectively, they form a universal, flexible code for mapping
Dotherwise undifferentiated navigable space. Grid cells have multiple firing fields
that span the entire available space in a periodic hexagonal pattern, which pro-
vides a metric to the neural representation of space. This type of cells system is
present throughout the medial entorhinal cortex and in the pre and parasubicu-
lum [79]. The correlation structure of grid cells is preserved during sleep periods
[80].
Head direction cells [81] Their firing represents the direction in which the
animal is heading, independent of its current location and the firing direction is
controlled by self-motion and perceptual information. Head-direction cells show
pattern completion and accommodation for missing cues, and probably set the
environmental orientation of the responses of place cells. When stimulated, these
neurons fire at a steady rate not showing adaptation, but decrease back to their
baseline rates as the animal’s head turns away more than 45 degrees from an
specific direction [82]. These cells are found in many brain areas, including the
post-subiculum, retrosplenial cortex, the thalamus (the anterior and the lateral
dorsal thalamic nuclei), lateral mammillary nucleus, dorsal tegmental nucleus,
striatum and entorhinal cortex [83].
8 A. Pastor
Border Cells. O’Keefe and Burgess [84] observed that the medial entorhinal
cortex contains a smaller number of border cells, which line up in specific orien-
tations along specific geometric boundaries of the environment. These cell types
were all discovered in rats, but place cells, grid cells and head direction cells
have since been found in other species. Border cells may assist in the assessment
of the allocentric distances by triangulation and perhaps in scaling the grid size
to accommodate to the size of the discoverable environment [85].
4 Space and memory connection: Spatial Clustering
Most theories of memory search assume that the just-recalled item, and its as-
sociated semantic and contextual information, forms part of the retrieval cue
for the next response. For instance, temporal clustering effects have been be
observed to the extent that recalling an item retrieves its associated temporal
context, as this information will be similar to the contexts associated with neigh-
boring list items [3, 12]. Similarly, SC effects should be observed to the extent
that recalling an item retrieves its associated spatial features, as this informa-
tion would be similar to the spatial features associated with spatially proximate
items. Assuming that spatial attributes form an integral part of the item rep-
resentations encoded in memory, it is reasonable to expect to see SC even in
tasks where participants are not instructed to encode the spatial context of the
to-be-learned items and where retrieval makes no explicit reference to the spatial
characteristics of the items.
The key properties of EM involve binding disparate and often arbitrary de-
tails together into a coherent event and the recollection of self-centered past
experiences in the context of time and space in which the events occurred [8].
Theories of EM suggest that memory encoding and retrieval are facilitated
by spatiotemporal context: a continually updated representation of location in
space and time. The Hippocampus appears to have neurons that are specialized
for encoding both spatial and temporal information. Hippocampal place cells
fire at specific locations within an environment [79], and recently documented
hippocampal time cells fire at specific temporal intervals between distinct events
[86]. Recent studies seek to examine the role of spatial context in human EM
retrieval through a hybrid spatial and EM task. Miller et al. [87] identified place
cells as neurosurgical patients performed a delivery task which required them
to deliver items to different stores in a virtual town. Following this navigation
task, patients were asked to freely recall the items they had delivered. Place
cell activation patterns during the navigational task were then compared to the
subsequent activation patterns that occurred during the free recall task. Miller
found that neural activity during the retrieval of each delivered item was similar
to the neural activity associated with the location where that item was encoded.
These findings demonstrate context-specific reinstatement of place-responsive
cell activity at the time of recall, supporting theories that implicate contextual
reinstatement as the basis for memory retrieval [87]. Kahana and others [88] have
found neural evidence for contextual reinstatement in humans. After studying a
Memorable navigation 9
list of 20 words and performing a brief distraction task, a participant recalls as
many words as he can remember, in any order. ECG activity is recorded during
336 T
each study and recall event. Participants exhibiting stronger neural signatures
of context reinstatement also exhibited more pronounced temporal contiguity
effects [89]. Another example is the [90] findings on the reactivation of encoding-
related brain activity during memory retrieval. Howard et al [91] analyzed the fir-
ing rates of ensembles of individual neurons as neurosurgical patients implanted
with hippocampal depth electrodes performed a continuous recognition mem-
ory task. They found that the ensemble similarity of neural activity when a
photograph was repeated was similar to the neural activity recorded during the
encoding of neighboring photos.
5 Method
Following a between subjects design we conducted a pilot experiment in which
participants were presented with items in two spatially dependent conditions:
Way finding group in which participants were presented via AR with visual
items upon arrival at various real-world locations, compared to a guided navi-
gation group in which participants passively spectated the navigation recording
of a corresponding matched-pair, featuring a 3D representation of the traversed
environment. We aimed to avoid semantic and temporal clustering strategies be-
tween subjects by presenting with identical target items in the same inter stimuli
time span.
We developed an AR system that enabled users in the way-finding group to
freely explore Poble Nou Central Park where they were presented with virtual
items upon arrival at various real-world locations. Our AR system navigation
recording features, used to replay a 3D representation of the way-finding sessions
to the matched-paired participants in the guided condition. We measured ORF
scores in IFR and DFR 24 hours after trial. We calculated SCF from the logged
navigational data. Comparisons were made regarding SCF in the two experi-
mental conditions. We inquired whether subjects higher SCF scores were more
prone to higher ORFs.
5.1 Hypotheses
The study was based on prior studies that show that recall dynamics is guided
by item and context similarity [92], that SC exists in a two-dimensional envi-
ronment [93], and that the EM system associates each new experience within
a spatiotemporal context and that this context becomes reactivated when the
experience is recalled [10, 87, 94].
We reasoned that the spatial conditions in which an item is experienced would
form a composite scene for the item, even if the item itself had no spatial infor-
mation associated with it prior to the experiment. In this sense, when a memory
is retrieved, its spatiotemporal context is partially reinstated. This reinstate-
ment would not only provide the phenomenological experience of remembering,
10 A. Pastor
but also help to cue other memories experienced within the same or related spa-
tiotemporal contexts. Therefore, in a task where participants were instructed to
navigate around an environment and encode each object in a specific real-world
location, it was reasonable to expect that recalling an item would reinstate its
spatiotemporal context including nearby items in SC. In the case of being guided
as static spectators, there would be less available spatial information at encoding
time of the EM scene, thus, other clustering strategies (temporal, categorical)
would organize recall.
We hypothesized that participants in the way-finding group would exhibit a
significant difference to consecutively recall items presented in spatially proxi-
mate locations when compared to passive spectators. We also hypothesized that
participants showing higher rates of SC would also show better memory per-
formance. Overall, when participants recalled an item, we expected that the
item will evoke its spatial context and thus enhance retrieval of unrelated items
experienced in nearby spatial locations.
390 A
5.2 Subjects
We interviewed 29 volunteers from Universitat Pompeu Fabra at Poble Nou
Campus in Barcelona. We then selected 7 matched pairs in terms of sex and
previous knowledge of the experimental location. 14 participants (2 female) aged
from 19 to 33 agreRed to take part in this study and were assigned each to one
of two groups, way-finding condition and guided condition. All participants re-
ported user level experience with AR systems. All were right handed and none
wore corrective lenses during the study.
Way-finding Condition Participants were required to explore the physical envi-
ronment, deciding by themselves the path to follow, using a handheld AR system,
which presented 17 virtual landmarks available only for one time display. In our
AR system, way-finding was supported by adding virtual landmarks at selected
positions of the physical space and rendering target items upon subject arrival.
Guided Condition Participants are presented with a realistic 3D representa-
tion of the Poble Nou Central Park, that replayed a session of the way-finding
Condition. Participants watched the entire navigation for the same amount of
time, with equal inter stimuli time span, and have the target items presented
in similar conditions. We take into consideration that previous studies [87] have
achieved SC by playing a video game portraying a detailed 3D model.
5.3 AR system
In order to convey a realistic and ecologically valid spatial experience, we de-
veloped an AR system using Unity software which enabled to overlay virtual
information in real world positions according to participants’ spatial coordi-
nates (GPS) and orientation. This system was installed on an Apple iPad model
MD369TY/A with 2048 x 1536 pixels visual display and used the built-in GPS
Memorable navigation 11
Fig. 1. Overview of two experimental conditions. The AR paradigm used for the Way-
Finding condition in the left image. A 3D virtual representation of the journey used
for the guided Condition.
receiver. The AR system allowed us to present to participants, 17 virtual land-
marks distributed over the physical space. This approach enabled participants
to decide the path to follow, navigate and find their way through the space. Each
time a participant arrived at the coordinate-defined physical location where the
virtual landmark was placed the system presented a virtual target item on the
handheld device diRsplay. Our system recorded all position and orientation trans-
formations, and user interactions with target items during each experimental
session, in order to be replayed for each of the guided condition participants
with identical order, visual spatial information, and inter stimuli time span.
Location. Our study took place at Poble Nou Central Park, designed by archi-
tect Jean Nouvel and built in 2008. Our study was conducted in a 170 meter
long by 60 meter wide area, comprising different landscape and architectural
elements, such as gravel, ground, grass and cork flooring, an area with salient
trees, two wooden huts, a brick chimney, and several children playground areas.
Each of these features was accurately rendered in our 3D representation of the
environment.
Virtual landmarks. 17 colorful virtual landmarks, equivalent size of 7 meter
height and half a meter diameter cylinders, were placed in AR related to real-
world locations. Each indicated a three meter equivalent radius interactive area
where the user found a target item upon arrival. Virtual landmarks held no
noticeable distinction from each other. The layout of the park and the location
of the virtual landmarks was identical for every participant.
Target items. 17 items from the Moreno-Martinez and Montoro [95] alternative
to Snodgrass & Vanderwart [96] object image databank were selected to be pre-
sented to participants. These pre validated pictures were semantically significant
everyday objects, rendered in a realistic appearance in 1024px wide by 768px
height and 72 ppi on the AR visual display, with item name captioned in 60px
Sans Serif type. Any of the 17 target items only became visible for a 5 second
12 A. Pastor
period when the participant physically walked into any of the three meter radius
interactive areas indicated by the virtual landmarks.
Real - Virtual Landmark connections. We chose to locate each virtual land-
mark near existing architectural landmarks found at Poble Nou Central Park.
Target items and physical landmarks held no semantical relation, as virtual tar-
get items were randomly allocated.
Fig. 2. Left, an orthographic image from the experimental location, and overlay of
virtual landmarks and target items. Left, Virtual target items where distributed near
existing architectural landmarks at Poble Nou Central Park.
5.4 Procedure
Before the start of each session, participants were given written instructions
explaining the procedures to take place, and asked to give signed consent in
order to begin the trial. Then, participants were guided through a 2 minute
familiarization process with the AR system. Finally, participants were led to
the trial starting position, defined at latitude 41.407221 and longitude 2.199322
which was set to be position X=0, Y=0 in our fixed coordinate system across
trials. Maximum duration of the procedure was 35 minutes.
Memorable navigation 13
Way-finding condition. The participants in the way-finding condition were
asked to physically explore the real park environment during a maximum of
20 minutes using a hand-held device that allowed virtual landmarks and target
items to be presented in AR. All 17 virtual landmarks are visible from the start,
indicating real world locations where users were to find virtual target items.
Guided condition. In the Second Pilot Experiment, participants sat down at
local coordinates X=0, Y=0, and were presented with a realistic 3D representa-
tion of the corresponding recorded session of a way-finding journey. Participants
watched the entire navigation for the same amount of time and inter stimuli time
span, and had the target items presented using the same display and in similar
viewing conditions.
5.5 Data Analysis
Immediate and Delayed Free recall Free recall tasks allowed us to measure the
way participants organize learned items [97–99]. EM was investigated by visually
presenting items for study, and then asking participants to recall the items. Using
a method for measuring SC modified from previous studies [87] we could quantify
the way in which people transition from one recalled item to the next. For that
reason, participants from both way-finding and guided conditions completed an
IFR task, in which they were asked to verbally report as many recalled items
as possible, in any order, for 90 seconds. 24 hours past from the experimental
procedure, each participant was called by telephone to be questioned about the
target items they were able to remember in free recall during 90 seconds in order
to complete a DFR task. Recalled items were considered valid only if reported
once and if they were actually presented to participant.
Spatial clustering factor. To determine whether the spatial proximity between
Ditems had an effect on the order in which items were recalled, we compare the
SCF for each recalled item by each participant in the way-finding condition, to
similar data from the guided condition. In order to establish a SCF for each of
the reported recalled items, both in IFR as in DFR tasks for all participants, we
compare the distances between a recalled item position and the position of the
next recalled item. We used a custom version of the Haversine formula imple-
mented in Python programming language. Then, we compared this measurement
to the distance between a recalled item position and each of the available possi-
bilities in the target item pool. A SFC of 1 was assigned to the most proximal
locations between any given pair of items in the entire pool of items, whereas all
other transitions between locations will receive proportional SFC values with 0
as a lower bound.
Spatial clustering and overall recall performance. To determine the impact
of SC in overall recall performance, we first calculated the ORF of each session
by defining the percentage of valid items recalled from the total of presented
items. Then we normalized each percentage value to decimal range. To obtain
an ORF of 1, all presented items during a session would have had to be recalled.
14 A. Pastor
At this point we conducted a Correlation Test between the ORF and the SCF
average of each session to assess the influence of SC on recall performance.
6 Results
The sample for the Second Pilot Experiment consisted of 14 subjects (2 females)
paired-matched and distributed in two groups, the way-finding and guided con-
ditions. The mean age of participants equaled 25 years (average SD=1.1). From
the 17 target item pool that the procedure asked to be found, participants in the
experimental condition scored a mean of 11,25 in target item findings. Results
for the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for normality indicated that the SCF distri-
bution in way-finding deviated significantly from a normal distribution for IFR
(p<.001) and DFR (p=.024). We then conducted Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for
normality for ORF scores, which indicated that the ORF distribution did not
deviate significantly from a normal distribution (p=.200).
Comparing SC in way-finding and guided conditions. A Mann-Whitney 2
tailed U test was conducted to compare the SCF for way-finding and guided
conditions in both IFR and DFR tasks. We found statistically significant differ-
ences in both in IFR U=561, p<.001 and in DFR U=453.5, p=.036.
Correlations between SFC and Memory Performance A Pearson product-
moment correlation coefficient was computed taking the complete set of free
recall tasks to assess the relationship between the OFR scores obtained in each
session and a SFC average of each session. We found a positive correlation be-
tween the two variables r =.499; p = .007. A Pearson product-moment corre-
lation coefficient was computed considering only the DFR results to assess the
relationship between the scores of recalled items obtained in each session’s OFR
and a SFC average score. There was a significant correlation between the two
variables r =.607; p=.021. Computing a Pearson product-moment correlation
coefficient only considering the results from IFR we found no statistically signif-
icant correlation between the two r =.108; p=.497.
7 Discussion
In recalling a list of previously experienced items, evidence has shown that hu-
mans organize their responses on the basis of the items’ semantic and temporal
similarities. This study aimed to shed light on the conditions in which spatial
contiguity of stimuli influences the organization of memory.
If spatial navigation is essential for the formation of the spatiotemporal con-
text of memory for a given stimulus, we hypothesized that, subjects who navigate
an environment in the way-finding condition would exhibit a significant tendency
to show SC in consecutively recalling neighboring items presented therein.
We also hypothesized that participants showing higher rates of SC during a
navigation task would also show enhanced memory performance.
Memorable navigation 15
Following a between subjects design we conducted a pilot experiment in
which participants were presented with items in two spatially dependent con-
540 T
ditions: Way finding group in which participants are presented via AR with
target visual items upon arrival at various real-world locations, and a guided
condition in which participants passively spectate the navigation recording of a
corresponding matched-pair from X=0,Y=0 local coordinates of the same en-
vironment. We assessed the performance differences between active navigators
and passive spectators measured in SFC and ORF using behavioral data and
scores obtained via IFR and DFR.
Wayfinding significantly increased SC Regarding the first hypothesis, we eval-
uated whether a correlation between SC and navigation paradigm existed and
found significant differences in SC favoring wayfinders. We found that naviga-
tion played a crucial role in the formation of context-based memories. As such,
the target items encountered during navigation became associated with their
spatiotemporal context at encoding. AAnd when this memory was retrieved, the
spatiotemporal context of the encoding episode was also reinstated. This rein-
statement not only provided the phenomenological experience of remembering,
but also helped to cue other memories experienced within related spatiotemporal
contexts.We suggest the need for future research to address the roles of decision
making and sensorimotor components of navigation and their contribution to
SC.
SC significantly increased ORF For our hypothesis regarding enhanced mem-
ory performance, we found a significant positive correlation between SC and
ORF r =.499; p = .007. However when grouping only IFR results, this effect
was significantly attenuated. We suggest the need for future studies that clarify
if participants employed a non spatial mnemonic strategy that obfuscated the
influence of SC in IFR.
Overall these results have confirmed previous studies that found that the
EM system associates each new experience within a spatiotemporal context and
that this context becomes reactivated when the experience is recalled [87, 10, 2].
These results must be interpreted with caution as we are aware that a major
topic of discussion for the validity of our results is the limited size of the sample.
Our AR framework proved to be adequate for analysis of the relation be-
tween space and memory because it helped evidence in a systematic, coherent
and exhaustive way the structure and functioning of recall dynamics in both
the guided and way-finding conditions. For the participants in the way-finding
Condition using the AR system and the hand held device demonstrated to be an
intuitive and straightforward task. Although our system accuracy needs further
improvements, the overall dynamics and interactions with virtual contents are
fluent and stable. Further improvements to the AR system and the handheld de-
vice could explore ways to device more precision in GPS readings and a greater
refresh frequency for a more fluent interaction with the environment. Because of
the use of current GPS technology this experiment can not take place indoors,
which also could be a matter of research. Regarding the rendering qualities of the
guided condition group we suggest further research must be done comparing the
16 A. Pastor
suitability of the realistic 3D virtual for our research needs, and compare to other
rendering solutions such as to that of a viewpoint recording of the way-finders
and its replaying over the guided condition.
We acknowledge the need to confirm these results by testing a greater par-
ticipant population. An extension of this study may address the use of spa-
tial mnemonic strategies, whether and how humans prefer spatial organizational
strategies over temporal or categorical strategies. We also suggest further re-
search on the role of encoding and retrieval modality [99] and the use of multi
modal tasks. This field of research has interesting implications for the design of
learning applications that could profit from spatial distribution of contents and
exploratory learning behaviors. Our approach also presented potential benefits
for memory studies and research on cerebral aging and neurodegenerative dis-
eases. For instance, in Alzheimer’s disease deficits in EM function are among the
first cognitive symptoms observed and its study in ecologically valid tasks may
be of profit. Furthermore, impaired EM function is also observed in a variety of
598 A
other neuropsychiatric diseases including dissociative disorders, schizophrenia,
and Parkinson’s disease.
Taking a different approach, several recent fMRI studies compared recall of
autobiographical memories with predicting possible personally relevant future
events known as episodic future thinking [38], and found near complete overlap
in the brain networks activated [100, 101]. This scenario could provide ground
for questioning the nature of SC in episodic future thinking. And also on the
process of imagination as recent studies suggest that there are common processes
in both EM and creative imagination, which can be characterized by the concept
of scene construction [6]. If the Hippocampus plays a critical integrative role in
a constructive process such as recollection it seems plausible that SC might also
have a role in supporting the imagination, and in predicting the future [21].