Stress-related Growth in Adolescents Returning to School
after COVID-19 School Closure
Lea Waters
Centre for Positive Psychology, Melbourne Graduate School of Education,
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 3001
Kelly-Ann Allen
Faculty of Education, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia, 3168
Centre for Positive Psychology, Melbourne Graduate School of Education,
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 3001
Gökmen Arslan
Burdur Mehmet Akif Ersoy University, Burdur, Turkey
International Network on Personal Meaning, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Abstract
The move to remote learning triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic impacted billions of
students globally in 2020. While research shows that school closure, and the pandemic more
generally, has led to student distress, the possibility that these disruptions can also prompt
growth in young people is a worthwhile question to investigate. The current study examined
stress-related growth in a sample of students returning to campus following a period of
COVID-19 remote learning (n = 404, age = 13–18; 50.2% female). The relationship between
positive education (i.e., the degree to which wellbeing skills were taught at school prior to the
COVID-19 outbreak) and student levels of stress-related growth upon returning to campus
was tested via structural equation modeling. Additionally, the degree to which students
engaged in positive reappraisal, emotional processing, and strengths use during the period of
remote learning were examined as mediators. The model provided a good fit (χ = 5.37, df =
3, p = .146, RMSEA = .044 [90% CI = .00–.10], SRMR = .012, CFI = 99, TLI = .99) with
56% of the variance in stress-related growth explained. More specifically, the degree to which
positive education was present at school explained 21% of stress-related growth (before
including mediators). Positive education also explained 15% of the variance in cognitive
reappraisal, 7% in emotional processing, and 16% in student strengths use during remote
learning. The results are discussed using a positive psychology paradigm and implications for
the teaching of wellbeing skills at school to foster adversarial growth are presented.
Keywords: COVID-19, adversity, growth, stress-related growth, positive education, positive
psychology, student wellbeing, youth mental health, strengths
Novel coronavirus pneumonia (COVID-19) spread rapidly across the globe in 2020, infecting
67,316,936 people and causing 1,539,965 deaths at the time of submitting this paper
(December 8, 2020; World Health Organization, 2020a). Following the recommendations of
the World Health Organization in March 2020, many governments swiftly enacted a state of
emergency involving quarantine measures for exposed individuals and communities, border
closures, physical distancing laws, stay-at-home orders, and school closures (Imai et al., 2020;
Sohrabi et al., 2020). These virus containment efforts were critical to ensure our biosafety, but
nevertheless, have put untold pressure on individuals, families, schools, workplaces, and
communities across the globe.
Young people, in particular, have struggled and, according to Guo et al. (2020),
teenagers “may be more vulnerable than adults to mental health problems, in particular during
a lockdown, because they are in a transition phase…with increasing importance of peers, and
struggling with their often brittle self-esteem” (p. 2). Focusing on adolescents, the current
study will examine the coping skills used by students during remote learning and the degree
to which students report stress-related growth upon returning back to school.
COVID-19, Remote Learning and Mental Distress in Teens
Adolescents across the globe have been confronted with a wide range of stressors during the
COVID-19 pandemic, including coronaphobia (i.e., fear of contracting the virus and fear of
family or friends contracting the virus) (Asmundson & Taylor, 2020; WHO-UNICEF-Lancet
Commissioners, 2020), economic hardship on families (Dorn et al., 2020), increased rates of
child neglect and abuse while families are in lockdown (Pereda & Díaz-Faes, 2020),
disruption to normal life and routines (Giuntella et al., 2020), increased screen time leading to
technostress (Molino et al., 2020), and increased exposure to online offenders and sexually
inappropriate content (Europol, 2020), social isolation (Galea et al., 2020), coronavirus-
related stress (Arslan et al., 2020), home confinement (G. Wang et al., 2020), and a loss of
hope about how to achieve their future education and career goals (WHO-UNICEF-Lancet
Commissioners, 2020).
Undoubtedly, one of the biggest disruptions for young people has been the rapid shift to
remote learning (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
[UNESCO], 2020a). As stated by Audrey Azoulay, the Director-General of UNESCO, the
COVID-19 pandemic has caused “unparalleled educational disruption” both in terms of scale
and speed (UNESCO, 2020b). On April 8, 2020, school closures peaked, with 188 countries
enforcing nationwide school suspensions, which took the form of distance education systems,
online classes, learning through radio and television broadcasts, and, in some regions,
suspending classes altogether (Marquez de Miranda et al., 2020). At that time, over 90% of
enrolled learners across the globe (n = 1.5 billion students) were affected (UNESCO, 2020a).
At the time of writing this paper, there are 952,907,822 students in countries with full or
partial school closures, with many countries moving into a second or third wave of
coronavirus clusters with no end in sight (UNESCO, 2020a).
Peer-reviewed research on the impact of school closures and remote learning triggered
by the COVID-19 pandemic is only just emerging, but the few studies that are available have
produced mixed results (Asanov et al., 2020; Azevedo et al., 2020). Some students have
benefited from learning at home, making the most of being able to learn at their own pace and
appreciating the calm of home compared to a noisy classroom (Lee, 2020). However, the
majority of students have experienced negative effects, including high academic distress
(Horita et al., in press), decreased learning effectiveness (Di Pietro et al., 2020; Owusu-
Fordjour et al., 2020), reduced motivation to learn (Garbe et al., 2020), lack of personal space
at home (G. Wang et al., 2020) and struggling to balance school and home responsibilities
(Garbe et al., 2020). The negative effect of school closures is amplified for students who live
in marginalized communities and areas where they were already exposed to intersecting
vulnerabilities (e.g., war, displacement, poverty, and weak healthcare and education systems)
(Banati et al., 2020).
Not surprisingly, the pressures of COVID-19 and remote learning have led to high
levels of depression and anxiety in young people across the globe (Nearchou et al., 2020). In
Chinese high school students, Zhou et al. (2020) reported the prevalence of anxiety,
depression, and a combination of both at 37.4%, 43.7%, and 31.3%, respectively. In a sample
of 5–15-year-olds in Bangladesh, 43% had sub-threshold levels for major depressive disorder
(MDD) (Yeasmin et al., 2020). Research conducted by UNICEF (2020) found that 47% of
young Australians (aged 12–24) felt the pandemic had increased their stress and anxiety. A
longitudinal research program in Canada comparing mental health reports prior to and during
the pandemic found evidence of statistically significant deteriorations in youth mental health
during COVID-19 (Hawke et al., 2020). Finally, in a review paper (n = 51 articles) assessing
the mental health impact of COVID-19 on 6–21-year-olds, high levels of depression and
anxiety were found across China, the United States of America, Europe, and South America
(11.78–47.85%) (Marquez de Miranda et al., 2020).
Beyond the high rates of depression and anxiety, researchers have also identified
moderate levels of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) occurring in young people on
account of the COVID-19 pandemic. To date, there have been three studies published on
PTSD in teenagers during the coronavirus crisis (all conducted in China). In one study of
adolescents and early adults (aged 14–20), the mean score of post-traumatic stress was 26.35
(SD = 9.96; total score = 85) and 14.4% of the sample met the cut-off criteria for the diagnosis
of PTSD (Liang et al., 2020). In the second study, moderate levels of post-traumatic stress
1 Note: The mean score is specifically for the teenage sample, yet the statistic of 14.4% also includes a
sample of adults (21–35 years).The percentage of PTSD cut-off uniquely for adolescents was not provided in the
paper.
disorder were found in students from Grade 7 to Grade 12 (11–18-year-olds), with higher
levels for students who reported adverse childhood experiences prior to the pandemic (Guo et
al., 2020). In a third study, C. Wang et al. (2020) found that young people (aged 12–21) had
significantly higher PTSD scores than older adults (aged 49+).
It is important to note that the three studies above were conducted in February 2020,
within the first four weeks of the World Health Organization classifying the virus as a
pandemic in China. The timing of assessing PTSD is important, given that the length/duration
of exposure to trauma has been shown to increases the severity of PTSD (Kaysen et al.,
2010). Research conducted later in the course of the pandemic may find higher rates of youth
PTSD.
Can Adolescents Grow Through This Crisis?
The evidence above supports Guo et al.’s (2020) argument that adolescents are susceptible to
mental disorders as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and, while it is undoubtedly
important to continue researching the prevalence of psychological distress, adolescents will
also benefit from science that identifies whether and how they can grow through this
challenge. Indeed, Dvorsky et al. (2020) caution that research focused only on distress
outcomes may create a gap in knowledge about the “resilience processes” adopted by young
people. In line with this, Bruining et al. (2020) advocate for “an open scientific mind to
COVID-19 studies by including ‘positive’ hypotheses and questions in addition to those
testing negative expectations” (p. 1). Despite these calls, a recent analysis of academic
databases containing COVID-19-related psychological research identified that only 1% of the
research has examined positive outcomes (Burke & Arslan, 2020). Such disproportionate
emphasis on the negatives and problems of COVID-19 will skew the accumulated knowledge
base, narrow the types of programs that are put in place, and bias our understanding of how
young people function in times of crises.
Whether intentional or not, the deficit lens ignores and dismisses the competencies and
capacities inherent in young people to be resilient and generative in the face of adversity
(Masten, 2001). In the context of disasters (e.g., floods, earthquakes, and so on) Vernberg
(2002) found that children and teens were “active agents” in the crisis response and recovery.
As such, a positive psychology lens applied to COVID-19 opens up a different view from that
of the “crises reaction” research (Rusk & Waters, 2013). Studies that adopt a strengths-based
approach and assume young people are meaning-making creatures who are capable of agency
and resilience will round out the current findings on anxiety and depression, thus providing a
more complete picture.
Vernberg’s results show that spiraling into distress is not the only pathway experienced
by young people in times of crisis, thus supporting Wong’s (2011) contention that “positive
potentials” can be harnessed from negative experiences. Indeed, research conducted during
the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) pandemic that found that anxiety, isolation,
and sleeping problems co-existed with social growth (i.e., taking greater care of family
members and giving friends more support during the pandemic) and spiritual growth (i.e.,
higher levels of appreciation for life) (Lau et al., 2006). In a longitudinal study conducted on
people during and after the SARS crisis, 86% of those who had contracted the SARS virus
reported that benefits arose from the experience (Cheng et al., 2006). Moreover, this study
found that experiencing SARS galvanized positive growth in the form of higher societal
solidarity, increased courage, and increased appreciation for life, leading Cheng et al. (2006)
to conclude that for the majority of patients, SARS triggered “enduring changes in
psychosocial resources” (p. 870).
More specifically to young people, Bruining et al. (2020) suggest a range of “positive
side-effects” of the COVID-19 crisis, including improved sleep, loss of social pressure, and
more time to think. Supporting this, Dvorsky et al. (2020) posit that stay-at-home orders can
help young people experience nature and family as well as have the time to pursue new
hobbies and interests, which, they suggest, can lead to greater meaning in life. Research by
Hawke et al. (2020) during COVID-19 with a sample of 14–28-year-olds found high levels of
internalizing disorder (68.4% in a clinical sample; 39.9% in a community sample), but at the
same time more than 40% of this sample also reported experiencing positive outcomes such as
improved social relationships, greater self-reflection, and greater self-care.
Past research has shown that traumatic events can be a trigger for positive growth in a
range of domains, including self-perception, interpersonal relationships, knowledge of one’s
strengths, life philosophy, and appreciation of life and spirituality—a constellation of
outcomes variously referred to as stress-related growth (Park, 1998; Park et al., 1996) and/or
post-traumatic growth (Helgeson et al., 2006). Vaughn et al. (2009) define stress-related
growth as the “experience of deriving benefits from encountering stressful circumstances” (p.
131). Calhoun et al. (2000) define PTG as the “experience of significant positive change
arising from the struggle with a major life crisis” (p. 521).
Sometimes used as interchangeable terms, stress-related growth (SRG) and post-
traumatic growth (PTG) both concern the way in which adversity can trigger psycho-social
growth; however, they can be distinguished in two ways: (1) the type of adversity; and (2) the
degree of internal change that occurs. With regard to the type of adversity, SRG focuses on
growth that arises from stressors (e.g., anything physical or psychological that produces
stress; Grant et al., 2003), whereas PTG focuses on growth following a trauma (i.e., an event
that changes a person’s basic feeling of being safe and has a lasting effect on their functioning
and wellbeing; Kimberg, 2016). With regard to the degree of internal change that occurs,
SRG is reflected in enhancing one’s cognitive-affective or social resources as a result of
experiencing stressors (Mansfield & Diamond, 2017). PTG, on the other hand, reflects a
deeper level of internal change, according to Tedeschi and Calhoun (2004), in which “[a]
psychologically seismic event can severely shake, threaten, or reduce to rubble many of the
schematic structures that have guided understanding, decision making, and meaningfulness”
(p. 5).
In the current study we chose to examine the experience of SRG rather than PTG on the
grounds that there is confirmed evidence that teens are experiencing many stressors (as
outlined earlier in this paper) but only moderate trauma (Guo et al., 2020; Liang et al., 2020).
While COVID-19 has led to significant disruptions and many teenagers feel stressed, this is
different from being traumatized (i.e., a permanent alteration to one’s feeling of safety,
flashbacks, hyperarousal, etc.). Additionally, while COVID-19 may create fundamental,
enduring schematic changes in the worldview and feelings of safety of some youth, it is more
reasonable to assume that a higher number of teens will experience changes in cognitive-
affective or social resources compared with those who experience a “psychologically seismic
event.” We acknowledge that COVID-19 may cause trauma for some youth, especially those
in marginalized communities, but we chose to focus on the study of SRG because it is
applicable to a larger number of adolescents.
Considerable research has shown the transformative capacity of young people to use
aversive experiences as a platform for growth (Levine et al., 2008; Meyerson et al., 2011).
Children and teens have been found to grow following experiences such as severe illness
(e.g., cancer; Currier et al., 2009), terrorist attacks (Laufer, 2006), natural disasters (Hafstad et
al., 2010), death of a parent (Wolchik et al., 2009), war (Kimhi et al., 2009), and abuse
(Ickovics et al., 2006). While research on growth has traditionally focused on intense events
or trauma such as those listed above, research has also shown that students can grow through
the “ordinary adversity” encountered through the hassles of everyday life (e.g., academic
issues, time pressure, friendship challenges) (Cassidy et al., 2014). We were unable to find
any published research on whether, or how, young people grow through the experience of
pandemic. The current study fills this gap.
The findings above, showing that young people have the capacity to use adversity as a
springboard for growth, leads to our first hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1: Adolescents will demonstrate stress-rated growth during COVID-19.
Coping Approaches During Remote Lockdown
and Their Relationship to SRG in School Re-entry
The possibility that the stressors of COVID-19 can trigger SRG in teenagers leads to the
question of what factors might increase the chances of this growth. A key factor that has been
repeatedly shown to contribute to growth through adversity is social support (Scrignaro et al.,
2011). The support of others in a time of crisis has been shown to help individuals grow by
providing emotional sustenance (e.g., an empathic ear) (Nenova et al., 2013) and by helping
people think differently about the crisis (e.g., reducing negative appraisals) (Fontana et al,
1989). In the context of COVID-19, the need for disease containment and biosafety has
resulted in widespread stay-at-home orders, school closures, and physical distancing
measures, meaning that social support has been hampered (Rousseau & Miconi, 2020). Not
surprisingly, children and teens are reporting prolonged states of loneliness and isolation as a
result of a lack of in-person contact with their peers (Alvis et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020;
Loades et al., 2020).
Given that the COVID-19 crisis hinders a student’s ability to fully utilize social
support, examination of the role that other factors can play in promoting growth is needed.
With reduced social contact, C. Wang et al. (2020) suggest that the development of
intrapersonal skills is required during lockdown. More particularly, they argue for the
development of student skills that optimize “psychological, emotional and behavioral
adjustment” (p. 40). Examples provided by C. Wang and her colleagues (2020) include: (1)
cognitive approaches that help students challenge unhelpful thoughts; and (2) emotional
approaches that give students the ability to express and handle their emotions. In earlier
research on everyday stressors, Mansfield and Diamond (2017) found a significant association
between SRG and cognitive-affective resources.
The current study is guided in its research of cognitive-affective approaches by the
findings of Mansfield and Diamond (2017) and also follows the recommendations of C. Wang
et al. (2020) to study a student’s “psychological, emotional and behavioral adjustment.” More
specifically, we will examine the relationship between SRG and three well-known coping
skills: a cognitive skill (positive reappraisal), an emotional technique (emotional processing),
and a behavioral skill (strengths use).
This study will examine the relationship between the use of these three intrapersonal
coping factors during remote learning and SRG once a student returns to school campus.
Transitioning back to school, although a welcome move for many students, is still likely to be
experienced as a source of distress (Capurso et al., 2020). Re-entry requires a process of
adjustment and a rupture in the “new-normal” routines that students had experienced with
their families at home (Pelaez & Novak, 2020). Some students may experience separation
anxiety, others may experience coronaphobia, and others may find the pace and noise of
school unsettling (Bruining et al., 2020; Levinson et al., 2020; Pelaez & Novak, 2020). Even
for those who adjust well, a “post-lockdown school” takes time and energy to get used to—
wearing masks, lining up for daily temperature checks, washing hands upon entry into
classrooms, and maintaining a 1.5-meter distance from their friends are foreign for most
students and will require psycho-emotional processing (Levinson et al., 2020). We speculate
that the better a student has coped during the period of remote learning (through positive
reappraisal, emotional processing, and strengths use), the higher the chance they will have of
growing through stress when they return to campus-based learning because they will need to
direct less of their intrapersonal resources to “repair mode” and direct those resources towards
adapting and making the most of being back at school (and growing from COVID-19 more
generally). Let us turn now to the three coping mechanisms that will be examined in the
current study.
Positive Reappraisal
Positive reappraisal is a meaning-based, adaptive cognitive process that motivates an
individual to see a stressful event not only in the negative but also to reflect on whether any
good can come from the experience (Carver et al., 1989; Folkman & Moskowitz, 2000).
Positively reappraising a stressful experience in ways that look for any beneficial
outcomes (Garland et al., 2011) has been shown to make people more aware of their values in
life and to act upon those values (Folkman & Moskowitz, 2000), thus, in doing so, it is linked
to a deeper sense of meaning in life emerging from the stressor (Rood et al., 2012). Positive
reappraisal has been shown to reduce distress and improve mental health outcomes across a
range of different crises such as chronic illness, war, and rape (Helgeson et al., 2006; Sears et
al., 2003). In relation to the COVID-19 crisis, Xie et al. (2020) assert that an optimistic
outlook may be especially important. The reverse pattern has also been found in two student
samples (Liang et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2020) during the coronavirus crisis, in that negative
rumination (i.e., repeated negative thoughts about the virus) has been related to higher levels
of distress. Learning how to re-construct obstacles into opportunities during COVID-19 (e.g.,
“I miss seeing my teachers in person, but I am learning to be a more independent student”)
can help young people to emerge from the crisis with new mindsets and skill sets. This logic
leads to the second hypothesis of the current study:
Hypothesis 2: Higher use of positive reappraisal during remote learning will be significantly
related to higher levels of stress-related growth when students return to school.
Emotional Processing
Emotional processing is described as the technique of actively processing and expressing
one’s emotions during times of stress (in contrast to avoidance) (Stanton et al., 2000).
Emotional processing has been shown to be a positive factor in helping children cope with,
and grow through, adverse events such as grief (McFerran et al., 2010), identity conflict
(Davis et al., 2015), and natural disasters (Prinstein et al., 1996). To date, the role of
emotional processing during a pandemic has not been explicitly studied; however, there is
indirect research to suggest the value of this coping approach. For example, students in Chen
et al.’s (2020) study who had knowledge of how to manage their stress levels displayed fewer
symptoms of depression during COVID-19. Similarly, in Duan et al.’s (2020) study, emotion-
focused coping during the coronavirus crisis was significantly related to levels of anxiety in
students from Grade 3 to Grade 12. These findings lead to Hypothesis 3:
Hypothesis 3: Higher use of emotional processing techniques during remote learning will be
significantly related to higher levels of stress-related growth when students return to school.
Strengths Use
The third coping factor to be examined in the current study is the skill of strengths use.
Strengths are defined as positive capacities and characteristics that are energizing and
authentic (Peterson & Seligman, 2004). Strengths use is described by Govindji and Linley
(2007) as the extent to which individuals put their strengths into actions and draw upon their
strengths in a variety of settings. Shoshani and Slone (2016) showed that strengths have a
moderating role in the relationship between political violence and PTSD for young people
exposed to lengthy periods of war and political conflict. In an adult sample, strengths were
found to enhance PTG in earthquake survivors (Duan & Guo, 2015). In the current COVID-
19 pandemic, Rashid and McGrath (2020) suggest that “using our strengths can enhance our
immunity to stressors by building protective and pragmatic habits and actions” (p. 116).
Adding to this, research shows that strengths use leads to an increased sense of control/self-
efficacy in young people (Loton & Waters, 2018), which may be an important outcome to
combat the “uncertainty distress” (Freeston et al., 2020) that many young people are currently
feeling (Demkowicz et al., 2020).
The research and reasoning outlined above about strengths use has been used to
formulate Hypothesis 4:
Hypothesis 4: Higher strengths use during remote learning will be significantly related to
higher levels of stress-related growth when students return to school.
The Role of Positive Education
As outlined above, this study posits that the degree to which students experience SRG upon
school re-entry will be significantly influenced by the degree to which they engaged in three
adaptive coping skills during remote learning (positive reappraisal, emotional processing, and
strengths use). This raises the question of how a student knows to engage in such skills during
times of stress, and this turns our focus to the role that schools play in teaching wellbeing
skills to students—a field of study known as positive education.
The term positive education was coined by Seligman and colleagues in 2009, who
argued that schools should “teach both the skills of wellbeing and the skills of achievement”
(Seligman et al., 2009, p. 294). Since that time, the field of positive education has developed
and evaluated a steady stream of interventions to equip students with a range of skills and
practices to boost their mental health, including mindfulness (Waters et al., 2015), gratitude
(Froh et al., 2008), progressive relaxation (Matsumoto & Smith, 2001), and, more particular
to this study, cognitive reframing (Sinclair, 2016), emotional intelligence (Brackett et al.
(2012), and strengths use (Quinlan et al., 2015). Positive education programs have been
shown to improve student wellbeing (Owens & Waters, 2020) and student learning (Waters &
Loton, 2019) as well as boosting teacher wellbeing (Williams et al., 2015), teacher meaning
(Brunzell et al., 2018), and teacher practice (Waters, in press). At the more macro level,
positive education has been able to assist in making positive changes to school culture
(Waters & White, 2015; White & Waters, 2014) and in building capacity across school
systems (Waters & Stokes, 2013).
Positive education is an important and timely area of science, given the World Health
Organization’s focus on student wellbeing as a top priority during the COVID-19 crisis
(WHO, 2020b) and the call by UNESCO for schools to play a pivotal role in supporting both
the learning and mental health needs of students through this pandemic. Positive education
can be used to inform teachers, schools, school systems, and international agencies not only
on how to ameliorate the risks but also on how to grow in capacity to withstand future crises.
As argued by Burke and Arslan (2020), “as traumatic as COVID-19 is to many now, it could
also become a springboard for positive change, especially in schools that draw on positive
education research to support staff wellbeing and sustain programs and services that foster
students’ social-emotional health” (p. 137).
In the current study we have adopted a positive education approach and aim to test the
relationship between the degree to which students report being taught wellbeing skills at
school and their use of adaptive coping skills during remote learning. While prior research has
shown that students can be successfully taught wellbeing skills and that these skills have a
positive impact on coping and mental health (for recent reviews see Owens & Waters, 2020;
Waters & Loton, 2019), these findings were conducted in a non-pandemic time. The current
study is the first to examine the link between positive education, coping skills, and student
growth during a pandemic and puts forward the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 5: Student ratings of being taught positive education skills at school prior to the
pandemic will be directly positively related to their use of positive reappraisal, emotional
processing, and strengths use during remote learning.
Hypothesis 6: Student ratings of being taught positive education skills at school prior to the
pandemic will be indirectly positively related to SRG upon school entry via their use of
positive reappraisal, emotional processing, and strengths use during remote learning.
Method
Participants
Data were collected from 404 students from a large independent school in New South Wales,
Australia. Participants were recruited from Grades 7 to 12 and ranged in age from 11 to 18 (M
= 14.75, SD = 1.59), Two hundred and three students identified as female (50.2%), 189 as
male (46.8%), and 12 identified as non-/other gendered or declined to answer (3.0%). The
majority of the sample (i.e., 351; 84.9%) attended school from home during remote learning.
Also, the vast majority of the sample (i.e., 376; 93.1%) listed English as their primary
language. Prior to conducting the survey, the school was invited to participate and parents
were sent information packages explaining the nature of the research, resources available to
students feeling distress, security and anonymity of the data collected, and explaining the opt-
out process. Participation was voluntary and students could opt out at any time before or
during the survey process.
Measures
Positive Education
Students were asked to rate the degree to which they had been taught positive education skills
at school prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. The SEARCH positive education framework
(Waters, 2019; Waters & Loton, 2019) was used as the conceptual framework to devise the
items. SEARCH identifies six pathways to student wellbeing: (1) strengths; (2) emotional
management; (3) attention and awareness; (4) relationships; (5) coping; and (6) habits and
goals. Students rated the degree to which they had been taught how to use their strengths,
taught to manage their emotions, and so on, prior to COVID-19. There was one item per
SEARCH pathway (e.g., “Prior to COVID-19, to what degree did your school teach you about
how to understand and manage your emotions?”). The alpha reliability for this scale was .91.
Emotional Processing
Students were asked to rate the degree to which they engaged in emotional processing
a thorough understanding of them,” etc.) during the COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown using
the four-item scale Emotional Processing Scale (Stanton et al., 2000). Answers were given on
a four-point scale from “I didn’t do this at all” to “I did this a lot.” The internal reliability of
the scale was α = .78.
Positive Reappraisal
Positive reappraisal was measured using the four-item using the Positive Reinterpretation and
Growth Scale of the COPE inventory (Carver et al., 1989). Students were asked to rate the
degree to which they engaged in positive reappraisal techniques (“I looked for something
good in what was happening,” “I learned something from the experience,” etc.) during the
COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown. Answers were given on a four-point scale from “I didn’t
do this at all” to “I did this a lot.” The internal reliability of the scale was α = .82.
Strengths Use
Students were asked to rate the degree to which they used their strengths during the remote
learning using an adapted three-item version of the Strengths Use Scale (Govindji & Linley,
2007), a 14-item self-report scale designed to measure individual strengths use (e.g., items
included “During remote learning and family lockdown I had lots of different ways to use my
strengths,” “During remote learning and family lockdown I achieved what I wanted by using
my strengths,” etc.). Answers were given on a four-point scale from “I didn’t do this at all” to
“I did this a lot.” The internal reliability of the scale was α = .89.
Stress-related Growth
Using an abbreviated Stress-Related Growth Scale (Vaughn et al., 2009), students were asked
to think about whether their experience with COVID-19 changed them in any specific ways,
including internal growth (“I have learned to deal better with uncertainty,” “I learned not to
let small hassles bother me the way they used to,” etc.) and social growth (“I reached out and
helped others,” “I have learned to appreciate the strength of others who have had a difficult
life,” etc.). Answers were given on a five-point Likert scale from “Not at all” to “A lot.” The
internal reliability of the scale was α = .85.
Procedure
Prior to completing the survey, parents were sent a package with an explanatory statement.
This included information on the nature of the research being undertaken, the types of
questions that would be asked, data storage, anonymity, security measures to be taken for the
storage of data, and the opt-out consent process. Parents were given a two-week window prior
to the survey to opt out on their students’ behalf.
For students who elected to participate, the school distributed the survey via an email
link on the Qualtrics platform distributed by the teachers during the students’ mentor time.
The first screen of the form provided information on the survey and reminded students that
they could opt out or stop at any time. If distressed, several resources were made available,
including teachers at the school, parents, and helplines were provided. Teachers were present
during the entire duration of the survey to provide clarification on instructions and/or support
for students feeling distressed.
The data collected from the survey was anonymized and shared with the participating
school administrators, and this was clearly stated to all participants of the study, including
teachers, parents, and students. No personally identifiable information was made available in
the data asset provided to the school. The original data source from the survey will be stored
in a secure, password-protected file at Monash University for five years.
Through the survey, students were asked to reflect upon three different points in time:
before school closures, during school closures, and after return to school. More specifically,
students were asked to reflect on the positive education taught by their school prior to
COVID-19. They were asked to reflect on what actions they took during COVID-19
lockdown to thrive cognitively (positive reappraisal), emotionally (emotional processing) and
behaviorally (strengths use). And upon return to school, students were asked to reflect upon
what they had learned as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown (stress-related
growth).
Data Analyses
We carried out a two-step analytic approach to examine the association between positive
education indicators and student levels of SRG upon returning back to campus during the
COVID-19 outbreak. Observed scale characteristics were first performed to investigate
descriptive statistics and the assumptions of analysis. Normality assumption was checked
using kurtosis and skewness scores, with their cut points for the normality. Skewness < |2| and
kurtosis scores < |7| suggest the assumption of normality is met (Curran et al., 1996; Kline,
2015). Pearson correlation was additionally used to examine the association between the
variables of the study.
Following this, structural equation modeling was used to test the mediating effect of
positive reappraisal, emotional processing, and strengths use during the period of remote
learning in the association between positive education (i.e., the degree to which wellbeing
skills were taught at school prior to the COVID-19 outbreak) and SRG upon returning back to
campus. Common data–model fit statistics and squared multiple correlations (R ) were
examined to evaluate the results of structural equation modeling. Tucker-Lewis index (TLI)
and comparative fit index (CFI) scores between .90 and .95 indicate adequate model fit,
whereas their scores ≥ .95 provide a good or close data–model fit. The root mean square error
of approximation scores (RMSEA; with 90% confidence interval) and the standardized root
mean square residual (SRMR) between .05 and .08 are accepted as an adequate model fit,
while those scores ≤ .05 indicate a close model fit (Hooper et al., 2008; Hu & Bentler, 1999;
Kline, 2015). The results were also interrelated using the squared multiple correlations (R )
with: < .13 = small, .13–.26 = moderate, and ≥ .26 = large (Cohen, 1988). All data analyses
were performed using AMOS version 24 and SPSS version 25.
Results
Observed Scale Characteristics and Intercorrelations
Findings from observed scale characteristics showed that kurtosis and skewness scores ranged
between –.803 to .478, and all measures in the study were relatively normally distributed.
Moreover, the scales had strong internal reliability estimates with the present sample, ranging
indicated that positive education had moderate and positive correlations with positive
reappraisal, emotional processing and strengths use and SRG, ranging between .26 and .40,
respectively. Similarly, SRG was moderately to largely and positively associated with
positive reappraisal, emotional processing, and strengths use ranging between .40 and .59
Mediation Analyses
Several structural equation models were employed to analyze the mediating effect of positive
reappraisal, emotional processing, and strengths use in the relationship between positive
education and SRG upon returning back to campus during the COVID-19 outbreak. The first
model, which was conducted to test the mediating role of emotional processing in this
association, indicated good data–model fit statistics (χ = 1.20, df = 1, p = .273, RMSEA =
.069 [90% CI for RMSEA: .00–.13], SRMR = .010, CFI = 99, and TLI = .99). Standardized
regression estimates revealed that positive education was a significant predictor of emotional
processing (β = .26, p < .001) and SRG (β = .34, p < .001). Moreover, emotional processing
significantly predicted youths’ SRG (β = .46, p < .001). The indirect effect of positive
education accounted for 7% of the variance in emotional processing, and positive education
and emotional processing together explained 41% of the variance in SRG. These findings
demonstrate the partial mediating effect of emotional processing on the link between positive
education and student SRG upon returning back to campus during the COVID-19 outbreak.
The second model, which was conducted to test the mediating effect of positive
reappraisal, indicated excellent data–model fit statistics (χ = .76, df = 1, p = .382, RMSEA =
.00 [90% CI for RMSEA: .000–.12], SRMR = .010, CFI = 1.00, and TLI = 1.00). Positive
education had a significant predictive effect on positive reappraisal (β = .39, p < .001) and
SRG (β = .24, p < .001). Positive reappraisal also significantly predicted youths’ SRG (β =
.58, p < .001). The indirect effect of positive education on SRG through positive reappraisal
positive reappraisal, and positive education and positive reappraisal together explained 50%
of the variance in SRG. Consequently, the findings of this model indicated the partial
mediating effect of positive reappraisal in the relationship between positive education and
student SRG.
The third model, which was carried out to examine the mediating effect of strengths
use, indicated excellent data–model fit statistics (χ2 = .24, df = 1, p = .626, RMSEA = .00
[90% CI for RMSEA: .000–.10], SRMR = .010, CFI = 1.00, and TLI = 1.00). Positive
education significantly predicted strengths use (β = .40, p < .001) and SRG (β = .25, p <
.001). Strengths use also had a significant predictive effect on student SRG (β = .48, p <
.001). The indirect effect of positive education on SRG through strengths use was significant,
reappraisal, and positive education and strengths use together explained 40% of the variance
in the SRG of youths. These results indicate the partial mediating effect of strengths on the
association between positive education and student SRG.
The final and main model, which tested the mediating effects of emotional processing,
model fit statistics (χ2 = 5.37, df = 3, p = .146, RMSEA = .044 [90% CI = .00–.10], SRMR =
.012, CFI = 99, and TLI = .99). Standardized estimates showed that positive education had
significant and positive predictive effect on emotional processing (β = .26, p < .001), positive
reappraisal (β = .39, p < .001), strengths use (β = .40, p < .001), and SRG (β = .18, p < .001).
SRG was furthermore significantly predicted by emotional processing (β = .18, p < .001),
positive reappraisal (β = .36, p < .001), and strengths use (β = .23, p < .001). In this model, all
variables together explained 56% of the variance in the SRG (before including mediators =
21%). The indirect effect of positive education on SRG through the mediators was significant,
mediating effect of emotional processing, positive reappraisal, and strengths use in the
relationship between positive education and the SRG of students.
Discussion
As the COVID-19 global health disaster continues to unfold across the world, researchers are
rushing to quantify adolescent psychological distress (Hawke et al., 2020). Such investigation
is important because children and teenagers have been identified as a particularly vulnerable
group within our society during the pandemic (Guo et al., 2020). School closures, stay-at-
home orders, physical distancing, and other protective measures have exposed wide numbers
of young people to fear, technostress, isolation, and loneliness (Asmundson & Taylor, 2020;
Giuntella et al., 2020; Molino et al., 2020; WHO-UNICEF-Lancet Commissioners, 2020),
while, at the same time, taking away important psycho-social resources needed to support
their mental health (Loades et al., 2020; Rousseau & Miconi, 2020) and learning trajectories
(Azevedo et al., 2020).
Not surprisingly, calls have been made to rapidly put in place programs that seek to
reduce youth anxiety and depression such as cognitive behavioral therapy programs and stress
management programs (Power et al., 2020). We agree that research and action on distress
amelioration is vitally important, but we also suggest that it need not come at the expense of
learning about the positive outcomes that young people might experience in a pandemic.
Bruining et al. (2020) suggest that positive outcomes can arise and co-exist with the negative
stressor of COVID-19. Wong’s (2011) positive psychology 2.0 framework goes one step
further to suggest that negative and positive states can go beyond co-existing to also
interacting, such that negative experiences can prompt positive outcomes. Indeed, stress-
related growth, the outcome variable of interest in the current study, requires stress to be
present for growth to occur.
Stress-related growth involves the “experience of deriving benefits from encountering
stressful circumstances and, thus, going beyond one’s original level of normative functioning”
(Vaughn et al., 2009, p. 132). In SRG, stress is not only a force that can weaken the
individual, it also becomes an activating agent that triggers growth. In the process of making
sense of COVID-19, we can pivot back and forth between the pandemic being a negative
force and also being a positive force that serves to motivate us to search for the “diamonds in
the coal,” leading to growth (Carver et al., 1989). Previous research has shown that young
people can, and do, grow through adverse experiences (Salter & Stallard, 2004). This same
finding was shown in the current study where the mean score for cognitive/affective growth
(e.g., “I learned not to let small hassles bother me the way they used to”) was 2.57 + 1.2 out
of 5 and the mean score for social growth (e.g., “I have learned to appreciate the strength of
others who have had a difficult life”) was 2.96 + 1.3. These scores are higher than other youth
samples who have experienced minority stress (cognitive/affective growth 2.30 + .65/social
growth 2.45 + .63) (Vaughn et al., 2009) and those who reported on everyday stressors
(cognitive/affective growth 2.10 + .60/social growth 2.15 + .63) (Mansfield & Diamond,
2017).
In addition to demonstrating that teenagers can experience growth during the global
pandemic, this study also sought to explore the degree to which a set of cognitive, emotional,
and behavioral coping skills used during remote learning could predict SRG upon school re-
entry. All three coping skills significantly predicted the degree to which students reported
they had grown through COVID-19. Positive reappraisal had the strongest effect, followed by
strengths use and then emotional processing.
Positive reappraisal is a meaning-based, cognitive strategy that allows an individual to
“attach a positive meaning to the event in terms of personal growth” (Garnefski & Kraaij,
2014, p. 1154). This cognitive coping skill has been shown to be an adaptive way to help
teenagers deal with a range of distressing situations, including being bullied (Garnefski &
Kraaij, 2014) and coping with loss, health threats, and relational stress (Garnefski et al.,
2003). Interestingly, Garnefski et al. (2002) found that adolescents did not use positive
reappraisal as frequently as adults, suggesting that this is a skill that is worth teaching in the
positive education curriculum in the future. To this end, Rood et al. (2011) explored whether
positive reappraisal could be experimentally induced in teenagers and found that it could by
asking them to think of stressful event in their lives and then “try to think about the positive
side effects of the stressful event. Examine what you have learned, and how it has made you
stronger” (p. 83). Moreover, Rood et al. (2011) found that of the four cognitive coping skills
induced in teenagers (rumination, distancing, positive reappraisal, and acceptance) it was
positive reappraisal that had the largest impact on wellbeing.
The degree to which students reported using their strengths during remote learning was
significantly, positively related to the amount of SRG they reported once back at school. In
past research, strengths use has been positively associated with a host of wellbeing indicators
for adolescents during mainstream times/non-crisis times, including life satisfaction (Proctor
et al., 2011), subjective wellbeing (Jach et al., 2018), and hope (Marques et al., 2011). In the
context of war and political violence, Shoshani and Sloane (2016) found that strengths were
inversely related to psychiatric symptoms and PTSD in teenagers. In times of natural disaster,
Southwick et al. (2016) argued that strengths help young people deal with the crisis
adaptively and find solutions for the obstacles. In the COVID-19 pandemic, Bono et al.
(2020) found that the strengths of grit and gratitude fostered resilience and impacted grades in
university students. Our study found that strengths use was a significant predictor of the
degree to which teenagers experienced SRG, suggesting that teaching students to identify and
use their strengths will be beneficial in preparing them to grow through the current pandemic
and in future times of adversity.
The third coping skill tested in this study was that of emotional processing, which is
characterized by the conscious way a person acknowledges and handles intense emotions that
come along with a distressing event or experience (Stanton & Cameron, 2000). Park et al.
(1996) found that seeking emotional support from others and venting one’s emotions were
significantly related to SRG in a sample of university students. In a sample of adult breast
cancer patients who were taught to actively process their emotions through self-disclosure and
sharing mutual fears in support groups had enhanced psychological adjustment over time
(Spiegel et al., 1981). The intensity, uncertainty, and fear surrounding the COVID-19 virus
triggers increased depression and anxiety as well as a more general state of heightened
emotions in young people (Ellis et al., 2020). Add to that the emotions that students report
experiencing specifically because of remote learning such as loneliness, frustration, and
lowered hope (Garbe et al., 2020; Horita et al., in press) and it is easy to see how important it
is for students to adaptively work through these emotions each day. The degree to which
students identified, validated, and expressed their emotions was a significant predictor of SRG
in the current study.
One factor that significantly predicted the use of these coping skills during remote
learning was the student ratings of the degree to which their school had taught them positive
education skills prior to COVID-19. More specifically, when students reported that they had
been taught the skills for increasing their levels of “SEARCH” (strengths, emotional
management, attention and awareness, relationships, coping, and habits and goals; Waters,
2019; Waters & Loton, 2019) they were more likely to utilize adaptive coping skills during
remote learning. Positive education predicted 15% of the variance in positive reappraisal, 7%
of the variance in emotional processing, and 16% of the variance in strengths use.
Additionally, positive education had an indirect effect on SRG through its impact on the three
coping skills. The degree to which positive education was present at school explained 21% of
stress-related growth (before including mediators) and 56% of the variance when including
the relationship between positive education and the three coping skills. In non-pandemic
periods, positive education has been shown to promote coping skills in students. The current
study shows the value of positive education during times of crisis. It may be possible that
positive education plays an important role in preparedness and prevention for future
challenges such as a natural disaster (Almazan et al., 2018, 2019; Mohammadinia et al.,
2019).
The role of positive education and coping skills on a student’s ability to grow from the
adversity created by COVID-19 has important implications for schools as we move forward
in the pandemic. At the time of writing this paper, the United States of America, United
Kingdom, Malaysia, and parts of Europe have all announced a second wave of lockdown
(Khan et al., 2020; Kupferschmidt, 2020; “Once more with dread,” 2020) and many schools
are moving back into remote learning, with no certainty as to when students will be back on
campus. Schools, through a positive education approach, can help students to enhance their
“psychological immunity” to this virus in order to cope with the multiple stages of the
pandemic they are cycling through. Positive education and coping skills also equips students
with the vital skills that enable them to build healthy relationships with others—vital for
building social support networks and fostering a sense of belonging to their school (Allen et
al., 2017, 2018, 2019, Frydenberg et al., 2012).
Capurso et al. (2020) assert that it is important for schools “to instigate a sense-making
process in children by providing an arena where they can process critical events connected to
the COVID-19 pandemic at both an emotional and a cognitive level, thereby building up their
resilience and minimize the risk of long-lasting trauma” (p. 66). Several other authors have
also called for the need for school–family/school–community partnerships to build “resilient
systems” around young people during times of crisis (Brock & Jimerson, 2004; Masten &
Motti-Stefanidi, 2020; Prinstein et al., 1996). Dvorsky et al. (2020) call for “school-wide
wellness supports” that promote “adaptive coping and resilience-promoting processes” (p. 1).
Findings from the current study suggest that teaching students how to engage in positive
reappraisal, emotional processing, and strengths use will increase their chances of growing
through the stress they are experiencing.
The coping skills tested in our study provide a “psychological formula” that allows
students to validate the negatives (e.g., through emotional processing) and identify the
positives (e.g., through positive reappraisal). Striking the balance between owning the pain
and seeing the positives was a key factor in adversarial growth experienced by SARS patients
(Cheng et al., 2006). Adding strengths use to positive reappraisal and emotional processing
provides the action element to round out a “cognitive-emotion-behavioral approach”
recommended by C. Wang et al. (2020) and helps students to use their strengths to regain a
sense of agency in a time of uncertainty. According to Rashid and McGrath (2020), focusing
on strengths makes the negative “less powerful” and “reminds us that we have our personal
strengths that can carry us through the crisis” (p. 119).
The results in this paper have pointed to a number of positive education factors that can
be incorporated into positive education interventions during COVID-19 (and beyond),
including helping students find a sense of meaning and growth, providing coaching on how to
engage in positive reappraisal, while also owning and validating the distressing emotions that
are surfacing and helping students to draw upon their strengths. It is easy to see how strengths
such as courage, perspective, gratitude, kindness, and hope are all adaptive in a global
pandemic. Activities that involve expressive writing (Smyth & Pennebaker, 2008), play
(Rhoads, 2020), and class conversations (Lepore et al., 2000) can incorporate positive
reappraisal, emotional processing, and strengths, and can be delivered in person or via remote
lessons.
Limitations
Due to the nature of the retrospective design used for this study, which was a function of the
sudden onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, one limitation is the potential for recall bias among
the student participants in the survey. Students were asked to complete a single survey about
three time points they had experienced in the prior eight months (prior to the onset of the
pandemic, during remote learning, and back at school). Thus, there were uncontrolled time
lags between their pre-pandemic exposure to positive education and the time point when they
rated it. Similarly, students were asked to retrospectively rate their use of coping mechanisms
during remote learning once they had returned to school. It is possible that some students
either underrated or overrated their use of the coping mechanisms due to lack of recall or a
desire for impression management. Under ideal circumstances, longitudinal design would
have been used to survey students during and after the remote learning to real-time metrics on
their use of emotional processing, positive reappraisal, and strengths use. However, because
the COVID-19 pandemic was not anticipated and the design of a study and process of gaining
ethics approval took time, we were not able to access students during their period of remote
learning and, instead, must rely on their retrospective recall.
Another potential shortcoming of this study relates to the limited representation of
students in the sample. More specifically, students were self-selected from only one school in
Australia. Moreover, the school is an independent grammar school. While there is limited
reason to believe that this would inherently bias the results of the study pertaining to the
relationships between the three coping mechanisms and stress-related growth, there is
potential for a bias in the conclusions pertaining to the positive education metric. Given that
the positive education was the prime independent variable, it was necessary to recruit a school
that had taught positive education. As such, the school that formed the research site was a
school that had provided students with a positive education curriculum and practices. It is
likely that students from the broader population may not have had the same degree of positive
education exposure as students in this study and this may alter the results found.
Another consideration is the long-term duration of COVID-19 itself. The first wave of
COVID-19 lockdowns and school closures in Australia occurred in March–May 2020, and the
survey was administered to students in September 2020. As the COVID-19 pandemic
continues through the time of writing this paper (December 2020), and is expected to go on
for some time longer, the lasting effects of the pandemic may impact the nature of SRG
experienced in students. It is unknown what role the duration of crises plays on SRG, so there
is benefit in exploring whether SRG grows, stalls, or reverses as the virus continues.
Conclusion
To be able to fully assist adolescents during COVID-19, a group who have been identified as
having heightened vulnerability (Allen & McKenzie, 2015), researchers need to provide a
comprehensive, well-rounded understanding of their experiences—the negatives, the
positives, and the intersection between the two. The current study was guided by the
assumption that young people have the agency and the capacity to grow through hard times,
even while experiencing high levels of distress. The addition of positive education research is
required, not only to counterbalance the current overreliance on crisis reaction/deficit
orientation, but also to provide practical, growth-oriented strategies for teachers and,
ultimately, to provide hope to the billions of students affected by COVID-19.