Running head: SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 1
Whether and How Semantic Similarity Impairs Short-Term Memory: A Test with a New Index of
Semantic Similarity
Sho Ishiguro a,b and Satoru Saito a
a Graduate School of Education, Kyoto University
b Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
Author Note
Corresponding authors: Graduate School of Education, Kyoto University, Yoshida-
honmachi, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan (S. Ishiguro). Telephone number: +81-80-3568-
1496 (S. Ishiguro). E-mail addresses: ishiguro.sho.grocio@gmail.com (S. Ishiguro)
saito.satoru.2z@kyoto-u.ac.jp (S. Saito).
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 2
Abstract
Semantic similarity appears to have a facilitative effect on short-term memory (STM), which
contrasts with the detrimental effects of phonological and visual similarity on STM. Given that
STM theories generally posit detrimental effects of similarity, it is theoretically and empirically
important to test the semantic similarity effect. Recently, a review study proposed that semantic
similarity per se would have a detrimental effect while semantic association and additional
retrieval cues, which are facilitative of STM, would work as confounding factors for the
semantic similarity effect. The present study tested this view by minimizing the influence of
these possible confounding factors in the experiment and by utilizing a new index of semantic
similarity in the analysis. The results of the present study indicated that the semantic similarity
indeed had a detrimental effect on immediate serial recall correct-in-position scores. An
examination based on two other scoring methods (i.e., item correct and absolute order errors)
further suggested that the locus of the detrimental effect of semantic similarity is in order
memory. In addition, other semantico-lexical variables (e.g., word length, frequency, and
imageability) were also analyzed. Patterns of these variables’ effects on item memory were
complementary to the effect of semantic similarity on order memory. From a theoretical point of
view, as the detrimental effect of semantic similarity demonstrated by the present study is
comparable to phonological and visual similarity effects, this finding implies a store based on
semantic information or a general process for various types of information.
Keywords: semantic similarity, short-term memory, serial recall, semantic association,
web-based task
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 3
Whether and How Semantic Similarity Impairs Short-Term Memory: A Test with a New Index of
Semantic Similarity
1. Introduction
The similarity of stimulus properties, in general, impairs short-term memory (STM):
STM research has demonstrated detrimental effects of phonological (Baddeley, Lewis, & Vallar,
1984; Conrad, 1964; Poirier & Saint-Aubin, 1996), tonal (Williamson, Baddeley, & Hitch, 2010),
and visual similarity (Avons & Mason, 1999; Poirier, Saint-Aubin, Musselwhite, Mohanadas, &
Mahammed, 2007; Saito, Logie, Morita, & Law, 2008). Ishiguro and Saito (2019) further
suggested that the detrimental effect of face similarity on STM (Smyth, Hay, Hitch, & Horton,
2005) can be viewed as a detrimental effect of social trait similarity by implying that social
dimensions of faces influence perceived face similarity (cf. Todorov, Said, Engell, & Oosterhof,
2008). Taken together, various types of psychological characteristics exhibit a similarity
disadvantage for STM. Demonstrations of similarity effects—particularly the phonological
similarity effect—have received theoretical attention, and as a result, a considerable number of
STM theories and models postulate detrimental effects of similarity (Botvinick & Plaut, 2006;
Brown, Neath, & Chater, 2007; Farrell, 2006; Henson, 1998; Nairne, 1990; Page & Norris, 1998;
for a review, see Hurlstone, Hitch, & Baddeley, 2014). According to these STM theories and
models, similarity leads to confusion or competition between items, which impairs STM
performance. The similarity disadvantage is, therefore, empirically and theoretically underpinned
in STM research.
Nevertheless, a facilitative effect of semantic similarity on STM has been frequently
reported in studies using the immediate serial recall task (e.g., Guérard & Saint-Aubin, 2012;
Neale & Tehan, 2007; Poirier & Saint-Aubin, 1995; Saint-Aubin, Ouellette, & Poirier, 2005;
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 4
Saint-Aubin & Poirier, 1999a; for a review, see Ishiguro & Saito, 2020). This suggests that the
semantic similarity effect may be an exception among other similarity effects and that testing the
semantic similarity effect is empirically necessary. Furthermore, it is theoretically important to
investigate a similarity effect given that a similarity effect based on a certain type of information
can be seen as evidence for a mnemonic process/mechanism based on that type of information.
For instance, phonological and visual similarity effects are taken as corroborative evidence for
phonological and visual stores in the working memory framework (e.g., the phonological loop
and visuo-spatial sketchpad; Baddeley, 1986; Baddeley & Logie, 1999; see also Camos &
Barrouillet, 2014).
This study tests whether the semantic similarity effect is detrimental or facilitative to
STM by using the immediate serial recall task and a common scoring method for this task (i.e.,
correct-in-position scoring). Referring to Ishiguro and Saito (2020), we aimed to minimize
effects by possible confounding factors in this study. This study further examines how semantic
similarity impairs immediate serial recall by evaluating effects of semantic similarity on item and
order memory with two additional scoring methods (i.e., item correct and absolute order errors
scorings). Prior to explaining the current study in detail, we will begin by describing previous
studies on semantic similarity, explanations for the semantic similarity effect, and a critical
review of previous studies based on findings from a recent review study.
1.1. Observations and Explanations of Semantic Similarity
Previous STM studies on semantic similarity have typically compared memory
performance for lists of semantically similar words with that for lists of semantically dissimilar
words. In a typical list construction, semantically similar words (e.g., “cat, deer, dog, horse, lion,
tiger” or “climb, mountain, peak, steep, summit, valley”) are those belonging to the same
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 5
taxonomical category (e.g., “animal”) or those related to a common theme (e.g., “mountain”)
(for a classification of manipulations of semantic similarity, see Tse, 2009). Accordingly, a
semantically similar word list contains categorically or associatively related words. Semantically
dissimilar word lists are typically constructed by drawing words from different categories or
themes: a semantically dissimilar word list includes categorically or associatively unrelated
words. Studies have demonstrated that memory performance for similar word lists is higher than
that for dissimilar word lists, using data of correct-in-position scores from the immediate serial
recall task, suggesting a facilitative effect of semantic similarity. Note that correct-in-position
scoring, which counts to-be-remembered items recalled at their correct positions, is commonly
used for the immediate serial recall task and that the detrimental effect of phonological similarity
is well-replicated by correct-in-position scoring data of the immediate serial recall task (e.g.,
Page, Madge, Cumming, & Norris, 2007; Poirier & Saint-Aubin, 1996; Watkins, Watkins, &
Crowder, 1974), which sharply contrasts with a facilitative effect of semantic similarity.
As correct-in-position scoring is thought to reflect both item and order memory (Nairne
& Kelley, 2004; Saint-Aubin & Poirier, 1999b), several studies have used other scoring methods
to investigate semantic similarity effects on item and order memory separately. Item correct, or
the free recall criterion, counts recalled to-be-remembered items regardless of position. As item
correct scoring ignores the order of items but focuses on their identity, it is thought to measure
item memory. Conditionalized order errors refer to the number of items recalled at the wrong
position (i.e., absolute order errors), divided/corrected by the number of to-be-remembered items
recalled regardless of position (i.e., item correct). Conditionalized order errors are thought to
reflect order errors, controlling for item memory. By these two scoring methods, it has been
suggested that semantic similarity is facilitative to item memory while it is detrimental or neutral
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 6
to order memory (Poirier & Saint-Aubin, 1995; Saint-Aubin et al., 2005; Saint-Aubin & Poirier,
1999a; Tse, 2009; Tse, Li, & Altarriba, 2011).
These findings of semantic similarity effects on STM can be explained by the extended
redintegration theory (Saint-Aubin et al., 2005; Tse, 2009), which addresses semantic similarity
effects by adapting the original redintegration theory (Hulme, Maughan, & Brown, 1991; Hulme
et al., 1997) to the domain of semantic similarity. The original redintegration theory postulates
that memory representations suffer from interference and/or temporal decay, and as a result, they
are degraded by the time of retrieval. According to this theory, the redintegration process, which
recovers memory representations by using preexisting knowledge, occurs at retrieval. The
extended redintegration theory adopted the redintegration process from the original
redintegration theory and further broadened the original theory to include semantic similarity
effects in its theoretical scope by assuming two additional mechanisms: spreading activation in
associative networks and cuing by additional retrieval cues. Positing pre-experimental
associations between words in similar word lists (e.g., the association between “cat” and “dog”
or that between “climb” and “peak”), Tse (2009) suggested that encoding/retrieval of a word
activates representations of other words associated with that word (for a similar idea, see
Kowialiewski & Majerus, 2020). Such spreading activation in associative networks is thought to
facilitate the redintegration process. Additional retrieval cues are labels generated and utilized by
participants (Poirier & Saint-Aubin, 1995; Saint-Aubin & Poirier, 1999a; Tse, 2009). Even when
such labels are not provided explicitly by an experimenter, participants are assumed to generate a
label for a similar word list (e.g., a label of “animal” for “cat, deer, dog, horse, lion, tiger” or
“mountain” for “climb, mountain, peak, steep, summit, valley”) and utilize that label as an
additional retrieval cue at the integration process. To sum up, the extended redintegration theory
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 7
(Saint-Aubin et al., 2005; Tse, 2009) states that semantic similarity enables the mechanisms of
the spreading activation in associative networks and/or the cuing by additional retrieval cues,
which facilitate the integration process. Given that the redintegration process refers to the
recovery of degraded memory representations, the extended redintegration theory can explain the
facilitative effect of semantic similarity on item memory as enhancement in the recovery of
memory representations’ identities. In addition, the redintegration theory attributes the increase
in order errors caused by semantic similarity to a form of confusion known as the interpretation
problem. For example, when recalling the first word (e.g., “cat”) in a list (e.g., “cat, deer, dog,
horse, lion, tiger”), the degraded representation of the first word can be matched with the third
word (e.g., “dog”) inappropriately, and as a result, that wrong word can be recovered.
Specifically, Saint-Aubin et al. (2005) proposed that features of semantically similar words
overlap with each other and feature overlaps lead to the interpretation problem. We note that a
variety of STM theories or models, as well as the extended redintegration theory, propose
confusion as an underlying mechanism of the detrimental effect of similarity (e.g., Botvinick &
Plaut, 2006; Brown et al., 2007; Henson, 1998).
1.2. A Critical Review of Explanations of Semantic Similarity
The extended redintegration theory (Saint-Aubin et al., 2005; Tse, 2009) can explain
effects of semantic similarity on both item and order memory. It, however, requires that
semantically similar words should be semantically associated with each other (i.e., semantic
association as a prerequisite of the mechanism of the spreading activation in associative
networks) and/or that labels should be generated for semantically similar word lists (i.e., label–
word relationships as a prerequisite of the mechanism of the cuing by additional retrieval cues).
Although these requirements seem reasonable given that previous studies manipulated semantic
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 8
similarity by contrasting associatively or categorically related word lists with unrelated word
lists, Ishiguro and Saito (2020) pointed out that a semantic similarity between words is
conceptually different from either a semantic association between words or a relationship
between words and a generated label. They also conducted a meta-regression analysis of past
studies’ correct-in-position score data of the serial recall task with their proposed indices for
semantic similarity and semantic association. The results of their meta-regression analysis
suggested that manipulation strength for semantic similarity decreases the effect size of
similarity advantage while that for semantic association increases it. A statistically significant
intercept with a positive value was also implied. They interpreted these results as follows. First,
manipulations used in previous studies have three effects via semantic similarity, semantic
association, and label cuing, which are alluded to by the extended redintegration theory. Second,
semantic similarity per se has a detrimental effect on serial recall. Third, semantic association, as
a confounding factor, contributes to the apparent semantic similarity advantage. Last, the positive
intercept, which was statistically separated from the effects of semantic similarity or semantic
association in their meta-analytic study, can be viewed as showing label cuing’s facilitative
effect. In addition, they reviewed data from the serial recall task scored by item correct and
conditionalized order error scoring and data from the serial reconstruction of order task (as a task
of order memory). In reviewing the patterns of influence of semantic similarity and semantic
association on memory performance assessed by different tasks and by different scoring
methods, Ishiguro and Saito offered a view that semantic similarity is detrimental to order
memory but neutral to item memory whereas semantic association is neutral to order memory but
facilitative to item memory (for the selective effect of semantic association on item memory, see
also Saint-Aubin, Guérard, Chamberland, & Malenfant, 2014). In addition, their view posits that
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 9
label cuing primarily enhances item memory (for the selective effect of labels on item memory,
see also Botvinick & Plaut, 2006, pp. 220-221).
In fact, a classic STM study by Baddeley (1966) demonstrated the detrimental effect of
semantic similarity (see also, Crowder, 1979). In Baddeley’s study, target words were visually
presented to participants throughout the whole session and participants were asked for ordered
responses. Thus, Ishiguro and Saito (2020) identified the task in Baddeley (1966) as the serial
reconstruction of order task. As the serial reconstruction of order task can be regarded as a
measure of order memory (Saint-Aubin & Poirier, 1999b; Whiteman, Nairne, & Serra, 1994), the
detrimental effect of semantic similarity demonstrated by Baddeley (1966) is consistent with
Ishiguro and Saito’s view that semantic similarity is detrimental to order memory. Moreover, it
can be said that facilitative effects of semantic association and labeling on item memory are not
captured by the serial reconstruction of order task. Accordingly, data of the serial reconstruction
of order task would clearly demonstrate the detrimental effect of semantic similarity by
separating it from effects of semantic association and labeling. By contrast, it remains unclear
whether and how semantic similarity, separated from semantic association and labeling, has
effects in the serial recall task, even though the serial recall task has been used as a common
STM measure.
1.3. Details of Current Study
Building on the view proposed by Ishiguro and Saito (2020), we made three predictions
regarding the semantic similarity effect in an experimental setting that controls for effects of
association and labeling with the immediate serial recall task. First, the detrimental effect of
semantic similarity would be observed in memory performance data that at least partly reflect
order memory. Second, its detrimental effect should be null or weak if memory performance is
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 10
evaluated by scoring for item memory. Third, its detrimental effect should be evident in scores
that measure order memory in particular. These three predictions can be tested using three
scoring methods: correct-in-position scoring (for the first prediction), item correct (for the
second prediction), and absolute order errors (for the third prediction). We note that, as far as we
know, no studies have demonstrated the detrimental effect of semantic similarity with the serial
recall task by correct-in-position scoring except for a review study with meta-regression analysis
(Ishiguro & Saito, 2020).
In addition to the attempt to minimize effects by semantic association and labeling, as
previous studies of the immediate serial recall have demonstrated a detrimental effect of
orthographical word length or the number of letters (Coltheart, Mondy, Dux, & Stephenson,
2004) and facilitative effects of imageability or concreteness1 (Tse & Altarriba, 2007) and
frequency (Hulme et al., 1997), these three variables were factored into the analysis. Age of
acquisition (AOA) may not affect immediate serial recall performance but it slows speech rate
(Roodenrys, Hulme, Alban, Ellis, & Brown, 1994). Considering the possibility that AOA affects
memory performance by slowing speech rate (i.e., a possible mediation effect), we also entered a
measure of AOA in the analysis.
1 As values of imageability and concreteness are highly correlated, these two terms are often used
interchangeably. In the present study, we consistently use the term “imageability” to refer to
either imageability or concreteness (see also, Tse & Altarriba, 2007).
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 11
2. Method
2.1. Participants
In total, 120 participants were recruited online via Prolific Academic Ltd. Referring to a
previous study that conducted the immediate serial recall task online (Chubala, Guitard, Neath,
Saint-Aubin, & Surprenant, 2019), recruitment criteria for participants were as follows: a) first
language was English, b) nationality was UK, USA, or Canada, c) approval rate for past studies
on Prolific Academic Ltd. was equal to or more than 90%, d) having no language related
disorders, e) not having been diagnosed with cognitive impairment or dementia, f) having normal
or corrected-to-normal vision, and g) aged 19 to 30 years old.
Data were not stored correctly for four participants because of a computer malfunction. In
addition, two participants did not follow instructions as we intended and answered “+” (i.e., the
fixation cross) as their remembered first item at each trial. Therefore, data for the remaining 114
participants were used in the analysis. The mean age of these participants was 24.78 years (SD =
3.62, range 19-30). A total of 66 participants reported being women and 47 participants reported
being men. One participant responded, “prefer not to say.”
2.2. Stimuli
We selected words and constructed lists of words following three steps. First, we selected
2640 words that were commonly available in affective norms (Warriner, Kuperman, & Brysbaert,
2013), frequency norms (Brysbaert & New, 2009), imageability norms for disyllabic words
(Schock, Cortese, & Khanna, 2012), and AOA norms (Kuperman, Stadthagen-Gonzalez, &
Brysbaert, 2012). Second, referring to the database of the English lexicon project (Balota et al.,
2007), we adopted 1930 noun words out of the 2640 words. In English, a word can be used in
several word classes or part-of-speech classes. For example, “approach” can be used as a noun or
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 12
a verb. Here, words that can be used at least as nouns were regarded as noun words. Lastly, using
Match software (van Casteren & Davis, 2007), we constructed 100 lists of 6 words (600 words in
total). We matched arousal and dominance values, imageability, log frequency, AOA, and word
length in the orthographic form but did not match for valence values. Nevertheless, the resultant
100 lists did not differ in the mean values of these variables including valence (all ps > .17),
implying homogeneity of the lists. Note that all words were disyllabic because we adopted words
from imageability norms for disyllabic words (Schock et al., 2012), and thus, word length was
controlled for in terms of syllable number.
Although the above-mentioned list construction method was designed to minimize
categorical and associative relationships between words in a list, we also checked semantic
associations between words in each list. Out of 600 words, 492 words were available as cue
words in word association norms (De Deyne, Navarro, Perfors, Brysbaert, & Storms, 2019). For
these 492 words, the probability of generating each of the other five words of a list when a word
of a list was provided as a cue word (i.e., forward associative strength values) was retrieved from
the norms. For 2460 forward associative strength values (492 cue words × 5 words of a list),
2442 values (99%) were 0 and the mean value was almost 0 (5.44 × 10-5). Thus, semantic
associations in each list were judged to be negligible.
2.3. Procedure
At the beginning of the experiment, participants read a webpage with the consent form
and moved to a web-based task only if they agreed to participate in the task. Then, participants
were instructed to remember six words at a trial and report them in the order in which the words
were presented. If they could not recall a word in the correct order, they were instructed to type
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 13
“skip.” After these instructions, they took part in 5 practice trials, which were followed by 25 test
trials.
Each trial began with a fixation cross presented for 750 ms, followed by a blank of 250
ms. Then, six words were presented sequentially. Each word was presented for 750 ms with an
interstimulus interval of 250 ms. After the offset of the last word, a blank of 250 ms was
presented. Then, participants started recalling words in a position-by-position manner. The first
page contained a text form in which they typed the word presented first at the trial. If they could
not recall the first word, they typed “skip.” Then, they moved to the second page. In total, for a
trial, there were six pages asking for words at the six positions. After completion of six
responses, the next trial began. For 25 test trials, 25 lists randomly sampled from 100 lists were
allocated to each participant. In each trial, presentation positions of words were also randomized
across participants (e.g., a word would appear at position 1 for a participant but that word would
appear at position 6 for another participant). For practice trials, words that were not used for the
test trials were used. The task was completed within about 30 min. Participants received 4.5
British pounds for their participation.
2.4. Dissimilarity Index
Referring to Ishiguro and Saito (2020), we define semantic dissimilarity as distance from
the centroid in a semantic space. Our assumed semantic space has three dimensions of valence,
arousal, and dominance because these affective dimensions are thought to be major dimensions
in semantics (Hollis & Westbury, 2016; Osgood & Suci, 1955; for detailed discussion, see
Ishiguro and Saito, 2020). Words are represented as points in this three-dimensional semantic
space. For each list, the centroid is a point that has the mean value for the six words’ valence
values, the mean value for their arousal values, and the mean value for their dominance values.
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 14
An item’s distance from the centroid refers to the Euclidean distance from the centroid to a point
of the item. As the centroid is an averaged or blended point in a given list, the distance from the
centroid of a word corresponds to the semantic dissimilarity of that word within a list.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. The Validity of a Web-based Task and the Quality of Data
Although the validity of web-based cognitive tasks has been confirmed (Crump,
McDonnell, & Gureckis, 2013), it is desirable to check the quality of data in individual studies
(Germine et al., 2012). As a way of assessing data quality, we examined whether our data
replicated benchmark findings established by traditional laboratory experiments. Specifically, we
targeted a) patterns of the serial position curve and b) locality constraint of transposition errors
as benchmarks. For the serial position curve, a strong primacy effect and a weak recency effect
have been reported in the immediate serial recall task: the primacy effect is typically large in
size, spanning over several early items, while the recency effect is usually small and limited to
the last one or two items (e.g., Jahnke, 1963). Locality constraint refers to a constraint that order
errors follow, by which the probability of recalling an item wrongly decreases as the distance
between the input position of the target item and the input position of that wrongly recalled item
increases (Henson, Norris, Page, & Baddeley, 1996). For example, in an attempt to recall an item
presented at position t at output position t, a wrongly recalled item is more likely to be an item
presented at position t + 1 or t - 1 than an item presented at position t + 2 or t - 2.
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 15
position. Within a cluster, six bars indicate response proportions or recalling probabilities of each
item presented at input positions 1-6.
proportions were clustered by output positions 1-6. Within each cluster, six bars represent items’
input positions 1-6. As the task used an open set of items (instead of a closed set) and allowed the
response of “skip,” the sum of response proportions in a cluster does not need to equal 1.0.
The peaks of each cluster correspond to correct recall proportions in our data: a strong
primacy effect and relatively weak recency effect are evident. In addition, patterns of
transposition gradients follow locality constraints: items adjacent to the target item are recalled
more frequently than far items in terms of input position. We note that our data appear to show
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 16
an asymmetry of transposition gradients or, more specifically, a tendency of forward movement
errors over backward movement errors. Although a tendency of forward movement errors would
not be an established finding, Haberlandt, Thomas, Lawrence, and Krohn (2005) reported a
tendency of forward movement errors, consistent with the present study’s data.
Given that our data replicated benchmark findings of primacy, recency, and transposition
error patterns, and that we set an acceptance rate for recruitment, we judged the quality of our
data to be acceptable and that the validity of our web-based task was confirmed.
3.2. Memory Performance at an Item Level
For a fine-grained analysis of the semantic similarity effect, we targeted memory
performance at an item level. Dependent variables are a) correct-in-position scores, b) item
correct scores, and c) absolute order errors. As for correct-in-position scores, when an item was
recalled at its correct position, “1” was assigned to that item. Otherwise, “0” was assigned to that
item. For item correct scores, when an item was recalled at a trial in which that item was
presented, regardless of its position, that item received “1.” Otherwise, “0” was assigned to that
item. Absolute order errors refer to whether items were recalled at wrong positions, which was
calculated by subtracting correct-in-position from item correct scores (i.e., an order error = item
correct - correct-in-position score). We suppose that correct-in-position scores reflect both item
and order memory while item correct scores primarily reflect item memory. Absolute order errors
are thought to reflect errors of order memory.
For each dependent variable, we used a mixed-effects logistic regression model with
variables of fixed effects being a) input position, b) word length, c) imageability, d) log
frequency, e) AOA, and f) distance from the centroid to test whether these variables affected the
recalling probability of an item. As correlations between semantico-lexical values of the selected
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 17
600 words were moderate to weak (absolute values of Pearson’s correlation coefficient rs range
from .01 to .52), multicollinearity was unlikely to occur in an item-level analysis. We also set
participant, list, and word as variables of random effects with an assumption that words were
nested within lists.
Our primary interest was the fixed effect of distance from the centroid but we recognized
the possibility of random slopes for distance from the centroid within each participant and/or
stimulus (i.e., list and word). In other words, the effect of distance from the centroid would vary
depending on each participant and/or stimulus. Thus, for each of the three types of scores (i.e.,
correct-in-position, item correct, and absolute order errors), we compared four models: a) a
model with only random intercepts, b) a model with random intercepts and random slopes for
each participant, c) a model with random intercepts and random slopes for each stimulus, and d)
a model with random intercepts and random slopes for both of each participant and stimulus.
Model selection for mixed models by using the Akaike information criterion (Matuschek, Kliegl,
Vasishth, Baayen, & Bates, 2017) favored a simple model with only random intercepts for three
types of scores. Therefore, we reported the results of the simple model below. We note that the
statistical software we used (i.e., R) provided “boundary (singular) fit” warnings for several of
the complex models, which would also justify the selection of a simple model. As we reported
raw data and scripts for the analysis on the first author’s GitHub repository
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 18
model for correct-in-position scores. As the serial position curve shows the strong primacy effect
for the first position, negative effects for positions 2-6 are interpreted as a disadvantage relative
to the first position. A negative effect of word length (z = -6.32, p < .001) and positive effects of
imageability (z = 4.01, p < .001) and frequency (z = 5.95, p < .001) indicated their effects on
STM. AOA did not reach statistical significance (z = 0.28, n.s.). More importantly, distance from
the centroid had a positive effect (z = 2.02, p < .05), indicating that the recalling probability of an
item increased as the distance between that item and the centroid of a list increased. As we
assumed that the distance on a semantic space indicated semantic dissimilarity, the results
support the detrimental effect of semantic similarity on STM (or the facilitative effect of
semantic dissimilarity).
Results of a Logistic Model for Correct-in-Position Scoring Data
Estimate SE z value p value
Intercept 1.13 0.31 3.63 < .001 ***
Position 2 -0.85 0.06 -13.09 < .001 ***
Position 3 -1.21 0.06 -18.81 < .001 ***
Position 4 -1.92 0.07 -29.24 < .001 ***
Position 5 -2.72 0.07 -38.77 < .001 ***
Position 6 -2.36 0.07 -34.83 < .001 ***
Distance from centroid 0.07 0.03 2.02 .044 *
Word length -0.14 0.02 -6.32 < .001 ***
Imageability 0.09 0.02 4.01 < .001 ***
Frequency 0.28 0.05 5.95 < .001 ***
AOA 0.00 0.01 0.28 .780
Note. Intercept partly reflects the effect of the first position. *p < .05. ***p < .001
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 19
3.2.2. Item correct scores. As a measure of item memory, item correct scoring was also
results for correct-in-position scoring in the previous subsection, position (see positions 2-5),
word length (z = -5.93, p < .001), imageability (z = 3.70, p < .001), and frequency (z = 6.34, p
< .001) had significant effects on item correct scores while AOA did not (z = 0.16, n.s.).
Nevertheless, distance from the centroid did not reach significance (z = 0.88, n.s.). Although
reasoning based on a lack of statistical significance needs caution, the contrast between a
order memory but not item memory.
Results of a Logistic Model for Item Correct Scoring Data
Estimate SE z value p value
Intercept 1.28 0.30 4.35 < .001 ***
Position 2 -0.52 0.07 -7.79 < .001 ***
Position 3 -0.80 0.07 -12.19 < .001 ***
Position 4 -1.54 0.07 -23.58 < .001 ***
Position 5 -2.40 0.07 -35.33 < .001 ***
Position 6 -2.22 0.07 -33.22 < .001 ***
Distance from centroid 0.03 0.03 0.88 .380
Word length -0.13 0.02 -5.93 < .001 ***
Imageability 0.08 0.02 3.70 < .001 ***
Frequency 0.28 0.04 6.34 < .001 ***
AOA 0.00 0.01 0.16 .872
Note. Intercept partly reflects the effect of the first position. *p < .05. ***p < .001
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 20
3.2.3. Absolute order errors. The contrast between correct-in-position scores and item
correct data suggests that semantic (dis)similarity defined by distance from the centroid affects
order memory. As a direct index for order memory, absolute order errors are focused on here. It
should be noted that observations of absolute order errors can be affected by item memory
because absolute order errors cannot be observed unless items are recalled: recalling more items
would lead to an increase of observations of absolute order errors. An analysis of item correct
scores in the previous subsection, however, does not support that distance from the centroid
increases item memory. Therefore, an effect of distance from the centroid on absolute order
errors in our data is assumed to reflect its effect on absolute order memory appropriately.
recognized. First, distance from the centroid decreases absolute order errors (z = -2.41, p < .05).
Second, all of the other semantico-lexical variables of word length (z = 1.21, n.s.), imageability
(z = -0.98, n.s.), frequency (z = 0.51, n.s.), or AOA (z = -0.27, n.s.) did not reach significance.
Comparison of these results and those of a model for item correct scores would suggest that
distance from the centroid selectively affects order memory while word length, imageability, and
frequency selectively affect item memory.
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 21
Results of a Logistic Model for Absolute Order Error Scoring Data
Estimate SE z value p value
Intercept -3.86 0.41 -9.33 < .001 ***
Position 2 1.37 0.13 10.17 < .001 ***
Position 3 1.62 0.13 12.23 < .001 ***
Position 4 1.55 0.13 11.67 < .001 ***
Position 5 1.16 0.14 8.44 < .001 ***
Position 6 0.65 0.15 4.43 < .001 ***
Distance from centroid -0.11 0.04 -2.41 .016 *
Word length 0.04 0.03 1.21 .228
Imageability -0.03 0.03 -0.98 .328
Frequency 0.03 0.06 0.51 .610
AOA 0.00 0.02 -0.27 .788
Note. Intercept partly reflects the effect of the first position. *p < .05. ***p < .001
4. General Discussion
STM theories generally assume a detrimental effect of similarity, which is corroborated
by ample evidence for detrimental effects of phonological, tonal, visual, and social trait
similarity (e.g., Ishiguro & Saito, 2019; Saito et al., 2008; Williamson et al., 2010). Semantic
similarity, however, has been regarded as facilitative of STM (e.g., Saint-Aubin & Poirier,
1999a). Given that the facilitative effect of semantic similarity is inconsistent with STM theories
and detrimental effects of other types of similarity, it is theoretically and empirically important to
test whether semantic similarity is facilitative or detrimental of STM.
Ishiguro and Saito (2020) suggested that the oft-reported semantic similarity advantage is
attributable to facilitative effects by confounding factors of semantic association and additional
retrieval cues (cf. Saint-Aubin et al., 2005; Tse, 2009), but semantic similarity per se is
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 22
detrimental to STM. According to this view, semantic similarity should exhibit a detrimental
effect on STM if controlling for effects of semantic association and additional retrieval cues.
In the present experiment, to minimize the effects of semantic association and additional
retrieval cues, we randomly selected words regarding associative or categorical relationships
between words. Experimental results of correct-in-position scores from the immediate serial
recall task indeed supported the view by Ishiguro and Saito (2020): semantic similarity impaired
STM performance. Although correct-in-position scoring is a common scoring method for the
immediate serial recall task, it would reflect a mixture of both item and order memory (Nairne &
Kelley, 2004; Saint-Aubin & Poirier, 1999b). To investigate how semantic similarity impairs
STM in terms of the item versus order memory distinction, we also utilized two additional
scoring methods (i.e., item correct and absolute order errors). Results suggested that semantic
similarity increased absolute order errors but did not affect item correct scores (i.e., the null
effect), which is in line with the view that semantic similarity is detrimental to order memory but
neutral to item memory. The presence or absence of effects of semantico-lexical variables on
item correct scores and order errors are complementary to semantic similarity effects.
Specifically, the null effect of semantic similarity for item correct scores would not be attributed
to the insensitivity of item correct scoring since the effects of word length, imageability, and
frequency for item correct scores are evident. In addition, for order errors, an effect of semantic
similarity with a lack of statistical evidence for effects of word length, imageability, and
frequency supports a view that semantic similarity leads to confusions between items.
Considering the findings by three different scoring methods, we concluded that the effect
of semantic similarity is detrimental to STM and the locus of its detrimental effect is on order
memory but not on item memory. As the present study’s findings are consistent with three
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 23
predictions derived from a view suggested by a meta-analytic review (Ishiguro and Saito, 2020),
we suggest that the present study supports this view.
4.1. Effects of Semantico-Lexical Factors on Item and Order Memory
Our primary interest was semantic similarity and factors of orthographical word length,
imageability, and frequency, which are known to influence correct-in-position scores, were
controlled for. Nevertheless, it would be valuable to consider their effects on item and order
memory. Although orthographic word length has been often confounded with phonological word
length in past studies’ experimental settings (e.g., Baddeley, Thomson, & Buchanan, 1975),
Coltheart et al. (2004) aimed to separate these two types of word length and demonstrated
significantly higher item recall for four-letter monosyllabic words than for six-letter
monosyllabic words. Furthermore, they reported identical percentages of order errors for four-
consistent with our findings, showing a detrimental effect of orthographic word length on item
memory and its null effect on order memory. As for imageability and frequency effects on item
and order memory, previous studies have provided coherent results of these facilitative effects on
item memory and mixed results for these effects on order memory. For example, Tse and
Altarriba (2007) and Walker and Hulme (1999) showed an effect of imageability on item
memory and its null effect on order memory, whereas Allen and Hulme (2006) showed that
imageability had facilitative effects on both item and order memory. Likewise, while existing
studies seem to converge in supporting the facilitative effect of frequency on item memory, some
studies reported its facilitative effect on order memory (e.g., Hulme, Stuart, Brown, & Morin,
2003; Tse & Altarriba, 2007) but other studies did not (e.g., Allen & Hulme, 2006; Poirier &
Saint-Aubin, 1996).
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 24
To recapitulate, the literature indicates that, despite the ambiguity in the effects of
semantico-lexical factors on order memory, effects of these factors on item memory are robust.
These effects on item memory sharply contrast with null results of the semantic similarity effect
on item memory demonstrated by the current study.
4.2. Affect and Semantics
The distance from the centroid of a given word in the valence-arousal-dominance space
may correspond to the emotionality of that word. This is because affectively loaded words in
terms of valence, arousal, and dominance tend to have large distances from the centroid. Thus, a
positive effect of the distance from the centroid, which we assume reflects semantic dissimilarity,
can also be viewed as an effect of emotionality. We note that affect is not necessarily separable
from semantics given that activating affective information of a word is a form of activating
semantic information of that word (Lambon Ralph, Jefferies, Patterson, & Rogers, 2017; Martin,
2016) and that several STM researchers indeed consider affective information as a part of
semantics (Majerus & D’Argembeau, 2011; Monnier & Syssau, 2008). Importantly, how the
distance from the centroid (either called “emotionality” or “semantic dissimilarity”) influences
memory performance should be considered. We suggest that the null results of the distance from
the centroid’s effect on item memory do not fit well with a straightforward explanation that
affectively loaded words draw attention and enhanced attention leads to better memory for
affectively loaded words. By contrast, demonstration of the facilitative effect of the distance
from the centroid on order memory supports that affectively dissimilar words on a given list are
less likely to be confused with other words. Considering the patterns of influence of the distance
from the centroid on item versus order memory, our results would imply the semantic
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 25
(dis)similarity effect in terms of semantics and the affective (dis)similarity effect in light of
affect.
4.3. Implications for Memory Models
Our findings regarding the semantic similarity effect, along with findings from STM
studies on semantic factors (Campoy, Castellà, Provencio, Hitch, & Baddeley, 2015; Jefferies,
Hoffman, Jones, & Lambon Ralph, 2008; Nishiyama, 2014; Walker & Hulme, 1999), imply the
importance of a semantic factor in STM. A unique contribution of the current study is that it
demonstrated the detrimental effect of semantic similarity. As far as we know, this is the first
study that demonstrated the detrimental effect of semantic similarity in the immediate serial
recall task by using correct-in-position scoring. In addition to its novelty, its demonstration of the
detrimental effect of semantic similarity has implications for STM models because detrimental
effects of similarity are key findings in modeling STM. For instance, the detrimental effect of
phonological and visual similarity have been regarded as evidence for phonological and
visuospatial stores in working memory frameworks (Baddeley, 1986; Baddeley & Logie, 1999;
see also, Camos & Barrouillet, 2014). Our findings of the detrimental effect of semantic
similarity would imply a semantic store, the functions of which are similar to those of
phonological and visuospatial stores, or a general process acting for a variety of information
types. Now that a semantic effect comparable to phonological and visual effects has been
observed, it is desirable to compare and synthesize findings regarding semantic, phonological,
and visual maintenance in future studies.
SEMANTIC SIMILARITY IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 26
Declarations of Interest: The authors report no conflicts of interest.
Open Practice: For reproducibility and transparency, anonymized data of memory
performance, materials, and scripts used in the analyses are reported in the first author’s GitHub
Credit authorship contribution statement: Sho Ishiguro: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing-
original draft, Writing- review & editing, Visualization, Project administration, Funding
acquisition. Satoru Saito: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing- original draft, Writing-
review & editing, Supervision, Project administration.
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) fellows [grant number 17J05372]. The authors thank the
Global Education Office, the Graduate School of Education, Kyoto University, Japan, for
providing support for edits and proofreading on the manuscript. We also thank Masataka
Nakayama and Hiroyuki Muto for their advice on statistical analysis.