Counterfactual Thinking and Recency Effects in Causal Judgment
in press at Cognition
Paul Henne
Aleksandra Kulesza
Karla Perez
Augustana Houcek
Author Note
Paul Henne is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Philosophy and is affiliated with the
Neuroscience Program at Lake Forest College. Aleksandra Kulesza, Karla Perez, and Augustana Houcek
are undergraduate researchers at Lake Forest College.
We have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
This research was funded by a startup grant from Lake Forest College to Paul Henne and the
Reasons and Decisions Lab at Lake Forest College. Aleksandra Kulesza was supported by the
Department of Philosophy at Lake Forest College. Karla Perez was supported by the Richter Scholarship
at Lake Forest College. Augustana Houcek was supported by the James Rocco Data Research Scholarship
at Lake Forest College. The authors thank Claire T. C. Henne, Louie T. D. Henne, Jennifer Jhun,
Matthew Kelley, Josh Knobe, Nathan Liang, Janet McCracken, Kevin O’Neill, Roshni Patel, Matthew
Stanley, and an audience in Felipe De Brigard’s IMC Lab for comments on this project.
Correspondence should be addressed to Paul Henne 100 Durand Art Institute Lake Forest College
555 North Sheridan Road Lake Forest, IL 60045. phenne@lakeforest.edu.
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
Abstract
People tend to judge more recent events, relative to earlier ones, as the cause of some particular outcome.
For instance, people are more inclined to judge that the last basket, rather than the first, caused the team to
win the basketball game. This recency effect, however, reverses in cases of overdetermination: people
judge that earlier events, rather than more recent ones, caused the outcome when the event is individually
sufficient but not individually necessary for the outcome. In five experiments (N = 5507), we find
evidence for the recency effect and the primacy effect for causal judgment. Traditionally, these effects
have been a problem for counterfactual views of causal judgment. However, we argue that an extension of
a recent counterfactual model of causal judgment explains both the recency and the primacy effect. In line
with the predictions of our extended counterfactual model, we also find that, regardless of causal
structure, people tend to imagine the counterfactual alternative to the more recent event rather than to the
earlier one. Moreover, manipulating this tendency affects causal judgments in the ways predicted by this
extended model: asking participants to imagine the counterfactual alternative to the earlier event weakens
the interaction between recency and causal structure, and asking participants to imagine the counterfactual
alternative to the more recent event strengthens the interaction between recency and causal structure. We
discuss these results in relation to work on counterfactual thinking, causal modeling, and late-preemption.
Keywords: causal judgment, recency, counterfactual thinking, imagination, late preemption, experimental
philosophy
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
1 Introduction
Louie and Claire would win a bet only if both make a three-point shot during a basketball game. Claire
made a three-point shot right at the beginning of the game, and Louie made a three-point shot right at the
buzzer. So, Louie and Claire won the bet. In this case, it seems more natural to claim that they won the
bet because Louie made the three-point shot than it does to claim that they won the bet because Claire
made the three-point shot. This difference in judgments is an example of the recency effect for causal
judgment: in cases of joint-causation, people tend to judge that recent events are more causal than earlier
ones (Lagnado & Channon, 2008; Reuter et al., 2014; Spellman, 1997).
People’s causal judgments, however, reverse in a slightly different causal structure. The recency
effect occurs in cases of joint-causation, where each event is necessary and only jointly sufficient for the
outcome. But consider a case of overdetermination—specifically a case of so-called late-preemption—
where each event is individually sufficient but not individually necessary for the outcome. In this causal
structure, Louie and Claire would win a bet if either makes a three-point shot during a basketball game.
Claire made a three-point shot right at the beginning of the game, and Louie made a three-point shot right
at the buzzer. So, Louie and Claire won the bet. In this case, it seems more natural to claim that they won
the bet because Claire made the three-point shot than it does to claim that they won the bet because Louie
made the three-point shot. This difference in judgments is an example of what we will call the primacy
effect for causal judgment: in cases of overdetermination—specifically cases of late-preemption—people
tend to judge that earlier events are more causal than recent ones (Chang, 2009; Lombrozo, 2010; Walsh
& Sloman, 2011).
Famously, one of the most prominent and influential accounts of causal judgment, counterfactual
accounts—where causal judgments depend on counterfactual thinking—fails to explain the pervasive
primacy effect and to give a unified explanation for these two effects (e.g., Gerstenberg et al., in press). In
this article, we argue that an extension of a recent counterfactual model of causal judgment (Icard et al.,
2017), however, can provide a unified explanation for the recency and primacy effects. The extension of
this model predicts that people should tend to imagine the counterfactual alternatives to more recent
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
events when they show the recency and primacy effects and that manipulating this tendency should affect
causal judgments. In this article, we test these predictions and find strong support for the extension of this
model. Critically, these findings provide a counterfactual explanation for the primacy effect—i.e.,
judgments of late-preemption—a longstanding puzzle for counterfactual accounts of causal judgment, and
they unify the explanation of the recency and primacy effects.
1.1 A Counterfactual Account
On counterfactual accounts of causal judgment, causal judgments depend on counterfactual thinking
(Byrne, 2016; Gerstenberg et al., 2017; Lewis, 1974; Mackie, 1974). So, when people reason about
whether some event caused an outcome, they do so by considering a counterfactual alternative to that
event and asking whether the outcome would still occur in that alternative. Thus, in order to know if
Louie making the three-point shot caused them to win the bet, people consider the situation where Louie
did not make the three-point shot, and then they ask if Louie and Claire still would have won the bet. If
Louie did not make the three-point shot at the buzzer, they would have lost the bet, so people should
judge that Louie making the three-point shot made a difference—it caused them to win the bet.
In these scenarios, there are, however, many counterfactual alternatives in which the outcome
would not occur (e.g., Hitchcock & Knobe, 2009; Menzies, 2004; Phillips et al., 2015). For instance,
Louie and Claire would not have won the bet if Claire had not made her shot at the beginning of the
game, if they had not made the bet at all, or if basketball just never existed. Yet each of these
counterfactual alternatives does not warrant a corresponding causal claim in the way that Louie’s failing
to make the buzzer shot does.
In order to account for this phenomenon, many counterfactual accounts of causal judgment do not
treat all counterfactuals equally (Byrne, 2016; Bernstein, 2014; Halpern & Hitchcock, 2014; Kahneman &
Miller, 1986; Phillips, et al., 2015). While researchers differ on exactly how to explain why people think
some counterfactuals are relevant and others are not, one view suggests that it is a matter of how likely
people are to simulate certain counterfactuals (Byrne, 2016; Icard et al., 2017; Kahneman & Miller,
1986). On this kind of view, some factors affect people’s propensity to simulate certain counterfactuals.
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
For instance, people are more likely to simulate the counterfactual to some abnormal action than the
counterfactual to some normal action (Kahneman & Miller, 1986; Icard et al., 2017; McCloy & Byrne,
2000), and they are more likely to simulate the counterfactual to an action than the counterfactual to an
inaction (Byrne & McEleney, 2000; Henne et al., 2019; Kahneman & Tversky, 1982). While it remains
an open question as to why there are these features of counterfactual thinking at all, some argue that they
aid goal-oriented decision making (e.g., Fazelpour, 2020).
This simulation view can be extended to recency effects in counterfactual thinking such that
temporal order also affects people’s tendency to simulate counterfactuals. Previous work on
counterfactual thinking shows that people are more likely to think of counterfactual alternatives to more
recent events than to earlier events (Miller & Gunasegaram, 1990; Segura et al., 2002; Sherman &
McConnell, 1996; Walsh & Byrne, 2004). In one study, researchers gave participants a passage in which
Jones and Cooper will win some money if they each toss a coin and both coins land on the same side
(Miller & Gunasegaram, 1990). Jones tossed first and landed on heads, and Cooper tossed second and
landed on tails. When asked to consider the possible ways in which they could have won the money, most
participants judged that they would have won if only Cooper (the second player) tossed a head rather than
if only Jones (the first player) tossed a tail (Miller & Gunasegaram, 1990). This pattern of judgments also
occurs when participants are asked to consider counterfactuals for more than two events in a temporal
order (Byrne et al., 2000) and in studies involving 6- and 8-year-old children (Meehan & Byrne, 2005).
Researchers disagree as to why people consistently simulate counterfactuals to more recent events (Byrne,
2007; 2016), but some argue that this tendency occurs because particular contexts (Byrne et al., 2000;
Walsh & Byrne 2004) or working memory (Miller & Gunasegaram, 1990) make these counterfactuals
salient. Nonetheless, future work should further explore why people have this tendency at all.
Combining this work on counterfactual thinking and causal cognition, counterfactual accounts of
causal judgment can provide a pretty straightforward explanation for the recency effect for causal
judgment. People are more likely to simulate the counterfactual alternative to some recent event.
Moreover, when the recent event is necessary for the outcome, the outcome does not occur in the
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
simulated counterfactual. This fact increases the extent to which people think that the recent event caused
the outcome. In the case of Louie and Claire, each player’s shot is necessary for them to win the bet.
However, people are more inclined to imagine the counterfactual where Louie does not make the final
shot than the counterfactual where Claire does not make her shot. And when people imagine this
counterfactual, they imagine Louie and Claire losing the bet. As such, people are more inclined to think
that Louie making the final shot made a difference: his shot caused them to win the bet.
While some counterfactual accounts can explain this recency effect for causal judgment, most
have trouble with the primacy effect that occurs in cases of overdetermination. While there are distinct
types of overdetermination discussed in the literature, we are focusing on judgments of what is called late
preemption (Bernstein, 2016). In such cases, two events occur; each event is individually sufficient but
not individually necessary for the outcome; if the first event failed to bring about the outcome, then the
second would have brought it about; and the first event brings about the outcome (Paul & Hall, 2013).
Famously, counterfactual accounts of causation (Ganeri et al., 1996; Lewis, 1986; Lewis, 2000; Paul,
1998b; Paul & Hall, 2013) and causal cognition (Gerstenberg et al., in press) have trouble explaining
judgments of late preemption, which we are calling the primacy effect. In such cases, philosophers and
non-philosophers accept that the earlier event caused the outcome (Gerstenberg et al., in press; Lombrozo,
2010; Paul & Hall, 2013). Yet if people imagine the earlier event not occurring, the outcome still would
have occurred in that scenario. So, the earlier event did not make a difference to the outcome, yet people
still judge that the early event was the cause. For instance, if people imagine that Claire had not made her
shot, Louie and Claire still would have won because Louie made his. But it still seems like Claire making
her shot caused them to win the bet.
The extension of a recent counterfactual model of causal strength—i.e., the degree to which a
factor is regarded as the cause of an outcome—however, shows promise for explaining and unifying the
recency and primacy effects. This recent computational model, which we will refer to as the necessity-
sufficiency model (Icard et al., 2017), has been used to explain the effects of norms on causal judgments
(Henne et al., 2021; Henne et al., 2017; Hitchcock & Knobe, 2009; Kominsky et al., 2015; Morris et al.,
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
2019; Samland et al., 2016; Willemsen & Kirfel, 2018). Uniquely, this model’s assumptions allow it to
predict different patterns of causal judgments for different causal structures (see General Discussion for
details). In joint-causation structures, it predicts that people will be more inclined to judge an event as
causal when they are more inclined to simulate the counterfactual alternative to it, whereas in
overdetermination cases people will be less inclined to judge the event as causal when they are more
inclined to simulate the counterfactual alternative to it. The necessity-sufficiency model explains many
effects produced by the abnormal-normal distinction’s impact on causal judgment, and it has made some
novel predictions that are confirmed in recent work (Icard et al., 2017; Kirfel & Lagnado, 2019; Morris et
al., 2019).
While some recent work has extended the necessity-sufficiency model to explain action-omission
differences in causal judgments (Henne et al., 2019), we argue that a further, novel extension may explain
both the recency and the primacy effects. If we extend the general approach of the necessity-sufficiency
model to recency, then we need to introduce a new, critical assumption to it: people are more inclined to
simulate counterfactuals to more recent events—regardless of causal structure. For instance, regardless of
whether the causal structure is that of joint causation or overdetermination, people are more inclined to
consider Louie not making his shot than they are to imagine Claire not making hers.1
With this new assumption on the extended necessity-sufficiency model, the model predicts that
people judge the causal strength of recent or earlier events differently as a function of causal structure. In
joint-causation cases, people are more inclined to judge the recent event as causal because they are more
inclined to simulate the counterfactual alternative to it. For instance, people are more inclined to imagine
Louie not making his shot, and in that situation, Louie and Claire do not win the bet. These simulations
highlight that Louie’s shot made a difference to the outcome. Hence, there is a predicted recency effect in
causal judgment. In overdetermination cases, however, people are less inclined to judge the recent event
1 Importantly, this assumption holds regardless of whether people make a causal judgment about the
earlier or the more recent event. As such, it is not the demand of a causal judgment task that encourages
people to simulate counterfactuals to more recent events.
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
as causal because they are more inclined to simulate the counterfactual alternative to it.2 For instance,
people are more inclined to imagine Louie not making his shot, and in that situation Louie and Claire still
win the bet. These simulations highlight that Louie’s shot did not make a difference to the outcome.
Hence, there is a predicted primacy effect in overdetermination structures. Thus, the extension of the
necessity-sufficiency model provides a unified explanation for the recency and primacy effects for causal
judgment. In doing this, it also provides a novel counterfactual explanation for judgments of late-
preemption.
1.2 The Present Studies
In this article, we tested the predictions of our proposed extension of the necessity-sufficiency model. We
investigated the recency and primacy effects for causal judgment and the interaction between causal
structure and recency (i.e., temporal order) using continuous measures of causal strength (Experiments 1
and 2). We found an interaction between causal structure and recency reflecting the presence of both
effects. We then investigated which event (earlier or later) people imagine happening differently
(Experiment 2). In Experiment 2, participants reported imagining the counterfactual to the more recent
event—regardless of causal structure. Using materials from Experiment 2, we found that manipulating
this tendency affected causal judgments in some of the ways predicted by the model (Experiment 3):
asking participants to imagine the counterfactual alternative to earlier events weakened the interaction
between recency and causal structure, but asking participants to imagine the counterfactual alternative to
the recent event only qualitatively strengthened the interaction between recency and causal structure.
In Experiments 1-3, participants’ judgments about the statistical normality of the early or late
event happening could have affected or explained our results (Supplemental Experiment 1). So, we then
2 In overdetermination structures, even if one event did not happen, the outcome would still have
happened. Some philosophers and cognitive scientists categorize these alternative possibilities, which we
call counterfactuals, as semifactuals (Goodman, 1947; McCloy & Byrne, 2002; Parkinson & Byrne,
2017). Others disagree with this taxonomy of counterfactuals (Bennett, 2004). While we refer to these
alternative possibilities as counterfactuals throughout, we do not take a stand on the appropriate taxonomy
here. We, however, do note that previous work shows that people’s consideration of semifactuals
decreases the strength of causal judgments (McCloy & Byrne, 2002; Parkinson & Byrne, 2017).
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
attempted to replicate the recency and primacy effects in a range of new vignettes that controlled for and
measured perceived statistical normality. In Experiment 4, we found robust support for these two effects
and strong evidence that they arise independently of effects driven by perceived statistical normality.
Using some of the new materials from Experiment 4, we then ran an improved version of Experiment 3
that avoided the confound of perceived statistical normality (Experiment 5). In Experiment 5, asking
participants to imagine the counterfactual alternative to earlier events weakened the interaction between
recency and causal structure, and asking participants to imagine the counterfactual alternative to the
recent event strengthened the interaction between recency and causal structure. In sum, we found strong
support for the extended necessity-sufficiency model and our counterfactual explanation for the recency
and primacy effects.
2 Experiment 1
The aim of this experiment was to determine if there is an interaction between recency and causal
structure such that a recency effect for causal judgment occurs in joint-causation structures and a primacy
effect for causal judgment occurs in overdetermination structures. Specifically, we wanted to know (1) if
in joint-causation conditions, participants would be more inclined to agree that events that happened later
(i.e., more recent), relative to earlier ones, caused the outcome and (2) if in overdetermination conditions,
participants would be more inclined to agree that events that happened earlier, relative to later ones (i.e.,
more recent), caused the outcome.
In this experiment, we manipulated recency (whether the event happened earlier or the event
happened later) and causal structure (joint-causation or overdetermination), and we measured
participants’ agreement with a causal statement. While earlier work found the recency and primacy
effects independently, these studies used a variety of different dependent measures, and none of them
directly investigated an interaction between causal structure and recency. Our design allowed us to
investigate this interaction and the presence of these two effects, and our continuous dependent measure
allowed us to investigate the causal strength of each event. In our experiments, we used agreement with a
causal explanation as the dependent measure, consistent with previous work on related topics (e.g., Henne
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
et al., 2019). That is, rather than asking participants if the events in the vignette caused the outcome, we
asked if the outcome occurred because of the different events in the vignette. Importantly, people
distinguish causal explanation and causation, but when they agree that something caused the outcome
there is no evidence that there is a difference between causal judgments and causal explanations
(Livengood & Machery, 2010). We had no a priori hypothesis about the ‘cause’ and ‘because’
constructions of our dependent measure producing different results; we expected people to respond to a
causal explanation or a causal statement similarly for recency effects. As such, we chose to use the more
natural ‘because’ construction. If there are hypotheses for why people would respond differently to
‘cause’ and ‘because’ constructions, future work could examine these differences.
2.1 Sample size
A pilot study using only the joint-causation conditions found a recency effect (p = .004) with an effect
size of d = .34. We calculated the number of participants required for d = .34 for 𝛼 = .05 at .85 power. We
required 156 participants for each condition. Expecting a 3-5% drop-out rate, we aimed to recruit 650
participants.
2.2 Participants
participants were United States nationals, were born in and resided in the United States, spoke English as
their first language, had a 99% approval rating on Prolific, and had not taken part in our pilot study. A
total of 655 participants completed the experiment that was programmed in Qualtrics
data from the remaining 640 participants (M = 32, SD = 12.22, Range = [18–75], 49% female). After
age age
completing the survey, participants were compensated $0.27.
2.3 Materials and Procedure
We advertised the experiment as “A Study About Your Judgments” and included the description:
“Participants will be asked to read a short passage and then answer some questions about it.” Participants
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
were told that they would be compensated $0.27 upon completion of the study. Before participants
entered the experiment, they read a consent form.
After they consented to participation, participants were randomly assigned to 1 of 4 conditions in
a 2 (Recency: early, late) × 2 (Structure: joint-causation, overdetermination) between-participants design.
level of agreement with the causal statement on a -50-50 scale [-50 = strongly disagree, 0 = neutral, 50 =
strongly agree]. Participants were then asked for basic demographic information and to respond to one
All research in this manuscript was approved by the Human Subject Review Committee at Lake
Forest College. All data collection was completed in all experiments in this manuscript prior to any
analysis by the authors. All materials, data, and analysis code for all experiments in this manuscript are
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
Joint-Causation, Early: Joint-Causation, Late:
Louie is playing a game of basketball, and he made a bet with his Louie is playing a game of basketball, and he made a bet with his
friends who are watching on the sidelines. friends who are watching on the sidelines.
If Louie both makes a layup and makes a 3-point shot during the If Louie both makes a layup and makes a 3-point shot during the
game, then he’ll win $100. game, then he’ll win $100.
Just when the game started, Louie immediately got the ball at the 3- Just when the game started, Louie immediately got the ball at the 3-
point line. He looked to the basket, dribbled in, and then made a point line. He looked to the basket, focused his shot, and made a 3-
layup right at the beginning of the game. point shot right at the beginning of the game.
Louie and his friends continued playing, but as hard as he tried, Louie Louie and his friends continued playing, but as hard as he tried, Louie
couldn't make another shot. couldn't make another shot.
And then right at the end of the game as the clock was winding down, And then right at the end of the game as the clock was winding down,
Louie got the ball at the 3-point line. He looked to the basket, focused Louie got the ball at the 3-point line. He looked to the basket,
his shot, and made a 3-point shot right at the buzzer. Then the game dribbled in, and then made a layup right at the buzzer. Then the game
ended. ended.
Because Louie would win $100 if he both made a layup and a 3-point Because Louie would win $100 if he both made a layup and a 3-point
shot, Louie won $100. shot, Louie won $100.
Overdetermination, Early: Overdetermination, Late:
Louie is playing a game of basketball, and he made a bet with his Louie is playing a game of basketball, and he made a bet with his
friends who are watching on the sidelines. friends who are watching on the sidelines.
If Louie either makes a layup or makes a 3-point shot during the If Louie either makes a layup or makes a 3-point shot during the
game, then he’ll win $100. game, then he’ll win $100.
Just when the game started, Louie immediately got the ball at the 3- Just when the game started, Louie immediately got the ball at the 3-
point line. He looked to the basket, dribbled in, and then made a point line. He looked to the basket, focused his shot, and made a 3-
layup right at the beginning of the game. point shot right at the beginning of the game.
Louie and his friends continued playing, but as hard as he tried, Louie Louie and his friends continued playing, but as hard as he tried, Louie
couldn't make another shot. couldn't make another shot.
And then right at the end of the game as the clock was winding down, And then right at the end of the game as the clock was winding down,
Louie got the ball at the 3-point line. He looked to the basket, focused Louie got the ball at the 3-point line. He looked to the basket,
his shot, and made a 3-point shot right at the buzzer. Then the game dribbled in, and then made a layup right at the buzzer. Then the game
ended. ended.
Because Louie would win $100 if he either made a layup or a 3-point Because Louie would win $100 if he either made a layup or a 3-point
shot, Louie won $100. shot, Louie won $100.
Causal Question:
To what extent do you agree with the following statement about the passage you just read?
Louie won the $100 bet because he made the layup.
2.4 Results
Critically, there was an interaction between causal structure and recency (F(1,636) = 109.67, p < .001, η2
= .15, CI [.11, .19]). There was no main effect of causal structure (F(1,636) = 2.62, p = .10, η2 = .00, CI
[.00, .02]), but there was a main effect of recency (F(1,636) = 16.50, p < .001, η2 = .02, CI [.01, .05]).
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
To decompose the interaction between structure and recency, we computed tests of simple main
effects. In line with the recency effect, participants in the joint-causation condition agreed that the recent
event (M = 28.81, SD = 27.96, n = 159) was more causal than the earlier one (M = 11.71, SD = 36.38, n =
162) (t(319) = -4.71, p < .001, d = -.52, CI [-.75, -.30]). In line with the primacy effect, participants in the
overdetermination condition agreed that the earlier event (M = 35.33, SD = 28.01, n = 161) was more
causal than the recent one (M = -3.44, SD = 40.85, n = 158) (t(317) = 9.90, p < .001, d = 1.11, CI [.87,
intervals. Light grey points represent individual participant responses evenly jittered.
2.5 Discussion
In Experiment 1, we found an interaction between recency and causal structure, reflecting the recency
effect for causal judgment in joint-causation structures and a primacy effect for causal judgment in
overdetermination structures. These results are consistent with previous work that finds a recency effect
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
in joint-causation structures (Lagnado & Channon, 2008; Reuter et al., 2014; Spellman, 1997) and a
primacy effect in overdetermination structures (Chang, 2009; Lombrozo, 2010; Mandel, 2003; Walsh &
Sloman, 2011). While previous work has used distinct stimuli and different measures to investigate these
effects separately, our materials uniquely allowed us to investigate directly the interaction between causal
structure and recency.
There is a worry about the generalizability of our findings in relation to previous work on this
topic. In our vignette, only a single agent performed both actions that caused the outcome. Much of the
earlier work on causal judgment found recency effects in joint-causation structures in situations where
distinct agents performed the actions (e.g., Reuter et al., 2014). To ensure that participants saw the
individual actions as distinct events, we revised our vignette in Experiment 2 so that it includes another
agent performing a completely distinct action.
A second, more important concern is about the extent to which people consider the counterfactual
alternatives to the events when they are making their causal judgments. The extension of the necessity-
sufficiency model assumes that people are—regardless of causal structures—more inclined to consider
the counterfactual to the recent event and that this tendency produces the recency and primacy effects. In
Experiment 1, we did not measure people’s consideration of the counterfactual alternatives directly, so we
cannot conclude that this was the case in Experiment 1.
Some work has investigated this tendency in people’s counterfactual thinking. As we mentioned
above, people tend to imagine the counterfactual alternatives to the more recent events in joint-causation
structures (e.g., Miller & Gunasegaram, 1990). However, some work has found that people consider the
counterfactual alternatives to the earlier events rather than the most recent in overdetermination structures
(Walsh & Byrne, 2004; Mandel, 2003). Participants in one study read a passage where two players can
win some money if one or the other, or both, pick a red card from a deck (Walsh & Byrne, 2004:
Experiment 3). The players, John and Michael, each drew a card. John drew first and picked a black card,
and Michael drew second and picked a black card. So, they lost. Of the participants who imagined
counterfactual alternatives for just one event (50%), 33% imagined the counterfactual alternative to the
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
earlier event and 17% did so for the later one (Walsh & Byrne, 2004). That is, participants were more
inclined to consider counterfactuals for the earlier event instead of the more recent event in
overdetermination structures. Notably, the researchers also found this pattern of results for exclusive
disjunctions, where either one event or the other, but not both, would bring about the outcome (Walsh &
Byrne, 2004: Experiment 1). These findings suggest that the recency effect for counterfactual thinking
that is typically found in joint-causation structures can be reversed in overdetermination structures (Walsh
& Byrne, 2004: Experiment 3). However, when these researchers manipulated the context, thus the
salience of the counterfactual alternatives, they actually found a recency effect for counterfactual thinking
in exclusive-disjunctive cases that was similar to the effect observed in joint-causation structures (Walsh
& Byrne, 2004: Experiment 2). These findings suggest that while there is a recency effect for
counterfactual thinking, this tendency can be manipulated by context, causal structure, and other
counterfactual interventions that make certain counterfactual alternatives salient.
The extension of the necessity-sufficiency model’s hypothesis is that when people display the
recency and primacy effects for causal judgment, they are more inclined to imagine the counterfactual to
the recent event—regardless of causal structure. We did not know, however, if participants in Experiment
1 were more inclined to imagine the counterfactual to the recent event or the earlier one. Because this
tendency can change depending on the salience of the counterfactual alternatives to each event (Walsh &
Byrne, 2004), we needed to test directly which counterfactuals people tended to imagine in our scenarios.
We do so in Experiment 2. If people were overall more likely to report that they imagined the
counterfactual to the recent event, then we would be justified in attempting to manipulate this tendency.
3 Experiment 2
There were two aims of this experiment. First, we wanted to conceptually replicate the results from
Experiment 1 when multiple agents, as opposed to just one, act to bring about an outcome. Just as in
Experiment 1, we manipulated recency and causal structure, and we measured participants’ agreement
with a causal statement. Second, we investigated which event people imagined happening differently
(early or late). Previous work on imagining counterfactual alternatives prompted participants with
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
something like the following: “John and Michael could have each won some money if only one of them
had picked a different card, for instance if…” and participants wrote in their responses (Walsh & Byrne,
2004). With this prompt, participants who identified one event could have identified what made a
difference to the outcome rather than what they were just imagining happening differently. Because of our
interest in the relationship between counterfactual thinking and causal judgments, we wanted to avoid
using a prompt that potentially emphasized what made a difference to the outcome. To avoid this
potential confound, we asked participants, “Think about what could have been different in the story that
you just read. Which event do you imagine happening differently?” and we had them select either the
early or the late event. We asked this question in fixed order before the causal question so that responses
to the causal question did not affect people’s responses to the counterfactual question. In line with our
proposed extension of the necessity-sufficiency model, we predicted that—if we replicated the recency
and primacy effects for causal judgment—people would be more likely overall to report that they
imagined the counterfactual to the more recent event, rather than to the earlier one, regardless of causal
structure.
3.1 Sample size
We aimed to recruit 650 participants just as we did in Experiment 1.
3.2 Participants
All participants were United States nationals, were born in and resided in the United States, spoke English
as their first language, had a 99% approval rating on Prolific, and had not taken part in our pilot study or
in Experiment 1. A total of 650 participants completed the experiment that was programmed in Qualtrics.
15 participants reported not paying attention, so they were excluded. We analyzed data from the
remaining 635 participants (M = 34, SD = 12.97, Range = [18–84], 51% female). After completing
age age
the survey, participants were compensated $0.27.
3.3 Materials and procedure
We advertised the experiment and compensated participants in the exact same way as we did in
Experiment 1. Before participants entered the experiment, they read a consent form.
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
After they consented to participation, participants were randomly assigned to 1 of 4 conditions in
a 2 (Recency: early, late) × 2 (Structure: joint-causation, overdetermination) between-participants design.
Each participant read a vignette and answered the counterfactual question and then the causal question
between participants, and participants selected whether they imagined the early or the late event
happening differently. The causal question was presented in the exact same way as in Experiment 1.
Participants were then asked for basic demographic information and to respond to an attention check.
3.4 Coding
We coded participants’ responses to the counterfactual questions for the planned analyses. We coded
participants’ responses in the early conditions such that those who selected “Louie making the 3-point
shot right at the beginning of the game” were coded as “Early” and those who selected “Claire making the
3-point shot right at the buzzer” were coded as “Late.” We coded participants’ responses in the late
conditions such that those who selected “Claire making the 3-point shot right at the beginning of the
game” were coded as “Early” and those who selected “Louie making the 3-point shot right at the buzzer”
were coded as “Late.”
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
Joint-Causation, Early: Joint-Causation, Late:
Louie and Claire are playing a game of basketball, and they made a Louie and Claire are playing a game of basketball, and they made a
bet with their friends who are watching on the sidelines. bet with their friends who are watching on the sidelines.
If both Louie makes a 3-point shot and Claire makes a 3-point shot If both Louie makes a 3-point shot and Claire makes a 3-point shot
during the game, then they'll win $100 and split it down the middle. during the game, then they'll win $100 and split it down the middle.
Just when the game started, Louie immediately got the ball at the 3- Just when the game started, Claire immediately got the ball at the 3-
point line. He looked to the basket, focused his shot, and made a 3- point line. She looked to the basket, focused her shot, and made a 3-
point shot right at the beginning of the game. point shot right at the beginning of the game.
Louie, Claire, and their friends continued playing, but as hard as they Louie, Claire, and their friends continued playing, but as hard as they
tried, Louie and Claire couldn't make another shot. tried, Louie and Claire couldn't make another shot.
And then right at the end of the game as the clock was winding down, And then right at the end of the game as the clock was winding down,
Claire got the ball at the 3-point line. She looked to the basket, Louie got the ball at the 3-point line. He looked to the basket, focused
focused her shot, and made a 3-point shot right at the buzzer. Then his shot, and made a 3-point shot right at the buzzer. Then the game
the game ended. ended.
Because they would win $100 if both Louie made a 3-point shot and Because they would win $100 if both Louie made a 3-point shot and
Claire made a 3-point shot, Louie and Claire won $100 and split it Claire made a 3-point shot, Louie and Claire won $100 and split it
down the middle. down the middle.
Overdetermination, Early: Overdetermination, Late:
Louie and Claire are playing a game of basketball, and they made a Louie and Claire are playing a game of basketball, and they made a
bet with their friends who are watching on the sidelines. bet with their friends who are watching on the sidelines.
If either Louie makes a 3-point shot or Claire makes a 3-point shot If either Louie makes a 3-point shot or Claire makes a 3-point shot
during the game, then they'll win $100 and split it down the middle. during the game, then they'll win $100 and split it down the middle.
Just when the game started, Louie immediately got the ball at the 3- Just when the game started, Claire immediately got the ball at the 3-
point line. He looked to the basket, focused his shot, and made a 3- point line. She looked to the basket, focused her shot, and made a 3-
point shot right at the beginning of the game. point shot right at the beginning of the game.
Louie, Claire, and their friends continued playing, but as hard as they Louie, Claire, and their friends continued playing, but as hard as they
tried, Louie and Claire couldn't make another shot. tried, Louie and Claire couldn't make another shot.
And then right at the end of the game as the clock was winding down, And then right at the end of the game as the clock was winding down,
Claire got the ball at the 3-point line. She looked to the basket, Louie got the ball at the 3-point line. He looked to the basket, focused
focused her shot, and made a 3-point shot right at the buzzer. Then his shot, and made a 3-point shot right at the buzzer. Then the game
the game ended. ended.
Because they would win $100 if either Louie made a 3-point shot or Because they would win $100 if either Louie made a 3-point shot or
Claire made a 3-point shot, Louie and Claire won $100 and split it Claire made a 3-point shot, Louie and Claire won $100 and split it
down the middle. down the middle.
Counterfactual Question, Early: Counterfactual Question, Late:
Think about what could have been different in the story that you just Think about what could have been different in the story that you just
read. Which event do you imagine happening differently: read. Which event do you imagine happening differently:
Louie making the 3-point shot right at the beginning of the game Claire making the 3-point shot right at the beginning of the game
Claire making the 3-point shot right at the buzzer Louie making the 3-point shot right at the buzzer
Causal Question:
To what extent do you agree with the following statement about the passage you just read?
Louie and Claire won the $100 bet because Louie made the 3-point shot.
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
3.5 Results
First, we investigated participants’ responses to the counterfactual question. Participants were overall
much more likely to select the late event (68.50%) than the early one (31.49%) as the one that they
imagined happening differently (𝜒2(1, N = 635) = 86.96, p < .001, OR = 4.24, CI [3.13, 5.74]). This
tendency occurred both in the joint-causation (𝜒2(1, N = 317) = 71.92, p < .001, OR = 7.13, CI [4.53,
11.23]) and in the overdetermination conditions (𝜒2(1, N = 318) = 22.18, p < .001, OR = 2.70, CI [1.78,
4.08]). A binomial logistic regression showed that there was no interaction between recency and structure
for participants’ selection in the counterfactual question (OR = 1.02, CI [.51, 2.01], p = .94) and no effect
of recency (OR = 1.02, CI [.62, 1.69], p = .84). However, there was a small main effect of structure (OR =
.60, CI [.37, .96], p = .003) such that participants in the overdetermination conditions selected the early
comparisons revealed that there were no significant differences between any of the individual conditions
(all ps > .10) (see Supplemental Materials for exploratory analyses and discussion).
For the causal question, there was an interaction between causal structure and recency (F(1,631)
= 74.71, p < .001, η2 = .11, CI [.07, .14]). There was also a main effect of causal structure (F(1,631) =
14.82, p < .001, η2 = .02, CI [.01, .05]) and recency (F(1,631) = 12.35, p < .001, η2 = .11, CI [.01, .04]).
p p
To decompose the interaction effect between structure and recency, we computed tests of simple
main effects. In line with the recency effect, participants in the joint-causation condition agreed that the
recent event (M = 15.82, SD = 30.22, n = 158) was more causal than the earlier one (M = 2.32, SD =
33.17, n = 159) (t(315) = -3.78, p < .001, d = -.42, CI [-.64, -.20]). In line with the primacy effect,
participants in the overdetermination condition agreed that the earlier event (M = 14.89, SD = 31.91, n =
158) was more causal than the recent one (M = -16.81, SD = 36.14, n = 160) (t(316) = 8.28, p < .001, d =
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
confidence intervals. Light grey points represent individual participant responses evenly jittered. (B)
Proportion of participants selecting each option for the counterfactual question as a function of structure
and recency.
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
3.6 Discussion
In Experiment 2, we replicated the results of Experiment 1 in a situation where multiple agents, as
opposed to just one, act to bring about the outcome; we found an interaction between recency and causal
structure, reflecting the recency and primacy effects for causal judgment. These results confirm the
reliability of the effects found in Experiment 1.
We also found that regardless of causal structure, participants overall tended to report that they
imagined the counterfactual alternative to the more recent event. This finding was predicted by our
proposed extension of the necessity-sufficiency model: when participants show the recency and primacy
effect for causal judgment, they should also show a recency effect for counterfactual thinking in both
joint-causation and overdetermination structures. Critically, although people selected the earlier event as
the cause in the overdetermination conditions, they still imagined the recent event happening differently.
This result appears to be inconsistent with some earlier work finding that people are more
inclined to imagine the counterfactual to earlier events in overdetermination structures (Walsh & Byrne,
2004: Experiment 3). So, it is important for us to consider why this tension arises. Importantly, we do not
think that this is a failure to replicate because other researchers have found similar results using
overdetermination scenarios (Mandel, 2003). We offer three potential explanations. One explanation is
that this disparity has to do with the different dependent measures of counterfactual thinking. As we
mention above, in Walsh and Byrne’s studies (and in others, e.g., Kominsky & Phillips, 2019), the
researchers asked participants to identify the counterfactual that would have made a difference to the
outcome. We did not ask participants to identify the counterfactual that would have made a difference to
the outcome in the scenario. Instead, our measure focused on the imagined counterfactual alternative and
avoids potential conflation with the causal question. We are unsure if participants in Walsh and Byrne’s
study conflate the counterfactual question with the causal question, but this is one potential explanation
for the disparity in the findings. Future work will have to determine the extent to which this potential
conflation occurs with measures used in previous work.
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
A second explanation for this apparent disparity relates to participants’ tendency to blame. In
Walsh and Byrne’s scenario, the players lost, and participants blamed the first player more frequently
than the second (2004). In turn, participants might have been motivated to identify the first player in
response to the counterfactual measure because they wanted to blame him. In our scenarios, by contrast,
there were no losing outcomes, so no blame should have been attributed to the agents. Thus, our
participants would not have been motivated to identify the counterfactual alternative to the first agent by
their desire to blame him. This difference in potential blame attributions could explain the differences in
counterfactual considerations. Importantly, we note that if this cognitive process affected counterfactual
judgments in Walsh and Byrne’s studies, it might not be a purely motivational bias; rather, because
people tend to consider the counterfactuals to blameworthy or norm-violating actions, blame—in addition
to recency—could have affected participants counterfactual considerations (See Byrne, 2016). Moreover,
we note that there is some evidence against this explanation for the differences between the results:
researchers have found and manipulated recency effects for counterfactual thinking in similar ways using
situations with winning outcomes (Byrne et al., 2000).
A third explanation for this disparity is that the salience of counterfactual alternatives varies
between the studies. While people tend to simulate the counterfactual to recent events, the context,
structure, and other experimental interventions can affect the salience of counterfactual alternatives
(Byrne et al., 2000; Walsh & Byrne, 2004). Walsh and Byrne argue that the recency effect in
counterfactual thinking occurs because people think about the events that produce the outcome (i.e., the
winning conditions), and when the first event matches those conditions, it anchors people’s consideration
of the alternative possibilities, making them more inclined to consider counterfactuals to later events. In
their studies, they reverse the effect when the first event does not match the winning conditions because,
they argue, the first event does not anchor people’s counterfactual considerations. Notably, when the first
event matched the winning conditions in inclusive-disjunction cases, they found a recency effect rather
than a reversal (2004: Experiment 2). Our results, in turn, are consistent with this work on counterfactual
thinking. Louie making his shot first matches the winning conditions, and this fact anchors people’s
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
counterfactual considerations, so we expect a recency effect for counterfactual thinking. As such, the
general recency effect might vary by context more than previously thought. Future work should continue
to investigate the potential for manipulating the salience of counterfactual alternatives and the effects that
such manipulations would have on causal judgments.
Regardless of what brings about these potentially divergent findings, participants’ causal
judgments and imagined counterfactuals in Experiment 2 are perfectly in line with what the extended
necessity-sufficiency model predicts: when people show the recency and primacy effect for causal
judgment, they show a recency effect for counterfactual thinking. While we have not shown that people
spontaneously simulate these counterfactual alternatives, our forced-choice binary measure of which
counterfactual alternatives people are more likely to consider indicates that there is overall a recency
effect for simulating counterfactual alternatives. These results justify a further, direct investigation into
whether people’s imaginings of particular counterfactuals actually affect their causal judgments in the
way that we have suggested. As such, in Experiment 3 we manipulate which counterfactuals people
imagine and investigate if these manipulations affect their causal judgments in the ways predicted by the
extended necessity-sufficiency model.
4 Experiment 3
The aim of this experiment was to manipulate people’s counterfactual thinking and to investigate whether
it affected their causal judgments in the ways predicted by the extended necessity-sufficiency model. In
this experiment, we had participants read one version of a vignette where we manipulated recency and
causal structure just as we did in previous experiments. Using a paradigm inspired by previous work on
normality and causal judgments (Kominsky & Phillips, 2019; Phillips et al., 2015), we then had
participants either imagine the early event happening differently (early-counterfactual-manipulation
conditions), imagine the recent event happening differently (late-counterfactual-manipulation conditions),
or describe the events that occurred in the passage (control) before measuring their agreement with the
causal statement just as we did in previous experiments.
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
For the extended necessity-sufficiency model, we had four specific predictions. First, in the
control conditions, we predicted an interaction between recency and structure, reflecting the recency and
primacy effects and replicating the results of Experiments 1 and 2.
Second, in the early-counterfactual-manipulation conditions, relative to the control, we predicted
a weaker interaction (or no interaction) between recency and causal structure. On the extended necessity-
sufficiency model, if people are encouraged to simulate the counterfactual to the early event—against
their natural tendency—they should show a weaker interaction between recency and structure. In joint-
causation conditions, people should be more inclined to judge the early event as causal, because they
would be encouraged to simulate the counterfactual alternative to it and these simulations highlight that
the early event made a difference to the outcome. This change in causal strength in the joint-causation
conditions should weaken the recency effect. In overdetermination cases, people should be less inclined to
judge the early event as causal, because they would be encouraged to simulate the counterfactual
alternative to it and these simulations highlight that the early event did not make a difference to the
outcome. This change in causal strength in the overdetermination conditions should weaken the primacy
effect.
Third, in the late-counterfactual-manipulation conditions, relative to the control, we predicted a
stronger interaction between recency and structure. On the extended necessity-sufficiency model, if
people are encouraged to consider the counterfactual to the late event—amplifying their natural
tendency—they should show a slightly stronger interaction between recency and structure. In joint-
causation conditions, people should be more inclined to judge the recent event as causal, because they
would be encouraged to simulate the counterfactual alternative to it and these simulations highlight that
the recent event made a difference to the outcome. This change in causal strength in the joint-causation
conditions should strengthen the recency effect. In overdetermination cases, people should be less
inclined to judge the recent event as causal, because they would be encouraged to simulate the
counterfactual alternative to it and these simulations highlight that the recent event did not make a
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
difference to the outcome. This change in causal strength in the overdetermination conditions should
strengthen the primacy effect.
Finally, we predicted that this difference in two-way interactions between the three
counterfactual-manipulation conditions would manifest as a three-way interaction between recency,
causal structure, and counterfactual manipulation.
4.1 Sample size
We aimed to recruit 156 participants per condition just as we did in Experiments 1 and 2 for a total of
1915 participants.
4.2 Participants
All participants were United States nationals, were born in and resided in the United States, spoke English
as their first language, had a 99% approval rating on Prolific, and had not taken part in our pilot study,
Experiment 1, or Experiment 2. A total of 1923 participants completed the experiment that was
programmed in Qualtrics. 43 participants reported not paying attention, so they were excluded. We
excluded an additional 21 participants either who completely disregarded the task or who had taken the
participants (M = 35, SD = 13.1, Range = [18–80], 49% female). After completing the survey,
age age
participants were compensated $0.33.
4.3 Materials and procedure
We advertised the experiment in the exact same way as in Experiment 1 and 2. Participants were told that
they would be compensated $0.33 upon completion of the study. Before participants entered the
experiment, they read a consent form.
After consenting to participate, participants were randomly assigned to 1 of 12 conditions in a 2
(Recency: early, late) × 2 (Structure: joint causation, overdetermination) x 3 (Counterfactual
Manipulation: early-counterfactual manipulation, control, late-counterfactual manipulation) between-
following page, participants were presented with instructions for the counterfactual manipulation task.
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
They were either asked to imagine the early event not occurring at all (early-counterfactual-manipulation
condition), the late event not occurring at all (late-counterfactual-manipulation condition), or to describe
asked for basic demographic information and to respond to the same attention check used in Experiments
1 and 2.
(A) Now we would like you to imagine Louie (B) Now we would like you to consider what (C) Now we would like you to imagine
not making a 3-point shot at all. happened in the passage. Claire not making a 3-point shot at all.
Please describe what you imagine. Please describe what actually happened in Please describe what you imagine.
the passage you read.
(Please write at least two sentences.) (Please write at least two sentences.)
(Please write at least two sentences.)
early-counterfactual-manipulation condition in the early conditions and for the late-counterfactual-
manipulation condition in the late conditions. (B) Instructions for the control conditions. (C) Instructions
for the early-counterfactual-manipulation condition in the late conditions and for the late-counterfactual-
manipulation condition in the early conditions.
4.4 Results
For the causal question, there was a three-way interaction between causal structure, recency, and
counterfactual manipulation (F(7,1847) = 16.82, p < .001, η2 = .06, CI [.04, .08]). There was also an
effect of causal structure (F(1,1847) = 5.04, p = .02, η2 = .00, CI [.00, .01]) and recency (F(1,1847) =
39.79, p < .001, η2 = .02, CI [.01, .03]), but there was no main effect of counterfactual manipulation
(F(2,1847) = 2.94, p = .05, η2 = .00, CI [.00, .01]). Critically, the interaction between recency and
structure was weaker in the early-counterfactual-manipulation conditions than in the control conditions (b
= 21.15, SE = 7.86, t = 2.68, p = .007, CI [5.72, 36.58]), but the interaction between recency and structure
was not significantly stronger in the late-counterfactual-manipulation conditions relative to the control
conditions (b = -3.29, SE = 7.87, t = -.41, p = .67, CI [-18.74, 12.15]).
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
To decompose the three-way interaction effect between structure, recency, and counterfactual
manipulation, we computed separate tests of the interaction effects and then the simple main effects for
each counterfactual-manipulation condition. First, we investigated the interaction of structure and recency
in the control conditions. In the control conditions, there was an interaction between causal structure and
recency (F(1,618) = 48.93, p < .001, η2 = .07, CI [.04, .11]), no effect of causal structure (F(1,618) = .27,
p = .59, η2 = .00, CI [.00, .01]), but an effect of recency (F(1,618) = 13.85, p < .001, η2 = .02, CI [.01,
p p
.04]). We further decomposed this interaction by investigating the simple main effects for each causal
structure. In line with the recency effect, participants in the joint-causation conditions agreed that the
recent event (M = 13.73, SD = 31.68, n = 153) was more causal than the earlier one (M = 4.65, SD =
36.32, n = 156) (t(307) = -2.34, p = .01, d = -.26, CI [-.49, -.04]). In line with the primacy effect,
participants in the overdetermination conditions agreed that the earlier event (M = 24.91, SD = 30.95, n =
160) was more causal than the recent one (M = -4.26, SD = 37.07, n = 153) (t(311) = 7.57, p < .001, d =
Next, we investigated the interaction of structure and recency in the early counterfactual-
manipulation conditions. In the early counterfactual-manipulation conditions, there was an interaction
between causal structure and recency (F(1,616) = 9.95, p = .001, η2 = .02, CI [.00, .04]). There was an
effect of causal structure (F(1,616) = 5.72, p = .01, η2 = .00, CI [.00, .03]) and an effect of recency
(F(1,616) = 17.84, p < .001, η2 = .03, CI [.01, .05]). We further decomposed this interaction by
investigating the simple main effects for each causal structure. In the joint-causation conditions,
participants’ agreement with the causal statement about the early (M = 11.69, SD = 29.79, n = 156) and
late events (M = 8.87, SD = 33.18, n = 154) did not significantly differ (t(308) = .78, p = .43, d = .08, CI
[-.13, .31]). As such, the recency effect was weaker in the early-counterfactual-manipulation conditions
than in the control conditions (b = -11.89, SE = 5.57, t = -2.13, p = .03). In the overdetermination
conditions, however, participants agreed that the early event (M = 13.81, SD = 34.79, n = 152) was more
causal than the late event (M = -6.10, SD = 36.75, n = 158) (t(308) = 4.95, p < .001, d = .55, CI [.33, .78]).
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
There was no evidence that the primacy effect was weaker in the early-counterfactual-manipulation
conditions than in the control conditions (b = 9.26, SE = 5.55, t = 1.66, p = .09).
Next, we investigated the interaction of structure and recency in the late counterfactual-
manipulation conditions. In the late-counterfactual-manipulation conditions, there was an interaction
between causal structure and recency (F(1,613) = 51.07, p < .001, η2 = .08, CI [.05, .11]). There was also
an effect of causal structure (F(1,613) = 4.16, p = .04, η2 = .00, CI [.00, .02]) and recency (F(1,613) =
8.77, p = .003, η2 = .01, CI [.00, .03]). We further decomposed this interaction investigating the simple
main effects for each causal structure. In the joint-causation conditions, participants agreed that the recent
event (M = 13.73, SD = 36.65, n = 160) was more causal than the earlier one (M = 1.97, SD = 36.48, n =
155) (t(313) = -2.85, p = .004, d = -.32, CI [-.54, -.09]). There was no evidence that the recency effect was
stronger in the late-counterfactual-manipulation conditions than in the control conditions (b = 2.67, SE =
5.55, t = .48, p = .62). In the overdetermination conditions, participants agreed that the earlier event (M =
17.25, SD = 33.40, n = 147) was more causal than the recent event (M = -12.53, SD = 37.51, n = 155)
(t(300) = 7.27, p < .001, d = .83, CI [.61, 1.06]). There was no evidence that the primacy effect was
stronger in the late-counterfactual-manipulation conditions than in the control conditions (b = -.61, SE =
5.59, t = -.11, p = .91).
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
intervals. Light grey points represent individual participant responses evenly jittered.
4.4 Discussion
These findings confirmed many of the predictions of the extended necessity-sufficiency model. In the
control conditions, there was an interaction between recency and structure, reflecting the recency and
primacy effects. When people were asked to imagine the counterfactual to the earlier event, we found a
weaker interaction between recency and structure, no evidence for a recency effect, but also no significant
reduction in the strength of the primacy effect. Moreover, when people were asked to imagine the
counterfactual to the more recent event, we had no evidence for a stronger interaction between recency
and structure or for stronger recency or primacy effects.
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
There were some unexpected results in this experiment. Interestingly, we found a qualitatively
weaker interaction between recency and structure in the control conditions (η2 = .07, CI [.04, .11])
relative to Experiments 1 (η2 = .15, CI [.11, .19]) and 2 (η2 = .11, CI [.07, .14]). One explanation for this
p p
difference is that the instructions in our control condition encouraged people to disregard the temporal
order of the events. In this condition, we had participants describe what they had read. One participant
wrote “2 friends played basketball and made a bet with some friends watching. they both made 3 point
shots and won $100 to split between them” and another wrote, “Both players made 3 point shots and won
the bet.” In many of the descriptions of the scenario, participants failed to describe the sequence of the
events themselves; they simply stated that both events happened. While the instructions for the control
condition were innocuous, the task may have encouraged participants to view each event as entirely
equivalent in temporality. Participants may have anchored their responses such that early and late events
were equivalent, thus they no longer engaged in the natural tendency to imagine the counterfactual to the
more recent event. We resolved this concern in Experiment 5 by modifying the instructions.
Another interesting result was that the interaction between recency and structure was largely
maintained in the late-counterfactual-manipulation conditions rather than strengthened as we predicted.
The extended necessity-sufficiency model predicts that there should be at least a slight increase because
the late-counterfactual-manipulation conditions amplify people’s natural tendency to consider the
counterfactual to the more recent event. We were unsure as to why this trend would occur, so we
attempted to replicate it in Experiment 5.
A third interesting result was that the primacy effect seemed to be larger than the recency effect
and more resistant to the counterfactual manipulation. While the recency effect was eliminated in the
early-counterfactual-manipulation conditions, the primacy effect persisted. One potential explanation for
the persistence of the primacy effect is that it was typically larger than the recency effect; for instance, in
Experiment 2 the recency effect was smaller (d = -.42, CI [-.64, -.20]) than the primacy effect (d = .93, CI
[.70, 1.15]). As such, the larger effect may be more difficult to manipulate, requiring more counterfactual
simulations to change. We, however, have only used two different vignettes to investigate these effects,
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
so we cannot be confident that this trend is consistent. We aimed to see if the larger size of the primacy
effect is consistent using a range of vignettes in Experiment 4.
At this point, reviewers identified an important potential confound in our experiments: normality.
In our vignettes, participants read about agents making shots “right at the buzzer.” Participants may have
thought that it was more statistically unlikely (i.e., statistically abnormal) for people to make a buzzer
shot than it was just to make some shot at the beginning of the game. So, it is possible that when we
manipulated recency, we also varied the perceived statistical likelihood of each event. This potential
confound is important because we know that people are more inclined to simulate counterfactuals to
statistically abnormal or exceptional events (e.g., Byrne, 2016; Kahneman & Miller, 1986). So, if
participants in our experiments saw more recent events as statistically abnormal, then normality and not
recency could have affected their counterfactual considerations, thus their causal judgments. If this were
so, the recency and primacy effects would not result from recency—but possibly from normality. As such,
if this potential confound explained the previous results, it would be possible that the findings from
Experiments 1-3 would be an investigation of the normality effects originally investigated by Icard and
colleagues (2017). Moreover, we know that recency and normality effects on causal judgment interact in
unique ways (Reuter et al., 2014). So, this potential confound could have also affected the accuracy of the
findings resulting from our manipulations.
We investigated this potential confound, and we found some support for it (See Supplemental
Experiment 1). In this supplemental experiment, we ran a version of Experiment 2 where we added a
question about how likely participants thought the early and the late event were to occur. The experiment
replicated the recency and primacy effects for causal judgment. It also showed that people judged the
early event to be more likely to occur than the late event. So, participants perceived the later event as
more statistically abnormal than the early event. As such, it is possible that our previous findings could
have been a result of this difference in perceived normality rather than recency.
We aimed to avoid this potential confound by developing a range of new vignettes that did not
show a difference in perceived statistical normality. If we detected an interaction between recency and
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
causal structure in these new vignettes where the late event is not seen as more statistically abnormal, then
we could be confident that recency and primacy effects arise independently of those produced by
normality. We tested this prediction in Experiment 4. If this prediction was confirmed, we assumed that
we could then use one of these vignettes to get more accurate results from our manipulation task without
the potential interference of statistical normality (Experiment 5).
5 Experiment 4
There were two aims of this experiment. First, we wanted to replicate the interaction between recency and
causal structure and the recency and primacy effects using multiple vignettes where the late event was not
perceived as more statistically abnormal than the early one. To do so, we developed three new vignettes
inspired by related work on causal judgment (Henne et al., 2019). Just as in Experiments 1 and 2, we
manipulated recency and causal structure, and we measured participants’ agreement with a causal
statement. Second, we wanted to investigate whether people thought the late event was more statistically
abnormal than the early one. To do so, after we asked participants the causal question, we asked them to
identify which event they believed was more likely to occur on a continuous measure. If participants
thought that the late event was more statistically abnormal than the early one, then there would be
evidence that recency and primacy effects are explained by perceived differences in statistical normality.
If participants did not perceive the late event as more statistically abnormal than the early one, then there
would be evidence that the recency and primacy effects arise independently of normality effects. We
predicted that we would find the same pattern of causal judgments as we do in Experiments 1 and 2 with
multiple vignettes, and we predicted that the late event would not be perceived as more statistically
abnormal than the early event.
5.1 Preregistration
includes sample size justification, preregistered hypothesis, and planned statistical analyses.
5.2 Participants
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
All participants were United States nationals, were born in and resided in the United States, spoke English
as their first language, and had a 99% approval rating on Prolific. A total of 1112 participants completed
the experiment that was programmed in Qualtrics. 24 participants reported not paying attention, so they
were excluded. We analyzed data from the remaining 1089 participants (M = 33, SD = 11.6, Range =
age age
[18–81], 50% female). After completing the survey, participants were compensated $0.30.
5.3 Materials and procedure
We advertised the experiment in the exact same way as we did in Experiments 1-3. Before participants
entered the experiment, they read a consent form.
After consenting to participate, participants were randomly assigned to 1 of 12 conditions in a 2
(Recency: early, late) × 2 (Structure: joint causation, overdetermination) x 3 (Vignette: coffee, implosion,
Supplementary Materials for all vignettes and dependent measures). On the following page, participants
causal question, participants were presented with the same vignette again on a new page. Below the
vignette, participants were asked “In the story that you just read, which event do you believe was more
likely to happen?” They responded on a -50-50 slider scale where the numeric value was not displayed: -
50 = [Early Event], 0 = Both were equally likely, 50 = [Late Event]. For instance, for the early conditions
in the implosion vignette, participants responded on the following scale: -50 = Tom switching on knob A,
0 = Both were equally likely, 50 = Tom switching on lever D. Participants were then asked for basic
demographic information and to respond to the same attention check used in Experiments 1-3.
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
Joint-Causation, Early: Joint-Causation, Late:
Tom works for a demolition company, and today he is demolishing a Tom works for a demolition company, and today he is demolishing a
building by implosion. building by implosion.
The building will implode automatically at 5:00 PM only if both The building will implode automatically at 5:00 PM only if both
knob A is switched on and lever D is switched on by 4:00 PM. knob A is switched on and lever D is switched on by 4:00 PM.
Tom previously had switched on knob A. So, at 4:00 PM, knob A is Tom previously had switched on lever D. So, at 4:00 PM, lever D is
on, but lever D is off. on, but knob A is off.
At that time, Tom switches on lever D. At that time, Tom switches on knob A.
Because the building would implode only if both knob A is switched Because the building would implode only if both knob A is switched
on and lever D is switched on, the building implodes at 5:00 PM. on and lever D is switched on, the building implodes at 5:00 PM.
Overdetermination, Early: Overdetermination, Late:
Tom works for a demolition company, and today he is demolishing a Tom works for a demolition company, and today he is demolishing a
building by implosion. building by implosion.
The building will implode automatically at 5:00 PM only if either The building will implode automatically at 5:00 PM only if either
knob A is switched on or lever D is switched on by 4:00 PM. knob A is switched on or lever D is switched on by 4:00 PM.
Tom previously had switched on knob A. So, at 4:00 PM, knob A is Tom previously had switched on lever D. So, at 4:00 PM, lever D is
on, but lever D is off. on, but knob A is off.
At that time, Tom switches on lever D. At that time, Tom switches on knob A.
Because the building would implode only if either knob A is Because the building would implode only if either knob A is
switched on or lever D is switched on, the building implodes at 5:00 switched on or lever D is switched on, the building implodes at 5:00
PM. PM.
Causal Question:
To what extent do you agree with the following statement about the passage you just read?
The building imploded at 5:00 PM because Tom switched on knob A.
5.4 Results
For this experiment, we fitted data to linear mixed-effects models, and we included vignette as a random
intercept in the models. We assessed significance for fixed effects via Satterthwaite’s degrees of freedom
method. We reported the descriptive statistics in the Supplementary Materials.
For the causal question, there was an interaction between causal structure and recency (F(1,1082)
= 115.04, p < .001, η2 = .10, CI [.07, .12]). There was no effect of causal structure (F(1,1082) = 2.70, p =
.10, η2 = .00, CI [.00, .01]) or recency (F(1,1082) = 1.10, p = .29, η2 = .00, CI [.00, .01]).
p p
To decompose the interaction effect between structure and recency, we computed tests of simple
main effects. In line with the recency effect, participants in the joint-causation condition agreed that the
recent event (M = 31.19, SD = 26, n = 269) was more causal than the earlier one (M = 6.63, SD = 35.1, n
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
= 268) (b = -24.6, SE = 2.67, t = -9.21, p < .001, CI [-29.8, -19.3], d = -.79, CI [-1, -.58]). In line with
b d
the primacy effect, participants in the overdetermination condition agreed that the earlier event (M =
25.56, SD = 33.95, n = 278) was more causal than the recent one (M = 5.38, SD = 40.82, n = 273) (b =
b d
For the statistical normality question, participants reported that the late event was more likely to
happen than the early event (M = 4.09, SD = 29.18, n = 1088) (t(1087) = 4.63, p < .001, d = .28, CI [.16,
judgments of normality varied as a function of recency and structure (See Supplemental Analysis 1).
There was some evidence that this tendency varied as a function of recency or causal structure, but these
findings were not in the direction whereby statistical normality would explain the recency and primacy
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
intervals. Light grey points represent individual participant responses evenly jittered.
5.5 Discussion
In Experiment 4, we replicated the interaction between recency and causal structure, reflecting the
recency and primacy effects for causal judgment, with three new vignettes. These results confirm the
robustness of these effects. Participants also thought that the late event was more likely to happen than the
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
early event; that is, it is not the case that participants thought that the recent event was more statistically
abnormal than the earlier one. This finding is actually in the opposite direction of what we would expect
if normality explained the recency and primacy effects that we found in previous experiments. Taken
together, it is clear that these effects arise from temporal differences between the events and not from the
perceived statistical normality of the events.
These results also help inform some of the findings from Experiment 1-3 wherein the primacy
effect tended to be much larger than the recency effect (see discussion in Section 4.4). Interestingly, when
we replicated the effects with a wider range of vignettes in this experiment, the effect size of the primacy
effect (d = .53, CI [.33, .73]) was qualitatively smaller than that of the recency effect (d = -.79, CI [-1, -
d d
.58]). Because of this variation, we are not confident in any consistent comparative difference in the effect
sizes between the recency and primacy effects. To get an accurate estimate of the effect sizes, researchers
should conduct a meta-analysis and investigate these potential differences across a range of experiments.
In this experiment, we found that the recency and primacy effects arise independently from
related effects of perceived normality on counterfactual thinking and causal judgments. But we found
some evidence suggesting that perceived statistical normality is a potential confound in Experiments 1-3
(Supplemental Experiment 1). So, while it seemed unlikely that normality completely explained these
results, it was possible that normality explained the results from our previous experiments or that
normality and recency interacted in these experiments. Critically, this possibility undermined some
inferences from the results of Experiment 3. As such, we needed to run an improved version of
Experiment 3 using a vignette that did not show a difference in perceived statistical normality such that
the recent event was more statistically abnormal than the early event. We did this in Experiment 5. For
participants judged the late event as being slightly more statistically normal than the early event (M =
3.65, SD = 27.71, n = 366) (t(365) = 2.52, p = .01, d = .26, CI [.06, .47]), but importantly we had no
evidence that this tendency varied as a function of recency and structure (p = .59).
6 Experiment 5
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
This experiment aimed to replicate the results from Experiment 3 while avoiding the potential confound
of perceived statistical normality. To do so, we used the implosion vignette from Experiment 4. Just as in
previous experiments, we manipulated recency and causal structure, and we measured participants’
agreement with a causal statement. Just as in Experiment 3, we had participants read a single vignette
counterfactual-manipulation conditions), imagine the recent event happening differently (late-
counterfactual-manipulation conditions), or describe the events that occurred in the passage (control)
before indicating their agreement with the causal statement. We also modified our materials such that the
control condition emphasized the temporal order of events (see discussion in Section 4.4). We had the
same predictions as we did in Experiment 3 (see Section 4), and we preregistered our hypotheses and
exploratory analyses.
6.1 Preregistration
includes sample size justification, preregistered hypothesis, and planned statistical analyses.
6.2 Participants
All participants were United States nationals, were born in and resided in the United States, spoke English
as their first language, had a 99% approval rating on Prolific, and had not participated in Experiment 4. A
total of 1332 participants completed the experiment that was programmed in Qualtrics. 35 participants
reported not paying attention, so they were excluded. We excluded an additional 13 participants who
either completely disregarded the task or wrote completely irrelevant material (detailed list:
age
Range = [18-78], 51% female). After completing the survey, participants were compensated $0.35.
age
6.3 Materials and procedure
We advertised the experiment in the exact same way as we did in Experiments 1-4. Before participants
entered the experiment, they read a consent form.
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
After consenting to participate, participants were randomly assigned to 1 of 12 conditions in a 2
(Recency: early, late) × 2 (Structure: joint causation, overdetermination) x 3 (Counterfactual
Manipulation: early-counterfactual manipulation, control, late-counterfactual manipulation) between-
participants design. Each participant read one version of the implosion vignette used in Experiment 4
manipulation task. We either asked them to imagine the early event not occurring at all (early-
counterfactual-manipulation condition), the late event not occurring at all (late-counterfactual-
following page, participants answered the same causal questions on the same scale as in Experiment 4
information and to respond to the same attention check used in Experiments 1-4.
(A) Now we would like you to imagine that (B) Now we would like you to consider what (C) Now we would like you to imagine that
Tom had not switched on knob A at all. happened in the passage you just read. Tom had not switched on lever D at all.
Please describe what you imagine. Please describe what actually happened in Please describe what you imagine.
the passage and the order in which the events
(Please write at least two or three sentences.) occurred. (Please write at least two or three sentences.)
(Please write at least two or three sentences.)
early-counterfactual-manipulation condition in the early conditions and for the late-counterfactual-
manipulation condition in the late conditions. (B) Instructions for the control conditions. (C) Instructions
for the early-counterfactual-manipulation condition in the late conditions and for the late-counterfactual-
manipulation condition in the early conditions.
6.4 Results
For the causal question, there was a three-way interaction between causal structure, recency, and
counterfactual manipulation (F(7,1272) = 25.33, p < .001, η2 = .12, CI [.09, .15]). There was also a main
effect of causal structure (F(1,1272) = 4.18, p = .04, η2 = .00, CI [.00, .01]), recency (F(1,1272) = 6.16, p
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
= .01, η2 = .00, CI [.00, .01]), and counterfactual manipulation (F(2,1272) = 3.70, p = .02, η2 = .01, CI
p p
[.00, .01]). Critically, the interaction between recency and structure was weaker in the early-
counterfactual-manipulation conditions than in the control conditions (b = 31.82, SE = 9.62, t = 3.30, p <
.001, CI [12.95, 50.69]), and the interaction between recency and structure was stronger in the late-
counterfactual-manipulation conditions than in the control conditions (b = -31.61, SE = 9.55, t = -3.30, p
< .001, CI [-50.37, -12.86]).
To decompose the three-way interaction effect between structure, recency, and counterfactual
manipulation, we computed separate tests of the interaction effects and then the simple main effects for
each counterfactual-manipulation condition. First, we investigated the interaction of structure and recency
in the control conditions. In the control conditions, there was an interaction between causal structure and
recency (F(1,405) = 38.44, p < .001, η2 = .09, CI [.05, .13]). There was also a main effect of causal
structure (F(1,405) = 4.63, p = .03, η2 = .01, CI [.00, .03]), but there was not a main effect of recency
(F(1,405) = .13, p = .71, η2 = .00, CI [.00, .01]). We further decomposed this interaction by investigating
the simple main effects for each causal structure. In line with the recency effect, participants in the joint-
causation conditions agreed that the recent event (M = 28.15, SD = 29.53, n = 107) was more causal than
the earlier one (M = 5.73, SD = 36.31, n = 100) (t(205) = -4.88, p < .001, d = -.68, CI [-.96, -.39]). In line
with the primacy effect, participants in the overdetermination conditions agreed that the earlier event (M
= 20.32, SD = 37.31, n = 99) was more causal than the recent one (M = -.20, SD = 36.64, n = 103) (t(200)
Next, we investigated the interaction effect of structure and recency in the early-counterfactual-
manipulation conditions. In the early-counterfactual-manipulation conditions, there was no interaction
between causal structure and recency (F(1,428) = 2.71, p = .10, η2 = .01, CI [.00, .02]). There was also
no main effect of causal structure (F(1,428) = .21, p = .64, η2 = .00, CI [.00, .01]) or recency (F(1,428) =
3.41, p = .06, η2 = .01, CI [.00, .03]). So, we found no evidence that causal judgments varied as a
function of recency and causal structure in the early-counterfactual-manipulation conditions, and we were
not justified in investigating the simple main effects.
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
Next, we investigated the interaction of structure and recency in the late-counterfactual-
manipulation conditions. In the late-counterfactual-manipulation conditions, there was an interaction
between causal structure and recency (F(1,439) = 129.93, p < .001, η2 = .23, CI [.17, .28]). There was no
main effect of causal structure (F(1,439) = 3.49, p = .06, η2 = .01, CI [.00, .03]), but there was a main
effect of recency (F(1,439) = 7.32, p = .007, η2 = .02, CI [.00, .04]). We further decomposed this
interaction by investigating the simple main effects for each causal structure. In the joint-causation
conditions, participants agreed that the recent event (M = 31.12, SD = 30.81, n = 113) was more causal
than the earlier one (M = 2.66, SD = 37.65, n = 108) (t(219) = -6.16, p < .001, d = -.82, CI [-1.11, -.55]).
There was no evidence that the recency effect was stronger in the late-counterfactual-manipulation
conditions than in the control conditions (b = 6.03, SE = 6.74, t = .89, p = .37). In the overdetermination
conditions, participants agreed that the earlier event (M = 34.26, SD = 27.91, n = 111) was more causal
than the recent event (M = -11.85, SD = 40.03, n = 111) (t(220) = 9.95, p < .001, d = 1.34, CI [1.06,
1.61]). The primacy effect was stronger in the late-counterfactual-manipulation conditions than in the
control conditions (b = -25.59, SE = 6.78, t = -3.77, p < .001).
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
intervals. Light grey points represent individual participant responses evenly jittered.
6.5 Discussion
The results of Experiment 5 confirmed the predictions of the extended necessity-sufficiency model. There
was a three-way interaction between recency, structure, and counterfactual manipulation. Critically, the
interaction between recency and structure was weaker in the early-counterfactual-manipulation conditions
and stronger in the late-counterfactual-manipulation conditions relative to the control conditions. In the
control conditions, there was an interaction between recency and structure, replicating the recency and
primacy effects. When we encouraged people to imagine the counterfactual to the early event, we found
no evidence of an interaction between recency and structure. Moreover, when we encouraged people to
imagine the counterfactual to the recent event, we saw a stronger interaction between recency and
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
structure. Because of these results and the results of Experiment 4, we can be confident that these patterns
of judgments did not result from differences in perceived statistical normality but rather solely from the
effect of temporal differences on counterfactual thinking and the relationship between counterfactual
thinking and causal judgments. These results yield strong support for extending the necessity-sufficiency
model to recency.
As we mentioned in Experiment 3 (section 4.4), the primacy effect again seemed to be more
sufficiency model, we expected that when we encouraged people to imagine the counterfactual to the
earlier event, we would see a weaker interaction between recency and structure or no interaction. In
Experiment 3, we found a weaker interaction but only a qualitatively weaker primacy effect. In
Experiment 5, however, finding no interaction, we were not justified in investigating the primacy effect
by looking at the simple main effects. To investigate the persistence of the primacy effect in the early-
counterfactual-manipulation conditions, we performed unplanned post-hoc pairwise comparisons (Tukey
HSD corrected) that were not preregistered. There was no evidence of a primacy effect in the early-
counterfactual-manipulation conditions (t(1272) = 2.47, p = .35, d = 34, CI [.07, 61]). As such, we have
no evidence that the primacy effect is more persistent than the recency effect. We suspect that the trend in
line with a primacy effect is due to the fact that the counterfactual manipulation affects only the extent to
which people see the events as sufficient in overdetermination conditions, while it affects the extent to
which people see the events as both necessary and jointly sufficient in joint-causation conditions.
7 General Discussion
In Experiments 1-5, we found an interaction between recency and causal structure, reflecting the recency
effect in joint-causation structures and the primacy effect in overdetermination structures. In Experiment
2, we found that people tend to consider counterfactual alternatives for more recent events regardless of
causal structure. In Experiment 3 and 5, we found that manipulating which counterfactual people consider
(early or late) affected their causal judgments in the ways predicted by the extended necessity-sufficiency
model. Specifically, encouraging people to consider the counterfactual to the early event weakened the
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
interaction between recency and structure, while encouraging people to consider the counterfactual to the
late event strengthened the interaction between recency and structure. In sum, we found strong support for
the extended necessity-sufficiency model of causal judgment.
Our results are consistent with previous work on causal judgments. Earlier work showed that
people tend to judge the more recent event as causal, relative to earlier events, in joint-causal structures
(Lagnado & Channon, 2008; Reuter et al., 2014; Spellman, 1997). Other work showed that people tend to
judge the earlier event as causal, relative to recent events, in overdetermination structures (Chang, 2009;
Lombrozo, 2010; Walsh & Sloman, 2011). Not only did we conceptually replicate both of these effects,
but we have also unified these distinct lines of inquiry. We used a continuous measure in order to
investigate the strength of the causal judgments (Icard et al., 2017), and we used new scenarios in order to
directly investigate the interaction between causal structure and temporal location. Our findings are robust
(Experiment 4), and we provide a unified explanation for them with the strong support of our
experimental manipulations (Experiments 3 and 5).
At the beginning of this article, we suggested that the extension of the necessity-sufficiency
model, a computation model of causal strength, to recency effects on causal judgment could explain both
of these effects. At this point, it might be helpful to some readers to consider some of the details of the
original model. Uniquely, the necessity-sufficiency model weights the extent to which the causal factor is
necessary for the outcome (necessity strength) by the probability of considering the counterfactual and the
extent to which it is sufficient for the outcome (sufficiency strength) by the probability of considering
what actually happened (for details, see Icard et al., 2017). As such, the more that people are inclined to
imagine a counterfactual to the potential cause, the greater the weight of the necessity strength, and the
more that people are inclined to think of the potential cause occurring just as it did, the greater the weight
of the sufficiency strength. On this model, causal strength, or the degree to which a factor is regarded as
the cause of an outcome, is equal to the weighted sum of the necessity strength and the sufficiency
strength of the potential causal factor. This model’s assumptions allow it to predict different patterns of
causal judgments for different causal structures. In joint-causation structures, it predicts that people will
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
be more inclined to judge an event as causal when they are more inclined to simulate the counterfactual
alternative to it because of an increase in the weighting of the necessity strength. In overdetermination
cases, however, people will be less inclined to judge an event as causal when they are more inclined to
simulate the counterfactual alternative to it because of a decrease in the weighting of the sufficiency
strength.
Our proposed extension of this model adds a novel, critical assumption: people are more inclined
to simulate counterfactuals to more recent events. This extension allows us to explain different patterns of
causal judgments about more recent or earlier events in different causal structures. In joint-causation
structures, people are more inclined to judge the recent event as causal (the recency effect), because they
simulate the counterfactual alternative to it and these simulations highlight that the recent event made a
difference to the outcome (i.e., there is an increase in the weighting of the necessity strength). In
overdetermination cases, people are less inclined to judge the recent event as causal (the primacy effect),
because they simulate the counterfactual alternative to it and these simulations highlight that the recent
event did not make a difference to the outcome (i.e., there is an decrease in the weighting of the
sufficiency strength). In our experiments, we confirm that people tend to imagine the counterfactual to the
recent event regardless of causal structure (Experiment 2), and our manipulation experiments (Experiment
3 and 5) lend strong support for this extension of the model.
At this point, some readers may wonder if some alternative models of causal judgment explain
the recency and primacy effects and the result of our studies. Spellman’s crediting-causality model
(CCM) is one prominent account that might do just that (Spellman, 1997). This model holds that the
causal strength of some event varies with the extent to which that event happening changes the subjective
probability of the outcome happening. To see how this model predicts the recency and primacy effects,
consider our original example. In overdetermination cases, Claire making her shot at the beginning of the
game changes the probability of winning the bet from some undefined degree of certainty to absolute
certainty. So, people judge the early event as the cause of the outcome because it greatly increases the
subjective probability of the outcome occurring. The CCM, thus, correctly predicts a primacy effect. In
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
the joint-causation conditions, the CCM explanation is slightly different. Claire makes her shot at the
beginning of the game, and people have a moderate degree of belief that Claire and Louie will win the bet
if Louie makes the shot at some point. Late in the game then, people’s belief that Claire and Louie will
win the bet might be very low. As a result, when Louie makes the buzzer shot, participants’ belief
changes dramatically from low to absolute certainty. As such, the later event produces a greater change in
the subjective probability of the outcome occurring than the earlier event. Thus, the CCM correctly
predicts a recency effect.
While the CCM predicts the recency and primacy effect, our results in Experiment 5 are
inconsistent with it. When we asked participants in Experiment 5 to imagine the counterfactual to the
earlier event, we saw an elimination of the interaction between recency and structure. When we had
participants imagine the more recent event happening differently, we saw the opposite effect: it
strengthened the interaction. These results are predicted by the necessity-sufficiency model but not by the
CCM. The CCM predicts that the recency and primacy effects are due to changes in the subjective degree
in belief that the outcome will happen, but our counterfactual manipulations aimed to affect participants’
counterfactual imaginings and not to change their degree of belief that the outcome will happen. As such,
our findings are consistent with work showing that the CCM fails to explain the effects of context
manipulations that make certain counterfactuals salient without changing the subjective probability of the
outcome (Byrne et al., 2000). There may be charitable ways to revise the CCM such that it explains our
results, but we think that these revisions would be ultimately unsuccessful (see Supplemental Discussion).
Rather, these results are promising for the necessity-sufficiency model of causal judgment (Icard
et al., 2017). This model was intended to explain many effects produced by the abnormal-normal
distinction’s impact on causal judgment, and it has made some novel predictions that are confirmed in
recent work (Gerstenberg & Icard, 2020; Icard et al., 2017; Kirfel & Lagnado, 2018; Morris et al., 2019).
Because the model assumes that people are more likely to simulate some counterfactuals than others, its
general approach has been extended to explain other distinctions that affect counterfactual thinking in this
way. As we mentioned in the introduction, it has been extended to explain the effect of action-inaction
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
differences on causal judgment (Henne et al, 2019). Our experiments suggest that the model can also
explain these recency effects on causal judgment—although it may also explain other domains of
counterfactual thinking like control (see Byrne, 2016).
Critically, our new extension of the necessity-sufficiency model also offers a novel solution to a
puzzle that counterfactual theories and models of causation have been wrestling with for decades: it offers
a counterfactual explanation for judgments of late preemption (i.e., the primacy effect). Late preemption
judgments are tricky for counterfactual theories because people judge that the earlier event caused the
outcome despite the fact that the outcome still would have happened in imagined counterfactuals where
the earlier event had not. As such, a counterfactual account seems insufficient, and some identify this
tension as detrimental. Notably, this difficulty for counterfactual accounts to explain the primacy effect
has led theorists to emend counterfactual theories (Paul, 1998a; Lewis, 2000) and to modify structural
equation frameworks of causation (Halpern & Pearl, 2005; Hitchcock, 2001). This is also a motivation for
adopting some kind of causal pluralism where there is a generative, or productive, concept of causation in
addition to the counterfactual one (Hall, 2004; Lombrozo, 2010). On these views, what accounts for
judgments of late preemption is the perception of force interacting between the cause and the effect—the
early event happening physically generates the outcome—rather than anything about the consideration of
counterfactuals. Our new extension of the necessity-sufficiency model, however, suggests that these kinds
of changes are not necessary, for it provides a novel counterfactual explanation for judgments of late
preemption. As such, counterfactual theorists and modelers do not have to look to generative theories of
causal judgment and reasoning or to pluralism to account for these late-preemption judgments; there is
now a counterfactual explanation that is consistent across many domains of counterfactual thinking.
8 Conclusion
In this paper, we found ample support for the recency and primacy effect for causal judgement. Using a
manipulation paradigm, we also found strong support for the extended necessity-sufficiency model of
causal strength, a computational counterfactual model of causal judgment. These findings should inform
work on causal judgment and alternative models for causal judgment (e.g., Khemlani et al., 2014;
RECENCY EFFECTS IN CAUSAL JUDGMENT
Quillien, 2020), and they should be extended to work on confidence in causal judgment (O’Neill et al.,
2021), to moral judgment (Gerstenberg & Lagnado, 2012), and to experimental jurisprudence (Knobe &
Shapiro, 2020).