The development of information technology from time to time makes changes and
shifts the role of human resources into machines. Shifting information that is usually
physically obtained becomes digital. Technological developments enhance the revolution. The
4.0 industrial revolution was characterized by the use of the internet, eliminating all existing
physical boundaries. The 4.0 industrial revolution provides opportunities and benefits in
various fields including business, economics, government as well as social and community.
The most noticeable benefit is that everything becomes more efficient both in terms of time
and cost. However, the big challenge that must be faced is the increasingly complex security
issues, increasingly unnecessary HR problems, wider social inequalities, and other issues that
have a negative impact.
Ministry of Law and Human Rights R.I. (abbreviated as Kemenkumham R.I.) is a
ministry within the Indonesian Government in charge of legal and human rights affairs.
Kemenkumham is under and responsible to the President of the Republic of Indonesia.
Kemenkumham Regional Office (Kanwil) is a vertical agency of Kemenkumham domiciled in
each province, which is under and responsible to the Minister of Law and Human Rights.
Regional Offices consist of several divisions which oversee a number of Technical
Implementation Units (UPT), including the Immigration Office, Correctional Institutions
(Lapas), Open Correctional Institutions, Narcotics Prisons, Detention Centers (Rutan), Houses
for Storage of State Confiscated Items (Rupbasan), Correctional Center (Bapas), Heritage Hall
(BHP), and Immigration Detention House (Rudenim).
The existence of the 4.0 Industrial Revolution is a big challenge for the Ministry of Law
and Human Rights. The toughest challenge in the UPT Lapas and Rutan is responsible for
prisoners. It is a challenge for the Ministry of Law and Human Rights to be able to change the
behavior of prisoners living in correctional institutions/detention in the period according to
their criminal law. They will return to society with better personal and behavioral changes.
The pattern of coaching in prisons must be adapted to changes in society in this era of
revolution. The challenge of the Ministry of Law and Human Rights to create a new form of
revolution on Prison management is one of them is Revitalization of Correctional
Management. The correctional implementation itself aims to restore the relationship of the
prisoners, whether in relation to his God, his personality, his fellow human beings, as well as
his environment, and to make the prisoners productive and expected to be a human being
who is empowered.
Another problem in the current penal system is overcrowding. Overcrowding is a
problem in almost all UPT Prisons where the number of prisoners in Prisons/Detention
Centers (Lapas/Rutan) has exceeded its capacity. This overcrowding creates new problems,
such as the imbalance in the number of correctional officers, the lack of budgets and facilities
due to concentrated funds to combat prisoners' eating, which in turn results in the service
and security of prisoners were not optimal. The failure of these things eventually led to the
development received by each prisoners to be uneven resulting in the unpreparedness of
some prisoners to deal with life outside the prison, especially with the existence of the 4.0
Industrial Revolution that requires individuals to become skilled human resources,
innovation, and creativity, and the individual must also be able to utilize the skills he has in
order to produce a product that can then be marketed so that building an entrepreneurial
spirit becomes important to survive in life outside of prison.
Correctional systems with a large number of prisoners that have been placed
previously referring to the capacity of prisons/detentions will be transferred to the
revitalization system for the administration of prisons requiring special time. Starting from
doing personality prisoners mapping, infrastructure, and prison/detention design then
grouping individuals according to their personalities. Furthermore, prisoners will be placed
according to his personality. To help facilitate these activities, an appropriate, fast and
accurate method is needed. In this study, prisoner’s personality grouping will be conducted
as a recommendation for prisoner’s placement.
The industrial revolution is a big and radical change in the way humans produce
goods. The industrial revolution began with the Industrial Revolution 1.0 which was marked
by the growth of mechanization and energy based on steam and water. During the Industrial
Revolution 2.0, electrical energy and motorbikes emerged. Furthermore, in Revolution 3.0 was
marked by the growth of the electronics-based industry, information technology, and
automation. Then, came the 4.0 Industrial Revolution which was marked by the development
of the Internet of/for Things (Schwab, 2017). Schwab (in his book The Fourth Industrial
Revolution, 2017), states that the Industrial Revolution 4.0, fundamentally, changed the way
of life, working and relating to each other
This industrial revolution, in fact, has an impact on all fields, such as the
manufacturing industry, production value chains, socio-economic factors, up to the education
and skills of workers. Indonesia itself, basically, is still not ready for Human Resources (HR)
and its distribution. In this 4.0 Industrial Revolution, there are at least 3 things that need to
be considered, namely the quality of human resources to fit the needs of the labor market
based on digital technology; the quantity of qualified, competent and in accordance with
industry needs; and uneven distribution of HR (Haryono, 2018).
Personality can give a picture of a person's tendency to behave and think, which
behavior and thoughts of a person will bring up a pattern of action, as explained by Pervin,
Cervone, and John (in Widhiastuti, 2014) that personality affects thoughts, feelings, and
behavior someone's behavior. Personality can be seen through several models, one of which
is through the Big Five Personality Model, which consists of 5 personality dimensions
abbreviated as OCEAN, (John, 1990).
OCEAN consists of Openness to Experience (O) which includes curiosity, broad
interest, creativity, originality and imaginative; Conscientiousness (C) which involves
regularity, accuracy, persistence, and the nature of discipline in completing a task;
Extraversion (E) which shows the ability to adjust to the environment, activeness in
interaction, optimism and concern for others; Agreeableness (A) which describes tenderness,
someone's trust with others, sympathy and empathy, and the ability to cooperate/cooperate;
and Neuroticism (N) which includes negative feelings, such as anxiety, nervousness, emotions,
feelings of inadequacy and impulsivity.
In Law Number 12 of 1995 concerning Penitentiary, it is explained that the correctional
system is an order of direction and boundaries and a way of fostering prisoners based on
Pancasila that is carried out in an integrated manner between the Trustees, who are fostered,
and the community to improve the quality of Prisoners in order to be aware of mistakes,
improve themselves, and not repeat criminal acts so that they can be accepted back by the
community, can actively play a role in development, and be able to live naturally as a good
and responsible citizen. Therefore, the system of correctional administration is made in such
a way as an effort to restore the prisoner to its nature in human relations with God, human
beings with their personalities, and humans with their environment.
To support and direct, the Government, in this case, the Ministry of Law and Human
Rights R.I. has issued Regulation of the Minister of Law and Human Rights of the Republic of
Indonesia Number 35 Year 2018 concerning Revitalization of Penitentiary Management which
explains that Revitalization of Correctional Operations is an effort to optimize the
implementation of correctional facilities as a form of treatment of Prisoners, Prisoners and
Clients, and protection of ownership rights to evidence. With this, Revitalization of
Penitentiary Management includes the formation of Prisoners (Regulation of the Minister of
Law and Human Rights R.I. Number 35 of 2018). Through this revitalization, prisoners is
obliged to conduct an assessment as a recommendation in placing prisoners into Super
Maximum Security, Maximum Security, Medium Security, and Minimum Security Prisons. The
following is a comparison matrix between each prison.
1. Goal Aware of Discipline Trained Integrated
2. Indicator of • Ward off bad • Establish self- • Providing • Build healthy
Success influences that discipline education and interactions
are attached to • Build training with the
personality or compliance • Ensure community
behavior with rules continuity of • Employ
• Changing the training with according to
concept of self market share competence
about • Providing • Provide
personality or learning additional
behavior opportunities business value
in the from
production / production
apprenticeship
area
3. Program • Disengagement • System • Vocational • Integration
• There is no Concentration Training / Life • There is
remission • There is Skill Training remission
• There is no remission • There is • There are CMK,
reintegration • There is no remission PB, CB, CMB
program reintegration • There is • Visit services
• Visit services program assimilation or can be face to
using • Visit Service management face and
Multimedia/ uses an and CMK physical
Video intercom and • Visit services contact in a
Conference separator can be face to building and
(not in one (located in one face and given a family
building) building but no physical visit permit
physical contact in a
contact) building with
supervision
4. Accessibility • Individual • Individual • Individual • Free individual
movements do movements are movements are movements
not exist limited limited • Group
• Individual • Group • Group supervision
supervision supervision supervision • Communicatio
• Communicatio • Communicatio • Communicatio n with officers
n only with n with officers n with officers freely
officers and on freely freely • Communicatio
a limited basis • Communicatio • Communicatio n with
n with n with
prisoners is prisoners prisoners
limited freely freely
• Limited • Communicate
communication with family
with family freely
5. Placement Prisoners based on • Prisoners from Prisoners from • Prisoners from
the results of the the Super Maximum Security Medium
assessment are Maximum or Prisoners based Security Prison
categorized as Security Prison on the results of the based on the
having a very low or convicted assessment have a results of the
level of based on the medium level of assessment
awareness/high risk results of the awareness have a high
assessment level of
have a low level awareness
of awareness
Source : Direktorat Jenderal Pemasyarakatan, 2018
By looking at the indicators above, then at each level of prison there is guidance as follows:
a. Development of religious awareness Direktorat Jenderal
b. Fostering awareness of nation and state Pemasyarakatan
c. Legal awareness development
d. Psychology counseling
a. Development of religious awareness Kantor Wilayah Kementerian
b. Fostering awareness of nation and state Hukum dan HAM R.I.
c. Legal awareness development
d. Fostering intellectual abilities
e. Psychology counseling
f. Rehabilitation
a. Beginner level education and skills Kantor Wilayah Kementerian
training Hukum dan HAM R.I.
b. Advanced level of education and skills
training
c. Advanced level of education and skills
training
Industrial scale production of goods or Kantor Wilayah Kementerian
services Hukum dan HAM R.I.
Source : Permenkumham R.I. Nomor 35 Tahun 2018
Following are the provisions of personality as recommendations for placement of
prisoners by referring to the Regulation of the Minister of Law and Human Rights R.I. Number
35 of 2018.
a. Ever/have a tendency to escape/plan to escape from prison, • (N) high
both with/without the help of others/networks, and • (E) low
endanger other people or not
b. Ever/have a tendency to commit violence, both individually (O) low
and in groups
• (A) low
c. Still active as a member of extremist/religious based
• (C)
fundamentalist groups/networks and/or as members of
high
separatist groups/networks
d. Never/still hold important positions in extremist
groups/networks based on religion and/or as members of
separatist groups/networks
e. Have ever received military training, such as a former TNI or
a former police officer, and/or paramilitary training
f. Have been involved in and/or held important positions in
demonstrations
g. Have been processed legally more than 3 times due to traffic
violations that are not accidental
h. Never been dismissed from work because of disciplinary
violations
i. Having been diagnosed as having a tendency to very high
aggressiveness/anti-social personality/anti-authority
personality/having a temperament personality
j. Having been diagnosed by a doctor having a dangerous
infectious disease that cannot/is difficult to cure
k. Having been diagnosed by a psychologist/psychiatrist has a
severe psychological disorder
l. Having been diagnosed by a psychologist/psychiatrist has
below average intelligence
m. Has great political power/influence
Lapas a. There is a tendency to escape/plan to escape from the • (N)
prison, both with/without the help of others/networks, and medium
endangering others • (E) low
b. There is a tendency to commit violence, both individually and
in groups (O) low
c. Still active as a member of extremist/religious based
• (A) low
fundamentalist groups/networks and/or as members of
• (C)
separatist groups/networks
medium
d. Have ever received military training, such as a former TNI or
a former police officer, and/or paramilitary training
e. Ever been involved in demonstrations
f. Have been processed legally more than 3 times due to traffic
violations that are not accidental
g. Never been dismissed from work because of disciplinary
violations
h. Ever been diagnosed as having a tendency to high
aggressiveness/anti-social personality/anti-authority
personality
i. Having been diagnosed by a doctor having a dangerous
infectious disease that cannot/is difficult/can be cured
j. Having been diagnosed by a psychologist/psychiatrist has
moderate-level psychological disorders
k. Having been diagnosed by a psychologist/psychiatrist has
below average intelligence
a. There is no tendency to escape from prison • (N) low
b. There is no tendency to commit violence, either individually • (E) low
or in groups
c. Never been involved as a member of extremist/religious- (O) medium
based fundamentalist groups/networks and/or as members
• (A)
of separatist groups/networks
medium
d. Psychologically, the level of aggressiveness is low and there
• (C)
is no tendency for an anti-social/anti-authority personality
low
e. It has been diagnosed by a doctor that there is no contagious
disease
f. Have been diagnosed by a psychologist/psychiatrist having a
mild psychological disorder or not having a psychological
disorder
g. Ready to receive training, both physically and mentally
prepared
a. There is no desire to escape from the prison • (N)
b. There is no tendency/does not like violent behavior medium
c. Never been involved as a member of extremist/religious- • (E)
based fundamentalist groups/networks and/or as members medium
of separatist groups/networks
d. Psychologically, the level of aggressiveness is low and has the (O) high
ability to interact socially well
• (A) high
e. It has been diagnosed by a doctor that there is no contagious
• (C)
disease
high
f. Having been diagnosed by a psychologist/psychiatrist does
not have a psychological disorder
g. Have the skills to produce a marketable product
h. Can create innovations, both product innovations produced,
production processes, and how to market products
Source: Kanwil Kemenkumham Banten, 2019
This study uses primary data derived from prisoner’s personality data records from
Serang Prison and Rangkas Prison. The number of prisoners that became the object of the
study was 137 in total. The independent variables used in this study are:
1. Openness to Experience
2. Conscientiousness
3. Extraversion
4. Agreeableness
5. Neuroticism
This study will classify prisoners based on their personality by using cluster analysis
in SPSS. Follow existing data, for the clustering process using the Non-Hierarchical or K-Means
Cluster method. The K-Means method processes all objects at once. This process starts with
determining the number of clusters first. The desired number of clusters is in accordance
with the responsibilities of the Regional Office of the Ministry of Law and Human Rights,
namely as many as 3 clusters namely the Maximum Security Prison, Medium Security Prison
and Minimum Security Prison.
After the analysis, continued with the interpretation of each cluster to see the
difference in variables in the cluster formed and the number of members in each cluster.
Respondents in this study were prisoners in the correctional institutions/detention of
Banten Regional Office of the Ministry of Law and Human Rights with a total of 137 people.
Descriptive statistics are used to find out how the general description of the spread of
prisoners in each. Descriptive statistics of Inamate’s personality can be seen in the following
Std.
N Minimum Maximum Mean Deviation
Openness 137 5 16 11.23 1.819
Concientiousness 137 6 15 12.09 1.873
Extraversion 137 8 15 10.73 1.512
Agreeableness 137 5 16 11.31 1.897
Neuroticism 137 6 15 10.53 1.839
Valid N (listwise) 137
Furthermore, it can be done to adjust personality scores by using a data concentration
measure that divides the data into four equal parts, namely 1/4 N each or called Quartile (Q).
The quartile is divided into three, namely quartile 1 (Q1), quartile 2 (Q2), and quartile 3 (Q3).
These three quartiles divide all distributions from data frequencies which will be counted into
four equal parts and 1/4 N respectively. The results are as follows:
Personality Score Description
< 11 Low
11 Medium
> 11 High
The next step is cluster analysis using the Non-Hierarchical Cluster or K-Means Cluster
method with the SPSS version 23. Aids program From the clustering process, there are 3
clusters or groups of respondents, each of which has different characteristics from one
another. The average respondent's personality score is as follows:
11 10 12
9 13 13
10 10 11
11 10 13
9 11 11
Cluster 1 contains prisoners which has the following personalities:
11 High
9 Low
10 Low
11 Medium
9 Low
Prisoners in Cluster 1 shows that the average of prisoners is quite open to new insights, but
still prefers things that are conventional and simple. In addition, this includes individuals who
often work aimlessly, tend to give up easily, and are lazy. Prisoners in this cluster is also
rather closed, not enjoying social interaction so much, it is rather difficult to empathize, but
it is not difficult to be cooperative if asked. This cluster also includes a person who is calm,
relaxed, and emotionally strong. Looking at the profile, it is predictable that the tendency of
the prisoners in Cluster 1 to be placed in the Medium Security Prison.
In the Medium Security Prison, prisoners will receive training in the form of training to
improve/increase its skills so that prisoners could create a product that could be marketed.
Guidance is in accordance with the personality of the prisoners in this cluster where guidance
is needed which forces the prisoners to work with certain goals and strengthens its ability to
socialize because it is faced with other people who also get the same training. In addition,
prisoners in this cluster is not difficult to be cooperative and also has calm/not emotional
emotions so there will be no obstacles in giving guidance.
Cluster 2 contains prisoners which has the following personalities:
10 Low
13 High
10 Low
10 Low
11 Medium
Prisoners in Cluster 2 shows that the average has a tendency to be uncooperative, cynical,
rude, even manipulative, cruel, and easily suspicious of others. Coupled with the low level of
extraversion, this cluster include a quiet type, less friendly, and prefers to be alone as a
prisoners. Prisoners in this cluster also has a tendency towards impulsivity and easily
provoked emotions, even if there is nothing to disturb, prisoners tends to look calm. This
shows the possibility of prisoners to committing acts of violence, besides that it is added to
the nature of hardworking, neat, and careful, it is possible, the prisoners can arrange a plan
to escape carefully so that it is not known by others, Therefore, looking at the personality
profile, the prisoners in Cluster 2 should be placed in the Maximum Security Prison.
Cluster 3 contains prisoners which has the following personalities:
12 High
13 High
11 Medium
13 High
11 Medium
Prisoners in Cluster 3 shows that on average prisoners has a broad, creative interest and great
curiosity. Besides that, it is supported by hard-working, organized, neat, and careful personnel
in work, as well as being cooperative, empathetic, and obedient. Although prisoners in this
cluster has an average tendency to be anxious and nervous, as long as there is no trigger,
prisoners with a quiet person. prisoners in this cluster also enjoys socializing with other
people, but at certain times it also takes time for themselves. Looking at the personality
profile, prisoners in this cluster is appropriate if placed in the Minimum Security Prison. His
creative personality, hard worker, cooperative, and thoroughness in his work show his ability
to be productive individuals, especially if accompanied by skills that suit his interests and
talents.
From the results of the cluster analysis, it can be seen that prisoners will be placed, namely:
Based on the results of the analysis discussed, it was found that out of 137 prisoners
that had previously been placed in Rangkasbitung and Serang Prison, they would be placed
according to their personalities. prisoners with a high Openness to Experience personality,
high Concientiousness, Moderate Extraversion, High Agility and Neuroticism will be placed in
the Minimum Security Lapas. In this study 58 people will be placed in the Minimum Security
Prison.
Prisoners with moderate Openness to Experience personality, high Concientiousness,
low Extraversion, Agreeableness and Low Neuroticism will be placed in Medium Security
Prison. In this study 27 people will be placed in the Medium Security Prison.
Prisoners with a low Openness to Experience personality, high Concerniousness,
Moderate Extraversion, Agreeableness and Low Neuroticism will be placed in the Maximum
Security Prison. In this study 52 people will be placed in the Maximum Security Prison.
This research is a preliminary study using the K-Means method which is processed
using SPSS. When compared with the manual calculations made by Kemenkumham employees
there is no significant difference from the results. But manual calculations using the Ms-Excel
program help take a long time and are done in many stages.
The number of prisoners in Banten for all UPTs is approximately 11,000 people. For
existing prisons, design and infrastructure have been prepared in accordance to Regulation
of Ministry of Law and Human Rights Number 11 of 2017 concerning Grand Design Handling
Overcrowded in State Detention Houses and Correctional Institutions that have adopted
technology in the era of 4.0.
Furthermore, with placements tailored to the personality of the prisoners, it is
expected that prisoners will get guidance that is in accordance with the conditions and
situation. The placement of the prisoners is also expected to reduce the overcrowding that
occurs in almost all Correctional Technical Implementation Units, both in the Banten Regional
Office of the Ministry of Law and Human Rights and in all other Regional Offices of the
Ministry of Law and Human Rights of the Province. With the reduction in overcrowding,
prisoners had also received coaching evenly so that it can be an individual who is ready to
face life outside of correctional institutions / detention and contribute as a productive HR in
the era of the Industrial Revolution 4.0.
The K-Means Clustering method can be used as a prisoners grouping method based
on its personality at other Technical Implementation Units in the Banten Regional Office of
the Ministry of Law and Human Rights and can be further developed through various
measurement tools considering that the K-Means Clustering method is more practical and
faster.
Donnelly, G., Iyer, R., & Howell, R. T. (2012). The Big Five personality traits, material values,
and financial well-being of self-described money managers. Journal of Economic
Psychology, 33(6), 1129–1142.
Haryono, Siswoyo. (2018). Re-Orientasi Pengembangan SDM pada Revolusi Industri 4.0.
Universitas Muhammadiyah Yogyakarta. Yogyakarta.
John, O. P. (1990). “The Big Five Factor Taxonomy: Dimension of Personality in the Natural
Language & in Questionaires”. In L. Pervin (Ed.) Handbook of Personality:
. (pp. 66-100). Guilford Press. New York.
Keputusan Direktur Jenderal Pemasyarakatan Kementerian Hukum dan Hak Asasi Manusia
Republik Indonesia Nomor : PAS-15.PR.01.01 Tahun 2019 tentang Penetapan Lembaga
Pemasyarakatan dan
Lippa, R. A. (2006). Finger lengths, 2D:4D ratios, and their relation to gender-related
personality traits and the Big Five. Biological Psychology, 71(1), 116–121.
Milfont, T. L., & Sibley, C. G. (2012). The big five personality traits and environmental
engagement: Associations at the individual and societal level. Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 32(2), 187–195.
Oltedal, S., & Rundmo, T. (2007). Using cluster analysis to test the cultural theory of risk
perception. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 10(3), 254–
Peraturan Menteri Hukum dan Hak Asasi Manusia Republik Indonesia Nomor 35 Tahun 2018
tentang Revitalisasi Penyelenggaraan Pemasyarakatan.
Peraturan Menteri Hukum dan Hak Asasi Manusia Republik Indonesia Nomor M.HH-
05.OT.01.01 Tahun 2011 tentang Perubahan atas Keputusan Menteri Kehakiman Nomor
M.01-PR.07.03 Tahun 1985 tentang Organisasi dan Tata Kerja Lembaga Pemasyarakatan.
Peraturan Menteri Hukum dan Hak Asasi Manusia Republik Indonesia Nomor 11 Tahun 2017
tentang Penanganan pada Rumah Tahanan Negara dan
Lembaga Pemasyarakatan.
Santoso, Singgih. (2018). PT Elex Media Komputindo.
Jakarta.
Schwab, Klaus. (2017). . Crown Business. New York.
Stephens, C. L., Christie, I. C., & Friedman, B. H. (2010). Autonomic specificity of basic
emotions: Evidence from pattern classification and cluster analysis. Biological
Undang – Undang Republik Indonesia Nomor 12 Tahun 1995 tentang Pemasyarakatan.
Widhiastuti, Hardani. (2014). “Big Five Personality sebagai Prediktor Kreativitas dalam
Meningkatkan Kinerja Anggota Dewan”,
Wiggins, J. S., & Trapnell, P. D. (1997). Chapter 28 - Personality Structure: The Return of the
Big Five (R. Hogan, J. Johnson, & S. B. T.-H. of P. P. Briggs, eds.).