Title: How do our brains support our real-life friendships?
Authors: Elisa C. Baek1, Ryan Hyon1, Mason A. Porter2 & Carolyn Parkinson1,3
1Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United
States of America, 2Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, United States of America, 3Brain Research Institute, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
Word count: 1782
Number of figures: 3
Note: This article was written to introduce young audiences (teens and preteens) to an emerging
area of research that combines tools and methods from neuroscience and mathematics.
Abstract
Have you ever wondered how your friends impact how you see the world? Or how you’re able to
keep track of the many different people in your life? To study these questions, scientists have
begun to look at people’s social networks and their brains at the same time. We give an
introduction to this area of study and discuss how scientists use ideas from both neuroscience
and mathematics to examine these questions. We also highlight some recent discoveries that
reveal both how our brains support our ability to socialize with others and how our relationships
with other people are related to how we use our brains.
Keywords: social networks, friendships, neuroscience
How do our brains support our real-life friendships?
Your Complex Social Life
Think about all of the people who you know. Who comes to mind? You might think first
about your closest friends. You might also think about the people who are the most popular in
your grade, such as the kids with the most friends or those who are well-known by everyone else
in school. How are you able to keep track of all of these different people and their relationships
with each other? Our brain has mechanisms to support our ability to keep track not only of all of
the different people in our lives, but also of the complicated relationships between those people.
Scientists have also begun to look at how the ways that we use our brains are related to features
of our social world, like the number of friends that we have and whether we play an influential
role in our social groups.
Studying Social Networks
How do scientists study the relationships between the features of people’s social worlds
and the ways that they use their brains? For many years, neuroscientists have studied people’s
brains without considering the social environment in which people live. Meanwhile, other
scientists — including mathematicians, statisticians, and sociologists — have developed many
tools to study networks. There are all sorts of networks around us. Some examples are networks
of roads between locations in a city, flights between airports, power lines between houses, and
the World Wide Web. However, people are particularly attuned to one specific type of network:
our social networks. Recently, researchers have begun to combine the study of brains with the
study of social networks to help us understand how our brains support our ability to socialize and
connect with other people.
Scientists can study a social network in many ways. Most typically, a social network is a
collection of people who know each other and the relationships between those people [1,2].
Suppose that a researcher seeks to characterize a social network of your school based on
friendship. To do this, the researcher can map out the students in your school and which students
are friends with each other. In network-science terms, the students are called nodes and each
In network-science terms, each student is a “node” and each friendship between two students is
distance between two students by adding the number of edges between them. For example, the
Stock File #221784609.]
What are we interested in learning about your school’s social network? Perhaps we seek
to identify the most influential student in your school. Depending on the type of influence that
interests us, we can try to do this in different ways. If we are interested in identifying the most
popular student in the network, we can calculate what network scientists call degree. We
calculate the degrees in your school’s social network by counting the number of friends of each
student in the school. For instance, maybe the most popular student in the school has 54 friends,
giving them a degree of 54. If we are instead interested in identifying the students who are good
at connecting different groups of friends together, we can calculate a measure of social “bridges”
called brokerage. Degree and brokerage are just two examples of the many different things that
we can calculate to study a person’s role in a social network. We can also calculate degree and
brokerage in networks other than social networks. For example, using airports as nodes and
flights between them as edges, we can calculate brokerage to identify which airports serve as
large hubs by connecting otherwise unconnected airports.
We can also use the information in a social network to calculate how close or far away
people in the network are from each other. This is an abstract type of distance between them.
Let’s think more about this type of distance using an example. Suppose that we pick two random
students—Felicity and Marco—in a school’s social network. We can calculate the distance
between Felicity and Marco by using the information about who their friends are. If Felicity and
Marco are friends with each other, there is a distance of 1 between them. If they are not friends
with each other, but Felicity is friends with Amy who is friends with Marco, then Marco and
When you see a friend, your brain automatically keeps track of their social-network
characteristics. For example, Felicity’s brain calculates Marco’s degree. Because Marco
is connected to two people, Marco’s degree is 2. Additionally, when Felicity sees Marco,
her brain calculates the distance between them in the network of friendships of the people
who they know. Marco is a friend of a friend of Felicity, so the distance between them is
Studying Brains
How can we relate the rich information in a social network to how the people in that
network use their brains? One way that scientists have begun to study this question is by
collecting and studying brain data of people in the same social network. In our example of a
school friendship network, researchers may ask some of the students in the school to attend a
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study session to measure their brain activity
while they are doing a task. An MRI scanner is a powerful magnet that can take pictures of a
person’s brain while they are doing a task—like watching a movie, viewing pictures of people,
or playing a game—that a researcher has asked them to do [3]. For more information on how an
MRI scanner works, see [3].
Scientists often use surveys to collect information about people’s social networks. For example,
scientists can ask people to list their friends. Scientists can then use these people’s responses to
characterize their social networks. Scientists can also obtain information about how people’s
brains respond to the world by measuring their brain activity in functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) studies. Scientists can then combine the results from brain scans with
information about people’s social networks to study questions about how our brains and social
Scientists can study many interesting questions by combining information about how
different parts of a person’s brain respond during a task with information about the person’s
information about this student come to your mind? You might think about what this person looks
like or if they are kind or funny. You might also think about what “role” this person plays in your
social world; this is called their social-network position. Is this person popular? Is this person
good at connecting people from different friendship groups? Scientists have shown that people’s
brains automatically process these different types of information when they see people who they
keeping track of other people’s social-network positions can help you navigate your social world.
For example, you probably would only want to share a secret with your closest friends, and it
could be risky to tell a secret to the most popular student at school because this person is well-
connected to a lot of other people.
Scientists have discovered that people in certain social-network positions use their brains
differently in different contexts. For example, remember how people’s brains automatically track
how popular someone is? Recent research has revealed that the brains of people with a large
degree (i.e., popular people) track the degrees of other people especially closely [4]. In other
words, popular people may pay especially close attention to the popularity of their peers.
Scientists have also studied if people with large brokerage use their brains differently in a
particular context. In one study, researchers found that the brains of people with large brokerage
were particularly sensitive to determining when other people’s opinions were different from their
own [4]. These people had especially elevated activity in parts of the brain that are involved in
thinking about what other people are thinking about. This is a very important function for people
with large brokerage, because these people provide social bridges to connect different groups of
people who may have distinct beliefs or opinions.
Scientists have also compared how the brains of different people in the same social
network process the world around them. In one study, researchers examined a social network of
business-school students [5]. Some of these students participated in an fMRI study in which they
watched a bunch of movie clips. Students who were closer together in the social network (such
as friends) had more similar brain activity, and people who were farther apart had less similar
brain activity. Friends had especially similar brain activity in brain regions that are involved in
processing emotions and interpreting the movies. This study suggests that people who are closer
to each other in their social network may think in similar ways when they watch movies and
perhaps also when they experience other things. To evaluate whether this result is reasonable,
consider the similarities between you and your friends. Do you and your friends laugh at the
same jokes or feel similar emotions when you watch movies? This may reflect similarities in
how you and your friends think about the world around you.
Even though scientists have found that people in different social-network positions have
brains that operate in different ways, they haven’t yet discovered (1) if differences in the brain
lead to people occupying particular social-network positions or (2) if occupying particular social-
network positions can cause changes in the brain [1]. These open issues are hard to resolve in
humans because of both practical and ethical concerns. For instance, it would be very difficult to
randomly assign people to occupy specific network positions (for example, to randomly assign
one person to have many friends and a different person to have no friends). Even if it were
possible in practice to randomly assign people to occupy different social-network positions, it
would be unethical to do so. For example, forcing an individual to have a smaller number of
friends may cause distress in that individual. (For more information on the role of ethics in
studying brains, see [6].) Instead, scientists have studied other animals (such as macaque
monkeys) to gain some insights into them. One group of researchers placed macaque monkeys in
social networks of different sizes and then used an MRI scanner to measure the monkeys’ brain
structure and activity about one year later [7]. They found that monkeys in larger social networks
developed differences in the structure and activity of brain regions that help them (and also help
humans) make sense of what others are thinking. Although it is not yet known if things work
exactly the same way in humans, this study demonstrates the power of social networks to shape
the brain in a closely-related species
Conclusions
Scientists simultaneously study the brain and social networks to investigate how our
brains shape and are shaped by the complex social world in which we live. Such research has
helped us learn how our brains support our ability to keep track of people in our social networks
and their relationships with other people. It can also help scientists understand how people in
different social-network positions may use their brains differently and how people in a social
network may be similar in how they process the world around them. Combining the study of
brains and social networks is a new area of research, and interesting new studies in it are coming
out all of the time. What questions would you be interested in answering if you could measure
people’s brain activity and study their social network?
Glossary
● Brokerage: A measure of how well a person in a social network connects (i.e.,
“bridges”) different groups of people in the network.
● Degree: The number of connections of a node in a network. For example, the degree of a
person indicates how many friends they have in a social network.
● Distance: How far apart two nodes are from each other in a network. This is an abstract
notion of distance. For example, there is a distance of 1 between you and your friends and
a distance of 2 between you and a friend of one of your friends.
● Edge: A connection between two nodes in a network. An example is a friendship
between two people in a social network.
● Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI): A way of measuring what is going on
in somebody’s brain. An MRI scanner is a powerful magnet that can very quickly take
many pictures of a person’s brain. See [3] for more details.
● Node: An object in a network that is connected to other objects. An example is a person
in a social network.
● Social network: A network in which, typically, each node represents a person and an
edge represents some kind of connection (such as a friendship) between two people.
● Social-network position: Someone’s social-network position encompasses the roles that
they play in their social network. These roles may relate to various questions. Some
example questions include the following: Who are their friends? Do they have many
friends? Do they “bridge” otherwise separated people?