RUNNING HEAD: Aging and financial risk
Aging and financial exploitation risk
R. Nathan Spreng1,2,3,4, Natalie C. Ebner5,6,7,8, Bonnie E. Levin9, Gary R. Turner10
1Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, Montreal Neurological Institute, Department of Neurology and
Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, nathan.spreng@gmail.com
2Departments of Psychiatry and Psychology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
3Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, QC, Canada
4McConnell Brain Imaging Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
5Department of Psychology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA. natalie.ebner@ufl.edu
6Institute on Aging, Department of Aging & Geriatric Research, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, USA.
7Cognitive Aging and Memory Clinical Translational Research Program, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, USA.
8Florida Institute for Cybersecurity Research, McKnight Brain Institute, &
Pain Research and Intervention Center of Excellence, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
9Alexandria and Bernard Schoninger Professor of Neurology, University of Miami, Miller School of
Medicine, Florida, USA. blevin@med.miami.edu
10 Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada, grturner@yorku.ca
Corresponding author:
R. Nathan Spreng
Montreal Neurological Institute
3801 University St.
Montreal, QC, H3A 2B4, Canada
p. 514-398-7268
e. nathan.spreng@gmail.com
To appear in:
Aging and Money, 2nd edition
Ronan Factora (Ed)
Springer Press
Acknowledgements:
This work was supported by a pilot grant from the McKnight Brain Research Foundation and NIH grant
1R01AG057764-01A1.
Abstract
Financial exploitation among older adults is an increasing public health concern. Whether in-person or
online, financial risks are becoming omnipresent in our increasingly connected and wired world.
Understanding why some older adults are more vulnerable to financial exploitation than others, and the
specific contexts in which this vulnerability is most likely to emerge, is necessary to design more target
surveillance and intervention tools. In this review, we identify the cognitive, socioemotional, and brain
changes in aging that increase financial exploitation risks in later life. Next, we build on this review to
propose a new social cognitive neuroscience model of financial exploitation risk. In the final section we
review emerging work to develop profiles for older adults, towards novel intervention techniques to
reduce the burden of financial exploitation in later life.
Keywords
Aging, financial exploitation, fraud, cyber security, cognitive aging neuroscience, socio-affective
neuroscience, phishing, risk detection
I. Financial exploitation risk in older adulthood: Scope of the problem
II. Determinants of financial exploitation risk
Cognitive changes
Socioemotional changes
Structural and functional brain changes
III. Social cognitive neuroscience model of financial exploitation risk
IV. Financial risk: Assessment and surveillance
Structured Assessment of Financial Exploitation Risk (SAFER)
Online fraud and cyber-security risk assessments
V. Conclusions and future directions
I. Financial exploitation risk in older adulthood: Scope of the problem
Among older adults financial loss due to reduced decision-making capacity and increased risk of
deception has reached epidemic proportions, constituting an emerging public health crisis. Financial
exploitation is now among the most common forms of elder mistreatment (1-5). A Senate report released
in 2019 found older adults are losing an estimated $2.9 billon annually to financial scams (6). Other
estimates have reached as high as 36 billion (7). These numbers almost certainly underestimate the actual
prevalence of fraud as many older adults are unaware or unwilling to report fraud for fear of appearing
cognitively impaired or conforming to negative aging stereotypes (8). Further, the vast majority of
exploitation cases involve family members or close acquaintances and are likely to go unreported or be
ignored (1, 9).
These estimates, considered in the context of the rapid expansion of older adults living longer in
the US and other industrialized nations based on projections reported by the Census Bureau, raise concern
that financial decision-making deficits in older adulthood will impact an increasingly large segment of
the population (5, 10). Going forward, financial exploitation of older adults is likely to impose increasing
societal costs in terms of increasing health care and economic burdens (11). For older victims of
exploitation, experiencing adverse financial events has been associated with greater rates of
hospitalization and long-term care admissions, poor physical and mental health, and higher mortality (12,
13). Older adults acutely feel the effects of financial exploitation, with limited opportunity to recover
from loss (14). Sudden and unexpected financial losses as a result of exploitation may force older adults
onto public entitlement systems or relatives to take on unexpected financial burdens. Further, the
realization of being a victim of fraud is often accompanied by feelings of self-blame, guilt and
embarrassment. These stressors are widely recognized as adversely impacting psychological well-being.
However, the specific toll of financial exploitation remains poorly studied and is likely underestimated
(15).
At the same time, technological advances are opening up multiple avenues for poor financial
decision-making, leading to scams and fraud in our increasingly wired world. In particular, phishing
(e.g., via email, text, social media etc.) is a widespread threat and a leading tool for online fraud and
subsequent financial exploitation. These attacks are particularly appealing to perpetrators because they
are simple, readily available, low-cost to attackers and do not have to occur in mass-scale to be effective.
The FBI received 2,400 complaints last year with victims’ losses from phishing estimated at $325 million
(16). Surprisingly, older adults have largely been neglected in research on cyber-security and online fraud
avoidance, even though they may be particularly at-risk for such attacks.
Whether in person or online, financial exploitation risk among older adults is emerging as a
serious public health concern. These threats will surely increase in the coming decades as the baby
boomer generation ages further into older adulthood, taking its place as the wealthiest generation in
American history and providing an increasingly lucrative target population for financial fraud. Given the
potential scope of the problem, identifying early indicators of financial exploitation risk is critically
necessary (17). In the following sections we review the cognitive, socioemotional, and neural
determinants of financial exploitation risk that are critically necessary to inform early surveillance
efforts. We next present our social cognitive neuroscience model, identifying two pathways to financial
exploitation risk in later life. These dual routes to exploitation risk recognize both cognitive and
socioemotional factors, as well as the associated neural changes that occur in later life. We close the
chapter with a review of financial risk assessment tools, and previewing our work to increase the efficacy
of surveillance strategies. Together these efforts are focused towards the ultimate goal of early detection
and intervention, to reduce the burden of financial exploitation in older adulthood.
II. Determinants of financial risk
Demographic risk factors for financial exploitation include age, lower education and income
levels (18, 19) as well as household size and race (9, 19, 20). While these demographic factors are
important for informing broader policy and public health initiatives, they do not address how to identify
a given individual’s risk for financial exploitation. Predicting person-specific risk profiles requires a
better understanding of individual differences in cognitive and socioemotional capacities, as well as the
social and motivational contexts within financial decisions are made in later life (21, 22). In a recent
review, we proposed a novel model of decision-making in older adulthood incorporating cognitive,
socioemotional, as well as the brain changes associated with the aging process (23). This model emerged
from an earlier survey of the research literature, with particular consideration given to financial decision-
making in everyday life, beyond the confines of the laboratory or the clinic. Real world financial
decisions involve weighing concrete choices such as reconciling a weekly budget, managing investment
risk profiles, or justifying a big-ticket purchase. Yet we often forget that these decisions are made in situ,
in complex and shifting social milieu that require navigating emotional reactions and often nuanced
social cues. Examples of these in situ dynamic social contexts could include the friendly local bank
manager who is ‘recommending’ a higher risk (and higher fee) investment portfolio; the insurance
telemarketer who calls repeatedly to promote ‘no medical required’ health insurance; or the grandson
who continually asks to ‘borrow’ money. Enumerating the scope of financial risks confronting older
adults in today's world, from calculating compound interest to calculating complex social agendas and
motivations, requires broader consideration of both cognitive as well as socioemotional capacities.
Understanding how these abilities evolve and manifest in the context of age related alterations in
structural and brain function in later life will enable us to define increasingly sensitive risk profiles,
improving detection, lessening risk, and ultimately help older adults to avoid fraud and exploitation.
Below we update our review of the recent scientific advances in mapping the cognitive,
socioemotional and neural determinants of altered decision-making in older adults and suggest how these
changes may relate to increased financial risk. Yet we urge caution here. It is important not to fall victim
to the ‘aging equals decline’ heuristic. The portrayal of older adults as poor decision-makers, vulnerable
to exploitation and abuse, continues to propagate through the popular media and in the scientific
literature. However, this stereotype has surprisingly mixed empirical support. Older adults often show
better or more adaptive decision-making abilities relative to their younger counterparts in many contexts,
and these age-related gains often manifest in more real-world settings (10). Over the past decade the field
of decision-science and, more recently, decision-neuroscience (24), has provided a more nuanced picture
of the cognitive, affective, social, and neural determinants of decision-making capacity in older adults.
Here we take care to highlight both the gains and the losses in cognitive and socioemotional functioning
that occur throughout older adulthood, and how these contribute to differing – but not necessarily
declining – financial exploitation risk profiles in later life.
Cognitive changes. Cognitive changes in older adulthood have been associated with financial
exploitation risk. This has been demonstrated both in the context of age-related cognitive impairments
(25, 26) as well as in normative aging (3, 22, 27). Among the most robust patterns of age-related cognitive
decline is a reduction in cognitive control, or ‘fluid’ cognitive abilities. These abilities are necessary to
learn novel information, inhibit maladaptive responses, imagine and plan for the future, and to flexibly
adapt one’s behavior when the decision-making context changes (28, 29). In the context of financial
exploitation risk, age-related declines in cognitive control have been associated with a more risky
decision-making style, and declines in financial capacity – a critical risk factor for financial fraud and
exploitation (18, 30). Poor cognitive control has been linked to risky decision-making in older adulthood.
This risk profile in older adults has been directly associated with greater susceptibility to deceptive
advertising, a key tool for fraudsters (31). Reduced cognitive control capacity has also been associated
with poor decision-making, problem-solving and planning for one’s financial future (32, 33). In addition
to these more complex cognitive control abilities, declines in specific cognitive skills necessary for
financial transactions have been associated with financial exploitation risk in aging and brain disease
(32-34). Specific cognitive skills that have been investigated in the context of financial management
include conceptual, pragmatic, and judgment abilities, ranging from basic (numericity) to more complex
skills (financial reasoning and planning). These abilities are necessary to enumerate, allocate and monitor
personal finances in the service of current and future financial goals (34).
However, not all cognitive processes decline with age. Knowledge of oneself and the world, often
referred to as ‘crystallized’, conceptual, or semantic knowledge, continues to increase across the adult
lifespan, remaining comparatively stable into older age (35). There is increasing evidence that older
adults may be able to draw upon this expanded repertoire of semantic, or fact-based, knowledge to
identify potentially fraudulent behavior or avoid exploitative situations (10, 24). In the context of
financial decision-making, Li and colleagues (36) tested this possibility and reported that crystallized
cognitive abilities in older adults directly offset losses in fluid abilities, leading to more adaptive financial
decisions. Similarly, during a game in which players were required to make financial deals with their
fellow game players, older adults rejected more ‘unfair’ offers than their younger counterparts (37).
While younger adults incorporated more empathic responding into their deal-making strategies, older
adults tapped into more lived experience (e.g., ‘money doesn’t buy friends’) in making their decisions.
While the older adults were as empathetic as the young, their reliance on personal experience and prior
knowledge to make more ‘rational’ decisions took precedence.
These divergent trajectories of age-related cognitive changes, with fluid cognition decreasing and
crystalized knowledge increasing, may also result in a mid-life ‘sweet-spot’ for optimal financial
decision-making (38). While younger adults possess the cognitive control skills necessary to respond
flexibly and adaptively to rapidly shifting financial contexts (including the motivations of others), they
typically lack the experiential knowledge to identify longer-term patterns and anticipate future
consequences. In contrast, older adults have lower fluid cognitive abilities, and reduced financial skills,
leaving them vulnerable to exploitation. Yet, they are able to bring more lived experience and prior
knowledge to decisions, allowing older adults to more accurately identify and potentially avoid longer-
term risk. In the context of these shifting cognitive abilities across the adult lifespan, middle adulthood
may provide the optimal balance of executive control and experiential knowledge to maximize financial
decisions, in both the near and far term.
In sum, cognitive changes impact decision-making capacity across the lifespan. These changes
have a direct impact on financial competence and magnify exploitation risk for older adults. Fluid
cognitive abilities, necessary to make complex decisions in uncertain contexts decline. In contrast,
greater reservoirs of prior knowledge in later life can be advantageous in contexts where past experience
is a reliable predictor of future outcomes. Put simply, the decision-making context matters. Contexts
involving speed, pressure, novel information, and shifting contingencies or agendas require high levels
of cognitive control, and thus leave older adults at greater risk. In contrast, decision contexts that allow
for deliberation, and the integration of current facts with prior knowledge, may be particularly
advantageous for decision-making in aging.
Socioemotional changes. Fraud and financial exploitation, by definition, are transactional, i.e.,
they involve both victim and perpetrator. Avoiding fraudulent, exploitative or deceptive behaviors
depends on the ability to successfully navigate complex, potentially conflict-ridden, social dynamics. In
this context, reduced socioemotional capacity would be associated with heightened risk, both for
interpersonal exploitation (the grandson who continuously ‘borrows’ money) and for more impersonal,
albeit relational, forms of exploitation such as telemarketing fraud (39). Personal familiarity between
victim and perpetrator almost certainly increases the social complexity of potentially exploitative
situations. This may be a contributing factor for the overwhelming prevalence of within-family financial
abuse (1, 9) and may be further compounded by diminishing social support and need for sociality,
loneliness and a reduced sense of well-being (26, 40, 41).
There is growing evidence that socioemotional factors have different influences on decision-
making in older versus younger adults. Older adults show reduced negative emotional arousal to
anticipated losses (42). This absence of negative emotion to anticipated losses suggests that older adults
may engage in more risky financial decision-making, and indeed this has been shown to be the case.
Older adults make more sub-optimal decisions during risk-seeking (i.e. greater potential for loss), but not
during risk-avoidant financial decisions (42). On a decision-making task designed to mimic real-world
shifts in gain and loss contingencies, more than one-third of older adults did not identify altered
contingencies and continued to make high-risk decisions (31). These older participants also failed to
show anticipatory emotional arousal during risky choices. This suggests that a significant proportion of
older adults may experience a disruption in deception-detection, although the evidence remains
somewhat equivocal on this point.
Older adults also demonstrate less reactivity to negative emotional stimuli (see 43, for a review),
including explicitly deceptive cues such as lies (44, 45) or breach of financial trust (46). Reduced arousal
to negative emotional cues has been associated with lower activation of a brain region involved in bodily
sensation (47). This may mean that the ‘gut-feeling’ associated with a pending risky decision may be
reduced with age (42). Altered emotional responsiveness to negative stimuli is also consistent with the
well-documented ‘positivity bias’ in older adulthood. Older adults show selective attention to, and greater
memory for, positively-valenced over negatively-valenced information (see 48, for a review). In the
context of less detailed memories and representations of the future (49), it has been suggested that older
adults may make decisions on the basis of a ‘bright but blurry’ future (50). Positively skewed, yet less
precise, imaginings of the future, may heighten the risk of maladaptive long-term decisions.
Age-related emotional changes have direct impacts on decision-making abilities in social
contexts, potentially increasing vulnerability to interpersonal exploitation (see 51, 52 for review). For
example, older adults assign higher trustworthiness ratings to pictures of unknown faces than do young
(47). They also show reduced flexibility in adjusting financial investment portfolios following a breach
of trust by a partner in an investment game. In contrast, younger adults adapted their decision-making
style and reduced investments following untrustworthy actions by game partners (46). Similar age
differences in learning the trustworthiness of financial brokers has also been reported (53). Older adults
display positivity biases in other social contexts, including impression formation. For example, they show
particular difficulty overcoming positive first impressions such as matching trustworthy faces with
untrustworthy behavior (53-56); leaving them vulnerable to the “wolves in sheep’s clothing” (57). This
may be pose a particular challenge for older adults encountering the friendly-looking, polite con artist
who assumes a trustworthy appearance or reputation to mask untrustworthy behavior. It may also present
an even greater challenge when assessing the motives of a known other, such as a cherished grand-
daughter, who’s motives for ‘borrowing’ money may change from helpful to harmful over time.
Reduced ability to detect deception in aging has also been demonstrated in the cyber realm, in
the context of an ecologically valid field experiment that simulated an email phishing campaign. Older
women showed particular vulnerability to a cyber attack (58), and those very old individuals with low
cognitive and affective functional profiles were particularly vulnerable (59). As noted earlier, studies
investigating affective influences on decision-making suggest that older adults may adopt a more risky
decision-making style in anticipation of a more positively imagined, albeit less detailed, future (50).
These deficits also manifest in the social realm, broadening the specter of vulnerability from maladaptive
personal choices to interpersonal exploitation and fraud. Further, age-related changes in socioemotional
and cognitive processes likely interact to influence decision-making behavior. These interactions may be
positive and beneficial in some contexts. As we described earlier, access to a larger repertoire of prior
knowledge has been shown to mitigate impulsive decision-making and reduce temporal discounting
during financial decision-making tasks (36). However, these changes may also compound deficits in
more cognitively demanding contexts: older-adult decision-making is particularly impaired on tasks that
require rule-learning or shifting contingencies, or involve more abstract or context-dependent reasoning
(see 24), as well as the detection of negatively-valenced deceptive cues (44, 46, 58), particularly when
cognitive demands are high (60).
Structural and functional brain changes. In addition to the cognitive and socioemotional changes
outlined above, researchers have examined whether changes in the structure and function of the brain
predict financial exploitation risk in normal aging and brain disease. Such changes may provide early
biomarkers, signaling increased financial exploitation risk in later life. Early work in this area (61)
reported an association between reduced cortical volume in the angular gyrus of the parietal lobe in Mild
Cognitive Impairment with performance on a comprehensive measure of financial skills and capacity –
the Financial Capacity Instrument (FCI 34). Performance on the FCI has also been associated with
reduced dorsal medial prefrontal cortex volume in early Alzheimer’s disease (62). Together these regions
have been implicated in conceptual thinking as well as the ability to generate a mental image regarding
one’s future actions (63), two abilities that may be critical for fact-based financial planning, reasoning,
and decision-making about monetary allocations.
Appraisal of socially-conveyed information in domains relevant to financial exploitation such as
deceptive advertising (31, 64), trustworthiness judgments (47, 65), impression formation (56, 66), self-
other judgments (67) or risky decision-making in novel contexts (68) has been consistently associated
with medial prefrontal cortex structure and function. As reviewed briefly above, appraisal of information
with high personal significance, or involving social inferences about the actions or intentions of others,
is represented more dorsally in medial prefrontal regions, where the affective meaning of these
contingencies is represented more ventrally (69). Differences in value expectation have been linked to
alterations in an “Affective-Integrative-Motivational” brain circuit, including ventral striatum, anterior
insula, medial temporal lobe and prefrontal cortex regions, as well as motor-planning areas (24). Medial
prefrontal cortex is closely connected with limbic structures and ventral striatum, known to mediate
affective responses and emotional regulation during decision-making tasks (24). The integrity of ventral
frontal brain regions, and their connections to other brain systems, may be essential for navigating
complex social dynamics in situations of high personal relevance, such as potential fraud or exploitation,
particularly if the perpetrator is known (see also 52 for a recent extension of the “Affective-Integrative-
Motivational” framework to social decision making in aging).
Dorsal and ventral medial subregions of prefrontal cortex are core nodes in a network of brain
regions collectively referred to as the default network (63). This assembly of functionally connected brain
regions is engaged by internally-focused thoughts including thinking about one's past, an imagined future
or mentalizing about the thoughts or feelings of others (63, 70, 71). As noted earlier, the majority of
financial exploitation incidents are transactional and occur in a social context (1, 9). Thus age-related
brain changes to the default network may predict exploitation risk in older adulthood.
Our work has shown early evidence for this association (72). We recruited a group of older
individuals who had been victims of financial exploitation and a closely matched sample of elderly adults
who had been exposed to, but avoided, exploitation. All
participants underwent structural and functional brain scans
using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technology. Older
adults who had experienced financial exploitation showed
reduced anterior insula volume and increased functional
connectivity between this region and the default network (see
a collection of brain regions implicated in detecting salient
stimuli in the environment (73). This region has been
implicated in generating our ‘gut-feelings’ in potentially
with financial fraud in the anterior insula and
Integrative-Motivational” brain circuit associated with
superior temporal sulcus/gyrus (right lateral
decision-making capacity (24). Increased connectivity
hemisphere)
between salience and default network brain regions may signal greater reliance on more salient social
processing during decision-making in older adulthood. Enhanced salience of social information,
combined with altered social processing secondary to default network changes, such as positive
impression formation (66), may leave older adults more vulnerable to undue social and affective
influences and exploitation. Collectively, these findings suggest that changes in functional connectivity
between large scale brain networks implicated in social decision-making may be an important neural
marker of exploitation risk. We explore this idea further in our social cognitive neuroscience model
In this section we briefly reviewed the evidence linking age-related changes in cognitive,
socioemotional, and neural function to decision-making ability and financial exploitation risk. Changes
in each of these domains, and their interactions, directly influence exploitation risk in older adults.
Accurately measuring these changes, and identifying clinically-relevant markers of exploitation risk,
represents an important next step in early detection and intervention. In the next section, we present our
social-cognitive neuroscience model of financial exploitation in older adulthood. This model is intended
to provide a framework to guide future research on detection and intervention to reduce the risk of
financial exploitation in later life.
III. Social cognitive neuroscience model of financial exploitation
Thus far we have highlighted the cognitive and socioemotional functions that increase
vulnerability resulting in poor decision-making ability and ultimately exploitation risk. These include a
shift from fluid intellectual abilities to greater reliance on experience and prior knowledge. Other changes
include altered socioemotional functioning, including the emergence of a positivity bias, poor sensitivity
to future financial loss, reduced deception detection, and poor trustworthiness judgments. Critically,
these changes are associated with discrete patterns of functional and structural brain alterations in older
adulthood, which in turn may signal context-specific vulnerabilities to financial fraud and exploitation
in later life.
We have proposed an integrated social cognitive neuroscience model of financial risk in older
adulthood. This model takes into account the complex changes described above as well as their associated
faulty decision making would yield a more comprehensive framework for developing surveillance and
assessment tools. We recognize the myriad determinants driving financial exploitation risk, some of
which are fixed such as reading level, socioeconomic status, neighborhood factors, and ethnicity. They
also include contextual factors such as financial regulatory regimes, availability of community and social
as well as instrumental support, or access to educational and informational resources. However, our
model focuses primarily on person-centered factors, such as neuropsychological and functional
capacities, as mediated by age-related changes in brain structure and function. Based on the research
reviewed above, we identify two behaviorally and neurally distinct pathways to increased financial risk
in aging.
The first pathway originates from age-related changes in the balance between fluid intelligence
abilities (which decline) and crystallized intelligence or prior knowledge (which is preserved). Loss of
fluid cognitive abilities may lead to reduced efficiency in maintaining financial goals, inhibiting
impulsive behaviors, or flexibly adapting to new contingencies or motivations, whether one’s own or
those of others. These changes can ultimately result in poor financial decision-making, consistent with
past research (18, 41, 74). The second pathway originates from reduced social capacity (specified in our
model as social appraisal and perception) in older adulthood. As reviewed earlier, older adults show
reduced ability to appraise and detect potentially deceptive information (31, 46, 58). They also
demonstrate alterations in social perception abilities necessary to make appropriate trustworthiness
judgments (55, 56, 64), and display increased attention to more positively-valenced information (48).
These changes in socioemotional processing may leave older adults more vulnerable to undue social
influences resulting ultimately in increased risk for exploitation at the hands of others, although research
directly addressing this relationship remains in its infancy.
Critically, both pathways are associated with dissociable patterns of brain changes in older adults:
Functional and structural changes in lateral frontal and parietal brain regions have been implicated in
age-related decline in fluid reasoning ability such as working memory, inhibition and mental flexibility
(75) and changes in socioemotional functioning are associated with alterations in the Affective-
Integrative-Motivational brain circuit (24), reward circuitry (Suzuki et al., 2019), default network brain
regions (61, 64, 66, 72), or their interaction. In developing this social cognitive neuroscience model of
exploitation risk in aging, we put forth the idea that recognizing and appreciating these dissociable
patterns of behavioral and brain change with age will help in the development of more context-specific
indicators of financial exploitation
Cogni&ve capacity Social Capacity
risk in older adulthood (e.g.,
heightened vulnerability to
Fluid (reasoning/problem- Social appraisal
solving) vs. decep8on exploitation in situations of high
crystallized (knowledge/ Social percep8on
versus low social complexity).
experience) IQ trust, posi8vity bias
cognitive capacity, associated with
Age-related changes in
changes in lateral prefrontal cortex,
brain structure and func8on
would predict increased difficulty
with financial management tasks such
Financial mismanagement Suscep8bility to social as problem-solving, planning or
(monetary skills, financial influence (decep8on-
reallocation of resources. In contrast,
knowledge, judgment) detec8on, trust-judgments)
declines in socioemotional capacities,
associated with changes in default
network brain regions, or their
Financial exploita8on risk
interactions with limbic regions and
subcortical structures involved in
affect processing, would lead to
increased social vulnerability and
exploitation at the hands of others. However the respective contributions of social and cognitive
capacities to social decision-making remains an area of active study (60) and these factors almost
research has shown that declines in working memory are associated with reduced capacity to mentalize
about the thoughts or intentions of others (76). Similarly, working memory for social attributes of others
is associated with interactions between default and frontal brain regions (77, 78). Thus, while there
undoubtedly is coupling between social and cognitive capacities at the level of both brain and behavior,
the intent of the model is to highlight and emphasize the distinct contributions of cognitive and
socioemotional changes to financial risk and how these contribute to context-specific risk profiles for
older adults.
Our review thus far has shown that patterns of cognitive and socioemotional functioning, as well
as associated brain changes, in later life are well understood. However, adequate surveillance and
intervention tools relating to these changes to financial risk profiles do not yet exist. In the next section
we review existing surveillance tools as well as new directions in assessing financial risk emerging from
our own laboratories. These efforts may lead to earlier identification of older adults at risk for financial
exploitation, whether through financial mismanagement or undue social influence and coercion.
IV. Financial risk: Assessment and surveillance
An array of measures and assessment strategies have been developed to operationalize financial
capacity and vulnerability to exploitation in older adults. These include self-report scales such as the
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority Risk Meter (79); the Susceptibility to Scams Survey (18), and
the Age Associated Financial Vulnerability Survey (40). Other self-report instruments measure basic
skills such as financial literacy, numericity, and planning (80, 81). More recently, multi-dimensional
assessments of financial capacity such as the Lichtenberg Financial Decision Making Rating Scale have
been developed (22, 27). These assess both the contextual (previous history of exploitation,
psychological well-being) and intellectual (decision-making capacity) factors that contribute to
exploitation risk.
Self-report measures and assessment scales are the most widely available tools for assessing
financial exploitation risk. However, comparatively few performance-based measures, necessary for
more ecologically valid, in situ assessments, have been developed to measure financial skills and
decision-making abilities. Among the most accessible and widely studied of these performance-based
measures is the Financial Capacity Instrument (FCI, 34). The FCI was developed as a standardized
measure to assess everyday financial skills. It is based on a multi-dimensional construct of financial
capacity, encompassing discrete spheres of activity including basic monetary skills, financial conceptual
knowledge, cash transactions, checkbook management, bank statement management, and financial
judgment. The FCI has been used extensively to quantify declines in financial capacity, as well as
providing an early behavioral marker signaling the onset and progression of brain disease (32, 34, 82,
83). In addition to measuring cognitively-dependent financial skills and abilities, our model suggests that
performance-based assessments should also incorporate measures of socioemotional functioning.
Moreover, these assessments should measure risk of in person exploitation as well as risk for the
increasingly pervasive incidence of online fraud. Below we briefly outline our efforts to develop
performance-based measures that are able to identify and distinguish cognitive and socioemotional
determinants of financial risk, as well as the specific context in which that risk occurs, from personal
decision-making to inter-individual exploitation, to online fraud.
Structured Assessment of Financial Exploitation Risk (SAFER), developed by Spreng and
Turner, is a semi-structured interview based on the Assessment of Capacity for Everyday Decision-
making (ACED). The ACED has been used to evaluate decision-making competence in cognitively
impaired older adults (84, 85) We have designed a novel application of the instrument based on our
aging population to assess financial decision-making competence, and by extension, exploitation risk. A
key feature of the SAFER is the ability to distinguish cognitive and social influences on financial
decision-making. During the assessment, older adults are presented with two scenarios, drawn from real
cases of financial exploitation. These scenarios were provided and vetted by a local adult protective
services office. One scenario involves potential exploitation by an unknown other (credit card
telemarketing) and a second involves a known other (theft by a family member). Decision-making
competence is assessed along four dimensions: Understanding, problem appreciation, reasoning and
decision-making logic. Older adults are asked a series of targeted questions to elucidate their reasoning
and rationale for the decisions they make in response to each scenario. Separate scores are computed for
decision-making capacity (quality of the response) and content (reliance on social versus non-social
information). Early data are consistent with our model. Decision-making competence in these real-world
contexts is determined both by the social context and the cognitive complexity of the decision.
The Assessment of Situational Judgment task (ASJ), developed by Getz and Levin (under
review), examines one’s ability to detect scams and infer deception. The ASJ is administered as an online
survey and presents scenarios based on FBI cases as well as benign real-life requests for information.
Categories of scams include invitations to participate in business opportunities, card skimmers, charity
scams, emergency scams, game promotions/sweepstakes, government imposters and deceptive
advertisements, identity theft, money transfer/check scams, and online/ phishing scams. In addition,
subjects are asked to respond to questions pertaining to computer knowledge and scam exposure and
experience. This tool was developed for older individuals and includes scams most used against the
elderly.
Online fraud susceptibility and cyber security risk assessments. Training older adults to avoid
online phishing attacks has limited efficacy, as skills are forgotten or poorly applied on-the-spot. This
leaves older adults vulnerable to malicious phishing emails, even shortly after training (86). Based on
our field-experimental work that suggested particular vulnerability to email-based phishing among older
women (58) and older individuals with low cognitive and affective profiles (59), we identified an urgent
need for behavior-based susceptibility profiles to inform intervention and fraud prevention strategies.
Towards this goal we recently developed PEST -- the Phishing Email Suspicion Test -- an ecologically
valid lab-based measure of phishing susceptibility (87). In PEST, participants rate a series of phishing
and non-phishing emails regarding their level of suspiciousness. PEST allows quantification of email
phishing susceptibility, as participants’ overall level of suspicion regarding phishing emails and their
ability to distinguish phishing from non-phishing emails. By comparing suspicion scores for each email
to the email’s real-world efficacy, we demonstrated the ecological validity of PEST. Phishing emails
that were more effective in real-world behavior were also more effective at deceiving people in the
laboratory. PEST is open-source and can be leveraged in private as well as corporate contexts to assist
in profiling individuals according to their susceptibility risks. Using PEST we have recently
demonstrated reduced ability to discriminate safe from malicious emails among cognitively unimpaired
older adults (88). Further, this reduced discrimination ability more pronounced among older adults at
increased genetic risk for cognitive decline secondary to Alzheimer’s disease. Using PEST-based
individual risk profiling, we are now able to build towards age-tailored/personalized defense solutions.
These include decision-supportive monitoring and real-time warnings of potentially deceptive emails
calibrated to individual risk profiles. Such personalized, automated, real-time cueing offers tremendous
potential to assist in the decision-making process and reduce the burden of detecting deception for the
individual, with the broader aim to reduce online financial fraud victimization.
Similar initiatives are emerging to provide older adults with information and guidance to reduce
victimization in cyberspace. One recent initiative, supported by the Cybercrime Support Network (CSN)
particularly older adults to avoid getting swindled in the first place by focusing on “three golden rules”
(Slow it down, Spot check, and Stop! Don’t send), and was designed with seniors in mind to assure user
friendliness (e.g., large font size, retro-inspired graphics, and ease of use for mobile devices and social
media sharing).
V. Conclusions and future directions
As revealed in this brief review, age-related changes in decision-making capacity can directly
influence financial competence and financial exploitation risk in older adulthood. Rapid advances in our
understanding of the cognitive as well as the socioemotional affective, and social determinants of
decision-making, and their neural basis, are opening new avenues for identifying person-specific
predictors of exploitation risk. However, continued research is urgently needed to narrow the gap
between investigations of neural mechanisms underlying decision-making deficits, and assessments of
financial competence in the real-world, including cyberspace. The neural mechanisms associated with
decision-making, and financial decision-making specifically, in older adulthood are becoming
increasingly well-defined (24, 89). This is opening exciting opportunities for the development of more
targeted, brain-based decision-making aids. The social cognitive neuroscience framework proposed here
differentiating cognitive and socioemotional changes, and their neural correlates. These two routes to
risk may ultimately guide the development of more specific brain and behavioral markers, accounting
for the specific contexts, in-person, online, in which exploitation is most likely to occur.
Another significant challenge in the field is to bridge the gap between laboratory measures and
performance-based, real-world decision-making measures. Efforts are ongoing in this direction,
including the development of ecologically valid assessment tools to measure financial competence (34,
84, 85, 90) and online fraud risks (58, 59, 87, 88) in vulnerable older adults. Consistent with our social
cognitive neuroscience model, some of these instruments are also being incorporated into a neuroimaging
environment to characterize the both the brain and behavioral correlates of performance on these tasks
(33, 62).
While such advances are essential to mapping the neural and neurocognitive basis of financial
exploitation risk, a critical missing link remains access to community-dwelling seniors who have been,
or continue to be, financially exploited. This is a challenging yet urgently necessary research goal, to
assess the discriminative validity of measures and markers of exploitation risk. To this end, greater
collaboration between the research community and point of care service providers is warranted. Such
collaborative efforts are needed to identify older adults who have experienced exploitation for
participation in research projects, to vet and validate translational opportunities arising from the research,
and ultimately to reinforce this first line-of-defense by providing community and financial services
workers with the information and tools necessary to identify and prevent abuse before it occurs.
A White House Council on Aging report urged that much more research be conducted to improve
surveillance and early detection of elder abuse (17). This will require large and diverse samples of older
adults who have and have not been victims of exploitation to identify sensitive, specific, and
generalizable behavioral and neural biomarkers of exploitation risk that will ultimately be translatable
and useful for point of service providers. Large-scale, multi-site, and broadly-defined investigations are
necessary. As we have shown here, much of this work is well underway. However efforts need to be
rapidly scaled up to match the expanding scope of the problem of financial exploitation risk in our aging
population.