Introduction: Whose Social Problems?
Philippe Fontaine and Jefferson D. Pooley
This material has been published in Society on the Edge: Social Science
and Public Policy in the Postwar United States, edited by Philippe
This version is free to view and download for private research and study
only. Not for re-distribution or re-use.
Philippe Fontaine and Jefferson D. Pooley. “Introduction: Whose
Social Problems?” In Society on the Edge: Social Science and Public
Policy in the Postwar United States, edited by Philippe Fontaine and
1 67
Jefferson D. Pooley, – . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2020 10 1017 9781108765961 001
Introduction: Whose Social Problems?
Philippe Fontaine and Jefferson D. Pooley
doi
Since . . . people variously located in the social structure differ in their
appraisal of a particular situation as a social problem, we should be
prepared to find . . . that the “solutions” proposed for coping with
these problems also differ
—Robert Merton and Robert Nisbet, Contemporary Social Problems, ix–x
1.1 A Sociologists’ World?
t first glance 1961
A , the collection Contemporary Social Problems
is indistinguishable from dozens of similarly named textbooks. The
volume, edited by Robert Merton and Robert Nisbet, was the lat-
est installment in a long-running genre of works aiming to orient
American sociology undergraduates to a range of “social problems.”
Like its predecessors, the Merton and Nisbet collection featured a
chapter-by-chapter march through a succession of named problems
such as crime, drug addiction, and family disorganization. So the
textbook was, in its form, unremarkable.
But this was no ordinary social problems textbook. The first clue
was authorship: Columbia’s Robert Merton and the Berkeley-trained
UC Riverside dean Robert Nisbet were both theorists, known for
grappling with European intellectual traditions. Merton was no
stranger to empirical work, but his famous alliance with Paul Lazars-
feld at Columbia’s Bureau of Applied Social Research epitomized—
even symbolized—a postwar shift away from sociology’s commit-
ment to social problems in a reformist key. For his part, Nisbet’s only
other book, The Quest for Community, was a dense and idiosyncratic
work of intellectual history. In short, Merton and Nisbet were among
the least likely American sociologists to take up the genre.
A second clue, linked to the first, was the editors’ first-paragraph
claim that a comprehensive theory of social problems was still lack-
ing. What unified their book’s chapters was merely a “theoretical
orientation.” That common framework was a loose-fitting version of
Merton’s functionalism: The volume’s contributors, and the editors
themselves, stressed consequences over causes, pointed to latent so-
cial problems, and placed “systemic interdependence” at the center
of analysis. 1
Merton and Nisbet, Contemporary
Social Problems, vii, viii, x.
introduction whose social problems 2
: ?
problems were represented, with chapters on juvenile delinquency,
mental disorders, and race and ethnic relations. But there were a
number of unusual inclusions—chapters that had rarely, if ever, ap-
peared in social problems textbooks. One was devoted to traffic and
transportation, and another, dropped in the third edition ( ), to
the “military establishment.” Most surprisingly, Merton and Nis- 2
Merton and Nisbet, Contemporary
Social Problems, rd ed.
bet commissioned a “disaster” chapter, focused on calamities like
tornadoes, floods, and earthquakes that seem only glancingly social.
The collection was, in short, a surprising intervention. The
phrase itself, “social problems,” was a token for an approach to so-
ciology from which Merton and Nisbet had distanced themselves.
The “social problems” course, the “social problems” textbook: These
were the hallmarks of an older, “amateur” phase of the discipline’s
history, the kind of sociology that Merton and his Harvard teacher
Talcott Parsons had, after World War II, helped expel to the margins.
The whiff of reform and Midwestern starch hung about the phrase.
The discipline’s new elite, forged in shared wartime service, favored
systematic theory, sophisticated quantitative methods, and value-free
scientific rigor—very much like its counterpart in economics.
It was around this time, indeed, that some of these new-style
economists—notably Gary Becker—were claiming rights over those
social problems Merton and Nisbet meant to make their own. So the
appearance of Contemporary Social Problems in —on the edge of
the decade’s social unrest—was a revival of a peculiar kind. Merton
and Nisbet, having won the battle for the discipline, were now claim-
ing the vanquished tradition’s core domain. They were likely aware
of the economists’ nascent and still-marginal enterprise. But their
aim was redemptive, not defensive: to introduce sociological theory
into a social problems literature that was, in their view, theoretically
impoverished and hopelessly fragmented. Economists interested in 3
Merton and Nisbet’s charge was
itself, arguably, unfair: The prewar
“noneconomic” problems would have endorsed the critique, but their
social problems textbooks, and other
remedy was of a different, and more auspicious, character.
works by their authors, were steeped
Though these economists were not cited, references to psychol- in theory—albeit of a distinctive mode
(“history of social thought”), with
ogists abound throughout the book. The relative prominence of
its own touchstones, referents, and
psychology can be explained by its more constructive relationship
Spencerian residues. See Turner and
121 28
Turner, The Impossible Science, – ;
with sociology, as exemplified by the expansion of interdisciplinary
and Hinkle, Developments in American
social psychology after the war. But arguably more important still
7 12 186 90
Sociological Theory, – , – . Still,
was what Ellen Herman has described as a shift “toward a larger ju- Erwin Smigel, in the preface to his
5 Handbook on the Study of Social Problems,
risdiction for psychology.” With deep roots in the cross-disciplinary
admitted that “[w]e have not been able
projects of the war, that shift marked psychology’s increased involve-
to find a unifying theory for the study
of social problems.” Smigel, “Preface,”
ment with a wide range of social problems during the early postwar
vii.
decades. The discipline’s protean character encouraged its broad
Sewell, “Some Reflections on the
application, and helped to spread its language to the other social Golden Age of Interdisciplinary
introduction whose social problems 3
: ?
sciences. By , psychology’s expanded remit had registered with
Social Psychology”; and House, “So-
cial Psychology, Social Science, and
sociologists studying social problems, as an individualistic comple-
233 35
Economics,” – .
ment to their approach. The result was that psychologists’ efforts to
Herman, The Romance of American
expand their jurisdiction over social problems found a more receptive 11
Psychology, chap. . Herman’s title,
as she notes herself, is inspired from
audience, at least initially, than did economists.
Abraham Maslow’s title of part in
The appearance of psychologists and, more tentatively, economists
Toward a Psychology of Being.
on the social problems terrain was, in its way, a reminder that their
On the protean nature of psychology
and its implications for the discipline’s
study has always had a double character. The vocabulary of “social
relevance to a wide range of issues, see
problems” developed primarily within sociology, but the study of the
Capshew, Psychologists on the March, .
problems themselves was always and already a trans-disciplinary en- 7
See Merton’s comments on the
“bridge-building game” between
deavor. Sociologists have claimed the social problems label, but schol-
the two disciplines, delivered at a
arship on the problems of society—the alternative phrase we adopt
conference on juvenile delinquency:
to signal this ecumenism—has featured the other social sciences too. “The tactic that could be most helpful,
it seems to me, would be for us to join
In the decades after Merton and Nisbet’s volume, sociology’s always-
together and fuse our respective sen-
partial claims for jurisdiction, if anything, weakened further.
sitivities from time to time but, in the
50 main, to continue to develop the con-
The social problems literature in sociology had been ushered in
ceptions most pertinent to each field.”
years earlier, in Sociology and Modern Social Problems, a “elemen-
Merton, “Concluding Comments and
tary text” authored by Missouri’s Charles Ellwood and designed for an Example of Research,” .
sociology courses centered on “current social problems.” The vol- 8
Ellwood, Sociology and Modern Social
Problems, .
ume treated the family as the main locus of social challenge, though
a handful of late chapters addressed a series of related domains: pop-
ulation growth, immigration, the “negro problem,” the “problem
of the city,” crime, and “poverty and pauperism.” The text’s basic
orientation—even its reformist politics—would remain a staple of
the social problems textbook for decades. The volume’s chapter-
per-problem format, as well as its catalog of named problems, were
embraced by the many competing texts published in the s and
s to service sociology’s undergraduate curriculum. Ellwood him- 9
Reinhardt, “Trends in the Teaching of
‘Social Problems.’ ”
self became the chief interwar proponent of “social problems” as the
discipline’s anchoring orientation. 10
Turner, “A Life in the First Half-
Century of Sociology”; and LoConto,
American sociology was, in organizational terms at least, built on
“Charles A. Ellwood and the End of
the idea of “social problems.” The phrase supplied a practical scheme
Sociology.”
to organize the would-be discipline. Even its subfields and journals
began to mimic the problem-by-problem “sociology of” schematic
pattern. The “social problems” construct, in short, helped sociology
establish its distinctive identity—and its institutional foothold in the
US academy. By the s, however, advocates for a more rigorous,
and resolutely quantitative, science of sociology took aim at the social
problems paradigm. They lumped its textbooks and leading figures,
Ellwood included, together with social work, public edification, set-
tlement houses, and moralizing do-goodism. This Depression-era 11
Turner and Turner, The Impossible
2 3
Science, chaps. – ; Turner, American So-
assault on the social problems approach was, in its way, new. But the
ciology, chap. ; and Bannister, Sociology
rhetoric of science—the boundary work with reform—had been a sta-
and Scientism, chap. .
ple of the proto-discipline from its late nineteenth-century origins. 12
Sociology, together with its barely
introduction whose social problems 4
: ?
What made the s different was that sociologists turned on
differentiated siblings in the American
Social Science Association, was bap-
themselves. The rhetorical demarcation had, in preceding decades,
tized in applied social reform during
existed in uneasy admixture with ongoing reform commitments.
the last decades of the nineteenth cen-
Now advocates of a scientific sociology drew the border to exclude tury. There is an extensive literature
on the proto-discipline’s engagements
not just “outsiders” such as Christian temperance activists and so-
with, and resistance to, “reform” in all
cial workers, but also those fellow sociologists insufficiently weaned
its typical (and often feminized) mean-
ings. On the late nineteenth-century
from the discipline’s reformist past. The sometimes-belligerent cam-
context, see, for example, Furner, Ad-
paign was waged by evangelists for statistical methods. Ellwood
vocacy and Objectivity; and Haskell, The
and his reform-minded allies answered in kind. There was an Emergence of Professional Social Science,
9 10
esp. chaps. – . On the settlement
organizational flashpoint—the mid- s fight over the American
house movement, see, for example,
Sociological Society (ASS) and the Chicago-based American Journal of
Deegan, Jane Addams and the Men of the
Chicago School; and Lengermann and
Sociology (AJS). At the time, some of the discipline’s oldest and best-
Niebrugge-Brantley, “Back to the Fu-
established outposts were scattered across the country’s non-elite
1885 1930
ture: Settlement Sociology, – .”
universities and colleges, with particular strength in Catholic insti- On the social survey movement, see, for
example, O’Connor, Poverty Knowledge,
tutions. Many of these programs retained an ameliorist orientation,
26 44
– ; and Gordon, “The Social Survey
with close ties to social reform movements—Christian and nominally
Movement and Sociology in the United
States.” On social work in particu-
secular—long after Chicago’s department had rejected its reformist
lar, see Lengermann and Niebrugge,
roots. In , they won control of the ASS and launched a rival,
“Thrice Told: Narratives of Sociology’s
ASS-sponsored flagship, the American Sociological Review (ASR). It Relation to Social Work.”
Calhoun, “Sociology in America: An
was, however, a Pyrrhic victory: Soon enough the ASR itself became a
10 19
Introduction,” – . Early figures in
platform for the very brand of rigorous, quantitative empiricism that
the discipline, such as Lester Ward,
Albion Small, and Franklin Giddings,
Ellwood and his allies had earlier resisted.
had made claims for sociology’s scien-
The Depression-era struggle over the discipline’s future was not,
tific character, even as they remained
however, resolved by the manifestos for quantification penned by variously entwined with reform groups
and initiatives. Second-generation so-
advocates of a more scientific sociology. The key factors, instead,
ciologists like W. I. Thomas and Robert
were generational turnover and World War II. By the end of the
Park—indeed, Ellwood himself—
adopted a similar rhetoric of scientific
war, when the academic job market picked up in earnest, many
distance, likewise belied in practice
of the quantitative insurgents were nearing retirement. The result
by their on-the-ground alliances with
was a vacuum in disciplinary leadership that a younger cohort— philanthropists and Social Gospel re-
formers. The main strategy to square
figures such as Samuel Stouffer and Robert Merton—soon filled. The
the science/reform circle—a tack also
wartime mobilization, was decisive for a number of mutually rein-
adopted by the social problems text-
book authors of the s—was to insist
forcing reasons: Shared service in Washington and overseas, with all
on a division of labor: The sociologist
its agency-spawning cross-pollination, helped to connect young soci-
supplies the analytical guidance, while
ologists with each other and with like-minded social scientists from the reformers and politicians are on the
hook for implementation. Turner, “The
other disciplines. The team-based work itself, some of it employing
Origins of ‘Mainstream Sociology’ and
new survey methods, was widely perceived as a down payment on a 56 58
Other Issues,” – .
postwar social science of on-the-cusp promise. The backdrop to the struggle was
mounting frustration with sociology’s
There were other factors. Some members of the new elite, includ-
apparent public ineffectuality as sym-
ing Parsons (an erstwhile economist) and Lazarsfeld (an applied
bolized by its virtual exclusion from the
New Deal bureaucracies that employed
psychologist), were disciplinary outsiders with few commitments to
so many economists and political scien-
prewar American sociology. There was, too, explicit postwar Con-
tists. See Camic, “On Edge: Sociology
gressional concern (buoyed by natural scientists) about the social during the Great Depression and New
Deal.”
sciences’ alleged reformism, even before the “social”/“socialism”
See, for example, Ellwood, Methods in
conflation became an early Cold War staple. The post-World War
Sociology.
introduction whose social problems 5
: ?
II upstarts were, moreover, over-represented at Ivy League schools,
Lengermann, “The Founding of the
American Sociological Review”; Turner
maintained close ties to the New York foundation world, and served
and Turner, The Impossible Science,
as key brokers in the government/foundation patronage network of
60 62 81 23
– , n ; Abbott, Department
1950 106 17
the s. and Discipline, – ; and Bannister,
14 15
Sociology and Scientism, chaps. – .
The relevant point is that sociology’s “east coast fraternity,”
As Lengermann’s meticulous anatomy
hitched to a cross-disciplinary movement to accent the science in
makes clear, the conflict was multi-
dimensional, though it centered on
social science, had displaced sociology’s already-battered teaching-
a populist revolt against a perceived
oriented majority. Clearly, the “postwar settlement,” in its paradig-
elite. The targets of the populists’ ire
matic mix of survey methods and functional theory, was never ac- included the Chicago department—in
21 all its methodological diversity—as well
cepted by the full discipline. But the social problems tradition, in
as the discipline’s leading evangelists
particular, was widely discredited. Indeed, it served as a symbolic
for “scientific” quantification.
and field-defining rejected past. The movement to remake sociology Abbott and Sparrow, “Cold War
and Hot War”; Steinmetz, “American
as a science was won, in other words, through a series of repudi-
Sociology before and after World War
ations, articulated in a litany of pejoratives: speculative, edifying,
II”; Converse, Survey Research in the
5 7
United States, chaps. – ; Turner and
reformist, Christian, and impressionistic. Methodological rigor and
Turner, The Impossible Science, chap.
theoretical sophistication were the proposed substitutes. For the the-
; and Platt, A History of Sociological
228 30
ory, the Ivy departments turned to European sociology as an alterna- Research Methods in America, – .
Solovey, “Riding Natural Scientists’
tive genealogy, with such remarkable success that the field’s classical
Coattails onto the Endless Frontier.”
pantheon was—after the war—almost completely repopulated by
On the early Cold War brokerage
European figures like Max Weber and Emile Durkheim. and patronage networks, see Crowther-
Heyck, “Patrons of the Revolution”; and
The discipline’s new, Eastern seaboard mainstream did not, cru-
2 3
Solovey, Shaky Foundations, chaps. – .
cially, rule out problem-oriented work. Indeed, many of its core
Abbott and Sparrow, “Hot War, Cold
commitments—around methodological rigor and theory-building, War,” . The standard story of mid-
century American sociology treats the
for example—were forged in the wartime mobilization. The lessons
changes outlined here as (using the
of the war, in turn, helped guide the self-identified “behavioral sci-
department shorthands) a displacement
of Chicago by Harvard and Columbia.
ences” movement among sociologists and other social scientists dur-
Chicago, in these accounts, is treated
ing the early Cold War: Problem-oriented work, funded by founda-
as a bastion of textured and qualitative
tion or government patrons, was especially well-suited to the large- empiricism then smothered by an
alliance of quantitative technicians and
scale, team-based empirical projects that general theory-building
high functionalists at Harvard and
required. So work on problems, even those within the traditional
Columbia. This account is caricatural.
Columbia’s department, for instance,
social-problems array, was perfectly compatible with the postwar
was already prominent decades before
formation—even if, in practice, the early Cold War mix of projects
the fateful meeting of Merton and
was heavy on overseas propaganda and morale topics. The point is Lazarsfeld. For its part, the interwar
Chicago department was both more
that applied work was welcomed into the house of the ascendant
plural, and less dominant, than the
behavioral sciences while the meliorist social problems tradition was
typical interwar account allows. (As
Andrew Abbott has shown, the idea of
not.
the “Chicago School” was a retroactive
The Society for the Study of Social Problems (SSSP) was founded
creation of the early s, when the
in as a protest against the postwar marginality of that meliorist department briefly embodied the
26 traits it projected onto its past. Abbott,
tradition. The new group openly defined itself against the behav-
Department and Discipline, chap. .) But
ioral sciences vanguard. Its aim was to shelter a reformist alternative
the main problem with the Chicago-
Harvard-Columbia emplotment is
to the apolitical mainstream by then ensconced in the ASS leader-
that most of the country’s interwar
ship. The SSSP’s founders, and its early membership, were largely
departments and programs, and many
drawn from the same Midwestern departments that had long incu- of its sociologists, are left out.
27 21
Steinmetz, “American Sociology
bated the discipline’s undergraduate substrate. Especially in its first
introduction whose social problems 6
: ?
decade, the SSSP was the organizational redoubt for the discipline’s 339
before and after World War II,” .
22 1943
half-vanquished social problems tradition. In a soon-famous AJS study,
a young C. Wright Mills surveyed in-
The SSSP was a backlash organization. The group took aim at the
terwar social problems textbooks to
rising generation of Eastern seaboard sociologists who had refined
sketch out what he called American
sociology’s “common style of thought.”
and tested new quantitative methods, as well as affirmed the pri-
He treated the books (over of them)
macy of disciplinary issues—taken as “scientific” problems—over the
as a proxy for the discipline’s “pro-
older, reform-tainted social problems formulation. But the SSSP was fessional ideology”—as a more-or-less
faithful register of its commitments.
not, by its own self-definition, bounded by a putative “social prob-
The texts, he added, are “empirically
lems” subfield. The group, instead, represented an alternative—and
confused,” fragmentary, and indifferent
to structural patterns—and thereby
besieged—orientation toward sociology as a whole. It was fitting,
leave out the “larger problems of social
then, that Alvin Gouldner, Merton’s former student, delivered the
structure.” The typical sociologist, in
group’s presidential address at its annual meeting in . The Mills’ wartime portrait, was provin-
cial, small-minded, and Babbitt-like.
speech was an unbridled attack on the postwar sociological establish-
Mills, “The Professional Ideology of
ment. Gouldner assailed sociologists’ claims to value freedom, in a 165 66
Social Pathologists,” – . A similarly
caustic account, published two years
line of critique that would—by the end of the decade—find wide ap-
later, came from criminologist Edwin
peal among student protesters. The mantle of objectivity, to Gould-
Sutherland: “The textbooks display a
ner, was a license to neglect real human problems in the service of minimum of abstraction and a maxi-
mum of the commonplace.” Sutherland,
professional self-interest. “In return for a measure of autonomy and
“Social Pathology,” . See also Emil
social support,” he wrote, “many social scientists have surrendered
Bend and Martin Vogelfanger’s quarter-
century textbook survey, “A New Look
their critical impulses.” The “dominant drift” of American sociology,
at Mills’ Critique.”
he concluded, was a self-chosen segregation, a moral abnegation.
See, for example, Connell, “Why is
The antiseptic detachment of Merton and Nisbet’s Contemporary Social
Classical Theory Classical?”; and Scaff,
“Max Weber and the Social Sciences in
Problems, published the same year, was a case in point.
America.”
By the early s, then, the discipline’s erstwhile social problems 24
The best overview of the “behav-
tradition had weakened, and alternative bids for the domain were ioral sciences” movement—the self-
understood clustering of sociologists,
gathering momentum. The SSSP claimed the interwar legacy, though
social psychologists, and political sci-
with a leftward, minoritarian pitch. That claim was not, however,
entists (the latter with their own, com-
plementary “behavioralism” moniker)
honored by the postwar mainstream. Over the subsequent, turbulent
in the early Cold War, with participa-
decade, American sociology settled into a pattern of joint custody
tion from some anthropologists and
of the social problems terrain. The social movement activism of the a handful of economists—remains
Crowther-Heyck, Herbert A. Simon,
early s, at places such as Greensboro and Port Huron, had mush-
chap. . For a history of the label, in-
roomed into nationwide protest and unrest—including conservative
cluding the crucial role of the modern
Ford Foundation, see Pooley, “A ‘Not
backlash—by the decade’s end. Many of the demonstrations and dis-
Particularly Felicitous’ Phrase.”
turbances centered on the “classic” social problems: race relations,
This distinction helps explain our
urban life, crime, the family, poverty, education, and war. The po-
interpretative difference with Arnold
Rose. In his posthumous history
litical system registered the public clamor around these issues, by
of social problems research, Rose dis-
way of campaigns, commissions, policy proposals, programs, and
cerned a drop-off of sociological interest
legislation. The qualified interventionism of Lyndon Johnson’s Great in the interwar period, with a post-
war revival linked to the war’s boost
Society platform was only the most visible stimulus.
to applied research. Rose, “History
One result was an efflorescence of sociological work on the con-
and Sociology of the Study of Social
7 9
Problems,” – . Our own review of
ventional social problems, some of it sponsored by government agen-
the primary and secondary literature,
cies and the big foundations themselves. On the heels of the vast
however, suggests that the interwar
postwar expansion of the US university system, and sociology in period represented the heyday of self-
conscious sociological engagement
particular, the discipline produced a massive wave of scholarship—
introduction whose social problems 7
: ?
much of it consciously policy-relevant. The s unrest helped to
with “social problems”—and that, by
the early postwar years that tradition
yoke the behavioral sciences—the sociological elite included—to do-
was marginalized. Rose’s postwar
mestic problems. The RAND Corporation’s turn from war-gaming
narrative conflates a broader problem
to urban poverty was, in that decade, a highly visible instance. orientation, or openness to applied
work, with the reformist social prob-
Radical interventions, allied with the New Left student movement
lems tradition.
and growing black militancy, cohabitated with the cross-tabulated
On the SSSP, see Skura, “Constraints
on a Reform Movement”; and Abbott,
sobriety of the discipline’s mainstream. This was, taken as a whole,
78 79
Department & Discipline, – .
a lively postscript to Merton and Nisbet’s improbable claim on the
The founders enlisted the University
discipline’s social problems tradition.
of Chicago’s department as a symbolic
1960 ally, with cooperation from notable
But the main result of the s for sociology was, if anything, the
Chicago figures Ernest W. Burgess (the
unraveling of the discipline’s claim to sovereignty over the “social
SSSP’s first president) and Herbert
problems” domain. By the end of the decade, sociology’s hold on Blumer (its third). Skura, “Constraints
on a Reform Movement,” . Alfred
social problems had weakened. The fall-off looked steeper still by
McClung Lee was, however, the orga-
the close of the twentieth century, at least as registered in political
nization’s real leader, and he assumed,
from the beginning, a defiant posture
and policy impact. By contrast, psychologists and economists won
toward the discipline’s elites. Lee, based
a larger jurisdiction for their disciplines in the wake of the s.
at Brooklyn College, positioned his
Psychologists benefitted from the growing belief that problems of pugilistic presidential address
as a David-and-Goliath rejoinder to
society could be approached with the techniques of individual di-
Harvard’s Samuel Stouffer’s speech
agnosis, while economists capitalized on the pervasiveness of the
as ASS president the year before. Lee,
“Sociologists in an Integrating Society.”
market metaphor. More generally, their work seemed congruent with
Gouldner, “Anti-Minotaur.”
the intellectual assumptions of the last third of the twentieth century.
If the social problems tradition had
In Daniel Rodgers’ words, the disciplines contributed to and built
supplied, for the early postwar elites,
upon “conceptions of human nature that stressed choice, agency, a useful symbolic contrast, the idea of
33 an establishment-cozy “mainstream”
performance, and desire.”
furnished something similar for post-
The book’s nine chapters explore this apparent shift in the postwar 1968
sociologist-dissidents. See Calhoun
and VanAntwerpen, “Orthodoxy,
division of labor in social science, each refracted through a single
Heterodoxy, and Hierarchy.”
“problem”: the family, crime, the Black ghetto, education, discrim-
30 206 207
Gouldner, “Anti-Minotaur,” , .
ination, poverty, addiction, war, and mental health. The authors’
Light, From Warfare to Welfare.
accounts address three major themes. The first is problem status itself: 32
For a merciless account of sociology’s
general loss of policy influence in the
How and when did the issue (poverty, for example, or crime) come
two decades after , see Turner,
to be viewed as a problem of public significance, and to whom? For
“The More American Sociology Seeks
most chapters, this question implicates the interwar period and the to Become a Politically-Relevant Disci-
pline, the More Irrelevant it Becomes to
wartime context itself. Each chapter traces its designated problem’s
Solving Societal Problems.”
career—the waxing and waning of social-scientific interest, public
33 3
Rodgers, Age of Fracture, .
concern, and political intervention in that particular area. Document-
ing shifts in the disciplinary division of labor since World War II is the
collection’s second aim. The relative contributions of the various so-
cial sciences—in cooperation or rivalry, as these patterns shifted over
time—is taken up by each chapter in accounts that, juxtaposed to
one another, record the disciplines’ contrasting fortunes. The book’s
chapters all take up, finally, the signal question of social problems’
explanation. Did the leading approaches of one or another social sci-
entist or discipline point to individuals as the source of the problem?
Or did they stress social conditions that supersede and overlay the
introduction whose social problems 8
: ?
experience of the individual? To what extent, if at all, were structural
or systemic accounts accorded priority in one period or another? The
answers to these questions have obvious implications for policy. The
contributors investigate, in the context of their problem-subject, the
vexed and bi-directional relationship between social science and the
political system over the postwar decades.
The balance of this introduction follows a similar format. We take
up, first, the question of social problem status, move on to assess
the redrawn boundaries of postwar social science, and conclude
with a meditation on the paired questions of policy and explanatory
resonance. Our aim is to make sense of a tension exposed by the
chapters, taken as a whole. The authors document a divergence be-
tween developments internal to the social sciences, on the one hand,
and the fate of competing disciplinary frameworks at the level of
policy and politics, on the other. Crudely speaking—that is, with
the variation across the problem domains bracketed—the core so-
cial sciences, sociology included, remain active contributors to the
problem-specific literatures through the period under study. On the
question of reigning explanatory mode, there is, again, no simple
shift from, say, structural or systemic explanations to those that favor
individual factors. And yet the chapters, taken together, register clear
disciplinary “winners” at the level of policy and politics: namely, eco-
nomics and psychology. The volume’s contributions, likewise, trace a
postwar attenuation of social-structural ways of seeing problems like
racial prejudice and poverty—though again, only at the intersection
of politics and social science.
We conclude by grappling with this discrepancy. Disciplinary
frameworks such as homo economicus and psychological individual-
ism, we argue, both contributed to, and benefited from, a conception
of society that, by the s, was increasingly skeptical of social ex-
planations and interventions. Likewise, academic discourse and
public debate were embedded in, and helped to reinforce, a social
imaginary that was already tuned to personal frames of understand-
ing. Psychology and economics thrived because they resonated with
the era’s growing individualism, while also helping to underwrite
it. The story is one of an elective affinity between these disciplines
and a public imagination that was decreasingly social-structural and
decidedly not sociological.
1.2 Problem Status
Sociologists, as the term “social problems” took hold in the early in-
terwar years, raised the obvious definitional question: What counts
as a social problem? The field’s textbooks and coursework supplied
introduction whose social problems 9
: ?
an ad hoc answer, in their problem-a-week inventories: A social prob-
lem, according to their implicit argument, is one of the pathologies
tion, making the number of people affected a defining characteristic
of a social problem, began to appear in the early s, and then
reappeared in regular installments—across commentaries, presi-
dential addresses, and theoretical treatises—for the balance of the
century.
The key issues, if not the problem-designates themselves, have
remained consistent over the decades. Are social problems merely
“what people think they are”—in the blunt words of an influential
intervention? Or are there objective criteria—actual social con- 34
Fuller and Myers, “Some Aspects of
a Theory of Social Problems,” . For
ditions, for instance—that scholars might use to qualify an issue as
all their subjectivist bravado, Fuller
problematic? If indeed “objective” conditions are a legitimate yard-
and Myers remained committed to
stick, what is the measure of social health that specifies the pathol- a definition that includes an “objec-
tive phase”—a “verifiable condition,
ogy? The main (if often implicit answer) in the interwar years was
situation, or event.”
order—stability in the face of rapid, centrifugal social change. “Social
disorganization” was the ur-problem, in other words—the byproduct
of modernity expressed through crime, poverty, and the other spe-
cific problems. An alternative approach, one that looked to prevailing
norms, gained some traction in the s: A social problem is defined
by the gap between consensus values and conditions on the ground.
If social scientists can identify the norms and their violation, they
can name the pathology. A late-appearing rival to the order and norm
theories, which won significant uptake only in the s, dispensed
with objective conditions altogether. A social problem, on the strong
subjectivist view, is what people call a social problem.
The point is that a discourse on problem status—a running debate
on the definition of a “social problem” itself—developed alongside
the teaching and empirical study of specific pathologies. The dis-
putes and definitional struggles took place, for the most part, among
sociologists, but they are, nevertheless, relevant to the analysis of
problems of society in general. The act of naming problems, in 35
There is no robust history of the “so-
cial problems” discourse in American
patterned repetition, has helped to call those very problems into
sociology. The best overview is Senn
existence—and to attract the attention of a growing number of ob-
and Senn, “What is a Social Problem?”
servers to their significance. There is a creative, illocutionary char- See also Martindale, “Social Disorga-
nization”; and Spector and Kitsuse,
acter to the designation of social pathology. So too with the running
2 3
Constructing Social Problems, chaps. – ,
deliberation—the meta-discourse, as it were—over what elevates a
though the narrative is set up against
the authors’ theory. Two other brief
topic to problem status. Our own approach, moreover, to the prob-
histories appeared in the Handbook
lems of society and their study—the object of this volume—is in-
on the Study of Social Problems: Rose,
debted to the discourse, in particular the subjectivist turn of the “History and Sociology of the Study
of Social Problems”; and Chall, “Notes
s. So it is worth recounting here.
Toward a History of the Literature of
As we have seen, Ellwood’s textbook initiated the ad hoc tra-
Social Problems.”
dition of social problem designation: Social problems, in effect, are
introduction whose social problems 10
: ?
what sociologists think they are. That there are identifiable “social
evils” was, for Ellwood, a given, and so his stepwise elaboration re-
quired no warrant. The pathologies were announced by the chapter
titles: “The Problem of the Modern Family,” “The Immigration Prob-
lem,” “The Problem of the City,” and on down the list. Ellwood’s 36
Ellwood, Sociology and Modern Social
5 6 13
1919 Problems, – , .
textbook was re-issued in in an enlarged edition, and by the
middle of the next decade four competitors had emerged to serve the
proliferating core course in the discipline. These five texts, placed 37
Ellwood, Sociology and Modern Social
Problems, rev. and enlarged ed. The
side by side, demonstrate the arbitrary (or at least eclectic) charac-
others were Binder, Major Social Prob-
ter of the problem selection process. Only the family is named as a
lems ( ); Parsons, An Introduction to
problem across all five books, while just poverty and labor conditions Modern Social Problems ( ); Beach,
An Introduction to Sociology and Social
appear in three. There is a long tail of singletons (like “The ‘revolt
Problems ( ); and Queen and Mann,
of the young’ ” in one, or “The drug habit” in the other), and just a 1925
Social Pathology ( ). Two other ma-
jor texts appeared in : Odum’s
handful of topics that appear twice: race, immigration, crime, health,
Man’s Quest for Social Guidance; and
education, and war. Perhaps it is fitting that a sociologist, writing in
Bossard’s Problems of Social Well-Being.
1929 396 1929
, managed to identify “major” social problems. A survey of departments found
that Queen and Mann, Odum, and
A survey of American sociology departments, published that year,
Bossard were the most frequently used.
found that over half offered a generic “Social Problems” course, with
Reinhardt, “Trends in the Teaching of
‘Social Problems,’ ” .
many programs also reporting specialized courses such as “Drug
38 396
Bowden, “Our Major Social
Addiction and Alcoholism.” The departments, taken together, listed
Problems.” Wrote Bowden: “We have
distinct problems covered in their core “Social Problems” courses, 397
many social problems.” .
though a handful of topics stood out: poverty, crime, the family, race
problems, population, immigration, and divorce were each reported
by about two-thirds of respondents. So some stability—perhaps 39
Reinhardt, “Trends in the Teaching of
‘Social Problems,’ ” .
achieved through self-generated momentum, cross-pollination, and
the textbook/course interplay—was evident by the end of the decade.
We conducted our own analysis of textbooks published in the
early postwar years, tallying the chapter-problems of the six leading
volumes. Some of the same topics were prominent: crime and the 40
The six were selected on the basis
of a total count of book reviews from
family appeared in all six books, with race and poverty included in
1930 1960
to in JSTOR’s “Sociology”
all but one volume. A few of the leading problems in were less
journal collection, with the earliest
1950 1950
salient by the early s: Only three books devoted a chapter to edition appearing in the s chosen
for analysis. The books are Horton and
immigration, with still fewer devoted to population (two) or divorce
Leslie, The Sociology of Social Problems
(one). Newly prominent on the textbook agenda were mental health 1955
( ); Landis, Social Problems in Nation
and World ( ); Merrill, Social Problems
(five chapters) and education (four)—neither of which had made the
( ); Neumeyer, Social Problems and
top ten in . Perhaps reflecting the temper of the time, chapters on
the Changing Society ( ); Raab and
civil liberties, natural resources, and mass communication each made Selznick, Major Social Problems ( );
and Weaver, Social Problems ( ).
an appearance.
The topical drift over the decades is one index of what long
prevailed as the main method for identifying problems: the fiat of
sociologist-authors. This untheorized, taken-for-granted adhocracy— 41
The unarticulated selection pro-
cess remains a fixture of the textbook
together with an unexamined substrate of gauzy reformism—was
market, as Joel Best observed in :
already provoking critique in the interwar years. The charge of
“publishers continue to churn out old-
reformism was, to a point, fair. The interwar social problems ori- style, theoretically incoherent textbooks
introduction whose social problems 11
: ?
entation was predicated on faith in guided progress. The common
for traditional problem-of-the-week
courses.” Best, “Whatever Happened to
view was that—with the help of social science, moral uplift, and
Social Pathology?” .
modest government intervention—modernity’s rough edges could
This avoidance of theory was a point
be smoothed out. This bundle of assumptions was shared with other 1910
of pride to Ellwood back in : The
book, he wrote, “is not intended to be a
Progressive reformers, and consistent, too, with most of the American
contribution to sociological theory, and
discipline’s late nineteenth-century pioneers. The basic idea was that
no attempt is made to give a systematic
the onrush of social change had outpaced society’s ability to hold presentation of theory. Rather, the
student’s attention is called to certain
itself together—but that “social control” could be re-established. The
obvious and elementary forces in the
agitations of urban-industrial civilization, in other words, had so jos-
social life, and he is left to work out his
own system of social theory.” Ellwood,
tled the social order that social problems—byproducts of disorder—
Sociology and Modern Social Problems, .
had shaken loose. These problems, crucially, were fixable: Social
institutions and norms, with the aid of social science, just needed to
catch up with social reality. Social problems, whatever their magni-
tude, were amenable to social intervention.
Summarized in the language of the time, social problems re-
sulted from the “social disorganization” generated by “cultural lag,”
thereby requiring the remedy of “social control.” This worldview 43
“Social control” was already in
wide circulation by the s. “Social
furnished, for interwar American sociologists, an implicit theory
disorganization” was popularized by
of social pathology. Social problems were problems of modernity,
W. I. Thomas and Florian Znaniecki’s
brought on by the kinetic novelty of the factory floor and tenement The Polish Peasant in Europe and America
( ), while “cultural lag” was not
congestion. Social order was the background against which problems
coined by Chicago sociologist William
were identified. What then counts as a social problem? Disorder, the 1922
Ogburn until . Ogburn, Social
Change, Part IV. Even so, the ideas
unraveling of norms, the attenuation of social bonds, as expressed in
behind cultural lag and behind social
the broken family or the juvenile delinquent. The task of the sociolo-
disorganization were prevalent from
gist, in the view of interwar social pathologists, was to diagnose the the beginning of the social problems
tradition. Take the case of Ellwood’s
breakdown of order—the deviations from the solidarity that society’s
initial text: “old habits are usually
progress required. Theirs was, in other words, an under-articulated
not replaced by new habits without
an intervening period of confusion
functionalism, with cohesion as the normative benchmark. The prob-
and uncertainty. In other words, in the
lems, moreover, were linked to solutions: The social scientist not only
transition from old habit to the new
named the pathology, but also lent a hand in devising the treatment. habit there is much opportunity for
disorganization and disintegration.”
For most interwar authors, the point was not explicit activism—
Ellwood, Sociology and Modern Social
which, after all, smacked of social work and moralistic reformism. 131
Problems, .
Instead, the sociologist, and perhaps social science as a whole, fur- From Ellwood on, the social problems
literature took exquisite pains to distin-
nished expert guidance to the actual agents of social control.
guish sociology and/or social science,
So the mainline stance toward social problems was objectivist:
with its scientific character, from the
1920 work of reformers, social workers, and
Pathologies are real and discernible. Already by the mid- s, how-
legislators.
ever, a dissenting view crept in, one that insisted on public recognition
for an issue to count as a problem. Writing in , the sociologist
Clarence Case tethered problem status to the “attention of a consid-
erable number of competent observers within a society,” who clamor
for a social remedy. Case’s was the first articulation of a subjectivist
alternative, one that (in his words) sees a social problem as “partly
a state of the social mind and hence not purely a matter of unfavor-
able objective conditions.” Here public consternation was a necessary,
introduction whose social problems 12
: ?
if not yet sufficient, criterion for problem status: The “public mind
. . . recognizes the existence of the problem; and perceives also the fact
that it must be collectively solved.” This alternative to the prevailing
certitude—that there were problems out there that sociologists can
identify—was, in a way, subjectivist twice over. The social scientist
deferred to the public’s judgment that a state of affairs is problematic,
which also entailed deference to a set of social norms—the ones that
were violated. There was even a third dimension of relevant public
belief: the shared view that a given problem is in fact addressable.
For all the weight he granted to collective belief, Case preserved a
role for objective inquiry: A social scientist must still ratify that “ad-
verse social conditions” obtain. 45
Case, “What is a Social Problem?”
268 269 271
, , (italics in the original).
Case’s qualified subjectivism was subsequently endorsed by a
Case staked out his claim against
number of other interwar sociologists who emphasized the impor-
Hornell Hart’s definition, which
tance of value conflict in the definitional process. Indeed, Richard hinges on (objectively) measured
impact: “A social problem is a problem
Fuller’s quarrel with the mainstream “social disorganization ap-
which actually or potentially affects large
proach” concerned its neglect of clashing norms. Warring interest
numbers of people in a common way so that
it may best be solved by some measure or
groups cannot even agree on what counts as a problem, let alone a
measures applied to the problem as a whole
solution, since they bring incompatible values to the battlefield. Con-
rather than by dealing with each individual
sider the “problem” of unemployment, which many economists and as an isolated case, or which requires
concerted or organized human action.”
employers take to be an inevitable by-product of a market economy.
Hart, “What is a Social Problem?”
Treating labor-market conditions, in this example, “as if they were 349
(italics in the original). Hart, Case
notes, defines a social problem “in
objective states of social disorganization gets us nowhere.” The “clash
terms of objective data.” For Case,
of social interests” is the core of any social problem, and so the task
“these are not social problems in the
of the social scientist is to analyze that definitional struggle. Thus, full sense, but simply the adverse
conditions of life which form one side
according to Fuller and a co-author, social problems are “what people
of social problems, the other being the
think they are.” Conditions on the ground matter, but they do not
more or less prevalent social attitude
toward those conditions.” Case, “What
“assume a prominent place in a social problem until a given people
is a Social Problem?” .
define them as hostile to their welfare.”
Waller, “Social Problems and the
The objectivist view—that social problems exist regardless of
Mores”; Fuller, “Sociological Theory
and Social Problems”; Fuller, “The
whether people recognize them—persisted into the postwar decades.
Problem of Teaching Social Problems”;
Merton and Nisbet, for example, assigned sociologists the task of
Fuller, “Social Problems”; and Fuller
identifying those latent problems that the public failed to acknowl- and Myers, “Some Aspects of a Theory
49 of Social Problems.”
edge. But proponents of a more subjectivist cast were increas-
Fuller, “The Problem of Teaching
ingly vocal, notably within the new Society for the Study of Social 421 422
Social Problems,” , .
Problems (SSSP). The emergence of labeling theory was especially Fuller and Myers, “Some Aspects of a
Theory of Social Problems,” . Every
important. As outlined in Edwin Lemert’s Social Pathology ( )
social problem, therefore, has “both an
and popularized by Howard Becker’s Outsiders ( ), labeling the-
objective and a subjective aspect.”
ory proposed that normative majorities assign deviant status to the Writes Merton, in the volume’s
50 conclusion: “For the sociologist to
nonconformist minorities in their midst. So deviance—and by ex-
confine himself only to the conditions
tension other kinds of social pathology—has nothing to do with
in society which a majority of people
regard as undesirable would be to
“bad” behavior itself. “The deviant is one to whom that label has
exclude study of all manner of other
been successfully applied,” wrote Becker in . “Deviant behav-
conditions that are in fact at odds with
ior is behavior that people so label.” Becker and other self-styled the declared values and purposes of
introduction whose social problems 13
: ?
sociologists of deviance, in effect, turned the study of social prob-
those who accept or endorse these
conditions. Such a limitation would
lems on its head. The foundational moral calculus, that problems are
require the sociologist to subscribe to
problematic, was discarded in favor of an underdog morality—one
an extreme subjectivism, under the
that, at least implicitly, celebrated the outsider. This shift reflected self-deceiving guise of retaining the
objectivity of the scientific observer.”
a more general drift away from the small-town meliorism that C.
Merton, “Social Problems and Sociolog-
Wright Mills had mocked. The postwar “social problems” discourse, 708
ical Theory,” .
at the SSSP and within its Social Problems journal, was more insis- Lemert, Social Pathology; and Becker,
Outsiders. In an insightful paper,
tently qualitative, sympathetic to the stigmatized, and sensitive to the
Kai Erikson argued that deviance—
social process of definition. The new orientation registered the moral
far from a problem—is in fact crucial
for the renewal and sustenance of
energies of the Civil Rights Movement, the student New Left, and
social order. “Thus deviance cannot be
the counterculture, as well as the wider postwar culture of expressive
dismissed as behavior which disrupts
individualism that, in myriad ways, celebrated nonconformity. The stability in society,” he wrote, “but
is itself, in controlled quantities, an
1960 70
congealing, in the late s and s, of “symbolic interactionism” as
important condition for preserving
a self-conscious alternative to mainstream sociology—erected around
stability.” Erikson, “Notes on the
Sociology of Deviance,” .
Herbert Blumer’s influential reading of George Herbert Mead—was
51 9
Becker, Outsiders, .
a crucial development too. Much of the subsequent sociology of de-
52 1968
In a remarkably scabrous take-
viance was conducted under its banner, and even the early postwar
down of his SSSP colleague Becker,
exemplars of the labeling approach were retroactively classified as Alvin Gouldner assailed the sociology
of deviance for its romantic embrace
interactionist.
of the stigmatized, characterized by a
1960 1970
The result was that much of the s and s “social problems”
“collector’s aesthetic.” Among other
things, the Becker approach lets the
scholarship—if not the typical textbook—filtered its work through a
“overdogs”—the truly powerful—
subjectivist lens. Becker himself, in the introduction to his Social
off the hook. His is the “sociology of
Problems: A Modern Approach, embraced Fuller’s “what people think young men with friends in Washing-
53 ton.” Gouldner, “The Sociologist as
they are” definition. But Becker also registered a wider turn to the
106 11
Partisan,” – . Gouldner’s critique
process of problem formation—to the messy, power-laden definitional
from the left is echoed in Liazos, “The
Poverty of the Sociology of Deviance.”
struggle over a problem’s “career.” To a significant degree, that is,
53 2 5
Becker, “Introduction,” – .
sociologists shifted their gaze from the underlying social issues to the
“The chapters of this book,” Becker
people and institutions that go about naming problems. This was, for
wrote, “do not so much treat ‘social
Becker and others, contested terrain, pockmarked by definitional con- problems’ as they do areas in which
various people—citizens, politicians,
flict among citizens, professional experts, politicians, and, of course,
professional experts, cultural critics,
social scientists. The problematic people, so called, were in the mix
social scientists, and other interested
parties—define many kinds of social
too, shaped by but also reacting to their ascribed deviancy—an es-
problems as arising.” Becker, “Introduc-
pecially salient point within a racialized public and policy discourse
tion,” .
that frequently blamed victims for their own plight and would in-
creasingly do so in the years to come. Becker, in , called on 55
On the politics of social scientific
problem definition, around poverty,
sociologists to “take the point of view of those who are defined as
deficiency, and race in particular, see
causing the problem instead of those who so define it.” His pro-
10 16
O’Connor, Poverty Knowledge, – .
posal was to assume the perspective of the “other”—to study, in W. 56 27
Becker, “Introduction,” .
E. B. Du Bois’s haunting phrase, how it feels to be a problem. On 57 1 3
Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk, – .
this view there are no social problems as such, just ways of seeing
people as problems—as nuts, sluts, and perverts, in Liazos’ critical
shorthand. 58
Liazos, “The Poverty of the Sociol-
ogy of Deviance,” . Leah Gordon
Problems, according to this new, more interactionist approach,
suggested this point in conversation.
have a natural history of sorts—a trajectory that the social scientist
introduction whose social problems 14
: ?
might trace. Inchoate concern and organized advocacy, often trans- 59
The idea that social problems have a
career, with identifiable stages, appears
mitted through mass media, generate the widespread recognition
in a number of reflective accounts from
that problem status requires. What follows, typically, is an institu-
the period.
tionalization of the problem: the emergence of organizations and
professionals who claim, in effect, custody. These are, to borrow a
pair of prominent concepts in the literature, “control institutions”
staffed by the “troubled persons professions”—such as social work or
policy analysis—that subsist on the putatively troubled. Once these 60
“Control institutions” are described in
Erikson, “Notes on the Sociology of De-
are established and institutionalized, the contest over “ownership”—
viance,” . Joseph Gusfield discusses
the authority to name the problem, suggest solutions, and marshal a
the “troubled persons professions” in
response—continues along lines of stratified power. “Constructing the Ownership of Social
432 33
Problems,” – .
It was inevitable, perhaps, that the century’s drift toward a more
Gusfield develops the idea of problem
definitional approach to the study of social problems would arrive at
“ownership” in his important book,
1973 10 13
a pure and uncompromising subjectivism. In a pair of papers, The Culture of Public Problems, – , in
the context of drunk driving.
sociologists John Kitsuse and Malcolm Spector staked out a strong
constructionist position, one that proudly neglects “real” social con-
ditions. They even faulted apparent allies, like Becker and Fuller, 62
Kitsuse and Spector, “Toward a Soci-
ology of Social Problems”; and Spector
for not going far enough—for clinging, needlessly, to the view that
and Kitsuse, “Social Problems: A Re-
objective conditions help establish problem status. The word “pu-
Formulation.” Spector and Kitsuse
tative” is the decisive departure in their definition of social problems: codified their approach in a book,
Constructing Social Problems.
“the activities of groups making assertions of grievances and claims with
Kitsuse and Spector, “Toward a So-
respect to some putative conditions.” The task of the social scientist is
412 13
ciology of Social Problems,” – .
to document and explain the claim-making, and nothing more than Kitsuse and Spector were right that
Case, Waller, Fuller, and even postwar
that. Spector and Kitsuse concede that actors often marshal evidence
labeling theorists such as Becker all
about social conditions, but those assertions are merely gist for the
carved out a role for the social scientist
to, in effect, verify the public’s problem
analytical mill: “Here their causal analysis, not the sociologist’s, is the
recognition by holding it up against
crucial input.” The process of claiming and naming—of calling out
actual social conditions. Becker: “Ob-
an issue as a problem—is what matters in the study of social prob- jective conditions are an important part
of our conception of a social problem,
lems. The intrinsic gravity of a problem is almost irrelevant; social
then, because the definition of a social
problem status is a symbolic achievement, resulting from a complex
problem by participants in the society
is likely to refer to a situation in society
and contested social baptism.
which can, as Fuller and Myers say, ‘be
In a paper, Herbert Blumer the Chicago veteran and godfa-
checked as to existence and magnitude
ther of symbolic interactionism—more or less anticipated the position (proportions) by impartial and trained
observers.’ ” Becker, “Introduction,” .
that Kitsuse and Spector would so forcefully propound. Social prob-
Kitsuse and Spector, “Toward a
lems are not born, Blumer claimed; they are made—legitimated, in 414 415
Sociology of Social Problems,” ,
(italics in original).
other words, through a process of collective definition. There is, he
wrote, a “selective process in which, so to speak, many budding so-
cial problems are choked off, others are ignored, others are avoided,
others have to fight their way to a respectable status, and others are
rushed along to legitimacy by a strong and influential backing.” 65
Blumer, “Social Problems as Collec-
tive Behavior,” .
Blumer, like others before him, highlighted the career of the typical
social problem—the series of stages through which a problem passes,
from legitimation to (in some cases) government intervention.
introduction whose social problems 15
: ?
So Blumer, in a sense, furnished a digest of the literature of re-
flection on social problems, or at least its terminus in subjectivism.
What distinguished his contribution, however, was its claim that
social scientists rarely have anything to do with that process of col-
lective definition. Blumer chided his fellow social scientists for their
policy pretensions and inflated sense of public efficacy. Social scien-
tific knowledge, to the extent it enters the definitional stream at all,
is often “ignored, distorted, or smothered by other considerations.” 66
Blumer,“Social Problems as Collective
Behavior,” .
Powerful interest groups, politicians, media coverage, public opin-
ion polls, outside shocks, and legislative horse-trading, among other
factors, are normally far more decisive than social science over the
course of a problem’s career. 67
Friedrich Hayek, in a well-known
essay, already pointed out the
We take issue with Blumer’s last point, even as we endorse the
growing influence of these “profes-
subjectivist program that his paper encapsulates. The chapters of this
sional secondhand dealers in ideas.”
volume, like the classic sociology textbook, are devoted to specific Hayek, “The Intellectuals and Social-
ism,” .
problems of society, one after another. It is true, too, that our selec-
tion process for the chapter-topics honors the view that social prob-
lems are what people say they are. But for us, and for this project,
the social scientist is decisive. The chapters’ attention, in other words,
lingers on those problems that economists, psychologists and the
rest—even sociologists—took to be most trenchant over the postwar
decades. Major research projects, commissions and reports, works
of public resonance, expert testimony—moments in which social sci-
entists and their work joined the definitional fray—are at the heart
of the volume’s topical chapters. These interventions often withered
on the vine of official indifference, as Blumer observed—or else reg-
istered their impact at the more subterranean level of language. But
social scientists, in each of the postwar cases, were among the sig-
nificant definers. They helped to designate the problems and—in
complex interplay with other social and political currents—to give
shape to the policy responses.
The point, contra Blumer, is that social scientists were in the mix,
as postwar America grappled with its increasingly visible challenges.
The chapters, with that baseline, attend to the relative contributions of
the social science disciplines—their shifting prominence and claims
to topical “ownership” vis-à-vis their counterparts. Here the case
of sociology is instructive: For all its preoccupation with the “social
problems” domain, the discipline has watched its rivals—notably
psychology and economics—lay increasingly credible claims to the
problems themselves.
introduction whose social problems 16
: ?
1.3 Disciplinary Division of Labor
By the time Richard Swedberg considered the history of interaction
between economics and sociology, in , economics imperialism,
with Gary Becker as its flag bearer, had made a name for itself. The
uncoordinated attempts that had characterized its beginnings in
the late s had now coalesced, creating new momentum for the
discipline’s inroads into the realm of other social sciences. Becker’s
“economic approach to human behavior” was now complemented by
a similar effort in sociology with the publication of James Coleman’s
monumental treatise in rational choice sociology—Foundations of So-
cial Theory—in . Disciplinary boundaries had inexorably shifted
and jurisdictional changes were not temporary or accidental. 68
Swedberg, Economics and Sociology;
and Coleman, Foundations of Social
As Swedberg described the nature of these changes, he offered a
Theory.
fourfold periodization of the relationship between economics and
social analysis: the time of political economy (late eighteenth to late
1880 1910
nineteenth century); the Methodenstreit ( s– s); mutual igno-
1920 1960
rance and distortion in the social sciences ( s– s); and eco-
nomic imperialism and the challenge of redrawing the boundaries in
the social sciences ( s–). As a broad characterization of changing 69
Swedberg, Economics and Sociology,
14 15
– .
boundaries, Swedberg’s periodization fares well, but its third and
fourth period suffer from imprecisions. It is surprising indeed that
the opening years of the “mutual ignorance” period coincide with the
creation of the Social Science Research Council and that its end dove-
tails with what can be considered as the closing of the most prolific
period for interdisciplinary work in the US social sciences. Likewise,
placing the start of economics imperialism in the s illustrates the
frequent emphasis on the movement’s heyday at the expense of its
1950 1960
first significant inroads in the late s and early s. To some ex-
tent, the shortcomings of Swedberg’s last two periods reflect his own
biases as an economic sociologist: the minimization of the role of
political science in the redefinition of the division of labor in the US
social sciences in the early s, and the temptation to cast sociology
as the main rival to economics in the s.
The changing division of labor among the US social sciences since
cannot be understood without bearing in mind that their prac-
titioners viewed disciplinary boundaries through the prism of solv-
ing important problems of society. Clearly by the first decade of
the twentieth century, the departmental structure of the American
university as we know it was in place—with the caveat that many
departments remained bi-disciplinary. It was, even into the s, 70 122 31
Abbott, Chaos of Disciplines, – .
common for sociologists to coexist with either economists or political
scientists in the same department. Likewise, most social sciences had
their own professional societies, which strengthened a nascent sense
introduction whose social problems 17
: ?
of identity among disciplinary brethren, but did not stand in the way
of organizing common annual meetings, which remained the norm
until the s. 71
Young, “The Emergence of Sociology
1920 from Political Economy in the United
By the early s, increasing specialization was already raising
States.”
fears. The tendency to disciplinary isolation accentuated those fears,
with the benefits of specialization often contrasted with the costs of
excessive departmentalization and compartmentalization. Special-
ization itself was not regarded as evil, but its acceleration in a time
of rapid social change could, according to this view, prove counter-
productive. The concern was that social scientists, confined to their
disciplines, were badly positioned to grasp and address problems
of a complex, interrelated, and fast-changing society. Specialization
encouraged intellectual particularisms which made synthesis—the
integration of research findings from different social sciences—more
problematic. Increased specialization accompanied the professional-
ization of social science disciplines, but it would be an exaggeration
to suggest that their practitioners saw problems of society as falling
under the exclusive jurisdiction of any particular discipline.
To varying degrees, each of the core social sciences—economics,
sociology, and political science—addressed problems such as crime,
addiction, the family, prejudice, poverty, and education. And in the
s, at least, they stood on similar footing, as measured by prestige,
legitimacy, and co-equal membership in the Social Science Research
Council (SSRC). By providing flexible institutional structures sup-
porting multidisciplinary research work, the SSRC, created in ,
helped address concerns raised by increased specialization. Its pri-
mary purpose was to advance the research methods of political sci-
ence and related social sciences by encouraging greater cooperation
between existing disciplinary associations, including the American
Statistical Association. By the mid- s, the American Psychologi-
cal Association, the American Anthropological Association, and the
American Historical Association had all joined the SSRC. As political
scientist and SSRC co-founder Charles Merriam pointed out, the or-
ganization was established to support “cases where problems overlap
the boundaries of one or more of the special fields concerned.” 72
See Worcester, Social Science Research
1920 Council, 1923–1998, ; and Merriam,
By the late s, the sociologist William Ogburn and the anthro-
“Annual Report of the Social Science
pologist Alexander Goldenweiser drew a portrait of the US social
Research Council,” .
sciences in which their interrelations, more than their general na-
ture, stood out: “The problems of living society,” they wrote, “do not
range themselves so as to fit the artificial isolation forced upon the
social sciences by differences of specific subject and method. These
problems are what they are. If they are to be solved, whatever knowl-
edge we possess about society must be called into service, wherever
needed.” 73
Ogburn and Goldenweiser, The Social
7 8
Sciences and Their Interrelations, – .
introduction whose social problems 18
: ?
Ogburn and Goldenweiser offered a handful of examples that,
with the exception of taxation—described as the concern of eco-
nomics and political science—would have slotted into most social
problems textbooks of the time. Thus, poverty was described as
falling in the domains of psychology, economics, sociology, politi-
cal science, ethics, and education. With a few variations, the same
argument was repeated for immigration, race problems, and crime.
Ogburn and Goldenweiser’s book stood as a good illustration of the
position of leading social scientists on disciplinary specialization in
the wake of the SSRC’s creation. Increased specialization allowed for
greater professionalization and more “scientific” approaches, but so-
cial problems themselves did not fall under the exclusive preserve of
any single discipline.
In the eyes of Ogburn and Goldenweiser and many others, synthe-
sizing the research findings of various social sciences appeared much
more important than sanctifying their modes of expertise. Synthesis
was supposed to open new horizons for future developments in the
US social sciences, but with the unprecedented economic crisis of the
s, the sense of urgency thrust certain disciplines in the forefront.
In the process, it became even more obvious that the pressing prob-
lems of American society not only did not “fit the artificial isolation
forced upon the social sciences by differences of specific subject and
method,” but actually played a role in redrawing the boundaries at-
tached to these differences. Until the late s, social scientists had 74
Ogburn and Goldenweiser, The Social
Sciences and Their Interrelations, .
tended to emphasize interdisciplinary cooperation as a prerequisite
for solving social problems. With the crisis of the s, however, un-
even participation in policy-making marked the disciplines’ diverging
fortunes.
With the Great Depression and the New Deal, the pace of social
change continued to occupy the minds of social scientists, if only
because there was so much uncertainty as to the kind of social or-
der that would emerge from those troubled years. Yet, the threat
that large-scale economic disorganization posed to capitalism itself
quickly took precedence. As Charles Camic has shown, the s
were not a happy time for sociologists, whose nascent public stature
suffered at the expense of other social scientists, economists in par-
ticular. Among the significant changes in the substance and organi-
zation of American culture, Camic listed “a fundamental reordering
of the prestige hierarchy of academic disciplines as a result of trends
that predated the Depression.” 75 226
Camic, “On Edge,” .
Even before economic hardship struck the whole US society, in-
deed, there was a gradual shift in emphasis towards economic prob-
1920 1921
lems following the depression of – . Though social problems
still concerned the community of social scientists as a whole, the
introduction whose social problems 19
: ?
centrality of economic problems in American society, together with
Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover’s marked trust in economic
expertise, granted economists a comparative advantage over other
social scientists. As early as August , plans were discussed for a
study of recent economic changes, which would improve the under-
standing of the American economy as a whole with the aim to draw
down unemployment. Following the recruitment of collaborators,
work and discussions were undertaken under the directorship of eco-
nomic historian Edwin Gay and empirical economist Wesley Mitchell
from the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Both Gay
and Mitchell were known for promoting the collection of data as a
major resource in the search for the solutions to society’s problems. 76
It is worth remembering that Gay and
Mitchell played an important role in the
That two institutional economists found themselves at the center
creation of the NBER in and the
of a national survey commissioned by the federal government need
SSRC in .
not be taken as evidence that policymakers favored one stream of
thought over another, or that economics alone carried professional
expertise. The growing faith in professional expertise was tethered to
statistical methods more than disciplinary background, so differences
in recognition depended on social scientists’ familiarity with these
methods as much as their activism in the service of society, with
Mitchell illustrating the former trait and Gay the latter. When it came
to advising policymakers, however, differences in theoretical orien-
tations within economics could prove influential, because different
conceptions of disciplinary boundaries implied differential attention
to noneconomic factors in devising solutions to economic problems.
Institutional economists such as Mitchell and Gay showed greater
sensitivity to the relationships between economic and social organiza-
tion than their neoclassical counterparts, a tendency that helped give
quantitative economic research greater public relevance than it would
have had otherwise.
The Committee on Recent Economic Changes’s final report was
completed in February . As Gay noted in the introduction, the
report emphasizes the causes of American prosperity and suggests
that its current features resembled those of “former major periods of
prosperity.” As he referred to maladjustments of economic growth,
Gay likewise found similarities with the past, but also noted that “the
rapidity and vigor of growth of some elements is so great as seri-
ously to unbalance the whole organism.” In an argument reminiscent
of the cultural lag hypothesis, Gay observed a shift in the “psycho-
logical attitude” towards change in material conditions, with “quick
adaptation and rapid mutation” increasingly regarded with “more
social concern.” The economic historian hinted that “something dis-
tinctly different from our former experience is taking place” and that
“there seem now to be differences of degree which approach differ-
introduction whose social problems 20
: ?
ences in kind.” Gay’s remarks should not be taken as prophesizing 77 10 12
Gay, “Introduction,” – .
the coming economic crisis; instead, they reflected acute perception
that change in the adaptive culture failed to synchronize with change
in the material culture, making the perspective of a new type of social
organization altogether likely. It is ironic that such concern, which
emerged in a time of accelerated changes accompanying economic
prosperity, became even more paramount when policymakers began
to ponder the best way to adjust social organization to the economic
1920 1930
dislocations of the late s and early s.
From that perspective, the decision of now-President Hoover to
create the multidisciplinary Research Committee on Social Trends
in the autumn of is less perplexing. The Committee, the culmi-
nation of the growing stature of the social sciences throughout the
s, seemed especially suited to dealing with the undesirable social
consequences of economic prosperity. Yet by the time its report was
published in , after four years of economic hardship, its moti-
vation was hardly in phase with current preoccupations. In keep-
ing with the spirit of the s, the report viewed the “outstanding
problem” of American society “as that of bringing about a realiza-
tion of the interdependence of the factors of our complicated social
structure, and of interrelating the advancing sections of our forward
movement so that agriculture, labor, industry, government, education,
religion and science may develop a higher degree of coordination in
the next phase of national growth.” In a time of severe recession, that
concern seemed incongruous to say the least. More importantly, in
keeping with the emphasis on the social consequences of economic
prosperity, the report presented itself as a study of social change,
pointing to the interrelations between various social trends at a time
when economic changes were on everyone’s mind. Of course, the
contributors to the volume saw economic changes, like many other
changes, as parts of a broader pattern of overall social change, but the
“central view of the American problem as revealed by social trends”
cut against the inclination to concentrate on economic concerns in the
midst of a depression. 78
President’s Research Committee on
Social Trends, Recent Social Trends, xii,
Whatever interest sociologists and other social scientists might
xiii. Comparing its work to Hoover’s
have had in economic matters, it is understandable that economics,
Committee on Recent Economic
which was still methodologically pluralistic at the time and certainly Changes, Mark C. Smith presents
the Committee on Social Trends project
more open to the other social sciences than it became after World
as a “similar but more ambitious study
War II, acquired the status of a reference discipline in the eyes of
of American society.” Smith, Social
Science in the Crucible, .
policymakers. Though the merits of economists and the impact of
their ideas on economic policymaking were already recognized in the
pre-New Deal era, the kind of stature the discipline achieved during
the New Deal was of a different nature. Its practitioners’ strong
introduction whose social problems 21
: ?
commitment to objectivity and quantification combined with a sense
of economic urgency to create unprecedented expectations. 79
Barber, From New Era to New Deal.
1930 Likewise, Michael A. Bernstein’s A
Perilous Progress offers a detailed story
Keynes, but the message of The General Theory of Employment, Interest,
of the years prior to , pointing
and Money reached the United States much later. If one wants to form to the gradual strengthening of the
economics profession, its sensitivity to
a clear idea of the influence of economists on the public stage in the
objectivity, and its participation in the
United States, a good place to start is with US economics itself. By
realization of a public purpose.
the mid- s, the discipline encompassed a variety of perspectives—
a pluralism inadequately captured by the sharp distinction between
neoclassicism and institutionalism. Economics allowed for a variety 80 1920
Roger Backhouse notes: “In the s
and s, US economics was plural-
of theoretical approaches at the same time that its policy recommen-
istic.. . . Classical economists (Frank
dations, being less systematized, suffered from inadequate disci-
Taussig at Harvard) and institutionalists
plinary demarcation. As a result, the distinction between abstract (John Commons at Wisconsin and Wes-
ley Mitchell and John Maurice Clark at
and empirical work lacked the clarity it later achieved. The absence
Columbia) flourished alongside neoclas-
of a common theoretical framework encompassing pure and applied
sical economists (Irving Fisher at Yale)
1930 and Marshallians (Edward Chamberlin
economics meant that the shared identity of economists in the s
at Harvard). Some individuals defied
resulted more from efforts at “shaping an authoritative community,”
classification (Frank Knight at Iowa and
to use Michael A. Bernstein’s phrase, than from attempts at defining then at Chicago). By , all this had
changed, and neoclassical economics,
an orthodoxy around a certain conception of scholarly research. The
or at least the neoclassical synthesis
identity of economists built upon a professionalizing, not a disci-
of Paul Samuelson’s textbook, was
unquestionably dominant.” Backhouse,
plinarizing, vision.
“The Transformation of US Economics,
While economists, together with political scientists and legal
1920 1960 85
– ,” .
scholars, filled top New Deal policy posts, sociologists continued
to publish “social problem” treatises to a curiously indifferent public.
Though plainly relevant to the decade’s struggles, sociology’s litany
of social problems fell outside the main New Deal frame. Sociol- 81
Camic, “On Edge.”
ogists were not long in registering the weakening of their position
in academia and among policymakers. Throughout the s, they
missed no opportunity to voice their concern about the discipline’s
lowly place in society. They variously lamented the “almost complete
disregard of the depression in the programs of important sociolog-
ical meetings,” argued for increasing attention to the sociology of
economic relations, attributed the lesser influence of sociologists in
the current national crisis to an “inferiority complex,” and pointed to
the relatively greater role of economists in contemporary life and the
weak presence of sociologists in the bureaus, divisions, offices, and
sections of the Roosevelt administration. 82 1934
All these points are made in a
1934 Social Forces symposium devoted to
These concerns, voiced in a special issue of Social Forces, il-
examining questions concerning the
lustrated sociologists’ perceived need to deal with wider social and
role of sociology in the New Deal.
economic problems, which, as sociologist Luther L. Bernard put it,
“are not treated specifically under the heading of conventional eco-
nomics.” Bernard, the American Sociological Society’s president in
, added: “In fact such problems as those of poverty and relief,
social welfare, the standard of living, profits and social service, the
introduction whose social problems 22
: ?
function of capitalism in civilization, collective ownership and con-
trol, wages and welfare, child labor and child welfare, conditions
of work, and social reform can be treated adequately only from a
sociological standpoint.” The reference to conventional economics
implied that sociology could join with alternative streams of thought,
institutional economics in particular, which were closer to the other
social sciences and took these problems seriously. At the same time,
Bernard’s chauvinist claim that a “sociological standpoint” was re-
quired suggested that sociologists should hold the upper hand in this
potential collaboration. 83
Bernard, Contribution to “Questions
167 68
1930 for Sociology,” – . Camic places
In the late s, the growing significance of ideologies of eco-
the arguments of sociologists within
nomic planning notwithstanding, social scientists outside economics
two broader, distinct strategies: one that
had not relinquished the hope for a brighter future. Moreover, the made economic and political changes
associated with the Depression and
role of institutional economists in the New Deal left the door open
the New Deal expressions of long-term
for consideration of solutions that took the contributions of other
cultural trends, and the other that
emphasized mores, customs, values,
social sciences into account. As we have seen, sociologists showed
ideals, and attitudes and the particular
growing awareness of the need to make a special effort to demon-
institutions that supported them.
1937 277 80
strate the public significance of their field. In , a number of Camic, “On Edge,” – .
Balisciano, “Hope for America.”
“monographs appeared in print, under SSRC’s imprint, with the
titles standardized in the form of Research Memorandum on [X Topic] in
the Depression. The thirteen topics covered were family, religion, edu-
cation, rural life, internal migration, minority peoples, crime, health,
recreation, reading, consumption, social work, and relief policies.”
With a few exceptions, the topics addressed resembled those appear-
ing in the social problems literature of the time, even though the con-
tributing authors were not all associated with that tradition. This 85 268
Camic, “On Edge,” .
initiative did not produce durable results and eventually failed in its
attempt to strengthen a sociological vision of the Depression on the
public stage. The divisions in sociology did not help, but economics
was not especially unified either. Its greater public recognition by the
end of the s derived from a special combination of disinterested
scholarship, unmistakable resonance with current problems, and a
sense of identity based on professional expertise.
By the time the war started, the division of labor in the core social
sciences was mostly unchanged. In political science, from the early
s, various efforts to bring a scientific viewpoint to the study of
politics and to define the discipline as a policy science won its prac-
titioners more recognition on the public stage. Different disciplines
were nominated as suitable complements to political science in its
analysis of political questions: psychology and statistics for Charles
Merriam, physics for Bennett Munro, and classical economics for
George E. G. Catlin. As the role of political scientists in the New 86
Somit and Tanenhaus, The Develop-
ment of Political Science, 110– .
Deal amply demonstrated, however, the discipline enjoyed enough
introduction whose social problems 23
: ?
professional credit for its own expertise over political systems to be
recognized. 87
Writing on the nature of the social
sciences in the mid- s, Charles A.
In sociology, too, avowed appeals to science and quantitative meth-
Beard noted that political science “is
ods gained traction from the s and, as in political science, that
that division of social study which is
aspiration coexisted with a professed belief in the necessary involve- concerned with government.. . . It is
usually a plane-surface description
1920 1930
ment with public issues. Up to the late s and early s, sociol-
of those aspects of human nature
ogy to a large extent centered on the study of social problems, which
and human activity which pertain to
government.” Beard, The Nature of the
more or less coincided with the problems of US society. The New
Social Sciences, .
Deal marked a turning point, as we have seen, with economic prob-
lems acquiring increased political salience. Sociologists suffered from
their relative neglect of economic issues, but eventually reacted by
arguing that their discipline offered a broader treatment of the prob-
lems affecting US society. Reorganizing the insights of economics and
political science within a broader sociological framework could help
restore sociologists’ public stature.
While it is undeniable that the s marked an important stage
in the quantification of economics, the consolidation of its profes-
sional authority, and the affirmation of its relevance for the treatment
of public problems, it would be an exaggeration to suggest that its
estrangement from other social sciences had already begun. Part of
its success derived from its concentration on economic problems at
a time when those called for special attention. Yet, in the late s
and early s, economics was still methodologically pluralistic and
its internal diversity comparable to those of political science and so-
ciology. Within the division of labor in the social sciences, the place
of economics had not changed much from the s, even though its
position in their hierarchy had certainly improved.
The war itself created an even more challenging combination of
circumstances for the social sciences, with new problems coming to
the fore. Professional societies reacted to this sea change with vari-
able success, which eventually impacted the relative prestige of social
science disciplines on the public stage. The impact of the war on so-
cial science is well-known. The government’s need for rapid solutions
together with its lack of patience for departmental boundaries took
prewar efforts to mobilize social science to a new scale and encour-
aged a move in the direction of problem-oriented, cross-disciplinary
team work. That does not mean that the government had a definitive
idea of its actual needs, or that social scientists knew precisely the
nature and scope of their possible contribution. But overall, the two
parties found their bearings and established a form of collaboration
that survived the war for two decades before a new turn towards
specialization, helped by a new patronage system, began around the
mid- s. 88
Crowther-Heyck, “Patrons of the
Revolution.”
introduction whose social problems 24
: ?
Rather than changing the division of labor entirely, the war con-
fronted its practitioners with new questions and new forms of re-
search organization that made that division less constraining. In the
process, wartime service favored greater awareness of applied work
and more opportunity for disciplinary interaction. The prewar social
sciences did not lack applied and interdisciplinary ambitions, but war
problems, of a different nature from those of adjusting to modernity,
provided even more incentive for social scientists to cross disciplinary
boundaries. Leaving their departments to join governmental agen-
cies, social scientists were encouraged to curb their natural inclina-
tion to consider problems—economic, political, and sociological—
primarily associated with their own discipline. The enthusiasm for
interdisciplinary work came together with a conception of what it
meant to be scientific based on methods of investigation rather than
objects of study.
Many social scientists, notably economists, sociologists, and po-
litical scientists, were recruited to the war effort, working in various
capacities and locations. Economists worked as general, technical 89
Backhouse and Fontaine, The History
186 88
of the Social Sciences since 1945, – .
problem-solvers, collaborating with natural scientists and engineers
as well as with other social scientists. They were especially active
in the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), the Enemy Objectives Unit,
and the Statistical Research Group, where they dealt with problems
related to military strategy and tactics as well as more traditional
economic topics. It was during the war that economists began 90
Guglielmo, “The Contribution of
Economists to Military Intelligence
to develop a sense of separation from the other social sciences—
During World War II.”
a self-segregation of the privileged that sharpened in the postwar
decades. 91
Pooley and Solovey, “Marginal to
the Revolution.” The self-segregation,
Sociologists’ experience in the war “comprised two types of
though real and traceable, was by
service—in war-related research and in the military.” Like economists,
no means absolute. A number of
sociologists worked in a number of agencies, including the OSS Re- economists made serious efforts
to work with other social scientists
search & Analysis Branch, the Army’s Research Branch, the Depart-
throughout the early postwar decades.
ment of Agriculture (where they represented a significant contin-
gent), and the Labor Department. To some extent, war service 92
Abbott and Sparrow, “Hot War, Cold
War,” .
helped sociology regain academic standing vis-à-vis its neighbors, in
part through ambitious cross-disciplinary projects with social psy-
chologists, anthropologists, and political scientists working in the
federal government’s sprawling propaganda bureaucracy.
Political scientists, with their ties to law and public administra-
tion, likewise participated in military activities and civilian work in
connection with national defense. As of , they were especially 93
Ogg, “News and Notes.”
active in two federal agencies: the Office of Price Administration,
where, together with economists, they helped keep prices under con-
trol and organize the rationing of consumer goods; and the Office
of the Coordinator of Information, an intelligence organization later
introduction whose social problems 25
: ?
divided into the OSS and the Office of War Information, where they
interacted with sociologists in particular.
By , political scientist Pendleton Herring, who held several
positions in Washington during the war, was already drawing con-
clusions from the mobilization of his peers: “As professors of a
distinctive discipline, we have taught our courses and expected of
our colleagues in other departments that respect for jurisdictional
boundaries which serves as the greatest safeguard to our schol-
arly mysteries and the readiest protection of academic amenities.
Changes are already upon us that promise to alter greatly these fa-
miliar and pleasant arrangements.” Like many of his colleagues who
had worked in wartime service, Herring was aware of the growing
interest of other social scientists in understanding governmental ac-
tivities and, as a result, concluded that “the study of governmental
problems cannot be the concern of one discipline to the same extent
as in the past.” At the same time, he noted that problems formerly
associated with the subject matter of other social sciences had piqued
the interest of political scientists. Overall, Herring viewed the process
of cooperation among the social sciences as a way of inventing new
tools of analysis and of creating new sources for data. 94
Herring, “Political Science in the Next
758 759
Decade,” , . A decade later, po-
Herring’s conclusions for political science could be easily extended
litical scientist David Easton continued
to the other social sciences, whose practitioners had similarly experi-
to deplore overspecialization and the
enced the increased permeability of disciplinary boundaries during disintegration of social knowledge “into
a multitude of intellectual feudalities,”
the war and its beneficial effects on knowledge creation and policy
but remarked: “Today this condition
relevance. Social scientists had objective reasons to think of them-
has stimulated a movement towards a
re-integration of our compartmental-
selves as active participants in the war effort, but their recognition
ized knowledge.” Easton, The Political
in the early postwar years did not match their actual contribution
System, .
and hardly equaled that of physical scientists. With the exception
of economists, whose recognition in high circles was made obvious
with the creation of the Council of Economic Advisers in , so-
cial scientists took painful measure of the gap between their sense of
accomplishment and their invisibility to policymakers. As the war
came to an end in Europe, George A. Lundberg, a former president
of the American Sociological Society, betrayed these mixed feelings
when he complained “that social research was [seen as] a kind of lux-
ury to which surplus funds might be devoted as a sort of advertising
stunt reflecting the benevolence of donors, or in any event as a side
issue not vitally concerned with the serious business of managing
society. If social research is really to flourish,” the quantitative so-
ciologist concluded, “this view must change. Sooner or later it will
change.” How long it took, exactly, is difficult to say, but it is clear 95
Lundberg, “The Social Sciences in the
Postwar Era,” 1 .
that the decade following World War II was not an easy ride for the
US social sciences.
introduction whose social problems 26
: ?
Economics’ gradual shift towards hypothetico-deductive modeling
marked its entry into a new era, with greater methodological agree-
ment and lessened contacts with other social sciences as the new
trends. For social sciences other than economics, the late s rein-
forced the view that they were lacking in comparison with the natu-
ral sciences. According to Michigan psychologist and academic en-
trepreneur Donald Marquis, the social sciences (economics included)
followed imperfectly the sequence of six steps supposed to charac-
terize the scientific process. The idea that the social sciences lagged 96
Marquis, “Scientific Methodology in
Human Relations.”
behind the natural sciences became the rhetoric of social scientists
willing to push the agenda of the so-called “behavioral sciences.”
Self-identified behavioral scientists endorsed a cross-disciplinary,
problem-oriented approach—compatible, in their view, with theoret-
ical and methodological sophistication akin to the natural sciences.
Disciplinary divides were routinely, and as a matter of principle,
breached, but the shared domains of study were not, for the most
part, oriented to the litany of social problems that had preoccupied
their interwar predecessors.
From the late s onward, the political context, notably the “an-
tifoundation sentiment in American politics,” was not especially fa-
vorable to the social sciences, as “they became deeply entangled with
the domestic and international dimensions of the Cold War.” As 97
Solovey, “Cold War Social Science,”
. See also Solovey, Shaky Foundations,
earlier criticisms about their confusion between social advocacy and
119– .
scientific objectivity resurfaced and took on a new political sharp-
ness, the wartime accomplishments of the social sciences were grad-
1940 1950
ually sidelined. From the late s to the mid- s, McCarthyism
impacted the social sciences and natural sciences alike, but the hier-
archy of the sciences, reinforced by the growing prestige of physics
after the war, protected the latter more than the former. The various
attacks against the social sciences tarnished their reputation, but they
did not stall—and may have even spurred—the effort to establish
legitimacy through natural-science mimicry. As a result, as suggested
by Roger Geiger, the social sciences were “far more vigorous by ,
and much less in need of reformation, than had been the case at the
end of the s.” 98
Geiger, Research and Relevant Knowl-
edge, . On the postwar campaign for
The porousness of disciplinary boundaries in war work and the
scientific legitimacy in social science,
effort to turn the experience of interdisciplinary interaction into a
see Haney, The Americanization of Social
model for future research did not, in themselves, shift any jurisdic- Science, chap. .
tional claims nor reorder the prewar hierarchy of prestige. The war
helped created new methods, new subfields, and new collabora-
tions, to be sure, but, overall, these changes were compatible with the
existing disciplinary structure. As it turned out, cross-disciplinary
research ventures represented an alternative form of production and
introduction whose social problems 27
: ?
dissemination of social scientific knowledge more than an effort to
loosen the disciplinary yoke. 99
Fontaine, “Introduction: The Social
Science in a Cross-Disciplinary Age.”
From that perspective, it is not surprising that the first serious
challenges to the prevailing disciplinary division of labor came from
social scientists who, with unblushing ambition, plied their tools
in the traditional domains of their disciplinary rivals. The opposite
tack—to assert that a discipline might learn from its peers—was,
perhaps predictably, less significant. Likewise, it is understandable 100
Economists nonetheless kept an eye
on other social sciences, if only because
that these ambitions developed within a discipline—economics—
they offered insights to enrich their own
that stood aloof from a movement—the behavioral sciences—that
discipline’s behavioral assumptions. See
presented comparable intentions. Backhouse and Fontaine, “Economics
and Other Social Sciences.”
The first significant incursions of economists into the domains of
Pooley and Solovey, “Marginal to the
the other social sciences came with Gary Becker’s work on discrimi- 199
Revolution,” .
nation and Anthony Downs’ on government action. Both projects 102
Sociologists Richard Swedberg and
Mark Granovetter noted “that scholars
concerned topics that had long been on the agenda of the other two
like Becker and Downs were extremely
core social sciences, sociology and political science, respectively.
important in being the first to challenge
1960 1970
Other works in this vein followed in the s and s, encroach- the peculiar division of labor between
economics and the other social sciences
ing on the jurisdiction of other disciplines and culminating with the
that had developed in the twentieth
publication of Becker’s Economic Approach to Human Behavior in .
century.” Swedberg and Granovetter,
“Introduction,” .
Some sociologists, in fact, received Becker’s work on discrimina-
Swedberg (“ ‘The Battle of the Meth-
tion with interest, on the grounds that it furnished theoretical struc-
ods,’ ” ) also mentioned the work of
ture to a domain of study that could appear as inadequately system- Alfred H. Conrad and John R. Meyer on
the history of slavery in the late s,
atized. Some economists, by contrast, were lukewarm—suspicious
but the use of the “economic approach”
that microeconomic tools were appropriate for the study of discrim-
in economic history cannot be put on
the same footing as its uses in sociology
ination, when their application within microeconomics itself posed
104 and political science, since economic
problems. In studying discrimination, Becker was entering the
history is an organized subfield of eco-
“social problems” scene at a time when this tradition was subject nomics. See Cole, “Economic History in
the United States.”
to strong competition within sociology itself. As they discussed
Fleury, “Wandering through the
“Change and Controversy in Recent American Sociology” in ,
Borderlands of the Social Sciences,”
19 29
– .
sociologists Seymour Martin Lipset and Neil Smelser located a ten-
sion between the scientific emphasis of present-day sociology and its
earlier policy orientation within the social problems tradition, which
they believed had “brought it [sociology] rapidly to the fore as a ma-
jor subject of research and study in the United States.” In sociology,
they argued, the shift away from a policy-oriented approach towards
a more scientific position was associated with the use of more sophis-
ticated methods of analysis, and a view of problems of society “as
part of an interdependent whole.” As we have seen with Merton 105
Lipset and Smelser, “Change and
Controversy in Recent American Sociol-
and Nisbet, the study of social problems could be adapted to a func-
41 43
ogy,” , .
tionalist approach. Though Becker’s effort did not go unnoticed, its
microeconomic focus and mathematical apparatus were poorly fit to
the picture of functional interdependence held by many sociologists.
Leading political scientists such as Charles Lindblom and Ed-
ward C. Banfield received Downs’ An Economic Theory of Democracy
introduction whose social problems 28
: ?
rather favorably, pointing to its elegant effort to systematize ideas
through hypothetico-deductive modeling, but noting as well that—
even though they had not yet been presented in the form of an ex-
plicit theory—some of its conclusions were already known to political
scientists. Economists did not pay special attention, but those who 106
Lindblom, “In Praise of Political
Science”; and Banfield, Review of An
did mentioned the book’s emphasis on the need to integrate political
Economic Theory of Democracy.
and economic theory.
Bergson, Review of An Economic
Though Downs’ book did not address a social problem per se,
Theory of Democracy. See also Diamond,
Review of An Economic Theory of Democ-
it did consider the role of modern democratic governments in eco-
racy, Journal of Political Economy, ,
nomic matters and, as such, related to a number of earlier debates
which speaks of “the assimilation of
which opposed a problem-oriented perspective to a more “scientific” politics to economics.”
approach. The book came out at the end of a period of debate for
behavioralism, an approach that linked scientific analysis in political
science with the use of quantitative methods—survey methods and
statistical analysis in particular. As noted by James Farr, some of the
most significant studies associated with behavioralism “placed voting
at the center of a model of representative democracy that down-
played the individual citizen and highlighted the competition for
votes among elites within an overall system of liberal institutions.” 108 323
Farr, “Political Science,” .
Robert Dahl, one of the movement’s originators, recalled that the
behavioral approach was intended to furnish the discipline with “em-
pirical propositions and theories of a systematic sort, tested by closer,
more direct and more rigorously controlled observations of political
events.” 109
Dahl, “The Behavioral Approach
1960 to Political Science,” . Dahl did
Like sociology, in the early s political science was marked by
just that in his Who Governs? The
“a mood of sympathy toward ‘scientific’ modes of investigation and
book was not just another contribution
analysis.” Published at a time when a number of political scientists to community research. For all its
grounding in the political system of
were trying to promote a “scientific outlook” through the analysis
New Haven, Connecticut, the volume’s
of individuals, Downs’ reliance on rational man provided a nice il-
reflection on the relationships between
the theory of democracy and empirical
lustration of the explanatory power attached to simple behavioral
results, with its special attention to
assumptions for the study of political behavior. Yet, as Dahl noted,
the fragmentation of influence and the
behavioral political scientists had a greater ambition, namely “under- intricacies of local politics, could not
but shed light on America’s challenges
standing the psychological characteristics of homo politicus: attitudes,
in exporting democracy.
belief, predispositions, personality factors.” And here he mentioned
examples from sociology, psychology, and political science—not eco-
nomics. 110
Dahl, “The Behavioral Approach in
766 769
1960 Political Science,” , .
Throughout the s, the continuing incursions of economists
into the domains of sociology and political science marked a shift
in the disciplinary division of labor in the three core social sciences.
Before Becker’s and Downs’ work, sociologists and political scien-
tists’ belief in the benefits of interacting with economics rested on the
experience of war service and multidisciplinary team work. Within
certain limits, that attitude continued to reflect the spirit of the SSRC
enterprise: Political scientists and sociologists alike held that learning
introduction whose social problems 29
: ?
from other social sciences was a necessary step in the vexing effort to
solve society’s problems.
With economists’ first attempts to investigate “noneconomic”
topics, differentiating the various social scientific approaches—the
economic, the political and the sociological—to problems of soci-
ety took precedence over their integration. To some extent, Becker’s
and Downs’ effort in the late s, and those of others in the early
s, marked the beginning of a declining concern for a general
understanding of society. That decline coincided with the waning of
a cross-disciplinary age in social science, with the individual disci-
plines set in new, competitive relief. It is no exaggeration to suggest
that economists, who had been used to cultivating their difference
with other social sciences, benefitted from that reorientation, which
later encouraged the affirmation and propagation of economic rea-
soning within society at large. In policy circles, too, economists 111
Craig Calhoun regards economics
as the main competitor to sociology in
revealed ambitions that would have appeared excessive only a few
the project of a general understanding
years earlier. By , as suggested by Bernstein, “federal economists
of social life. It should be made clear,
were now very much part of an effort to stimulate social and political however, that Calhoun talks about
112 claims not achievements, for neither
change in modern American society.”
sociology nor economics offer an inte-
As Hamilton Cravens rightly put it, “the social sciences were more
grative approach. Calhoun, “Sociology,
Other Disciplines and the Project of a
the creature of politics than the other way around.” This explains
General Understanding of Social Life,”
why the launch of the Great Society programs exacerbated tensions
112 139
within social science. The wave of programs and initiatives testified Bernstein, A Perilous Progress, .
Cravens, “Have the Social Sciences
to the recognition that persisting social and political ills deserved
Mattered in Washington?” .
special attention at a time when, by their own admission, sociologists
largely neglected social disruption and political scientists paid inad-
equate attention to political crises. For their part and despite notable
achievements, economists were reminded that policy shifts could
diminish their comparative advantage over the other social sciences—
making it crucial to reaffirm their jurisdictional claim over a variety
of social problems.
By the late s, the core social sciences found themselves in con-
trasting situations. Just as political scientist David Easton deemed
behavioralism in need of revamping, and hoped to see more intel-
lectual resources devoted to studying the problems of the day, so
Alvin Gouldner pointed to the crisis of Western sociology and hoped
to find a better reflection of social conflict in social theory. At about
the same time, economist Mancur Olson, then Deputy Assistant Sec-
retary for Social Indicators, felt the need to remind the readers of
The Public Interest that “if poverty is not an economic problem, then
nothing is.” And in case this was not clear enough, he insisted: “it
is futile to attempt to determine the division of labor between so-
cial science disciplines in terms of the objects they are supposed to
consider. Reality cannot be divided into departments the way uni-
introduction whose social problems 30
: ?
versities are, and no logically defensible division of subject matters is
possible. The various disciplines are, however, distinguished by their
prejudices and their methods.” 114
Easton, “The New Revolution in
Political Science”; Gouldner, The Coming
Social scientists outside economics had good reason for their frus-
Crisis of Western Sociology; and Olson,
tration. The effort to make their disciplines more publicly appeal-
“Economics, Sociology, and the Best of
ing in the past decade had produced mixed results, as if the shift All Possible Worlds,” .
away from social advocacy had eventually diverted them from prob-
lems themselves. While the scientific accomplishments of economics
translated into increased prestige, with the Council of Economic
Advisers standing as the epitome of economic expertise in policy
circles, those of other social scientists found lesser resonance among
policymakers—and sometimes occasioned skepticism, as illustrated
by the repeated failures of US Senator Walter Mondale’s bills to cre-
1960 1970
ate a Council of Social Advisers in the late s and early s. 115
Solovey, “To Measure, Monitor, and
1950 1960 Manage the Nation’s Social Progress.”
If the prosperity of US capitalism in the s and s was often
credited to economists, the social and political crises of the s
seemed to underscore the lack of relevance and meaningfulness of
other social sciences for understanding contemporary problems of
society.
1960 1970
From the late s through the s, changes in the economic
and political context, together with cultural shifts, fueled the ongoing
redefinition of the boundaries between the social sciences. Becker’s
Economic Approach to Human Behavior, published in , included
such subjects as discrimination, democracy, crime, fertility, marriage,
and, more generally, social interactions. Potentially, such a range of
issues could bring economics closer to sociology, especially as the
latter had experienced notable transformations in the late s and
early s. With the invention of a “mainstream” in sociology came
repeated critiques of its orientations and calls for reform. The re-
volt against the mainstream implied a greater role for issues such as
race, class, and gender, which partly paralleled Becker’s own effort in
economics. Yet, the heart of the “economic approach”—the “com- 116
Calhoun and VanAntwerpen, “Or-
thodoxy, Heterodoxy, and Hierarchy,”
bined assumptions of maximizing behavior, market equilibrium, and
376 85
– .
stable preferences, used relentlessly and unflinchingly”—suggested
less collaborative prospects. Moreover, Becker’s approach was in 117
Becker, The Economic Approach to
Human Behavior, 5.
tune with more general trends in the realm of ideas in a way that
sociology, with the emergence of neo-Marxian perspectives, was not.
Those trends historian Daniel Rodgers has aptly described as the re-
sult of a process whereby “conceptions of human nature that in the
post-World War II era had been thick with context, social circum-
stance, institutions, and history gave way to conceptions of human
nature that stressed choice, agency, performance, and desire.” 118 3
Rodgers, Age of Fracture, .
introduction whose social problems 31
: ?
1.4 From Social Problems to Individual Problems?
How do social problems come to exist and persist? The question has
threaded through the reflective literature on social problems that so-
ciologists have produced since the interwar years. Writing in , for
example, Richard Fuller proposed a “natural history approach,” with
the aim to trace the “common order of development through which
all social problems pass.” Some thirty years later, Malcolm Spector 119
Fuller and Myers, “The Natural
320 321
History of a Social Problem,” , .
and John Kitsuse rephrased the point with antiseptic precision: The
“central problem for a theory of social problems,” they wrote, “is to
account for the emergence, maintenance, and history of claim-making
and responding activities.” The idea that social problems have 120
Spector and Kitsuse, “Social Prob-
lems: A Re-formulation,” .
careers is, in short, a recurring theme.
Most of the major mid-century social problems remain, as it were,
recognized. Crime, poverty, addiction, and the others were, into
the new millennium, still considered problems of society. What
had changed, for many problem domains at least, was their public
etiology—the prevailing frame by which they were explained. Trends
in US politics and policy since the mid- s, registered by the social
sciences too, had challenged their “social” dimension.
C. Wright Mills, back in , furnished a useful vocabulary to
address this shift. In The Sociological Imagination, he lamented the
claustrophobic consciousness of everyday life in America. For most
people, problems are experienced as private—as a “series of traps.”
Problems that are, to Mills, manifestly social come across, to the
average American, as personal. Caught up in “private orbits” and
the “close-up scenes” of family and work life, the public has the
nagging sense that something is off. But they have lost the power, 121 1
Mills, The Sociological Imagination, .
Mills thought, to link their private struggles to structural forces—the
kind of linkage that the Great Depression, for example, had made
conspicuous.
Mills’ project was to encourage a new consciousness, a “socio-
logical imagination,” that restores the relationship between “the
personal troubles of milieu” and “the public issues of social struc-
ture.” Employment, war, marriage, the city: The key to the sociolog-
ical imagination, he claimed, is the awareness that these perceived
problems are “caused by structural changes”—and therefore resis-
tant to personal solutions. Mills’ complaint was that private troubles
are no longer translated into public issues: “Much private uneasi-
ness goes unformulated,” he wrote in , “much public malaise
and many decisions of enormous structural relevance never become
public issues.” The sociological imagination is Mills’ solution to a 122 8
Mills, The Sociological Imagination, ,
10 12
, .
meta-problem: The process by which society’s problems come to be
recognized has, he claimed, broken down.
introduction whose social problems 32
: ?
The distinction between public issues and private troubles, tren-
chant as it is, implies that the former—recognized social problems—
present a structural explanation by default. For Mills, a problem’s
private enclosure just means that it is understood as personal. Once
a concern wins public recognition, its systemic nature is (or so Mills
suggests) revealed too. But the lesson of the post- s era is that
public resonance and personal frames of explanation can co-exist.
Social problems can, in effect, be stripped of their social character. As
a whole, the social dimension of the problems has thinned out over
these decades. The prevailing explanatory schemes, and especially
those policy interventions with meaningful purchase, have been cast
in increasingly individual terms. And the declining significance of
the social has a correlate in the disciplinary division of labor: psy-
chology and economics lay claim to political territory once occupied
by sociology.
The waning of the social, as a cross-problem pattern, demands
an explanation. One clue, we think, resides in the broader US po-
litical economy. Scholars of the postwar social-problems array have
remarked on the decisive importance of the welfare state—even in
its limited, US form. Joseph Gusfield, in his SSSP presidential
address, argued that the very concept “social problem” is “embedded
in the development of the welfare state.” The idea that societies have
fixable problems—and that they have a responsibility to go about
fixing them—is, he noted, a recent development. Private troubles can
only become public issues once the modern, democratized state has
emerged. Its moral substrate is the “optimism of a sense of progress”
according to which “most of life’s difficulties are inherently remedi-
able.” For Gusfield, this entailed, among other things, the rise of 123
Gusfield, “Constructing the Owner-
ship of Social Problems,” .
the “troubled persons professions,” who service—and profit from—
the public’s will to intervene. For our purposes, the crucial point is
that the very conceivability of social problems as such—as social and
resolvable—presupposes an interventionist state. 124
The linkage of the welfare state,
1970 sociology, and social problems is a
Since the mid- s, of course, the US version of the postwar Key-
major theme of Alvin Gouldner’s The
nesian welfare state has come under unremitting attack. Sharp cuts to
Coming Crisis of Western Sociology.
safety net programs, selective deregulation, free-falling marginal tax Writes Gouldner: “The needs of the
new Welfare State, then, constitute
rates, and enfeebled union protections were secured, at different reg-
both the growth opportunities and the
isters, in both Republican and Democratic administrations through
limiting conditions that shape modern
1990 Academic Sociology as an institution;
the s. This bundle of changes, paired with steep upticks in in-
Academic Sociology flourishes in a
come inequality and labor precarity, is often called “neoliberalism”—
period when Keynesian economics
a term that, given its political freight and competing definitions, we permit effective intervention with re-
125 spect to the more traditional economic
use sparingly. For now, the welfare state’s partial rollback suggests
factors. Sociology is thus the N + I
a tantalizing question: If social problems, as such, presume an in-
science of the Welfare State, providing
it with an expert, university-based staff
terventionist state, what is their fate when intervention takes on an
which addresses itself to the ‘other,’ the
entirely new meaning? Might, in other words, a relationship obtain
noneconomic social problems:
introduction whose social problems 33
: ?
between the prevailing US political economy and the country’s desig-
racial conflict, deviant behavior, delin-
quency, crime, the social consequence of
nated problems? If so—and this is our crucial question—how are the
poverty.” Gouldner, The Coming Crisis of
social sciences implicated, if at all?
Western Sociology, .
We can only gesture at some tentative answers, supported by the
See Rodgers, “The Uses and Abuses
of ‘Neoliberalism,’ ” and the linked
volume’s chapters. There is, to be sure, nothing neatly causal to re-
forum: Ott et al., “Debating the Uses
port: The social sciences, in their changing configuration, did not
and Abuses of ‘Neoliberalism.’ ”
convert, as it were, public issues into private troubles in the quarter-
century since the Carter Administration. But the social sciences,
economics and psychology in particular, are in the explanatory mix.
To even approach the issue is to back into a sociology-of-knowledge
thicket, since there are so many layers of mutual entanglement: pop-
ular beliefs, the political system, the policy-making process, the influ-
ence industries, and the social sciences themselves. There are, more-
over, elective affinities—resonances—among the layers as they have
co-evolved in the postwar era, so that claims of directional influence
are cripplingly hard to sustain.
The chapters nevertheless document an overall drift since the
s: an attenuation of social ways of seeing society’s problems, and
their replacement, to some extent, by economic and psychological
framings. Writ large, problems once cast as social were refracted, by
the s, through individualistic prisms, especially at the level of
policy and public debate. The social sciences contributed to this shift,
but were also—in their patterns of public prominence—re-mapped by
the changes they helped bring about. The process was complicated
by the suffusion of social scientific concepts to the general populace
and throughout the political system, alongside the spread of certain
tools—such as cost-benefit analysis—into the policy-making arena.
For our purposes, three dimensions of the social sciences of social
problems are worth isolating: explanation, prescription, and the frame
of analysis. Along each dimension, a social scientist’s program might
have, at the very least, implications for the way that problems are
understood and addressed. For example, we can distinguish between
explanations for a problem such as crime that are structural—rooted
in, say, the history of institutionalized racism or the economy’s lop-
sided distribution of wealth—and more individualistic frameworks
that assign blame to personal failures or even crude self-interest.
Interventions—proposed or implied—might hinge on that diagnosis,
with a remedial strategy such as redistributive spending arising from
a structural explanation. Or, on the individualistic account, a “fam-
ily values” public information campaign or stiff mandatory prison
sentences might follow. All of this (the explanation and even the rem-
edy) could be guided by the mode of analysis—the methods chosen,
paired with key disciplinary assumptions.
Words such as “structural” and “individualistic” are, of course,
introduction whose social problems 34
: ?
blunt designators. We have already referred to explanation—the
realm of causes—as well as remedies (implied or prescribed). The
question of method we have invoked too. At all three levels we are
keen to maintain a distinction—a soft one—between the structural
and the individualistic, but without imposing our definition on the
volume’s authors—who have their own reasons to frame the stakes
differently. Nor do we mean to invoke the contrast in the ontological
sense—that is, in terms of what the real stuff of society is (e.g., in-
dividuals, systems, or social relations)—even if those commitments
might ground explanatory accounts or methodological decisions. 126
See the interesting discussion in Tilly,
17 24
Durable Inequality, – . Of course,
If the question is how problems arise and why they persist, one set
a commitment to viewing social life
of answers looks to the aggregated beliefs and actions of individuals.
through the prism of the individual
Mental illness, from one angle, is quintessentially private, possibly makes it harder to even conceive of
supra-individual factors such as insti-
biological—if also affected by immediate social experience like early
tutions or political-economic dynamics.
family history. A more structural account might, by contrast, stress
Likewise, an ontology that privileges
systems or groups is ipso facto averse
the social conditions and institutions (notably including the “psy-
to explanations at the level of indi-
disciplines”) that help produce the diagnoses and treatment regimens
vidual minds or behavior. Only those
that organize individual lives. Thus for explanations to qualify as ontological schemes that foreground
social relations, social process, or the
structural in the loose sense we invoke here, they must point to the
dynamic, mutual constitution of subjec-
hard cake of law, institutions, or political economy. Attitudes and
tivity and structure are, as it were, truly
agnostic on the explanatory questions
actions take primacy in the more individualistic accounts.
we are interested in.
Attempts to address social problems might, accordingly, target
structural impediments or, instead, dispositions and behavior. It’s
true that there is, strictly speaking, no necessary overlap between a
given causal story about a problem and its proposed solutions. Indi-
vidualistic accounts, after all, often seek to explain socially patterned
outcomes. Those conditions—a racial wage gap, for example—could
accommodate a range of would-be remedies, including policies, such
as social welfare spending, that do not target the underlying “cause.”
Nevertheless, interventions may be suggested, or discouraged, by the
kind of explanation that elicits the greatest public resonance.
In other words, our two explanation types—individualistic and
social-structural—in effect nominate their causal agents as targets
for intervention. So if the public tends to see crime through an indi-
vidualist prism, social scientific explanations supporting individual
agency will generate more appeal among policymakers. Making the
crimes cost more (through harsher sentences or stepped-up enforce-
ment), for instance, can appear as the most sensible policy response.
If, instead, social forces find greater public resonance, social scientific
explanations of crime centered on social structures can attract poli-
cymakers much more effectively. Boosting the economic fortunes of
potential perpetrators, for instance, will appear as a more fitting re-
sponse. Explanations and policy interventions have affinities, in other
words, along the structural/individualistic lines we have drawn. In
introduction whose social problems 35
: ?
the context of politics, moreover, policies must be promoted and jus-
tified on the basis—at least in part—of causal accounts. Explanations
furnish distinctive kinds of rhetorical resources: Most individualistic
explanations invoke, at least implicitly, intention, while many struc-
tural explanations point to unintended consequences. A remedy such
as school-funding redistribution, for example, is hard to defend if
the education problem is really about bad teachers and indifferent
parents.
There is, finally, the frame of analysis—by which we mean method-
ology in the broad sense, inclusive of underlying assumptions. Here
again a crude distinction may be drawn between approaches that
position individual agency as the unit of analysis and those scholarly
strategies that attempt to account for structural forces first and fore-
most. These methodological choices are, at the same time, dueling
ways of seeing society. A commitment to methodological individ-
ualism, in other words, entails a social aperture whose exposure is
narrowed. Survey methods that treat populations as individuals-in-
aggregate, for example, might boost a more individualist problem
diagnosis—as might a framework that, in the microeconomic mode,
assumes rational maximizers. A political-economic analysis will, with
its focus sharpened to pick out large-scale systems, be prone to see
the pivotal role of institutions. There is nothing determinate about
these methodological nudges, but because they come with specific
questions, they privilege certain understandings of a problem.
The point of drawing this contrast, between the structural and the
individualistic, is to better specify patterns of change in the postwar
social science engagement with social problems. As sketched across
these three dimensions (explanation, prescription and frame of anal-
ysis), the claim that “social” problems have lost some of their social
character can be more precisely articulated. The draining out of the
social is really about the declining fortunes of structural approaches
to US society’s problems—and the ascendancy of more individualis-
tic alternatives.
Consider economics. The discipline has maintained, at least since
the s, outsized policy prominence relative to its social science
peers. But that fact obscures an array of relevant changes that, taken
1950 1960
together, mark the period since the late s and mid- s as dis-
tinctive. The economists who staffed the New Deal were, after all,
much more pluralistic by the standards of the postwar discipline,
with intellectual coordinates, in many cases, that were hard to dis-
tinguish from their sociologist or political science peers. The story
of economists’ war-won prestige in the early postwar decades is
well-known, but the discipline’s mathematized orthodoxy was only
1950 1960
secured at the end of the s. Well into the s, moreover, 127
Backhouse, “The Transformation of
1920 1960
US Economics, – .”
introduction whose social problems 36
: ?
the field’s mainstream paired its microeconomic neoclassicism with
a Keynesian macroeconomics. Already by the late s, however,
Chicago figures like Gary Becker were taking microeconomics on the
road—applying a utility maximization framework to domains well
beyond the discipline’s inherited jurisdiction. By the early s, the
Keynesian consensus in the macroeconomic realm was, in the face
of stagflation, unsettled. It is easy to exaggerate, but the trend, since
then, has been the ascent of the “economic approach” within the
discipline itself.
Meanwhile, the political climate for economists had improved,
reflecting a trend towards “economization”—a way of framing po-
litical issues in economic terms. The concept of “the economy,” 128
Berman, Creating the Market Univer-
174 77
sity, – (rendered as “economic
in the relevant sense as the sum total of economic activity, did not
rationalization”); and Berman, “Not
gain public or political purchase until the early postwar decades.
Just Neoliberalism.” Berman’s use of
By the late s, as Elizabeth Popp Berman demonstrates in a va- “economization” is distinct from, for
example, Murphy, The Economization of
riety of US policy contexts, thinking about government as mainly
Life, or Callon, “The Embeddedness of
in the business of improving the economy had become pervasive.
Economic Markets in Economics.”
Berman, “Not Just Neoliberalism,”
From regulatory rule-making all the way through to campaign dis-
; see also Mitchell, “Fixing the Econ-
course, policymakers and politicians increasingly framed their talk
omy”; Suttles, Front Page Economics,
and their decisions around economic impact. Government’s role is chap. ; and Smith, The Right Talk, chap.
to prime and pump the economy—an assumption, by the late twen-
tieth century, embraced across the political spectrum and reflected,
too, in everyday talk. The belief, almost unquestioned, was that a
strong economy is the public goal that matters most. To Berman, this
form of economization is much more ubiquitous—and ultimately
significant—than the market fundamentalism espoused by the politi-
cal right with special vigor since the s. Economization is, indeed,
an enabling condition, a seed-bed from which the far narrower “ne-
oliberal” worldview could grow. 130
Writes Berman: “While neoliberal-
1960 ism is still an influential worldview,
There was no single engine driving the post– s process of
economization is in many ways a more
economization, but US economists undoubtedly contributed, if only
powerful, and potentially more durable,
because they were also active in policy institutions like the Council of trend.” Berman, “Not Just Neoliberal-
131 ism,” .
Economic Advisers and in public debates. They were, at the same
Berman, Creating the Market Uni-
time, its main academic beneficiaries. Over this period they won
46 50
versity, , ; and Berman, “Not Just
408 9
unequaled levels of policy influence, even by the standards of the Neoliberalism,” – .
discipline’s existing prominence. While some of that sway took the 132
There is a large literature that
chronicles the post- s influence
form of promoting market liberalization and market creation—the
of economists on US politics and pol-
“neoliberal” facet—the policy leverage was secured on other, more
icy, only some of it related to the rise
mainstream grounds too. Economists’ elevated influence, moreover, of so-called “neoliberalism.” See, for
example, Bernstein, A Perilous Progress,
was felt indirectly: Through political and popular language, for ex-
chap. ; Hirschman and Berman, “Do
ample, and through the spread of policy instruments. These dynam-
Economists Make Policies?”; and Ap-
pelbaum, The Economists’ Hour.
ics, in practice, generated feedback loops: The discipline’s authori-
tative stature helped economists obtain positions—often prominent
ones—in policy institutions, which then boosted the field’s prestige.
introduction whose social problems 37
: ?
That legitimacy, and those institutional footholds, helped in turn
to promote and spread an economic way of thinking—a “cognitive
infrastructure” that, once in circulation, did not depend on actual
economists or their scholarship. At varying levels of depth and 133
This analysis draws heavily
from Hirschman and Berman, “Do
sophistication, politicians, public intellectuals, and policy elites ven-
Economists Make Policies?” Angus
triloquize economists. Even barstool banter is sprinkled with eco-
Burgin’s and Daniel Stedman Jones’
nomic concepts. So the idea, for example, that we are all calculat- analyses of neoliberalism—The Great
Persuasion and Masters of the Universe,
ing individuals—strategic managers of our own best interests—has
respectively —show that economic
seeped deeper into the social imaginary with the aid, at least, of
ideas, and not just economic theory,
change society, and that they do it from
economic thinking. Put differently, the country’s individualis-
within. So what matters is the seem-
tic spine was arguably straightened in the homo economicus mold.
ing convergence between those ideas
And if economists helped to underwrite the culture’s entrepreneurial and the political climate. See Fontaine,
“Other Histories of Recent Economics,”
ethos, they also reaped its legitimizing rewards—as an everyday war-
400 401
– .
rant for the discipline’s distinctive style of reasoning. That way
We are using the notion of “social
of thinking, suffused with disciplinary argot such as “externalities” imaginary” in Charles Taylor’s sense:
“By social imaginary, I mean something
and “marginal cost,” has taken special hold among policy analysts,
much broader and deeper than the in-
most of whom are not card-carrying economists. A related devel-
tellectual schemes people may entertain
when they think about social reality
opment, stressed by Berman and Daniel Hirschman, was the rapid
in a disengaged mode. I am thinking,
uptake of “policy devices” such as cost-benefit analysis or Congres-
rather, of the ways people imagine their
sional Budget Office bill-scoring. Some of these devices, created social existence, how they fit together
with others, how things go on between
or co-authored by economists, settled into the policy-making sedi-
them and their fellows, the expectations
ment in this period. Once lodged in rule-making practices, or even
that are normally met, and the deeper
normative notions and images that
established by statute, the instruments—at least the successful ones—
underlie these expectations.” Taylor,
enjoy an effortless and durable legitimacy. As authorless doxa, their
Modern Social Imaginaries, . Taylor, fo-
status as containers of particular values, often economic ones, goes cused on the broad sweep of modernity,
claims that a major economic dimension
mostly unseen. But the devices bear those values in consequential
was stitched into the Western social
ways, Frankenstein-like. Their assumptions ricochet across the pol-
imaginary centuries before Becker’s
Economic Approach to Human Behavior.
icy landscape—the antitrust fixation on price, for example, or the
See Taylor, Modern Social Imaginaries,
auctioning off of the public spectrum to the highest bidder.
chap. .
The point is that economics—with its surging fortunes since the 135
Hirschman and Berman borrow the
1960 “style of reasoning” concept from Ian
mid- s—has helped to undermine the idea that problems of so-
Hacking, “Statistical Language, Statisti-
ciety are social. To do so, economists did not have to deny the social
cal Truth, and Statistical Reason.” The
character of these problems. Instead they drew attention to their mi- economic style of reasoning, according
to Hirschman and Berman, “includes
croeconomic dimension at a time when governments, confronted
basic concepts such as incentives,
with the limits of the welfare state, found increasing merit in ra-
growth, efficiency and externalities. It
includes economic ways of approaching
tional pricing. The social problems tradition within sociology had
problems: by using models, system-
embraced the view that poverty, crime, and the other issues are fix-
atically weighing costs and benefits,
able dislocations of modernity. That worldview had indeed helped analysing quantitative empirical data,
considering incentives, and thinking
underwrite the wider belief that government has an obligation to
marginally. It suggests causal policy
intervene—as expressed, to some extent, in US social policy through
stories . . . linked to economic theories:
that investing in education will increase
the Great Society. The claim that a problem like racism has social
human capital and thus raise wage
roots, with attendant social remedies, has since become less legible.
levels, or that increased government
As we have suggested, the discipline of economics was both a con- spending will stimulate the economy.
And it makes certain methodological
tributor to, and beneficiary of, a way of seeing society’s problems
assumptions: about the importance of
introduction whose social problems 38
: ?
through a cost-benefit prism. That worldview did not rule out the
quantification and the possibility of us-
ing monetary value as a means of com-
possibility of government intervention, but did contribute to reori-
mensuration, for example.” Hirschman
enting governmental action towards creating favorable conditions for
and Berman, “Do Economists Make
market pricing. Economists lay claim to “ownership,” in Gusfield’s Policies?” . See also Berman, How to
1 2
Think Like an Economist, chaps. – .
sense, of no single problem in particular, but instead the whole array.
Hirschman and Berman, “Do
Those jurisdictional bids were contested, of course, and strands of
Economists Make Policies?” .
post– s quantitative sociology have—in some problem domains— Policy analysis is an especially amor-
phous, cross-disciplinary academic field
remained a significant presence. It is also true that work on the full
whose history has yet to be written.
spread of society’s “problems” has continued apace within sociol-
With roots in public administration and
Daniel Lerner and Harold Lasswell’s
ogy. The scholarship, however, failed to gain much policy purchase
mid-century “policy sciences” program,
through the s. If anything, sociologists positioned their inter-
policy analysis as a self-understood
ventions as a rearguard defense against policy rollbacks. Likewise, it label took hold in the late s and
early s, with especially heavy
was the rare work of sociology that resonated in the political sphere
contributions from political scientists
or with the wider public. By the late s, in short, it had become
housed in public policy schools, newly
established or re-branded from public
harder to think like a sociologist and get noticed.
administration in this period. See Tor-
The case of psychology is harder to pin down, though the disci-
genson, “Policy Analysis and Public
235 43
pline’s swelling influence in certain problem domains—like addiction Life,” – ; DeLeon, Advice and Con-
138 sent, chap. ; and Fleischman, “A New
and mental illness—is well-documented by the volume’s chapters.
734 38
Framework for Integration,” – .
The more crucial influence, however, was indirect, at the level of ev- 1970
By the mid- s, the think tank sector,
often tied to funded political agendas,
eryday discourse. The American vernacular, by the second half of
was growing dramatically, employing
the twentieth century, was littered with psychological concepts—the
policy analysts and the emerging policy
ideas, to some extent, and even the diagnostic language. Psychol- evaluation toolkit. See Medvetz, Think
2 3
Tanks in America, chaps. – ; and Smith,
ogy supplied, as it were, a vocabulary of popular knowledge—and a
4 5
The Right Talk, chaps. – . Economic
way of seeing problems. Viewed through the prism of popular psy-
modes of analysis have been fundamen-
tal to the academic field’s approach and
chology, problems are personal. They are, in C. Wright Mills’ phrase,
curricula, and to the practices of policy
“private troubles.” Structural explanations fall outside the frame, and
analysts in government and the think
remedies, too, have a narrow, therapeutic character. tank sector, ever since. See Fleischman,
“A New Framework for Integration,”
It is true that the line from popular psychology to the postwar
739 41
– ; Havemann, “Policy Analysis
politics and policy of society’s problems is hard to draw. Still, the
and Evaluation Research After Twenty
193 197 202
Years,” , – ; House, “Social
therapeutic ethos—its baseline individualism—has helped seed the
Psychology, Social Science, and Eco-
ground conditions for political intervention. Indeed, we refer to psy-
237 39
nomics,” – ; and Berman, How to
chologization to capture this dynamic—with the parallel to, and exam- Think Like an Economist, chap. .
Hirschman and Berman, “Do
ple of, economics very much in mind. If the ends of public life have
Economists Make Policies?” –
come to be recognized—by politicians, policymakers, journalists and
. They concede that economists
voters—as economic, something analogous can be said about private were co-authors, as it were, with other
disciplines in the creation of many
life: The injunction, issued with new urgency since the s, has
widely deployed policy instruments.
been to seek personal fulfillment. What counts as pathology, in a cul-
They adapt the “policy device” concept
from the “market device” idea out-
ture of self-actualization, is the individual’s state of mind—her men-
lined in Fabian Muniesa, Yuval Millo,
tal life as shaped by upbringing and immediate social experience.
and Michel Callon’s “An Introduc-
To the extent that psychological categories define the boundaries of tion to Market Devices.” Hirschman
and Berman develop an interesting
the problematic, they limit the range of imagined explanations—and
distinction between “devices for see-
interventions—to the personal sphere.
ing” and “devices for choosing.” The
“seeing” kind is about understanding,
Neither the popularization nor the self-fulfillment culture were
usually through a quantitative prism.
entirely new. The language of Freudian psychoanalysis, for example,
“Choosing” devices, by contrast, grease
introduction whose social problems 39
: ?
had entered into popular circulation in the s. And cultural
the wheels of decision-making.
Hirschman and Berman, “Do
historians have documented expressions of yearning for “authentic”
Economists Make Policies?” .
experience among late nineteenth-century American elites, which—
The historiographical debate over
by the s—had spread in contradictory co-evolution with mass
whether psychological social psy-
chology has shed much of its “social”
consumerism. But developments in the postwar decades were of a
character over the twentieth century
different character: Psychotherapy, as a practice and as an idea, took
operates at a different, academic regis-
off, as psychologists broke psychiatry’s monopoly on professional ter than the popularization dynamics
142 that we gloss here. See Greenwood, The
therapy in the late s. Federal legislation—the National Mental
Disappearance of the Social in American
Health Act of and the Community Mental Health Centers Act of
Social Psychology.
1963 139
—helped finance an army of trained psychotherapists. Clinical There is no treatment of “psychol-
ogization” comparable to Berman’s
psychology, a specialty that scarcely existed before the war, came to
elaboration of “economization.” Jan
dwarf the discipline’s academic ranks. Therapy for the “normal”
de Vos has employed the term in a
roughly analogous, though heavily
American—the merely neurotic—quickly lost its stigma, producing
theorized, way to the sense we invoke
an explosive growth in demand.
here: “Psychologization is the over-
By the s psychology had, in Ellen Herman’s words, become flow of the knowledge of psychology
into society altering the way in which
“public culture,” infused into social movement politics and mass me-
‘man’ is present with himself, others
dia. The postwar growth of humanistic psychology—epitomized
and the world. Psychologization is the
process in which psychological sig-
by figures like Carl Rogers and Abraham Maslow—directly fed a
nifiers and discursive schemes result
popular fixation on self-fulfillment. The s efflorescence of
in the typical dualism within modern
encounter groups, New Age spirituality, and the human potential humankind which reflects upon itself
having adopted the academic, psychol-
movement was itself just one tributary in a broad-stream therapeutic
ogizing gaze.” De Vos, “From Milgram
culture expressed—with inescapable ubiquity—in mass-circulation 158
to Zimbardo,” . See also De Vos,
Psychologization and the Subject of Late
magazine advice, confessional talk-show television, and the self-
Modernity. The term also appears, in
help book trade. So there was, in the decades after World War II, a
passing, in other academics works, to
lava-like flow of psychological concepts into the postwar American refer to the popular incorporation of
psychological concepts. Rutherford,
lexicon—transforming the meaning of the social world to its actors
Beyond the Box, . Nikolas Rose, in
themselves. Of course, the postwar American social imaginary was
his Foucaldian genealogies of the psy-
disciplines, occasionally invokes the
already tuned to personal frames of understanding, long before the
term, and with a similar meaning. Rose,
publication of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders–
38 248
Governing the Soul, , .
III in . 140
See, for example, Burnham, After
Freud Left, part .
If anything, disciplinary frameworks such as psychological indi-
Lears, No Place of Grace; Lears, “From
vidualism and homo economicus took hold, at the level of everyday
Salvation to Self-Realization”; Susman,
life, because they resonated with pre-existing currents of Ameri-
“ ‘Personality’ and the Making of
Twentieth-Century Culture”; and Leach,
can atomism. But the disciplines were not simple beneficiaries of
Land of Desire.
the country’s Lockean and bootstrapist legacies. They also helped
Herman, The Romance of American
to re-channel the social imaginary in distinct, if overlapping, ways: 9
Psychology, chap. ; and Cushman,
Constructing the Self, Constructing
through the spread of an entrepreneurial ethos, for example, or the
America, chap. .
thorough-going embrace of psychological talk. As a shared substrate
Capshew, Psychologists on the March,
of common sense—of a “worldview” in the everyday sense—the so- 6 8
chaps. and .
cial imaginary helps to set the parameters of political possibility. It is Herman, The Romance of American
310 9 11
Psychology, . See also chaps. – .
easier, in other words, to treat government as the problem, or to ac-
Grogan, Encountering America.
cept that there’s no such thing as society, when the social is imagined
as a collection of self-determining individuals. It is here, at the indi-
rect and hard-to-measure level of popular sentiment, that psychology
introduction whose social problems 40
: ?
and economics may have their greatest import. Even if psychology’s
direct policy influence was more intermittent and domain-specific
than that of economics, the two disciplines helped, in tandem, to peg
the boundaries of the politically thinkable to the postulate of self-
reliance. By the s it was harder to see private troubles as expres-
sions of social problems, or to target those troubles with collective
intervention. 146
Indeed, the two disciplines’ im-
plicit models of selfhood had, by the
The new prominence of economics and psychology coincided with
last quarter of the century, formed
the hardening of disciplinary boundaries among the social sciences.
a curious cocktail—of strategic self-
By the s, partly due to a shift in the patronage system, special- objectification mixed with authentic
self-fulfillment. The injunction, fully
ization gained ground, with disciplinary concepts and techniques
realized on the new millennium’s social
gradually supplanting the use of broad, integrative concepts and the-
media platforms, was to treat yourself
as a product promoted through the
ories. Economists overtook other social scientists in studying society’s
calculated appearance of authenticity.
problems and advising policymakers, while psychologists registered
Pooley, “The Consuming Self.”
their social-problems influence at the level of everyday language and
the spread of a popular therapeutic ethos.
The volume’s chapters, taken together, reveal a paradox—or at
least a discrepancy. In the realm of policy and politics, the postwar
story has an arc: Social problems became economic problems, per-
sonal problems, or both. Economists, and to a lesser extent psychol-
ogists, displaced sociologists at the public center of the social science
of society’s problems. That is the more-or-less consistent takeaway
from the chapters’ problem-by-problem accounts—but mainly, as it
turns out, for the high-stakes domain of policy, politics, and public
discourse. The chapters tell a different story about the social sciences
themselves. Debates that, in the early postwar period, were plural
and polyphonic remained so—at least in many cases—by the late
s.
Social scientists, as Savina Balasubramanian and Charles Camic
show in their chapter, were already fretting about the family early
in the twentieth century. The institution, according to sociologists
through the late interwar period, was especially vulnerable to the
disorganization wrought by modern social change. Concern for
the family’s fate took on a new, international cast in the early Cold
War period, in conjunction with the rise of demography as a cross-
disciplinary field. In the contest with the Soviets, the drive to mod-
ernize the “new states” had, as its demographic dimension, a concern
for large family size. The claim that economic development, and in-
sulation from socialism, hinged on fertility control was advanced by
demographers, many but not all housed in sociology. By the mid-
s, a domestic-facing research landscape was gathering momen-
tum, supported by government and foundation interest in the fam-
ily’s role as transmitter of inequality. The domain of family demog-
raphy, a resource-intensive specialty clustered in cross-disciplinary
introduction whose social problems 41
: ?
centers, spread throughout the remainder of the century—dwarfing
other claimants, including Gary Becker’s microeconomics of the fam-
ily.
In his chapter on education, Andrew Jewett traces the peculiar—
and sometimes hands-off—relationship of the mainline social sci-
ences to education research over the course of the twentieth century.
The existence of low-status education schools, operating as stan-
dalone units on the professional margins of the US university, colored
the shape and volume of social scientific inquiry in shifting ways.
Into the s, Jewett observes, education was typically positioned
as a solution for other problems of society, rather than its own fo-
cal concern. With the Cold War and the federal government’s new
mandate to steward economic growth as backdrop, “fixing” the na-
tion’s schools took on special urgency, as exemplified in the early
s by a policy and political climate increasingly oriented to na-
tional competitiveness. In Jewett’s account, social scientists from the
main disciplines move in and out of the education domain, some-
times yielding jurisdiction to “ed school” faculty whose radicalism
has tended to marginalize their contributions since the s. From
the s on, meanwhile, the policy prominence of economics has
increased. The human capital framework, in particular, supplied
an individualistic and vocational lens to assess the school system,
one that sidelined the stratification and inequality concerns of other
social scientists and educational researchers. Jewett’s account, in
other words, documents the post- s split-screen dynamic outlined
above: social-scientific pluralism juxtaposed to the overarching policy
influence of economics and, to a lesser extent, psychology.
Alice O’Connor’s chapter on poverty describes the broad arc of
twentieth-century poverty knowledge in terms of “disembedding.”
Progressive era social research had cast poverty as a structural prob-
lem, one that would require structural solutions. When journalists
and politicians thrust poverty back onto the social scientific agenda
in the s, the issue was framed—by economists and other social
scientists—in narrow and absolute terms, to the explicit exclusion
of inequality. Economists in the postwar policy firmament were de-
cisive and notably aloof, but the behavioral science–orientation of
their non-economist colleagues contributed to the War on Poverty’s
circumscribed ambitions too. By the time the political currents shifted
in the s, the stage was set for a further disembedding—a re-
pauperization of the poverty problem that culminated in Bill Clin-
ton’s mid- s welfare rollback. O’Connor’s account foregrounds
the often-determinate role played by politics and—in the case of the
neoconservative think tank—mezzo-level policy discourse. But social
scientists were not impotent bystanders in the disembedding process.
introduction whose social problems 42
: ?
They had, in the War on Poverty years, laid the groundwork for the
dodging of inequality questions—and, ironically, for the personal-
responsibility moralism that, in the Clinton era, marked a full retreat
from liberal social provision.
Leah Gordon, in her chapter, recounts how social scientists, dur-
ing and after the war, tended to treat discrimination as a system—
one with interlocking legal, political, and economic dimensions. By
the s systemic frameworks had receded in favor of more indi-
vidualistic explanations for the “race problem.” The study of dis-
crimination remained strikingly cross-disciplinary, but the lens of
prejudice—individual attitudes in the aggregate—was newly promi-
nent, supported by philanthropy and Cold War discretion. Gary
Becker brought microeconomics to discrimination in this period, too,
in an approach that, like the psychology of prejudice, stressed the
causal priority of dispositions. The announcement of formal equal-
ity in the civil rights legislation of the mid- s complicated the
study of race for the balance of the century. Systemic accounts were
partially revived, and evidence for persisting racial inequality was
widely documented. But causal factors proved harder to identify,
Gordon concludes. In the wake of de jure segregation, even radical
critics of “racism, institutional” and “internal colonialism” conceded
that discrimination’s effects were easier to describe than its causal dy-
namics. Quantitative sociologists and economists deployed a cascade
of measures that demonstrated disparate outcomes, though again
without clear explanatory accounts rooted in discrimination. By the
s the conservative rhetoric of “colorblindness” had, as it were,
turned the discrimination question on its head.
George Galster’s chapter addresses the “black ghetto”—the per-
sistent concentration of African-American poverty in the country’s
inner cities. The interwar Chicago School’s race-agnostic paradigm
was, Galster shows, challenged by a handful of high-profile sociol-
ogists and economists in the mid- s in works that, though they
documented a discriminatory thicket, failed to win public or pol-
icy traction. Only with the televised urban riots of the mid- to late
s, in the midst of Johnson’s Great Society, did the black ghetto
attain full-fledged problem status. Social scientists registered the new
stakes in a wave of studies that, in effect, established the battle lines
for decades. Works that stressed the spatially concentrated legacy
of racial discrimination were pitted—in a highly charged political
climate—against culture-of-poverty accounts. The research lines, in
turn, informed competing remedies, notably geographic dispersal,
community development, and—in a reflection of the country’s right-
ward drift—outright disengagement. The broad if uneven patterns
in the post- s scholarship, according to Galster, are a de-emphasis
introduction whose social problems 43
: ?
of race, on the one hand, and the strengthening of individualistic
frames, on the other. There is, moreover, a rough disciplinary divide:
Sociologists, he shows, have tended to highlight spatial and social
factors, with economists and political scientists favoring, for the most
part, more individualist and class-based accounts.
The story of crime, as related in Jean-Baptiste Fleury’s chapter, has
a familiar arc. Interwar criminology was dominated by sociologists,
who cited modern social conditions as the main source of crime. To-
gether with social psychologists and legal scholars, sociologists had
swapped out environmental explanations for the biological accounts
prevalent in the late nineteenth century. In the early postwar decades,
the study of crime came to center on juvenile delinquency, with a
rough division of labor established between sociologists and psy-
chologists. The overall explanatory frame remained environmental,
though low-income and subcultural factors had, by the s, largely
supplanted immigration and urbanization. New philanthropic atten-
tion to delinquency helped guide the federal government’s adoption
of community action programs under the Democratic administra-
tions of the s, with heavy involvement from social scientists.
Johnson’s twinned Wars on Poverty and Crime were, at least initially,
predicated on the postwar consensus that the root causes of crime
were social. As Fleury recounts, an uptick in crime and the urban
riots of the mid- to late s put Johnson and the Great Society’s
social policies on the defensive—as Republicans refined a racialized
backlash politics of “law and order.” By the late s a handful of
social scientists had launched high-profile attacks on the prevailing
criminological mainstream, coinciding with a federally sanctioned
turn toward “crime control” and standalone programs in “criminal
justice.” Though still prominent, sociologists shared jurisdiction with
other social scientists, including a growing and influential contin-
gent of economists. By the s, crime had been sheared off from
other social issues, with the field now centered on crime’s efficient
management.
Nancy Campbell’s chapter takes up the case of drug addiction.
The social science of the “opium problem” (an early label) was, from
its s beginning, entangled with the federal government. Federal
institutions generally promoted research that located addiction in
personal psychology or the properties of drugs and their effects on
the brain. There was, from the s onward, a marginal but persis-
tent alternative—exemplified by sociologists Alfred Lindesmith and
Howard S. Becker—focused on the social process of definition, one
that involved “addicts” themselves interacting with their social en-
1960 1970
vironment. An avalanche of new interest in the s and s—a
response to a perceived drugs crisis and follow-on funding and pol-
introduction whose social problems 44
: ?
icy mandates that brought into being the National Institute on Drug
Abuse (NIDA)—brought epidemiologists, economists, and anthro-
pologists into the research mix. In Campbell’s account, the social
sciences of addiction is a century-long jurisdictional melee, with the
notable inclusion of fields bordering on, or fully within, the natural
sciences. And so her conclusion—that the least “social” among them,
neuroscience, came to dominate by the s—provides support,
with a natural-science asterisk, for the volume’s social-attenuation
thesis.
In his chapter on mental health, Andrew Scull traces the social
sciences’ relatively light pre–World War II engagement with mental
health issues, with the partial exception of sociology. The postwar ex-
pansion of federal research funding, paired with explosive treatment
demand for returning veterans, transformed psychology, swelling
its ranks (as we have seen) with clinicians. Federal largesse, espe-
cially from the new National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH),
underwrote a surprisingly diverse range of projects, with psycholo-
gists, psychiatrists, and, to a lesser degree, sociologists as the main
beneficiaries. As psychology swelled under its postwar “scientist-
practitioner” settlement, sociology remained comparatively small
and, by the s, increasingly critical of psychiatry and the country’s
mental health institutions. Meanwhile, as Scull describes, psychi-
atry had rapidly shed its psychoanalytic character by the s, a
response to dried-up funding and the psychopharmacological revo-
lution. The chapter addresses the relative neglect of mental health
by economists, up through the s—even as the discipline (as
documented by the volume’s other chapters) marched its toolkit
through many other social problem domains. Scull’s explanation for
the anomaly is that mental health, in all its stigmatized irrationality,
was a step too far for a discipline committed to the everyday fact,
and scholarly application, of reason. With its tight discipline and es-
tablished policy sway, economists had “no need to chase after scraps
The social science of war, as Joy Rohde demonstrates in her con-
cluding chapter, is a curious case. If education gained problem status
in the early postwar period, war followed the opposite arc, shedding
its social problem framing. From the interwar years through to the
late s, war was a public-facing problem whose solution—the
eradication of armed conflict—seemed within reach for many social
scientists and their internationalist allies. Quincy Wright’s magisterial
and multi-disciplinary A Study of War exemplified the social-
scientific ambition to foster peace through an expert-guided world
order. The Cold War, however, abruptly stalled war’s brief career as
a social problem. The Soviet threat, and the national security state
introduction whose social problems 45
: ?
erected in response, helped to reframe the social science of war in
management terms. For the next two decades most social scientists
of war—though split on methodology and approach—hitched their
study to the Cold War struggle. By the late s the Vietnam deba-
cle had implicated Defense-sponsored work on counter-insurgency
and psychological warfare, leading to a public backlash against mili-
tary entanglements. Many social scientists, Rohde shows, abandoned
the study of war in Vietnam’s wake, ceding the domain to political
science in general and international relations in particular. The result
was a social science of war that remained, into the s, centered on
statecraft and security.
So the volume’s problem-specific accounts describe, from a bird’s-
eye view, an intriguing gap between developments internal to the
social scientific discourse, on the one hand, and public prominence,
on the other. The picture is one of academic pluralism juxtaposed to
a lopsided resonance at the level of politics and policy. In the second
domain, the more public constellation, economics and psychology
won an outsized influence that, however, was not always reflected
in the problem-specific academic literatures traced by the book’s
authors.
What are we to make of this discrepancy? One answer, which we
reject, is a variation on the theme that Herbert Blumer, in his
paper, put forward: Social scientists and their work are side-shows
in the political process. What matters, in the end, are the prevailing
political winds; politicians and policy-makers will, perhaps, raid the
academic storehouse, but for their own justificatory ends. The policy
shelf is well-stocked with academic literature fit for any particular
political platform to, in effect, check out. All the agency, on this view,
lies with the politicians and their house intellectuals and functionar-
ies. If governments are constrained, by organized interests and more
diffuse publics, then something gauzier—like the prevailing social
imaginary—furnishes those limits. On this account, social science is
an inert and ineffectual bystander—a supplier of raw materials, at
best.
The problem with this position, for all its obvious truth, is that
the constitutive contributions of social scientists to the underlying
conditions of reception are written off. We have, by invoking the pair
of ungainly process nouns “economization” and “psychologization,”
tried to gesture at the dynamism—the mutual shaping—that en-
meshes social scientists in the politics of American social problems.
The very seed-bed of legibility is fertilized, in part, by the circulation
of social scientific knowledge. If the individualisms of economics and
psychology have resonated in the century’s last years, the explana-
tion is not merely their good fortune. If their normative, explanatory,
introduction whose social problems 46
: ?
and methodological frameworks are a good match for the prevailing
politics, one reason is that psychology and economics have helped
to sculpt the very popular and political space in which they flourish.
The disciplines have, crucially, helped set the conditions for their own
success.