Journal:
Title: A Generalised Semantic Cognition Account of Aesthetic Experience
Ionela Bara1, Richard J. Binney1, Robert Ward1, and Richard Ramsey2
1 Wales Institute for Cognitive Neuroscience, School of Human and Behavioural
Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, Gwynedd, Wales, LL57 2AS, United Kingdom
2 Department of Psychology, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia.
Correspondence: richard.ramsey@mq.edu.au
Keywords: neuroaesthetics; aesthetic appreciation; semantic cognition.
Abstract
Given that aesthetic experiences typically involve extracting meaning from
environment, we believe that semantic cognition research has much to offer the field of
neuroaesthetics. In the current paper, we propose a generalised framework that is
inspired by the semantic cognition literature and that treats aesthetic experience as just
one example of how meaning accumulates. According to our framework, aesthetic
experiences are underpinned by the same cognitive and brain systems that are involved
in deriving meaning from the environment in general, such as modality-specific
conceptual representations and controlled processes for retrieving the appropriate type
of information. Our generalised semantic cognition view of aesthetic experience has
substantial implications for theory development: it leads to novel, falsifiable predictions
and it reconfigures foundational assumptions regarding the structure of the cognitive
and brain systems that may be involved in aesthetic experiences.
1. Introduction
Art appreciation has a long history, with the first accounts of human-made art dating back
to prehistoric times (Davies, 2012). The first instances of empirical investigation of
aesthetic experience from a psychological perspective date back to the 19th century
(Fechner, 1876). More recently, due to the advent of neuroimaging technologies, the field
of neuroaesthetics has begun to reveal how human brain networks are organised during
aesthetic experiences (Calvo-Merino et al., 2008; Chatterjee, 2010; Changeaux, 1994;
Iigaya et al., 2020; Kirsch et al., 2016; Zeki, 1999).
To date, an implicit assumption in many neuroaesthetics frameworks is that the
form of cognition and brain function may vary between art and non-art contexts or
aesthetic and non-aesthetic contexts (Chatterjee, 2010; Menninghaus et al., 2017; Pearce
et al., 2016; Pelowski et al., 2016, 2017). In this paper, and like others recently (Skov &
Nadal, 2018, 2020), we outline the value of using a more general framework to
understand aesthetic experiences. To do so, we place aesthetic experiences within a
semantic framework, which treats aesthetic experiences as just one example of how a
sense of meaning can accumulate. We will argue that adopting a generalist framework to
guide cognitive and brain-based investigations of aesthetic experiences has substantial
implications for theory development, leads to novel predictions and reconfigures
expectations regarding the basic cognitive and brain systems that may underpin aesthetic
experiences.
Of course, we are not the first to suggest that general-purpose brain systems may
play a role in aesthetic judgments. For example, visual (Zeki, 1999), motor (Kirsch et al.,
2016; Freedberg & Gallese, 2007) and cognitive systems (Leder et al., 2004; Leder &
Nadal, 2014) have previously been implicated in aesthetic judgments (for reviews, see
Chatterjee, 2003; Chatterjee and Vartanian, 2014; Pearce et al., 2016). However, these
prior accounts have always been framed from the viewpoint of how such systems
operate within a specific and specialised context – that is, when making aesthetic
judgments. We are proposing something different. We are proposing that it may be
more fruitful to consider how meaning is derived from the environment in general,
rather than how meaning is derived in specific situations that involve aesthetic
judgments.
Defining clear and categorical boundaries between what is considered
“aesthetic” and “non-aesthetic” is not easy or straightforward. Instead, we prefer to use
feature mapping or dimensional approaches, which have been used previously in social
cognition and psychopathology (e.g., Brown & Barlow, 2009; Oosterhof & Todorov,
2008; Cross & Ramsey, 2021). Under a dimensional view, different features of a
situation (e.g., the task, stimuli, or context) can be more or less aesthetically-oriented.
For example, we would consider the evaluation of visual clarity (Whittlesea et al., 1990),
implied motion (Bara et al., 2021a; 2021b), or symmetry (Jacobsen & Höfel, 2003;
Jacobsen et al., 2006) to be less aesthetically-oriented than assessing liking, preference,
or beauty.
Notably, the dimensional view applies equally to the whole objects or scenes as
well as to different features of objects or scenes. For example, a naturally occurring
fractal can be assessed as a whole object but also considering the distinct features that a
fractal might hold, such as colour or symmetry. That said, irrespective of the target of
evaluation (e.g., object-based or feature-based), the dimensional view considers
variation along a set of relevant dimensions. One implication that follows from a
dimensional approach is that objects, tasks or contexts that have fewer aesthetic
qualities are not necessarily devoid of any aesthetic qualities. In the following,
therefore, we use the terms “aesthetic” and “non-aesthetic” in a relative sense, one in
which the former has more aesthetic qualities than the latter.
A key assumption in the current paper is that aesthetic experiences often involve
deriving meaning from the environment. We refer to meaning here in a general sense,
which reflects the acquisition of broad and diverse forms of knowledge and
understanding of the world around us. On this basis, therefore, we suggest that whether
experiences have more and less aesthetic features, they are likely to rely, at least partly,
on the same cognitive and brain systems that process meaning and semantic
information more generally. Without explicit theoretical or empirical justification to the
contrary, we suggest that it will be beneficial to start from completely generalist
positions, which make no mention of aesthetics specifically. Only if or when such
general accounts are demonstrably false or clearly limited, should more bespoke
frameworks be required. Our starting position, therefore, contrasts with the dominant
starting position in the neuroaesthetics field, which assumes that something novel
needs explaining in neuroaesthetics research that cannot be explained adequately
through conventional and well-established lines of cognitive neuroscience research.
neuroaesthetics research to date has used art experience as a model to understand
may be beneficial for neuroaesthetics research to situate art experience within broader
frameworks that are built to understand aesthetic and hedonic experiences more
in the current paper, we also go a step further and argue that it will be even more
fruitful to consider aesthetic experience within an even broader and more general
framework of cognitive and brain systems, such as the semantic cognition framework
there should be far more similarities than differences in the structure of information
processing across aesthetic and what are typically considered non-aesthetic contexts.
i ii iii
psychology of art experience; B = aesthetic experiences; C = Semantic cognition. I) There
is a tendency to use art experience as a proxy for understanding aesthetic experience.
ii) Skov and Nadal (2020) propose that art experience overlaps with aesthetic
experiences. iii) The semantic framework spans all instances where meaning is derived
and therefore includes both art and aesthetic experiences.
The main body of this article is organised into five parts. First, we review
prominent brain-based models of aesthetic experience, which are tied to aesthetic
contexts and make no mention of semantic cognition. Second, we outline a completely
generalised framework for neuroaesthetics; one that treats aesthetic experience as just
one example of how a sense of meaning develops. To do so, we adopt an established
framework from the semantic cognition literature (Lambon Ralph et al., 2017). The
motivation for adopting a semantic framework is the recognition that aesthetic
experiences often involve drawing meaning from environmental cues. We therefore
relate aesthetic experience to cognitive systems for deriving meaning from the
environment, such as conceptual representations and context-dependent retrieval of
information. Third, we compare the structure of the proposed model to the existing
neurobiological models of aesthetic experiences. Fourth, we consider the implications of
such a proposal for the field of neuroaesthetics, which spans updates to current
neuroaesthetics models, as well as substantial revision to expectations more generally.
Finally, we consider strengths, limitations, and constraints on the generality of the
proposal.
2. Neurobiological models of aesthetic appreciation
Aesthetic experience has been modelled with reference to the neurobiological bases of
aesthetic appreciation and hedonic value (Chatterjee, 2003; Chatterjee and Vartanian,
B). In addition, other important neurobiological approaches have highlighted the
contribution of the default-mode network (DMN) to aesthetic experience (Cela-Conde et
al., 2013; Vessel et al., 2019; Vessel et al., 2013). Here, we focus only on two previous
neurobiological approaches to aesthetics that are most relevant to our current goals.
First, the most dominant neurobiological model proposes an aesthetic triad, which
involves inter-relations between sensory-motor, affective-valuation and knowledge-
Each component of the aesthetic triad is associated with largely distinct neural
networks and functional processes. Such neural circuits involve sensory-motor brain
areas that are involved in perceptual and motor processes, the reward brain system
known to be implicated in processing affective and pleasurable experiences and
dorsolateral and medial frontal cortices that are involved in decision-making and so-
called ‘knowledge-meaning’ processing (Chatterjee, 2003; Chatterjee & Vartanian,
2014). The ‘knowledge-meaning’ component appears to reflect a process of top-down
control that biases the operation of other brain systems (Chatterjee & Vartanian, 2014,
2016). For instance, framing effects, changing the environment, the title or artistic
status of images has been shown to alter neural activity and aesthetic experiences
associated with the evaluation of identical paintings (Huang et al., 2011; Kirk et al.,
2009; Lacey et al., 2011; Leder et al., 2006; Wagner et al., 2016; Wagner et al., 2014).
A second neurobiological model places greater focus on hedonic value and the
operation of brain circuitry associated with processing reward (Skov, 2019a, 2019b;
neuroscience of pleasure (Kringelbach & Berridge, 2017), Skov’s (2019a, 2019b) model
acknowledged that aesthetic experience involves the same brain circuitry as other
hedonic experiences, thus highlighting the relative lack of specialised or dedicated
neural systems in aesthetic processing. More specifically, Skov (2019a, 2019b)
describes the hedonic aesthetic value signals as integrating the sensory-perceptual
input, the projections from top-down decision-making systems and from the bodily
2019b) model is that aesthetic experience can be treated as a sub-category of more
general processing of hedonic value. Consequently, one may understand aesthetic
experience by understanding the cognitive and neural systems that support hedonic
value more generally.
Both of these prior neurobiological models have made considerable progress
towards building an understanding of neuroaesthetics. At the same time and given that
aesthetic experiences often involve inferring meaning, we feel that there is a great
opportunity for the field of neuroaesthetics to benefit from embracing established
models from semantic cognition. Notably, the semantic cognition literature has studied
the cognitive, neurobiological and computational principles of how meaning is arrived
at in general and therefore this work seems particularly relevant to consider in more
depth (e.g., Lambon Ralph et al., 2017; Jefferies, 2013). More specifically, we feel that
interfacing with the semantic cognitive literature will provide a framework to extend
and develop the ‘meaning-knowledge’ component of the aesthetic triad model
(Chatterjee & Vartanian, 2014) and also add a semantic component to model proposed
by Skov (2019a, 2019b), as we outline in the next sections.

meaning-knowledge, sensory-motor, emotion-valuation systems; B) the hedonic value
model and the brain regions associated with executive system, reward circuit,
interoceptive system; C) the generalised semantic framework and the neural correlates
associated with representation and control systems. In addition, panel C illustrates the
information integration from control and representational system, and from hub and
spokes through a process of brain-wide biased competition.
3. Rethinking neuroaesthetics: A generalised semantic cognition view of aesthetic
experience.
In this section, we outline our approach to modelling aesthetic experiences from a
cognitive and neurobiological perspective. Our starting point is different to prior
accounts, as we embed aesthetics into an account of people’s ability to interpret
meaning in the environment. Under such a view, aesthetic experiences have similar
features to many other complex and multimodal experiences, and therefore they may
rely on a similar set of cognitive and brain mechanisms. We share a similar motivation
and set of principles to some prior work, which also favoured a general set of systems
(Skov & Nadal, 2018, 2020). However, we go further and frame aesthetic experiences
within a well-established semantic framework, one that includes affective processing,
but is not centred on affective processing.
3.1. Basic features of the semantic framework
In this section, we outline the basic tenets of the controlled semantic cognition
(CSC) framework (Lambon Ralph et al., 2017). We first outline key computational
principles before detailing the neurobiology of the framework.
3.1.1 Computational principles
The CSC framework is divided into two principal sub-systems: representation
and control (Lambon Ralph et al., 2017). The representational sub-system contributes
to both gathering and storing conceptual knowledge and it is characterised by a hub-
and-spoke organisation. The hub-and-spoke structure refers to the idea that modality-
specific systems distributed across the brain (the ‘spokes’) play an essential role in
supplying the information required to establish concepts, namely our multimodal
sensorimotor, linguistic, and affective experiences of concept exemplars. The
supramodal hub is distinct from the spokes and serves two functions: 1) it mediates
transmodal interactions between different modes of input from the ‘spokes’ and 2) it
encodes a deeper level of representation that abstracts beyond a linear combination of
such inputs from the ‘spokes’. This deeper and more abstract level of representation is
argued to be critical for the production of generalisable concepts. For example, the
concept “dog” has modality-specific semantic representations in the ‘spokes’ relating to
sounds, smells, appearance, and actions. The representation of dog at the level of the
hub associates these modality-specific representations together, to provide an
integrated and fuller semantic representation of the concept “dog”.
The second sub-system of the CSC framework is responsible for controlled
processes required for retrieving the appropriate type of knowledge. Control processes
are a necessary feature of the framework because our extensive and varied experiences
of words, people and objects result in deep and complex representations, and in many
circumstances, we need only to retrieve a few details. Indeed, automatically retrieving
all aspects of our knowledge would be computationally expensive and might be
inappropriate and/or interfere with our ability to achieve our goals. For example, the
pianist need not retrieve all their expert knowledge of how to use their instrument to
play a concerto, if their only task be to move it across the stage (Saffran, 2000). The CSC
framework distinguishes between two types of control: domain-general control and
semantic control. Domain-general control operates in all contexts (e.g., orienting
attention to salient locations in space), whereas semantic control is particularly linked
to control processes that operate in semantic contexts (e.g., prioritising and directing
attention to which aspects of meaning are most relevant to a given context). For
example, the word “bark” has multiple meanings and control processes are required to
guide whether in a particular context, the bark on a tree is more relevant than the bark
of a dog. Importantly, the two key tenets of the CSC framework - representation and
control - do not operate in a manner that is completely detached from each other.
Instead, they dynamically interact and integrate semantic information.
3.1.2 Neural substrates of the CSC framework
The representational spokes are distributed throughout the brain and span the
full range and sensory-motor and affective signals, such as brain circuits associated with
contrast, is located within the anterior temporal lobes (ATL). Converging evidence from
neuropsychological examinations of semantic dementia patients has demonstrated that
ATL plays a critical role in sustaining the conceptual knowledge (Coccia et al., 2004;
Piwnica-Worms et al., 2010; Lambon Ralph et al., 2001).
Semantic control is associated with a range of brain regions, including
the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and temporoparietal cortex (Noonan et al., 2009;
Whitney et al., 2011), extended to middle frontal gyrus and posterior inferior frontal
sulcus (Fedorenko et al., 2012). As such, control processes partially overlap with
extensive evidence for domain-general cognitive control and executive functions, which
have been associated with dorsomedial frontoparietal cortex (Botvinick et al., 2004;
Corbetta et al., 2008; Duncan, 2010; Petersen & Posner, 2012).
3.2. A generalised semantic cognition view of aesthetic experience
The CSC framework has recently been used to model another domain of
cognitive neuroscience, which involves social information processing (Binney &
Ramsey, 2020). In this section, we use a similar strategy to apply the CSC framework to
aesthetic experience. It should be noted that the CSC framework has a parallel
distributed processing (PDP) structure which assumes interactionist principles
between different processors (McClelland & Rumelhart, 1981). Before we outline the
specifics of the model in relation to aesthetic experiences, however, we want to make
one general point regarding the formation versus retrieval of semantic knowledge. The
main focus in semantics has been on acquiring and storing of conceptual knowledge.
Here, in contrast, we use the semantic framework as a model to understand how one
may understand mental processes that may occur during ongoing, live aesthetic
experiences, which emphasises the retrieval or access of semantic knowledge. In the
following sub-sections, we use an example piece of visual art - Sorolla’s painting in
systems would operate together during aesthetic experiences.
3.2.1 Sensorimotor ‘spokes’
The first set of spokes considered are sensorimotor representations. Prior
neuroaesthetics research has highlighted that aesthetic experience is partly associated
with sensory systems, such as those underpinning visual, auditory or somatosensory
processes (Chatterjee et al., 2009; Chatterjee & Vartanian, 2014; Iigaya et al., 2020,
2021; Kawabata & Zeki, 2004; Vartanian & Goel, 2004; Yue et al., 2007; Zeki, 1999). In
the case of Sorolla’s painting, therefore, the observer’s visual system can recognise
stimulus features, which serve as the target of aesthetic evaluation (e.g., blue sea, rocky
landscape, the two people). In this case, category-selective responses in the ventral
visual pathway are likely to be important in the detection of visual features such as
motion cues, faces, bodies and natural landscapes (Kanwisher, 2010, 2017; Spiridon &
Kanwisher, 2002; Zeki, 1999). Indeed, responses in the visual system have been shown
to be modulated by aesthetic preferences (Calvo-Merino et al., 2010; Chatterjee et al.,
2009; Iigaya et al., 2020; Kawabata & Zeki, 2004; Orgs et al., 2013; Vartanian & Goel,
2004; Yue et al., 2007).
Similarly, due to the implied action of the two characters, we would expect that
the action observation network in inferior frontal and parietal cortices would be
engaged, thus reflecting the motor information that is implied in visual images (Calvo-
Merino et al., 2008; Caspers et al., 2010; Cross et al., 2009, 2011; Di Dio & Gallese, 2009;
Orgs et al., 2008; Urgesi et al., 2006). The action observation network, therefore, would
be another domain-specific representational “spoke”, which also has been shown to
contribute to aesthetic experiences (Kirsch et al., 2016). Finally, given the social
interaction between two agents, we would also expect posterior superior temporal
sulcus to be engaged (Isik et al. , 2017; Walbrin et al., 2018).
Sorrolla y Bastida (1863-1923) is one of the greatest Spanish painters, famously known
as the ‘Master of Light’ (Allen, 2019) for his iridescent representations of seascapes,
portraits or typical Spanish life scenes. The main two characters illustrated in this
painting are his wife Clotide and his youngest daughter, Elena having a walk on the
rocky shore of Javea.
3.2.2. Affective ‘spokes’
The second relevant ‘spoke’ in the representational system concerns affective
responses that are associated with rewarding and pleasurable experiences, as well as
experiences one would wish to avoid. In regard to assessing hedonic value, it has been
demonstrated that art and non-art stimuli are assessed in terms of positive and negative
hedonic value. The assessment of hedonic value has been associated with a distributed
neural circuit that spans prefrontal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), the ventral
striatum, anterior cingulate cortex, insula, and amygdala (Berridge et al., 2009; Brown
et al., 2011; Skov, 2019a). As such, whichever aspects of Sorolla’s painting an individual
may find rewarding or not, we would expect an affective representation to be signalled
in these brain regions. In principle, valence or affective signals can be associated with
basic image properties (colour, form, symmetry, visual complexity), the human form,
the representation of a mother and child, as well as waves crashing into rocks. There
could also be a mixture of differently valenced signals in one piece of artwork. For
example, the viewer might positively evaluate the two characters as mother and
daughter, but negatively signal that the rocky path is difficult to climb. Such valence
signals are of course central to any notion of preference whether in an art or non-art
context.
3.2.3. The supramodal ‘hub’
In contrast to processes within the ‘spokes’, the supramodal ‘hub’ would integrate
conceptual information from multiple modalities. Therefore, diverse signals from all the
‘spokes’ would combine in the ATL to produce an integrated conceptual representation.
affective signals with sensory motor representations that were derived from observing
the image, as well as the affective signals from the reward system. Indeed, previous
neuroimaging studies have demonstrated that operations in the ATL are based on
continuous interaction with modality-specific systems and lower-order heteromodal
association cortices (Kuhnke et al., 2021; Patterson et al., 2007; Pobric et al., 2010).
Current evidence for ATL involvement in aesthetic processing is complicated and
hard to interpret for several reasons. Some research has implicated in the ATL in
semantic processing, which spans meta-analyses (Vartanian and Skov, 2014), as well as
studies of art (Jacobsen et al., 2006; Kirk et al., 2009) and music (Koelsch, 2014). In
contrast, other studies have not implicated the ATL. One obvious limitation with current
evidence stands out. Signal loss and image distortion is well documented in the ATL due
to the use of standard or conventional imaging protocols in fMRI (Devlin et al., 2000). As
such, it is hard to interpret a lack of ATL engagement under these scanning conditions.
In the future, researchers should adopt newer imaging protocols, as well as post-
acquisition distortion correction techniques that have been successfully employed to
assure signal throughout the ATL (Jackson et al., 2016; Rice et al., 2018).
A further consideration for future research studying ATL involvement in
aesthetics is the anatomical mapping of ATL and its graded semantic function. Previous
research has defined ATL broadly as the anterior half of the temporal pole including BA
38, the anterior superior, middle and inferior temporal gyri and sulci plus the fusiform
gyrus (Binney et al., 2010). Previous research has also highlighted the ATL’s graded
function in meaning extraction, such that certain aspects of the ATL are more involved
with certain modalities (Binney et al., 2016; Olson et al., 2013; Rice & Lambon Ralph,
2015). To more systematically and comprehensively probe the role of the ATL in
aesthetics, a detailed understanding of the anatomical mapping and graded semantic
function would be required to formulate more specific hypotheses.
3.2.4. Cognitive control
associated with semantic control to regulate responses in other brain regions
depending on a range of factors, such as whether you see the stimuli in an art gallery,
whether you have prior knowledge of the artist, piece of art or style of art. For example,
we would expect semantic control to be relevant to guide and prioritise which features
are most important if you are asked to classify the type of art (expressionist, abstract
etc.) versus asked to evaluate the meaning of the artwork. Evaluating the type of art
may be addressed by focussing on superficial assessment of the basic features and
judging whether it is expressionist or abstract, for example. In contrast, if you were
asked to evaluate the meaning of the artwork, it may require one to go beyond the
surface-level features and consider more abstract concepts, such as the importance of
mother-daughter relationship or any hidden meanings that might be expressed
symbolically rather than literally. In a similar vein, previous studies have proposed a
meaning-driven mechanism that requires top-down processing to explain the semantic
incongruities or the aesthetic preference for challenging and ambiguous art (Belke et al.,
2015; Markey et al., 2019; Muth et al., 2015). Moreover, research investigating the top-
down effects on implicit face preference judgments (Chatterjee et al., 2009; Kim et al.,
2007) have provided support for the always-on hypothesis (Wassiliwizky &
Menninghaus, 2021), suggesting that some elements of aesthetic preference might
operate without explicit aesthetic awareness.
To date, only a small amount of prior work in neuroaesthetics has focussed on
the role of cognitive control. For example, Cupchik and colleagues (2009) found that
brain areas associated with reward processing were involved in aesthetic liking and
evaluation processes, whereas the activation of the lateral prefrontal cortex was
interpreted as the top-down attentional effort required in regulating high task demands
(Cupchik et al., 2009). Such findings mark the interplay between representational and
control processes, but do not address whether such control processes are semantic or
general in nature.
4. Biased competition
Although our model is largely inspired and based upon the CSC framework, we
also make one important addition, which is not specified in the CSC framework. The CSC
framework does not provide a mechanism by which information in different processors
becomes integrated. In the current model we suggest that integration between
frameworks have been used in cognitive neuroscience to provide a means for
communication between different brain systems and to solve the issue of signals from
multiple processors being combined (Beck & Kastner, 2009; Desimone & Duncan, 1995;
Duncan et al., 1997). Different information processors across the brain process visual,
motor and affective information. Signals from these processors settle on the “winning”
target of attention, which guides a behavioural response (see Ramsey & Ward, 2020a,
2020b) for more detail about biased competition in social contexts).
In much the same way, we suggest that neuroaesthetics could apply the
principles of biased competition as a roadmap for how signals from multiple processors
may be combined. From this perspective, the aesthetic judgments are arrived at through
a process of biased competition whereby there is mutual influence within and between
systems of representation and control. As such, competition would occur between
control and representational systems, and also between the hub and spokes. In the case
circuits would bias the representational units. Under this view, aesthetic experiences
would represent a dynamic and evolving flux of signals across a widespread neural
architecture, which at any one time would provide a sense of aesthetic evaluation.
Importantly, this basic principle of biased competition would operate the same
across all contexts whether or not there was a strong affective component. Indeed,
signals from diverse sub-systems across the brain would compete and settle on a target
of attention or judgement, whether one was choosing their favourite t-shirt to wear,
having lunch with a friend, climbing a mountain, doing sums or evaluating architectural
elegance.
multiple objects that would compete with each other via activation of neural
representations (e.g., sensorimotor, affective) to become the “winning” target of
attention. Indeed, there would be competition between the neural representation of the
rocky shore in the background and the human bodies in the centre of the painting. The
winner would gain an advantage in processing weight due to its greater relevance in
that context. The type of relevance that can influence the processing weight can include,
but is not limited to, current contextual, affective, and attentional states, as well as
object features such as colour, shape, and luminance. All else being equal, if we assume
that the human bodies hold higher relevance and bias than the rocky shore in this
context, it would mean that the human body would become the primary target of
attention and the processing of meaning.
5. Model comparison
5.1. Compared to prominent neurobiological models of aesthetics
There are at least two key differences in comparison to all prior neurobiological
models of aesthetics. First, we include a role for a supramodal ‘hub’, which no other
account of aesthetics has included. The supramodal hub is important in integrating
functionally relevant information from distributed modality-specific regions, thus it is
critical in providing an extra computational capability to the model in order to draw
coherent and generalisable concepts together. Second, we also propose an account of
how system-wide neural integration occurs via biased competition. By doing so, we
provide a solution to the computational problem of multiple processors acting in
parallel by providing an adaptive mechanism to accommodate both the maintenance of
modality-specific representations with controlled selection and prioritisation processes.
5.2. Compared to the aesthetic triad model (Chatterjee & Vartanian, 2014; Pearce et al.,
2016)
Although there are many similarities, the major difference between our model
and the aesthetic triad model concerns the ‘knowledge-meaning’ component. In the
aesthetic triad model, ‘knowledge-meaning’ is a separable component that is dissociable
from ‘sensory-motor’ and ‘affective-valuation’ components, and which largely
model, meaning is a product of the interaction between representation and control
circuits or dissociable from sensorimotor and affective representations or cognitive
control resources. Instead, representation and control circuits are both part of the
signal that gives rise to meaning.
5.3. Compared to the hedonic model of aesthetics (Skov, 2019a, 2019b; Skov & Nadal,
2018, 2019, 2020)
The major difference between our proposal and the hedonic value model is one
of scale and emphasis. Our model is similar to Skov (2019a, 2019b) in terms of the
proposed role for domain-general affective and reward processing. The difference in
our model is that we provide much more scaffolding around the reward system, in
terms of other cognitive and brain processes. In some ways, therefore, the Skov (2019a,
2019b) model is subsumed entirely within our model. We provide a more elaborate
account of the non-reward processes that we feel are also likely to play key roles in
aesthetic process in combination with reward processing. As such, we do not see any
disagreement between our model and Skov’s (2019a, 2019b) model; instead, we just
see our model as an extension of the Skov (2019a, 2019b) model.
6. Implications
In this section, we outline three implications for neuroaesthetics research that follow
from our generalised semantic account of aesthetic experience.
6.1. There may be, counterintuitively, less to explain.
A theoretical re-positioning towards similarities over differences when
comparing aesthetic and non-aesthetic cognition has one very general implication. The
field of neuroaesthetics may have considerably less to explain than it initially appeared.
It may seem an odd or counterintuitive argument, but some of the intrigue and
mysticism that surrounds aesthetic experiences may dissolve and thereby need no
additional explanation in terms of cognitive and brain systems. Or, at the very least,
such experiences may need the same sort of explanations as routine experiences such as
why someone has a favourite coffee mug or why they find someone’s face more
attractive than another face. For example, general preferences for features and
experiences that appear on average across individuals may be combined with personal
preference and engage reward circuits accordingly. Indeed, many life experiences, if not
every experience to some degree, have hedonic value and these play a critical part in
human motivated behaviour (Dickinson & Balleine, 2010; Symmonds & Dolan, 2012).
6.2 Cognitive and brain models of aesthetics require updating and revision.
A second implication of the current proposal is that neuroaesthetics models should be
updated to embrace and include contemporary research on semantic cognition. For
example, by re-conceptualising the cognitive and brain systems that underpin how
meaning is extracted from the environment, we have demonstrated how semantic
cognition research can extend current models of neuroaesthetics. Moreover, it is worth
noting that these changes are not trivial, but instead reflect a major reworking of how
meaning is determined in terms of cognitive and brain systems. As such, our proposal
transforms the way basic building blocks of cognition may be expected to integrate
information in aesthetic contexts. Such a reworking in expectations is important to
acknowledge because it leads to novel and falsifiable predictions, as we outline in
section 7.
6.3 Generalist approaches are the only way to determine if aspects of aesthetic experience
rely on distinct processing mechanisms.
Informally, a criticism that our approach has received is that aesthetic experience is a
priori a unique and even sublime form of human experience, which may be underpinned
by a partially distinct set of cognitive and brain mechanisms. Our response is, let’s prove
it. We argue that the only way to prove that aesthetic experience relies on partially
distinct processing mechanisms is to start as we are, by assuming that aesthetic
experience is a generalised form of meaning extraction and then falsify that position.
This means the field must consider the power inherent in a general semantic
framework, which makes no mention of aesthetics specifically. From there, predictions
such as we make above can be tested and potentially falsified.
7. Predictions, strengths, limitations, and constraints on generality
7.1. Predictions
The model provides clear and falsifiable predictions. By definition, generalist
positions inherently predict that differences will be minimal compared to similarities
when comparing information processing mechanisms across a variety of contexts. In
other words, it is expected that largely similar mechanisms will be at play across
aesthetic and non-aesthetic contexts and such predictions can be tested empirically.
More specifically, we would expect the same interactions between the supramodal hub,
the modality-specific spokes and the executive systems, which have been demonstrated
previously in semantic contexts (e.g., Lambon-Ralph et al., 2017), to operate the same in
aesthetic and non-aesthetic contexts. As one concrete example, a series of experiments
in our lab tested the hypothesis that executive control processes operate in a largely
similar manner across aesthetic and non-aesthetic contexts (Bara et al., 2021b.). The
results suggest that across different experimental contexts, as well as distinct aspects of
working memory (visual and verbal), executive resources are deployed in a largely
similar manner in aesthetic contexts compared to non-aesthetic contexts. As such, the
results provide support for our proposed model, in that common cognitive resources
are deployed across aesthetic and non-aesthetic judgments.
7.2. Strengths
Here, we outline two major strengths of the proposal. First, the proposed model
follows relatively well-established principles of brain organisation, which are based on
decades of cognitive neuroscience evidence, spanning distinct research domains and
methodologies: neuropsychology, neurostimulation and neuroimaging methods
(Duncan, 2010; Petersen & Posner, 2012; Lambon Ralph et al., 2017). This provides firm
empirical ground, robustness and credibility in supporting the theoretical framework.
In addition, the proposed framework fully embraces domain-general features of
cognition such as prioritisation and selection, which, by definition, are engaged to some
extent across all processes and contexts, including aesthetic experiences. Therefore, it
makes more effective use of existing knowledge and frameworks rather than remaining
more encapsulated from such work.
Second, generalist frameworks are computationally efficient, in the sense that
they explain the same set of information processing steps with fewer processing
components or add-on assumptions. By doing so, generalist theoretical positions also
provide a natural framework to generalise to a broader class of object, which includes
everyday items, such as photos, tools, landscapes, faces and bodies. Indeed, no new
computational add-ons are required to incorporate a new object type or setting, such as
attractiveness judgments and mate preferences in everyday life.
7.3. Limitations
A possible criticism of the proposed model is that it seems reasonable to expect
that any generalised framework has the potential to suffer a loss in specificity. That is,
there may be some instances of aesthetic experience that are not well accounted for by
the proposed semantic framework. We accept that this is a valid criticism and that we
should expect a loss in specificity in some instances. We suggest that part of the
empirical challenge is to identify, quantify and qualify the nature of any lack of
specificity. In other words, we should identify what, if anything, is missing, which
requires further, more bespoke computational processes to be added. Another possible
critique of the current framework might be that we have not reviewed research on the
neuropsychology of art (Bäzner, & Hennerici, 2007; Chatterjee, 2004; 2006; Sacks,
1995; Zaidel, 2015). Although acknowledging that a detailed discussion about the role
of ATL in neuropsychological deficits and aesthetic experience would be a valuable
extension of our framework, we do not have the space to cover it adequately here.
Finally, we recognise that the current framework does not address how variations in
exposure to cultural artefacts shape the understanding of aesthetic experience.
However, we acknowledge previous contributions on that topic (Germine et al., 2015;
Vessel et al., 2018) and also emphasise that how experience shapes aesthetic processing
more generally is a valuable and relatively under-studied research direction (Kirsch et
al., 2016).
7.4. Constraints on generality
As previously suggested, it can be helpful to be explicit regarding the generality
of our proposal (Simons et al., 2017). We are not claiming that the aesthetic experience
is not “special” in an everyday sense or on a phenomenological level. That is, we are not
suggesting that aesthetic or art experience are not rich and fulfilling experiences. People
make and engage with deliberate works of art in museums, galleries, and performances
around the world, and art creation and appreciation has been shaped through
education, cultural development and transmission of knowledge, practices, and values
(Bell, 1914; Carroll, 2000; Dutton, 2009; Krumbein et al., 1994; O’Neill et al., 2017; Scott,
2013). That is special. But what we are claiming is that the cognitive and brain systems
that underpin aesthetic experience are not special purpose, and may share much
greater similarity with cognitive processes that are typically not considered to reflect or
underpin the experience of art and aesthetics more generally (Skov & Nadal, 2018).
Second, we are not claiming that our proposed semantic framework explains all
of aesthetics. That is simply impossible. There are many aspects of aesthetics, which are
beyond the scope of our model, and potentially all neurobiological models of aesthetics.
For example, at present, our semantic account does not distinguish between different
types of meaning that could be relevant in aesthetic contexts. However, our starting
point would be that different types of meaning may be supported by largely similar
cognitive and brain structures that have been outlined in our framework. Nevertheless,
investigating how different types of meaning are processed in terms of cognitive and
brain systems would be a valuable direction for future neuroaesthetics research.
Furthermore, a focal aspect of aesthetic experiences is likely to concern how value
is assigned to different aspects of the world or how emotions are expressed. Such
processes may, of course, be inherently meaningful. We are just not suggesting that
aesthetics is only concerned with deriving meaning from the environment without
reference to any other processes. We are, however, making two more restricted claims.
First, we are claiming that meaning has to be a central and large part of any
understanding of aesthetics, which makes existing semantic frameworks particularly
relevant. Second, we are claiming that in terms of the same type of cognitive and brain
mechanisms that prior aesthetics-specific models have focussed upon such as visual,
motor and cognitive processes (Chatterjee, 2003; Chatterjee and Vartanian, 2014;
Pearce et al., 2016), our proposed model gives a computationally efficient answer to the
same questions without requiring any special focus on aesthetic contexts.
Finally, we are not suggesting that the proposed semantic framework is the only
generalist framework that may be useful to consider. We provide it as a worked
example to illustrate the broader point that generalist frameworks can provide
considerable value. Examples of useful alternative generalist frameworks may include
attention and memory. Indeed, the role played by cognitive control processes in
aesthetic experience has been previously considered by most of the cognitive
information processing frameworks (Graf & Landwehr, 2015; Leder et al., 2004; Leder
& Nadal, 2014; Pelowski et al., 2017). However, the extent to which aesthetic and non-
aesthetic judgments involve similar modular stages of cognitive processing - from early
automatic to intermediate and late controlled cognitive processing levels - has been
modestly investigated. Therefore, connecting neuroaesthetics to broader domains of
cognitive neuroscience, such as the executive control research would provide useful
paths to examine aesthetic specificity (Duncan, 2010; Petersen & Posner, 2012).
8. Conclusion
For neuroaesthetics research to develop further, we argue that one fruitful future
direction would be to adopt more generalist theoretical frameworks. In order to
demonstrate the benefits of embracing generalist perspectives, we propose a novel
generalised framework inspired by semantic cognition research, which treats aesthetic
experiences as one example of a meaningful experience. Our proposal outlines that
meaning derived in an aesthetic context should rely on largely overlapping and similar
cognitive and brain systems than those that are typically considered non-aesthetic
contexts. The benefits for theory development are fourfold: (1) it is a more efficient use
of resources and has firmer empirical foundations by leveraging already well-
established research programmes; (2) it provides novel and falsifiable predictions; (3)
it naturally generalises to a wider class of objects and contexts; and (4) it encourages
researchers to address boundary conditions between art and aesthetics and a wider
array of objects and settings.
Acknowledgements
This research was performed as part of an all-Wales Economic and Social Research
Council (ESRC) Doctoral Training Centre PhD studentship (awarded to RR and IB, PhD
student: IB). We would also like to thank members of the neuroaesthetics journal club
including Kohinoor Darda, Alysha Nguyen, Alexander Douglas, and Emily Cross, and two
anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on a previous version of the manuscript.