OPEN PREPRINT ARTICLE Measures
Daily Spiritual Experiences Scale. The daily spiritual
Daily Spiritual Experiences: Examining
experiences scale was developed by Lynn Underwood to
measure ordinary day to day spiritual experiences. The ten
Measurement Invariance by Gender in a
items included in the 2004 GSS survey were:
Nationally Representative Sample
• I feel God’s presence
Joe Chelladurai
• I am spiritually touched by the beauty of creation.
• I feel deep inner peace or harmony
• I ask for God's help in the midst of daily activities
Abstract
• I feel guided by God in the midst of daily activities
In this paper, I examine the Daily Spiritual Experience Scale
• I desire to be closer to God or in union with Him
(DSES) for measurement invariance across men and women.
• I feel God's love for me, directly
Data for this analysis is from the General Social Survey, a
• I feel God’s love for me through others
nationally representative dataset of participants from the
United States. Using lavaan and semPlot packages in R, I
• I find strength in my religion or spirituality
created nested models to test for levels of invariance. Results • I find comfort in my religion or spirituality
indicated that a brief 5-item DSES construct achieved scalar
invariance across groups, suggesting that the construct holds Analysis Plan
true for both men and women. These findings add support Based on Meredith’s (1993) recommendations, I
for testing gender differences for DSES using the brief 5-item examined measurement invariance using a nested model.
DSES construct.
Results
Keywords: measurement invariance, religion, spirituality, latent
Model Fit and Modification
variable modeling, lavaan
An overall model with ten items was created and
checked if the model fit well with the data. Model fit was
In recent research literature, it has well been
poor when all items were used. To improve model fit,
established that women and men vary on their average levels
modification indices were requested, and appropriate
of spirituality. This has been explained by various theories,
variables were removed. Some of the items that were
although subjected to debate (Freese, 2004). For instance,
removed were comparable to items that were in the final set
women take less risks than men, or that women are more
of items. For example, "I find strength in my religion or
religious and spiritual as their socialization processes are
spirituality" was similar to "I find comfort in my religion or
different than men. And moreover, women have historically
spirituality." As a result of this process, five items that
been engaged at home and as a result spend more time
resulted with good model fit were selected (CFI = 998, TLI =
contemplating religious or spiritual things.
996, RMSEA = 0.039, SRMR = 0.008.
Regardless of theoretical explanations, women and
men generally report different levels of spirituality. However,
five items of the daily spiritual experiences scale.
there is a need to first examine whether men and women
think about religion and spirituality in the same way. This can
be achieved using measurement equivalence testing which
would help to then examine differences with more
confidence.
Method
Participants
Participants for this study are from the 2004 General
Social Survey. Conducted by the National Opinion Research
Center, the GSS is a repeated cross-sectional survey with a
nationally representative sample. Data was collected by
interviewing in person and over telephone when in-person
interviews were not possible. Topics of the survey included
demographic characteristics, behavioral information,
psychological and social constructs such as happiness,
gender roles, financial choices, and political preferences.
Measurement Model by Group The final model supports further examination of group
differences in future research.
Next, I created a factor variable to examine the Findings should be taken with caution, however.
measurement model according to gender. Then, I examined The major drawback of the study is that best fitting model
the fit indices of the model with only men, and the model resulted with only five items when compared with the
with only women. Both had good model fit, with women (CFI original ten items. This has severe restrictions as to which
= .999, TLI = .999, RMSEA = .018, SRMR = .008) having a items can be used to measure and compare the levels of daily
slightly better model fit than men (CFI = .996, TLI = .991, spiritual experiences.
RMSEA = .057, SRMR = .012). Measuring spirituality has other challenges as there
is seldom one defining type of spirituality across a wide range
Configural Invariance of participants such as a nationally representative sample. It
is therefore important for future studies to focus exclusively
I then examined nested models to see what level of on spirituality to examine what type of religious and spiritual
invariance this measurement model reached. First, I beliefs and observances are pertinent to the individual.
examined the configural invariance model, where all Global measures such as religious affiliation and participation
parameters were allowed to vary. This model indicated good may provide some indication, but with current trends
model fit (CFI = .998, TLI .995, RMSEA = .041, SRMR = .01) and indicating an increase in spirituality and a decline in religiosity
provided evidence for configural invariance. (Pew Research Center, 2019) there is a need for more
measures such as the Daily Spiritual Experiences Scale.
Metric Invariance