Building robust and ethical vaccination verification
systems
1∗ 2 3
Baobao Zhang, Laurin Weissinger, Johannes Himmelreich,
4 5 6 1
Nina McMurry, Tiffany Li, Naomi Scheinerman, Sarah Kreps
Department of Government, Cornell University,
214 White Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Department of Computer Science, Tufts University
161 College Avenue, Medford, MA 02155, USA
Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs
Department of Public Administration and International Affairs, Syracuse University
200 Eggers Hall, Syracuse, NY 13244, USA
Institutions and Political Inequality Unit, WZB Berlin Social Science Center
Reichpietschufer 50, 10785 Berlin, Germany
School of Law, Boston University
765 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA
Department of Medical Ethics and Health Policy, University of Pennsylvania
423 Guardian Drive, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
To whom correspondence should be addressed; E-mail: bz377@cornell.edu.
December 30, 2020
As countries begin to vaccinate their populations against COVID-19, creating
systems to verify vaccine records will be vital to reopening businesses, educa-
tional institutions, and travel. We consider the challenges of building vaccine
record verification (VRV) systems that involve data sharing by health care
providers, methods for verifying vaccine records, and regulation of how en-
tities (e.g., workplaces, schools, businesses, and airlines) may request proof
of vaccination. In particular, we focus on the opportunities and risks associ-
ated with digital vaccine passport apps. We propose three ethical principles to
guide the building of VRV systems: 1) aligning systems with vaccine prioritiza-
tion, 2) upholding fairness and equity, and 3) building trustworthy technology
that protects the public’s health data.
In less than a year, scientists worldwide have developed effective vaccines against COVID-
19. Public health authorities are now deliberating policies around the verification of vaccine
records. Instead of focusing solely on the technical details, we consider vaccine record verifica-
tion (VRV) as a system, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The system involves 1) data sharing by health
care providers, 2) methods for verifying vaccine records, and 3) regulation of how entities (e.g.,
workplaces, schools, businesses, and airlines) may request proof of vaccination. Building ro-
bust and ethical VRV systems will be vital to reopening businesses, educational institutions,
and travel.
Historically, governmental agencies have played a dominant role in VRV systems by issuing
paper records. But now, non-profit organizations, corporations, and academic researchers are
developing digital verification systems. For instance, a non-profit organization has created an
app called CommonPass to verify users’ COVID-19 test results and, soon, vaccine records for
safer air travel. Tech companies, including IBM, are developing similar apps. Beyond airlines,
other businesses, employers, and educational institutions may rely on digital vaccine passports
in the future (1).
We acknowledge that building VRV systems for the COVID-19 pandemic poses both op-
portunities (e.g., more accurate verification) and risks (e.g., exacerbating health and economic
inequalities). In Fig. 1, we pose key policy questions associated with each component of the
system and the system as a whole. We argue for increased oversight to govern the development
and use of VRV systems. Based on our analysis, we endorse the following ethical principles to
guide public health authorities, policymakers, health care providers, and software developers:
• Aligning VRV systems with vaccine prioritization
• Upholding fairness and equity to avoid discrimination against individuals who cannot
access vaccines
• Building trustworthy technology that protects the public’s health data
Background
We consider how three existing public health surveillance measures could inform policies around
verification of COVID-19 vaccine records.
Paper vaccine record cards
The idea of an internationally-recognized VRV system is not new. In the 1920s and 1930s,
countries began tying air travel to health certificates to verify inoculation against certain dis-
eases. In 1951, the World Health Organization (WHO) took existing measures a step further by
establishing the International Sanitary Regulations that aimed to limit the international spread
of disease. An International Certification of Vaccination, known as the carte jaune, followed in
1959 and logged an individual’s vaccination history to meet countries’ exit and entry require-
ments (2). The WHO publishes vaccine requirements, largely an annual update on yellow fever
vaccination requirements across countries. The longstanding success of the carte jaune sug-
gests that paper-based vaccine records should not be abandoned. (Indeed, countries including
the U.S. and the U.K. are issuing paper vaccination cards.) Unlike digital health records, paper
records are less error-prone (e.g., not sensitive to internet connectivity), do not exclude those
without smartphones, and can serve as a backup for digital verification tools.
Immunity passports based on antibody tests
In the middle of 2020, several countries considered adopting immunity passports in the form
of a certificate or app that would verify that an individual has neutralizing antibodies against
COVID-19 (3). These antibody immunity verification proposals were not adopted because they
could have encouraged individuals to become infected with the virus. Furthermore, concerns
about the sensitivity and specificity of serologic tests and the possibility that people can become
reinfected with COVID-19 added additional roadblocks (4).
Vaccine records would eliminate many of the problems associated with immunity passports
based on antibody tests. Nevertheless, one concern remains: Immunity passports, whether
based on antibody or vaccine verification, could create a two-tiered society: those who have
greater freedom to work, travel, and perform other activities versus those who do not. Therefore,
we argue in our recommendations that public health policies must uphold fairness and equity
by not punishing people who cannot (yet) access vaccines.
COVID-19 exposure notification apps
COVID-19 exposure notification apps, designed to supplement manual contact tracing, illus-
trate the potential problems associated with implementing technological solutions quickly in
a pandemic. Although many countries have adopted the Google/Apple Exposure Notification
system that is privacy-preserving, use rates in the U.S. and Europe remain relatively low (5).
Concerns about vaccine passport apps are likely to be similar to concerns about contact tracing
apps: privacy violations, government/private surveillance, and abuse of the collected data (6).
Widespread adoption of vaccine passport apps requires overcoming public distrust of this new
technology and the government and private organizations that run them.
Challenges of building VRV systems
Health care providers
Health care providers that are vaccinating patients face challenges regarding the storage and
sharing of vaccine records. VRV systems require the mass collection of health data, generally
understood to be particularly sensitive information under most privacy law regimes (e.g., the
EU General Data Protection Regulation). Electronic transfer of health information also incurs
legal obligations under regulations like the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) in the U.S. Beyond legal concerns, the U.S. also faces information technology (IT)
hurdles because many health care providers do not enter vaccine records into online immuniza-
tion information systems (IISs) that facilitate data sharing. As of 2019, only 60% of U.S. adults’
vaccine records were in IISs (7). Expanding health care providers’ IT capacity would require
considerable resources.
Another important question is with whom health care providers should share vaccine records
and what specific data would be shared. Currently, there is a proliferation of third-party soft-
ware developers building vaccine passport apps. Without oversight or credible information
about these app developers, health care providers may be (rightly) hesitant to share vaccine
records. Patients may also be reluctant to participate because they fear that these apps could
leak sensitive medical data.
Verification methods
One central debate regarding verification methods is whether vaccine passport apps should sup-
plement paper cards or replace them entirely in some cases. While some express concerns that
paper records are easy to fake, paper vaccine records have a proven track record.
Well-designed vaccine passport apps can prevent fraud. Nevertheless, apps must be de-
signed with privacy, security, and transparency in mind to protect medical and personal data.
App-based verification will not work well in areas where health care providers do not have the
technical capacity to share data, where many people do not own smartphones, or where people
distrust the apps and the actors developing the apps.
One lesson from the exposure notification app experience in the U.S. and Europe is that
public trust in new technology and the actors developing and managing this technology is vital
for widespread adoption. In a survey conducted in early December 2020, we found that the U.S.
public does not prefer paper records over cellphone-based verification. In our survey (results
shown in Fig. 2), 54% of U.S. adults support requiring cellphone-based verification to travel
on airplanes and public transportation, compared with 52% for paper records. Nevertheless,
46% said that requiring cellphone-based verification would violate privacy, compared with 39%
for paper records. Even if vaccine passport apps were made mandatory, failing to establish a
trustworthy and privacy-preserving app could cause long-term distrust in tech companies and
governmental institutions.
Entities requesting proof of vaccination
While educational institutions and some employers have traditionally required proof of vac-
cination, many more entities (e.g., landlords, stores, restaurants, cinemas, airlines, and public
transit) may soon request it as well. Who is allowed to request proof of vaccination, when they
are allowed to begin request proof, and what type of verification they will (have to) accept are
currently being debated.
From a legal perspective, U.S. law provides little recourse against discrimination based
on immunity verification. Both states and private businesses have broad power to implement
mandatory vaccination requirements. U.S. laws protecting health data (e.g., HIPAA and the
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act) do not prohibit discriminatory uses of immunity
information. The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) also does not protect against discrim-
inatory impacts of immunity verification. Indeed, the ADA allows employers to limit hiring to
individuals who “shall not pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals in the
workplace.” The U.S. Equal Opportunity Employment Commission (EEOC) released guidance
in December, stating that employers can legally mandate vaccinations, provided that accommo-
dations are made for individuals with disabilities or those seeking religious exemption.
As immunity verification will likely impact fundamental rights like housing, education, and
employment, the absence of strong legal protections is troubling. Laws should balance protect-
ing the health of the public and preserving fundamental human rights. At the very least, entities
should not make impossible demands on individuals, such as requiring them to jump the vaccine
prioritization queue when vaccine supplies are limited, as we will discuss in the next section.
Guiding ethical principles
Based on our discussion of the associated challenges, we propose the following principles to
guide the development of VRV systems.
Aligning VRV systems with vaccine prioritization
Public health authorities have made painful trade-offs in deciding which groups should be given
priority in the COVID-19 vaccine queue (8). Proof of vaccination requirements need to be
aligned with vaccination prioritization. Only those who can get a vaccine ought to be subject
to mandatory proof of vaccine. When VRV is required for international air travel, for example,
then anyone who is at the back of a vaccine queue but who urgently needs or wants to travel,
can neither get a vaccine nor travel. This dilemma could create incentives to change vaccine
prioritization plans to allow travel for those who are otherwise at the back of the queue, thereby
undermining the principles that informed the vaccine prioritization plan in the first place. Plans
informed initially by medical and social needs could be amended to satisfy economic or political
interests instead. However, vaccine verification could complement and substitute for required
pre/post-flight testing and mask-wearing to make travel safer.
Upholding fairness and equity
The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated existing socioeconomic inequities by disproportion-
ately harming ethnic minorities and low-income individuals (9). VRV systems should amelio-
rate rather than exacerbate these inequities so that those most exposed do not then suffer the
most scrutiny when unprotected. Individuals who cannot access vaccines while supply is lim-
ited should not be denied public services, employment, education, or travel. Likewise, those
who cannot receive the vaccine for health reasons (e.g., those with severe allergies) should also
not face discrimination. Furthermore, governments and/or employers should pay for not only
the vaccines but also medical treatments for severe side-effects. Finally, as we noted earlier,
official paper vaccine records should be accepted so that those who do not own smartphones are
not discriminated against.
The fairness and equity principle should be applied internationally as well as domestically.
While the vaccines will likely be widely available to the public in developed countries in 2021,
some low-income countries will not see mass vaccination in the upcoming year (10). Developed
countries should not curtail immigration and travel from developing countries by imposing strict
vaccine requirements that cannot be met.
Upholding fairness and equity may be costly: the public must adhere to measures to pre-
vent COVID-19 spread (e.g., social distancing, mask-wearing, and surveillance testing) until
vaccines are widely available and herd immunity is reached. Nevertheless, keeping these pre-
ventative measures in place is prudent until we have more data regarding whether vaccination
prevents asymptotic transmission (11).
Once COVID-19 vaccines are widely and easily available, entities may — and perhaps ought
to — require vaccine verification. Permitting such policies would be in line with the individual
autonomy of entities in the private economic sphere and protect individuals’ health. Moreover,
such requirements would likely incentivize vaccination.
Building trustworthy technology
Any vaccine passport app should be privacy-preserving and secure. As a core technical design
tenet, the app and its back end should only collect and store data necessary for the app to
function. All data should be securely deleted once it is no longer needed. Developers should
avoid including any functionality that tracks unnecessary data or and avoid implementing any
third-party tracking or dependencies (12, 13). All data communications should remain end-
to-end secure between user devices and the data controller’s infrastructure. Vaccine passport
apps should also maximize privacy-preservation: individual users should be able to verify their
vaccination status without sharing personally identifiable (PII) or personal health information
(PHI) with the verifying entity. This is technically and cryptographically feasible (14).
The application and back-end should implement strong and positive security controls. Pro-
gram logic and back-end protections should include role-based access controls to ensure that
users can only access the information they require to complete the specific tasks assigned to
their role within an organization during a particular time frame. PHI and PII should never be
collected, accessed, used, analyzed, or shared without verified expressed user opt-in. Further-
more, the data controller should implement strong internal controls and safeguards to prevent
staff from accessing any personal data without appropriate process, such as third-party approval,
the four-eyes principle (i.e., two individuals being required to complete the process), documen-
tation, and alerts to affected individuals.
The most effective way to increase the trust in, and the security of, the solution is to use an
open-source approach for application and back-end services, as demonstrated by the German
Corona Warn App. This approach allows for crowd-sourced (automated and manual) security
review (15). Trust in institutions, both private or governmental, develops slowly and has taken
serious hits in recent years (16). However, the availability of source code would allow regula-
tors, security experts, and the press to peruse and improve the source code of the app, building
necessary trust in the VRV system.