Visual portrayals of people in need 1
Visual Portrayals of People in Need:
The Impact of Refugee Depictions on Compassion and Support for Humanitarian Aid
by
Delia Dumitrescu
and
Erik P. Bucy
30 December 2020
Abstract
As conflicts flare around the world, images of refugees are a familiar presence in Western media.
Drawing on existing accounts of refugee imagery, and on previous research on compassion and
on Moral Foundations Theory, we demonstrate how refugee depictions that vary in terms of their
sympathy framing influence public opinion, using three survey experiments in Sweden, the US,
and UK, with 25 unique images taken from international media coverage of the Syrian refugee
crisis and over 4,500 combined respondents. We find that ideology has a strong moderating effect
on the impact of refugee visual imagery: whereas liberals are similarly sympathetic to refugee
depictions, irrespective of the manifest vulnerability of those depicted or how they are pictured,
compassion responses among conservatives vary with the specific visual frame presented.
Moreover, compassion mediates the effect of visuals on right-wing support for refugee aid,
particularly when conservatives are shown images of individual children refugees as opposed to
images of groups of adults. We conclude by discussing the implications for the editorial selection
of news photographs of refugees, as well as the need for further research into the role of images in
shaping responses to humanitarian crises across different cultural contexts.
Keywords: Visual communication; refugee depictions; compassion; humanitarian aid; political
ideology; survey experiment; Syrian refugee crisis.
Senior Researcher, Institute of Political Science, University of Heidelberg. E-mail address:
delia.dumitrescu@gmail.com (Corresponding author)
Marshall and Sharleen Formby Regents Professor of Strategic Communication, College of
Media and Communication, Texas Tech University, Box 43082, Lubbock, TX 79409., USA.
Email address: erik.bucy@ttu.edu
Visual portrayals of people in need 2
Over the past few decades, ample evidence has mounted that news visuals, especially facial
displays of individuals, convey social and motivational information to viewers that facilitate
rapid processing and integration into memory while influencing attitudes and behavior (see
reviews by Dumitrescu, 2016; Fahmy & Alkazemi, 2017). Besides impacting emotional and
evaluative responses to pivotal moments, images of people ensnared in critical events can shape
support for related policies (e.g., Zillman, 2006). When public assistance or humanitarian aid are
seen as possible remedies, a chief consideration is the demonstrated vulnerability of those in
need, whether welfare recipients or refugees in search of a new home—a characteristic that is
most immediately conveyed in the forms of visual depictions published or broadcast in media.
Cross-country research provides overwhelming evidence that the visual portrayal of
refugees and migrants in the news is dominated by group shots, mostly of adult men, oftentimes
in opposition to authorities (e.g., Bleiker, Campbell, Hutchison & Nicholson, 2013; Wilmott,
2017; Zhang & Hellmueller, 2017). Individual refugees with manifested vulnerability are,
comparatively speaking, much less visible. This imbalance in visual focus is credited with
reducing public support for humanitarian aid on at least two accounts. First, group visual
portrayals are assumed to throttle the possibility of compassion for the victims (Bleiker et al.,
2013). Second, because compassion is greater for vulnerable victims (Goetz, Keltner, & Simon-
Thomas, 2010), the depiction of adults in no obvious distress contributes to unsympathetic
portrayals because it is not immediately apparent why they need assistance. Thus, both the social
context (group vs. individual) and the manifested vulnerability of the refugees depicted are seen
as altering the public’s response by changing the representation of refugees’ genuine need.
There is, however, to date, limited evidence about viewers’ perceptions of these visual
depictions, and of the mechanism underpinning the effect of such refugee imagery on public
Visual portrayals of people in need 3
assistance attitudes. While previous studies suggest that individual children generate higher support
than groups of children (e.g., Kogut & Ritov, 2005; Västfjäll, Slovic, Mayorga, & Peters, 2014),
there is little evidence about the impact of exposure to images of adult refugees (in groups or by
themselves); or how their effect compares to images of children. Moreover, despite left- and right-
wing individuals exhibiting different levels of sensitivity to the suffering and the need for care of
others (e.g., Graham, Haidt, & Nosek, 2009), the moderating role of viewer ideology on the
influence of refugee visuals remains largely unexplored.
In this paper, we build on multiple lines of research to address these lingering questions.
We begin by reviewing the evidence of the visual construction of refugees in the news, and of the
frequency and expected impact of the most prominent visual frames (i.e., the individualized/
collective focus of the shot and the degree of manifest vulnerability of those depicted). To facilitate
the comparison of refugee images with different visual composition, we merge these visual
dimensions of media refugee depictions onto a visual sympathy framing continuum. Reflecting
previous accounts, individualized portraits of clearly vulnerable refugees (e.g., images showcasing
individual children) fall at the highly sympathetic framing end of this continuum, while collective
shots of individuals with no manifest vulnerability (such as images of groups of adults) fall at the
unsympathetic extreme; individualized depictions of non-vulnerable individuals, or collective shots
of vulnerable refugees fall in between these two poles.
We draw on previous Moral Foundations Theory research (Feinberg & Willer, 2013, 2015;
Graham et al., 2009; Haidt, Graham, & Joseph, 2009) to derive a set of expectations about the
effects of refugee visual sympathy framing on viewers with different ideological outlooks, which
we test in three survey-experiments in Sweden, the US and UK. The experiments have a
cumulative N of about 4,500 participants and utilize 25 different refugee depictions in total, in
Visual portrayals of people in need 4
which we operationalize both the individualized/collective focus of the shot, and the manifested
vulnerability of those depicted (using the refugees’ age category, and in one experiment, their
manifest distress). The results show that, contrary to our expectations, group shots or images of
adult refugees in no apparent distress do not always trigger lower compassion levels. Our central
finding is that ideology has a strong moderating effect on the impact of refugee imagery. Whereas
liberals (left-leaning) appear immune to the (un)sympathetic visual framing of refugees, among
right-leaning participants compassion for refugees increases markedly upon exposure to highly
sympathetic portrayals (i.e., images of individual children) compared to unsympathetic ones.
Moreover, among conservatives, compassion also plays a mediating role for the effect of refugee
visuals on support for humanitarian aid. We conclude by discussing the implications for the
editorial selection of news photographs of refugees, as well as the need for further research into the
role of images in shaping responses to humanitarian crises across different cultural contexts.
Literature review
Why images in the news matter
Images are ubiquitous and increasingly influential in today’s multiplatform news environment
(Bucy & Grabe, 2007; Grabe & Bucy, 2009; see also, Dumitrescu, 2016). As representations of
events, news images encapsulate both social and contextual meaning. Depictions of individuals are
particularly influential in conveying emotional state and motivational intent (Stewart, Salter, &
Mehu, 2009). Based on very limited exposure times, viewers can infer personal characteristics or
trait attributions from still photographs of politicians (e.g., Hall, Goren, Chaiken, & Todorov,
2009) as well as make behavioral inferences about how they might act in different situations
(Swigger, 2012). Moreover, visual depictions of emotionally expressive individuals in the news
have been shown to impact viewers’ opinions about the issues these individuals are associated to,
Visual portrayals of people in need 5
through a process of exemplification (e.g., Zillmann, 2006). Emotional activation has been
evidenced by numerous political communication studies (e.g., Dumitrescu, 2006; Brader, 2005;
Powell, Boomgaarden, De Swert, & de Vreese, 2015) as a mediator of the visual effects on
attitudes and behaviors.
Media portrayals of refugees
As previously noted, research conducted across different national contexts reveals a
proclivity towards group depictions in media portrayals of refugees and migrants. In refugee
crises predating the Syrian war, Bleiker et al. (2013) found that single-person depictions made up
only 6% of images published in Australian news media, while groups of refugees ranging in size
from four to more than fifteen persons constituted fully two-thirds of images in news coverage.
A similar preponderance of group portrayals was reported in Germany, the US and UK with
respect to the Syrian crisis (see Wilmott, 2017; Zhang & Hellmueller, 2017).
Other studies highlight the limited variation in the gender and age composition of refugee
portrayals: Wilmott (2017) finds that more than two thirds of refugee images in British media
coverage of the Syrian crisis were exclusively or primarily of adult men. Men were also more
likely to be portrayed in groups—and to be depicted in conflict with authorities (Wilmott, 2017,
p. 77). Both visual choices have surfaced as potentially influencing attitudes towards refugees in
general. The visual focus on adult males has been picked up by far-right leaders as a justification
of their opposition to humanitarian aid (e.g., Clavel, 2015). Group portrayals, in turn, are
regarded as a key element underpinning the largely negative portrayal of refugees in the news
because “with every additional person, the compassionate effect [of generating public sympathy]
is said to decrease” (Bleiker et al., 2013, p. 404).
Visual portrayals of people in need 6
In contrast to these portrayals, images that highlight the human tragedy of refugee
movements have a different visual composition. These portrayals tend to focus on vulnerability
and suffering. Kędra and Sommier (2018, p. 42) find that “in the visual reports of war and
disaster, the vulnerability of children is a widely utilized category.” Children epitomize the most
compelling category of war victim, especially because they are not in control of their
surroundings or fate and are perceived to be incapable of faking injury and distress (see Höijer,
2004). In a study of online media in the UK, images of children were found to comprise roughly
15% of news coverage of the Syrian crisis (e.g., Wilmott, 2017). Sympathy framing sometimes
extends to depictions of adults, with one comparative study of US and German media coverage
of the Syrian crisis finding that roughly half of all refugee visuals focused on their lives and
suffering (Zhang & Hellmueller, 2017).
A visual framing continuum of refugee portrayals in news
Intrinsic to the analysis of refugee portrayals in the news is the common assumption that,
depending on the manifest vulnerability of those depicted (children, as opposed to adults, in
visible distress or not), and how they are portrayed (as individuals or in groups), these depictions
can influence public perceptions of the urgency of humanitarian need and, consequently on what
should be done to alleviate their condition. We systematize this assumption by combining these
two dimensions into a single continuum of visual sympathy framing of refugee portrayals (see
vulnerability, using a collective camera focus, while the sympathetic end of the continuum is
populated with individualized visual portrayals of vulnerable individuals.
Visual portrayals of people in need 7
Our primary aim lies in determining the extent to which the image types at the opposite
ends of this continuum generate—as expected—different public reactions, both emotionally and
for the willingness to support refugee assistance policies. At the same time, we also aim to
provide a better understanding of how refugee visuals that have an individual focus, but portray
individuals with no apparent vulnerability, or images that portray vulnerable victims from a
collective perspective affect viewer responses compared to images that are either highly
(un)sympathetic.
The moral underpinnings of decision-making and its ideological bases
To theorize how individuals may react to the signals of vulnerability and need encoded in
media portrayals of refugees, we draw on Moral Foundations Theory (hereafter MFT; Haidt et
al., 2009). MFT posits that people possess a set of “underlying moral intuitions, or emotional
sensitivity to certain types of social behaviors” (Tamborini, 2013, p. 45). When observing these
behaviors, a sense of moral affirmation or transgression may occur in observers, generating
positive or negative affect in response, even if these sentiments cannot be explained rationally.
The need for care and attention for those who are suffering is one of the most important
foundations of moral decision-making (Haidt et al., 2009). Violations of this principle are often
accompanied by feelings of compassion (Landmann & Hess, 2018), an emotion that “arises in
witnessing another’s suffering and that motivates a subsequent desire to help” (Goetz et al.,
2010, p. 351). Compassion and its close relative, empathic concern, are prosocial emotions.
Empathic concern has been shown to enhance altruistic motivations in helping those in need
(Batson, 2016), particularly for victims who are seen as “weak or helpless” (Davis, 2015, p.
283). At the same time, previous research also finds that compassion fades with the addition of
Visual portrayals of people in need 8
victims, even if they are identified as highly vulnerable (e.g., Västfjäll et al., 2014). Thus, we
predict that:
H1: Exposure to highly sympathetic visual frames (i.e., images of individual children,
whether in manifest distress or not) should elicit greater compassion for refugees than exposure
to highly unsympathetic visual frames (such as of groups of adults in no distress).
At the same time, previous MFT research provides ample evidence that sensitivity to
violations of moral norms varies with an individual’s left-right (or liberal-conservative)
ideological orientation (Graham et al., 2009; Haidt et al., 2009). In general, liberals are more
sensitive than conservatives to concerns about care and suffering, while conservatives are more
susceptible to other moral violations, such as those endangering authority or purity (Haidt &
Graham, 2007). The moderating role of ideology in shaping moral decision-making has been
shown in relation to numerous issues ranging from environmental causes (Feinberg & Willer,
2013) to economic and social issues (Day, Fiske, Downing, & Trail, 2014; Feinberg & Willer,
2015). In the case of refugee depictions, because liberals are concerned with protection against
harm, variations in the visual sympathetic framing of refugee portrayals should not matter much.
Conservatives’ sensitivity to the predicament of others should, however, be heightened by
exposure to more sympathetic frames. Thus, we predict that:
H2: Ideology will moderate the effect of exposure to images of highly sympathetic
portrayals (such as those of individual children, in distress or not) on compassion, when
compared to highly unsympathetic portrayals.
In light of previous evidence pointing to the mediating role of emotion in driving the
influence of visuals on related behavior (e.g., Powell et al., 2015), we also expect that:
Visual portrayals of people in need 9
H3: Compassion will mediate the influence of highly sympathetic refugee depictions on
support for humanitarian aid.
Finally, in the absence of clear theoretical guidance as to the influence of images in
between the two extremes of our framing continuum, we ask:
RQ. Compared to the two poles of the sympathy framing continuum, do viewers respond
with different levels of compassion to images of individualized portraits of non-vulnerable
refugees or to collective portrayals of vulnerable refugees?
Method
To obtain a broader, cross-cultural picture of visual influence, we conduct three survey
experiments across Sweden, the US and UK. According to UN data, between 2015 and 2017
(corresponding to the period of our studies), about 30,000 Syrians resettled in Sweden, about
3,000 in the US, and under 1,000 in the UK. Compared to the two Anglo-Saxon countries,
therefore, Sweden has been at the forefront of the Syrian refugee resettlement effort, and
Swedish media coverage of the refugee issue has been significantly less negative than in other
European nations (Berry, Garcia-Blanco, & Moore, 2016; De Cock et al., 2018).
Visual stimuli: operationalization of vulnerability. While vulnerability can be conveyed in
a variety of ways, we operationalize it using the age and the facial expressions of distress of the
refugees. Children are recognized in media coverage research as the epitome of defenselessness
(e.g., Kędra and Sommier, 2018); facial expressions, conversely, can instantly convey a person’s
suffering, due to their automatic processing (e.g., Stewart et al., 2009).
estimates17.asp (Accessed 15 October 2020)
Visual portrayals of people in need 1 0
Visual stimuli: validation study. We began by selecting 30 images from the online editions
of major international news providers, out of which six depicted a single child, four depicted a
single child in obvious distress, seven depicted a group of children, four depicted a single adult
male, three depicted a single adult male in obvious distress, and six depicted groups of adult men.
Two hundred and seventy four US participants (M age = 37.25, SD = 10.74; 52.6% female;
51.5% Democrat, 22.3% Republican; 60% liberal, 25% conservative) were recruited through
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk to rate the images on several evaluative dimensions. Each participant
in the validation study evaluated five randomly selected images, presented in random order.
To validate the group dimension, participants were first asked “to click on what stands
out most” in each image. The resulting visual heat maps revealed that images classified as
depicting one individual generated a dominant focus (centered on the person’s face), while
images classified as group-based showed split focus between various individuals; two images
performed poorer on this classification and were removed from the sample.
To validate the vulnerability manipulation, we first asked participants about the age of
those depicted, using the question: “Looking at the individual(s) who are the focus of this image,
how old would you say they are? Please write in your best estimate below.” The analysis of the
open-ended responses showed that individuals in the adult refugee images were correctly
identified as adults (over 18), and individuals in the children refugee images were correctly
identified as children (10 years old or younger). Respondents then rated the strength of the
The images were collected from the online editions of BBC, Le Monde, The Guardian,
Independent, The New Yorker, and Newsweek at the peak of the European refugee crisis in fall
2015 and spring 2016. These news sources were selected in connection with a separate media
content analysis project examining visual coverage of the Syrian conflict.
Visual portrayals of people in need 1 1
refugees’ emotional displays on scales for five discrete emotions (distress, anger, anxiety, hope
and happiness). For images selected to represent obvious distress, all but one were rated as
showing high distress (with the mean strength of 2.5 or higher on a 0-3 scale) and very low
positive emotion (with a mean of 0.5 or lower on the same 0-3 scale). Conversely, for those
images chosen to not show obvious distress, all but two of them received low to moderate scores
on negative emotion (with means of 2 or less) and low scores on positive emotion (with means of
1 or less). Finally, respondents also rated the extent to which those depicted could be described
as “in need of protection” on a scale of 1 (Not at all) to 5 (Extremely well). t-tests showed that
children in our selected images, irrespective of their distress display, were deemed in greater
need of protection than adults displaying no distress, and received similar scores as adults
displaying obvious distress.
In light of these results, we retained 25 images out of our initial sample as good
exemplars covering the different image categories on the visual sympathy framing continuum.
The final pool contained five images depicting groups of adults, three images of individual adults
in no distress, six images of groups of children, three images of adults in distress, five images of
individual children in no distress, and three images of individual children in distress.
Main studies: cross-country communalities
The three experiments in this study shared the same study flow, set-up of the visual
manipulation, and wording of the emotional response measures (translated in the Swedish case).
Study flow. In each administration, participants started the study by reading a short text
reminding them that, due to conflicts around the world, many individuals have become refugees
in different countries. For each participant, one of the validated images was introduced as an
example of those displaced. To emulate the visual exposure conditions they would normally
Visual portrayals of people in need 1 2
encounter in a real-life media setting, participants were allowed to spend as much time as they
wanted on this page. After clicking ‘Continue’, participants were asked about the emotional
response evoked by the refugee issue and then indicated their support for humanitarian aid. In
each administration, the questionnaire was programmed as forward-only.
Visual manipulation set-up: Multiplicity of images per experimental group. Images of
refugees are ultimately idiosyncratic, as those depicted may affect viewers due to a unique or
identifying look. Moreover, information in the background may make some images more effective
in arousing compassion responses than others. To maximize the possibility of detecting effects
associated with the type of refugee depictions, rather than the idiosyncrasies of individual
photographs, in each country we included between 1 and 3 different images to represent each
visual framing category (see below for details, and Appendix A for the images included in each
study). Participants had an equal chance of seeing any one image, and those who saw photographs
using the same visual framing were treated as part of the same experimental group.
Emotional response. Following presentation of the refugee image, participants were
asked: “When you think about those who come from conflict areas to ask for refugee status in
[COUNTRY], how do you feel? People can have complex emotions on these matters, so please
consider each specific feeling below and indicate to what extent you experience it.” Respondents
self-reported how much compassion and empathy they felt using a 5-point scale (1 = Not at all, 5
= Extremely), as part of a larger battery of emotions. We combine the two variables into an
overall compassion measure (Sweden: α = 0.93, M = 3.80, SD = 1.11; US: α = 0.84, M = 3.31,
SD = 1.13; UK: α = 0.90, M = 3.15, SD = 1.07).
Data collections by country
Visual portrayals of people in need 1 3
To provide a more stringent test of visual effects, we rotated the particular images that
participants were exposed to in different administrations, and adapted the humanitarian aid
measures to reflect the actual refugee governmental support in each country at the time of the
study. Below we describe these country-specific features in detail.
Sweden
Participants. A national sample of Swedish citizens (N = 1,375, 53.6% male, mean age
47.1, SD = 14.6) participated in the study as part of a larger survey fielded by the Laboratory for
Public Opinion Research at the University of Gothenburg from 28 September to 16 October 2016.
Visual treatment. The experimental treatment consisted in four image categories with none
depicting refugees in obvious distress. At the two extremes of the visual sympathy framing
continuum we had ‘Group of adults’ (n = 337) and ‘Individual child’ (n = 351). We included two
additional categories, ‘Individual adult’ (n = 341) and ‘Group of children’ (n = 346), as exemplars
of images falling in between the two sympathy extremes. In each category, respondents had an
equal chance of seeing any one of two images, with all images allocated randomly.
Support for humanitarian aid. Willingness to favor or oppose “offering financial support
to cover housing and food for those who have been granted refugee status in Sweden” was
measured on a 7-point scale (1 = Favor a lot, 7 = Oppose a great deal). We reverse code the
measure so that higher numbers indicate greater support (M = 4.77, SD = 1.95).
United States
Participants. The survey was administered by SSI to an internet panel of adult citizens
living in the northeastern United States from 14 December 2016 to 14 January 2017 (N = 1,185,
41.27% male, median age group: 35-44).
Visual portrayals of people in need 1 4
Visual treatment. The experimental treatment consisted in four image categories: ‘Group
of adults’ (n = 160), ‘Individual child’ (n = 451), ‘Group of children’ (n = 425), and ‘Individual
adult’ (n = 149). While the categories matched those in Sweden, to increase confidence in the
robustness of any empirical difference found in visual effects, we selected new images from our
pre-tested pool. Moreover, due to the mechanics of this particular administration, each adult
category had 1 associated image, while the child categories had 3 associated images each.
Support for humanitarian aid. Participants answered two questions: “Do you favor or
oppose offering financial support to those who have been granted refugee status in the US?” and,
separately “…to those waiting for their refugee applications in the US to be processed?” (1 =
Oppose a great deal, 7 = Favor a great deal). We combine these measures into a new variable
(alpha = 0.91, M = 3.54, SD = 1.73).
United Kingdom
Participants. The study was administered by YouGov to a national sample of UK citizens
on 15-17 May 2017 (N = 2,207, 44.7% male, mean age 47.7, SD = 16.8).
Visual treatment. In this administration we introduced distress as an additional element in
the visualization of vulnerability. Respondents were randomly assigned to one of four image
categories: ‘Group of adults’ (n = 604) , ‘Individual child in obvious distress’ (n = 529),
‘Individual adult in obvious distress’ (n = 548) and ‘Group of children’ (n = 526). Each treatment
group had three associated images. Nine of the 12 images were new with respect to the other
country studies; the remaining three were also shown in the US data collection.
Support for humanitarian aid. Participants were asked: “The British government
currently provides support to people who have been granted refugee status in the United
Kingdom, and who are in need. This support takes the form of access to housing and healthcare,
Visual portrayals of people in need 1 5
and money for food and childcare. On a scale from 0 (Strongly oppose) to 10 (Strongly support),
to what extent do you oppose or support the British government providing this sort of support?”
The original 0 to 10 scale was recoded to range from 1 to 11 (M = 6.62, SD = 3.17).
Moderator: Ideology
In every country, ideology was measured as part of a demographic battery at the end of
the study, using a Left-Right scale in Sweden and the UK, and a Liberal-Conservative scale in
the US. In the analyses, we use Left/Liberal and Right/Conservative interchangeably.
distributions for each specific image in each study are given in Appendix A.
Results
Simple effects (H1, RQ). We begin with a simple analysis of the relationship between
exposure to the visual treatment and self-reported compassion for refugees. H1 predicts an
increased in reported compassion as we move from highly unsympathetic to highly sympathetic
depictions (i.e., when comparing images of groups of adults to images of individual children),
while the RQ enquires whether viewers respond with different levels of compassion to images of
children and adults that vary in their degree of sympathetic elements. To examine these effects
by country, we run a regression analysis, bootstrapped over 1,000 replications, with compassion
In Sweden and the UK, ideology was measured on a 0-10 scale, while in the US it was
measured on a 1-5 scale. To simplify the presentation of our results, we transform the Swedish
and UK ideology variables into 5-point variables, using the same rule: {0,1} = extreme left (1),
{2,3} = moderate left (2), {4, 5,6} = center (3), {7,8} = moderate right (4), {9,10} = extreme
right (5). This transformation does not alter the results (see Appendix E).
Visual portrayals of people in need 1 6
as the dependent variable and the experimental treatment categories as independent variables. In
each case, the reference category is images of groups of adults; therefore, the resulting
coefficients indicate the extent to which other image types differs from the effect of this highly
unsympathetic visual frame. The results, with normal and bootstrap-corrected confidence
intervals, are reported in full in Appendix B.
The analyses offer limited support for H1. The models indicate a statistically significant
increase in self-reported compassion for refugees following exposure to images of individual
children in all countries. However, in Sweden, the overall significance of the model fails to reach
conventional significance levels (p >0.05). In the US and the UK, the model is statistically
significant, but the adjusted R-square values are around 1%. Moreover, the size of the effect of
seeing images of individual children as opposed to groups of adults is small in the UK (Cohen’s
|d| = 0.19) and small to moderate in the US (Cohen’s |d| = 0.30, see Appendix B for full analysis
and confidence intervals). As for the other image categories, the low explanatory power of the
models prevents us from drawing any firm conclusions at this stage.
The moderating influence of ideology on compassion (H2, RQ)
Moving to H2, we run the same model as for H1 with the addition of ideology as a moderator of
the experimental treatment effects. As in the previous model, the reference category is images of
visual treatment condition, with bootstrap-corrected confidence intervals. The results (with
bootstrapped standard errors over 1,000 replications and normal-based and bootstrap-corrected
confidence intervals) are presented in full in Appendix C.
Visual portrayals of people in need 1 7
Turning to H2, the interaction between ideology and exposure to highly sympathetic
images (of individual children, whether in distress or not) is significant in all three countries. The
conditions on the X-axis from the least sympathetic depiction (group of adults) on the left to the
significantly influences the variation in response to the different visual frames. Whereas for
liberals there is limited change in self-reported compassion across frame types, the level of
compassion among conservatives rises steadily when moving from the least to the most
sympathetic portrayal. Moderate and extreme conservatives in all countries react with
significantly more compassion in response to images of individual children than to images of
groups of adults. Effect sizes among conservatives are in the moderate range, with absolute
values of Cohen’s d of 0.43 in Sweden, 0.64 in the US and 0.35 in the UK (see full results in
Appendix C).
framing of refugees among conservatives, informing our RQ. The results from the set of middle
range images are country-specific. In Sweden, there is limited differentiation in response to groups
of adults, individual adult or groups of children. The individual child category stands apart as
garnering more sympathy (although the difference from groups of children and images of
individual adults only approaches significance). In the US and UK samples, however, we observe a
clearer differentiation by the victims’ age. In both cases, as with images of individual children,
images of children in groups elicit significantly more compassion than groups of adults among
moderate and strong conservatives.
The mediating role of compassion (H3, RQ)
Visual portrayals of people in need 1 8
To examine the extent to which compassion evoked in response to images of individual
children as opposed to groups of adults mediates support for humanitarian aid (H3), we test a
moderated mediation model corresponding to Model 8 in Hayes (2013). In each of our three test
countries, ideology is designated as a moderator and compassion as a mediator. The models are
expect to observe a significant indirect mediation effect (see Zhao, Lynch, & Chen, 2010).
individual children as opposed to groups of adults.
As Figures 4 illustrates, there is a significant indirect effect in each country, but only for
conservatives. Exposure to images of individual children (as opposed to groups of adults) leads to
an indirect increase in moderate and strong conservatives’ support for humanitarian aid of between
0.4 and 0.6 on the 7-point scale in Sweden, 0.3 and 0.4 on the 7-point scale in the US and between
0.6 and 0.9 on the 11-point scale in the UK (with coefficients and confidence intervals reported in
Appendix D). The total effects only reach significance in the US and UK. Cohen’s |d| for
conservatives in each country is 0.38 and 0.40 respectively, indicating a medium effect.
Looking to the other visual conditions, we observe that exposure to images of groups of
children as opposed to groups of adults also has significant indirect effects on conservatives’ aid
attitudes (as mediated by compassion) in the US and UK. In both countries the magnitude of
indirect effects for group portrayals is similar to that of images of individual children, but the
total effects reach significance only in the UK (see Appendix D). There are no additional
significant indirect or total effects in Sweden.
Visual portrayals of people in need 1 9
Discussion
Taken together, the results from this analysis yield several valuable insights into the
effects of the visual portrayal of refugees by the news media across different national contexts.
Our results suggest three conclusions:
1. The editorial selection of the refugee images in the media can affect right-wing viewers’
outlook on the plight of refugees and desirability of humanitarian aid.
The literature on media portrayals of refugees centers on the tendency of the news media
to frame, sympathetically or unsympathetically, the vulnerability of people displaced by war and
conflict. In this paper we provide empirical evidence that a specific category of viewers responds
differently to the two extremes on either end of our sympathy framing continuum. In all three
countries, right-wing individuals are more likely to express a higher level of compassion for
refugees in response to images of an individual child (in obvious distress or not) than in response
to groups of adults. Compassion mediates the relationship between seeing images of individual
children and support for humanitarian aid. The fact that we (a) observe moderate effect sizes
after exposure to just one image per respondent; (b) observe this effect with different visuals
representing our two framing emphases across three countries; and (c) at a time when study
participants will likely have been exposed to myriad images of refugees as the Syrian crisis was
still under way, suggests that we provide a conservative test of such visual effects.
The finding that compassion plays a larger role in response to sympathy framing among
conservatives and mediates right-leaning citizens’ attitudes towards humanitarian aid suggests
that variations in media depictions of refugees may have the capacity to bridge the ideological
divide over humanitarian policy. If liberals react with equal compassion to all visual
representations, but conservatives react more positively to images of children than to groups of
Visual portrayals of people in need 2 0
adult refugees, then the publication of more children affected by the crisis may help reduce the
difference in humanitarian aid positions between those on the left and right of the ideological
spectrum.
2. Perceptions of individual vs. group depictions of refugees merit further research
attention.
Beyond differences found for sympathy framing between liberals and conservatives,
these results offer two additional insights. First, in two out of three studies, the influence of
seeing groups of children portrayed is similar to seeing images of individual child refugees.
These results depart from previous studies showing significant differences in reactions to visuals
of one child compared to groups of children (see Kogut & Ritov, 2005; Västfjäll et al., 2014).
The similarity between groups of children and individual children in our US and UK studies
could be due to a number of reasons in which our design differed from previous research. For
one, we used many more images representing this type of depiction. As discussed, images are
idiosyncratic; previous studies using just one set of visuals as stimuli leaves open the possibility
that the effect could differ if respondents saw another set of images.
Moreover, the images we identified from international news coverage depicted the
children in a close-proximity group. Previous studies obtained the largest difference in
compassion and donations when the images of children were presented individually. Västfjäll
and colleagues (2014) allude to the possibility that the compassionate effect for a group may be
similar to that for individuals when members of the depicted group are perceived as related. While
we did not specify any identifiable information in our studies, the images showing children next to
each other may have fostered the perception of their closeness.
Visual portrayals of people in need 2 1
Second, we did not find that depictions of individual adults perform differently from
groups of adults in any of our three data collections. This suggests that when it comes to adults
the individual camera focus may not be sufficiently sympathetic to change attitudes, and that if a
compassion response is stronger for an individual adult than for a group of adults, then it is due
to their personal features, or to the particularities of their context. Either way, the results point to
the need for additional research on the impact of images that share both sympathetic and
unsympathetic elements in their framing of refugees.
3. The impact of refugee depictions should be considered across different national and
cultural contexts.
While conservatives in all our studies exhibited a similar pattern of emotional reactions
when exposed to images of individual children as compared to images groups of adults, the
variation in responses to the other depictions, combining both sympathetic and unsympathetic
features, suggests that the national context in which the studies were conducted may also play a
role in shaping perceptions—and support for aid. To get a more accurate understanding of the
visual framing of refugees, future studies should explore these cross-national and cross-cultural
differences further.
As with all experimental research, the limitations of our study design should be noted.
First, in each administration, images were accompanied by only a short introduction about the
refugees’ condition. In real life, the amount of text surrounding images varies, ranging from very
little (such as when images appear on covers, or simply accompanied by the headlines) to longer
text articles, which can provide a deeper contextualization of those depicted. Future studies
should explore further the interaction between the visual sympathetic framing of the refugee
images and the surrounding text.
Visual portrayals of people in need 2 2
Second, the design of our study precludes us from comparing the effect of the same
photographs across countries—because the images were rotated and differed on a country by
country basis. Instead, we chose to study the consequences of image types. Rather than a
weakness, this choice reinforces the finding that the degree of sympathy framing matters and
how refugees are visually presented in news accounts can have perceptual, emotional and,
ultimately, policy consequences.
Third, we note that the cultural context may play a role in the evaluation, but our data were
limited to three countries. In future iterations, adding more countries at the forefront of the refugee
relief effort (e.g., Italy, Greece, Germany), as well as countries of varying religious orientation
(e.g., Egypt, Turkey), should shed more light on the influence of cross-cultural factors.
Fourth, while the results suggest a strong effect of images of individual children among
conservatives—our results cannot speak to compassion fatigue, as each of our participants was
exposed to just one visual depiction. As news consumption in daily life likely involves a much
higher volume of exposure to numerous images emanating from an international crisis, it could
well be that this effect may change if more images of individual children were broadcast. Thus, it
would be beneficial to estimate the effects of cumulative image exposure in future studies.
Finally, more nuanced aspects of refugee portrayals could be evaluated, such as
variations in gender, the presence of religious symbolism, the display of extreme distress
(through graphic images of dead or seriously injured refugees), and the impact of textual framing
via the use of headlines, captions, or news narratives.
These noted shortcomings, however, do not take away from our main contribution, which
is to empirically show that the choice of images in the coverage of humanitarian crises involving
refugees bears notable consequences on the feelings of those who sit in the comfort of their own
Visual portrayals of people in need 2 3
homes in peaceful societies—conservatives especially—and the assistance they are willing to
give to lessen the plight of distant others in need.
Visual portrayals of people in need 2 4