Running head: AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT1
From Uncertainty to Insight: An Autocatalytic Framework
Liane Gabora
University of British Columbia
Mike Steel
University of Canterbury
Author Note
A chapter for (Beghetto, R. & Jaeger, G., Eds.)
Uncertainty: A Catalyst for Creativity,
Springer.
Learning and Development.
Correspondence concerning this manuscript may be addressed to:
Liane Gabora
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
Fipke Centre for Innovative Research, 3247 University Way
Kelowna, British Columbia, Canada, V1V 1V7
Email: liane.gabora@ubc.ca
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 2
Abstract
We show how uncertainty and insight can be modeled using Reflexively Autocatalytic
Foodset-generated (RAF) networks. RAF networks have been used to model the
self-organization of adaptive networks associated with the origin and early evolution both
biological life, and the kind of cognitive structure necessary for cultural evolution. The RAF
approach is applicable in these seemingly disparate cases because it provides a theoretical
framework for formally describing systems composed of elements that interact to form new
elements, and for studying under what conditions these (initial + new) elements collectively
become integrated wholes of various types. Here, the elements are mental representations, and
the whole is a conceptual network. The initial components—referred to as —are
foodset items
mental representations that are innate, or were acquired through social learning or individual
learning (of information). The new elements—referred to as
pre-existing foodset-derived
—are mental representations that result from creative thought (resulting in
items new
information). The demarcation into foodset versus foodset-derived elements provides a natural
means of (i) grounding abstract concepts in direct experiences (foodset-derived elements
emerge through ‘reactions’ that can be traced back to foodset items), and (ii) precisely
describing and tracking how new ideas emerge from earlier ones. Thus, RAFs can model how
endogenous conceptual restructuring results in new conduits by which uncertainties can be
resolved and needs can be met. A source of uncertainty is modeled as an element that resists
integration into the conceptual network, which is described as a containing the bulk
maxRAF
of the individual’s mental representations. This disconnect produces arousal, which catalyzes
one or more interactions amongst mental representations. We illustrate the approach using
the historical example of Kekulé’s realization that benzene is ring-shaped through a reverie of
a snake biting its tail. We show how a single conceptual change can precipitate a cascade of
reiterated cognitive ‘reactions’ (self-organized criticality) that affect the network’s global
structure, and discuss why this may help explain why cognitive restructuring can be
therapeutic. Finally, we discuss educational implications of the RAF approach.
analogy, autocatalytic network, conceptual network, creativity, cross-domain
Keywords:
transfer, innovation, potentiality, uncertainty
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 3
From Uncertainty to Insight: An Autocatalytic Framework
Introduction
Creativity flourishes in situations that involve both constraints and uncertainty
(Beghetto, 2019), or what has been referred to as (Kauffman, 2016).
enabling constraints
Ultimately, both the constraints and the uncertainty originate in the dynamics of
concepts:
mental constructs such as DOG or FREEDOM that enable us to interpret new situations in
terms of similar previous ones. By the of concepts, we mean their capacity to shift
potentiality
in meaning in ways that are often non-trivial, or even defy classical logic, when they combine
or serve as contexts for one another (Aerts, Broekaert, Gabora, & Sozzo, 2016; Aerts, Gabora,
& Sozzo, 2013; Hampton, 1988; Osherson & Smith, 1981). For example, though a seemingly
defining property of the concept ISLAND is the property ‘surrounded by water’, in the
context ‘kitchen,’ as in KITCHEN ISLAND, the property ‘surrounded by water’ is not only
unusual, but a sign of trouble!
Accordingly, our group has invested considerable effort into mathematically modeling
how creativity derives from such shifts in meaning when concepts combine (Gabora, 2017;
Gabora & Carbert, 2015; Gabora & Kitto, 2017), and synthesizing these results with what
happens during concept combination at the neural level (Gabora, 2010, 2018; Gabora &
Ranjan, 2013). In such models, because concepts usually appear in
constraints arise
predictable contexts; for example, typical contexts for ISLAND are DESERT (as in DESERT
ISLAND), or REMOTE (as in REMOTE ISLAND). from the fact that
Potentiality arises
concepts often appear in atypical contexts, and indeed there is no way of circumscribing the
possible contexts for any given concept. Moreover, as the KITCHEN ISLAND example shows,
atypical contexts can dramatically alter the properties of a given concept. Moreover, the
KITCHEN ISLAND example is far from extraordinary. For example, it would seem that all
instances of ISLAND have the property ‘larger than a breadbox’ but TOY ISLAND does not;
similarly, one might expect that all instances of the concept BUNNY possess the property
‘has a heart,’ but of course CHOCOLATE BUNNY does not. because to
Uncertainty arises
the extent that one cannot completely describe a situation in terms of all relevant concepts
and how they mutually serve as contexts for each other (including order effects), one cannot
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 4
precisely know how to act in that situation, or accurately predict what will happen.
Although in creativity research one often comes across the term ‘problem domain,’
concepts readily ‘jump’ domains; for example, ISLAND is in the domain but KITCHEN is
not, and BUNNY is in the ANIMAL domain, but CHOCOLATE is in the FOOD domain.
This is particularly true when concepts are used creatively, as occurs in metaphor (Lakoff,
1993), analogy (Gentner, 1983; Holyoak & Thagard, 1996), or cross-domain transfer, in which
a source from one domain (e.g., music) inspires or influences a creative work in another (e.g.,
painting) (Ranjan, Gabora, & O’Connor, 2013; Scotney, Weissmeyer, Carbert, & Gabora,
2019). For example, George Mestral’s invention of Velcro was inspired by analogy to burdock
root seeds (Freeman & Golden, 1997) which, in turn, inspired ‘shoelace-less runners’ (or
‘shoelace-less sneakers’). Ingredients for the creative process can come from just about
anywhere. Therefore, understanding what happens when concepts come together in unusual
ways is only part of the story of how a creator creates. Another part is: why does the creator
bring certain concepts together in the first place? How is it that the creator comes to look at
a problem from a particular perspective?
The relationship between uncertainty and creativity, and what it means to approach it
at the concept-combination level versus the global conceptual network level, can be
light shining on them from three different directions, yielding three differently shaped
shadows: that of a G, an E, and a B. Without going into the details of why this metaphor is
particularly apt, Focusing first on just the upper woodcutting by itself, consider the situation
in which you could not see the woodcutting, and had to guess its shape by examining the
shadows it cast. Though each shadow is different, they are all projections of this same
underlying object. You are in a state of uncertainty regarding its shape, but the shadows
provide constraints on the space of viable answers. In the language of the above-mentioned
concept combination models (which use a mathematical framework that was first used in
quantum mechanics), we can refer to the state of the woodcutting when no light is shining on
it as its . We would say that the woodcutting has the potentiality to
ground state actualize
This is done elsewhere (Scotney, Schwartz, Carbert, Saab, & Gabora, 2020).
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 5
different ways, and to actualize in one of these ways requires an or context, in this
observable
case, light shining from a particular direction.
the upper woodcutting. Your uncertainty regarding the the problem solution or creative
output is represented by your uncertainty as to the actual shape of the woodcutting. The
process of coming to better understand it by looking at it from different perspectives is
represented by the act of shining a light on it from different angles. First, this metaphor
suggests a way of understanding the underlying form or conception of a creative idea that is
consistent with the models of concept combination. Since the different sketches of a painting,
or prototypes of an invention, take different forms when expressed in the physical world, it is
tempting to assume that that they derive from different underlying conceptions in the mind.
Thus, it seems self-evident that a stream of creative thought entails the generation of multiple
distinct, separate ideas. However, the above-mentioned concept combination research
suggests, much as that the three shadows of each wood-cutting are projections of the same
underlying object, there is a single underlying as-yet-poorly articulated vision of the creative
project that manifests as different sketch or prototype ideas when looked at from different
contexts or perspectives.
Second, the woodcutting metaphor suggests a way of envisioning what is happening as
you hone or ‘reflect on’ an idea. Midway through a creative process, you may have an inkling
of how to proceed, but not yet know whether, or exactly how, it could work; we say that it is
‘half-baked.’ You entertain wildly different ways of looking at it, and these different
perspectives yield wildly different ‘takes’ on the idea, much as shining light on the
woodcutting from different directions yields different shadow-letters. However, over time, your
reflections on the problem converge. You start looking at it in similar ways, and the images
that come to mind overlap more, and seem less like ‘different ideas’ and more like ‘variants of
one idea,’ much as shining light on the upper woodcarving from the right at slightly different
angles would yield similar shadows. Although some might be wobbly or distorted, they would
all be G-shaped.
Third, the woodcutting metaphor provides a nice visual explanation of why we cannot
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 6
understand the creative process without investigating the global structure of the creator’s
they yield the same three shadows. To distinguish the shape of the woodcutting above from
the one below would require that light be shown on them from still more angles, casting
shadows that would not look like any particular letters we know. Similarly, the more complex
one’s unborn creative idea, the more honing steps required to discern its underlying form.
Note also that the situation in creativity may be more complex than the woodcuttings
scenario because each time you think about the creative problem from a particular angle, that
thought may feed back and alter your conception of the problem. (It’s as if each time you cast
a shadow on a woodcarving, that slightly altered the shape of the woodcarving.) In this case,
the order of the perspectives from which the problem was looked at alters the solution to the
problem. The upshot is that to understand the creative process we need to understand how
and why the creator looks at the problem from a particular sequence of perspectives or
contexts, in a particular order. In turn, to understand this, we must look beyond models of
concept combination to the global structure of how a creator’s concepts are woven together
into a conceptual network, and how this network is restructured, fueled by the creator’s needs,
goals, desires. For this, creativity research must turn to network science (Kenett, 2018).
This chapter proposes a method for modelling creative insight and its origins in
uncertainty using a certain kind of network, referred to as the Reflexively Autocatalytic
Foodset Generated (RAF) network. The term is used in its mathematical sense,
reflexively
meaning that each part is related to the whole. The term will be defined more
autocatalytic
precisely shortly, but for now it refers to the fact that the whole can be reconstituted through
interactions amongst its parts. The term refers to the elements that are initially
foodset
present, as opposed to those that are the products of interactions amongst them. In the RAF
model developed here, these elements are (MRs) composed of one or
mental representations
more concepts, and the network is a conceptual network: a web of shared properties, contexts,
associations, and relationships of logic, causation, and so forth, that bind them together. The
Although we use the terms ‘mental representation,’ we are sympathetic with the view (common amongst
ecological psychologists and in the quantum cognition community) that what we call mental representations
do not ‘represent,’ but act as contextually elicited bridges between the mind and the world.
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 7
chapter begins with a brief introduction to the literature on analogy and cross-domain
thinking to Next, we introduce RAF networks and their application to cognition, and present
a RAF network model of insight through cross-domain analogical transfer. We close with
some thoughts on educational applications of the model, followed by conclusions, and
suggestions for future research.
The Relationship between Uncertainty and Insight
We now discuss the psychological processes that will play a role in the creative process
modeled in this chapter: cross-domain transfer, analogy, and self-organized criticality.
Analogy and Cross-domain Transfer
Cross-domain thinking is ubiquitous in the history of innovation (Enkel & Gassmann,
2010; Feinstein, 2006; Kalogerakis, Lu, & Herstatt, 2010). Cross-domain thinking often takes
the form of analogy, which involves reducing uncertainty by mapping correspondences
between something you don’t understand and something else that you do understand which
shares its deep structure. Analogy is central to our humanness (Hofstadter & Sander, 2013;
Holyoak & Thagard, 1996). A well-known example of analogical transfer is Kekulé’s discovery
of the structure of benzene by visual analogy to a snake biting its tail (Findlay, 1965). This
example reveals an interesting aspect of the phenomenon: the information from the source
domain is not always retrieved from memory in the form it was originally encoded. MRs from
memory may need to be modified to be useful as a source (Holyoak & Thagard, 1996).
(Kekulé had likely never seen a snake bite its tail (though he may have encountered the
symbol of the uroboros); however, his daydreaming mind modified the concept SNAKE in a
way that elicited this insight.) Alternatively, the cross-domain source material may arise by
noticing something in the environment. For example, the concept of wing warping—the key
insight in the invention of the airplane—occurred to Wilbur Wright as he idly twisted an
inner tube box (Heppenheimer, 2003). He realized that by twisting the trailing edges of the
wings in opposite directions it would be possible to control the direction of the aircraft,
thereby removing the remaining fundamental obstacle to human flight.
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 8
Cross-domain inspiration is also prevalent in the arts; indeed, a film score attempts to
translate the emotional tone of an unfolding plot into music. A well-known example is
Schubert’s ‘Hymn to Mary’, also known as ‘Ellens dritter Gesang’ (‘Ellen’s Third Song’) or
(more famously) ‘Ave Maria.’ This song from the opera was inspired by
The Lady of the Lake
Walter Scott’s epic poem of the same title (Deutsch, 1928). Indeed, the phenomenon of
cross-domain creativity may go back much further, as the earliest stringed instrument may
have been derived from the bow and arrow (Montagu, 2017).
The cross-domain thought that goes into a creative work is not always evident in the
work itself. The prevalence of cross-domain influences on creativity was examined in two
studies, one with creative experts, and the other with undergraduate students from diverse
academic backgrounds (Scotney et al., 2019). Participants listed both their creative outputs,
and the influences (sources of inspiration) associated with each of these outputs. In both
studies, cross-domain influences on creativity were found to be widespread, and indeed more
frequent than within-domain sources of inspiration. In another study in which painters were
instructed to paint what a particular piece of music would ‘look like’ if it were a painting,
naïve participants were able to correctly identify at significantly above chance which piece of
music inspired which painting (Ranjan et al., 2013). Although the medium of expression was
different, something of its essence remained sufficiently intact for people to detect a
resemblance between the new creative output and its inspirational source. These studies show
that even when the creative output lies squarely in one domain, the process giving rise to it
may be rooted in another.
Analogy plays a role not only in the discovery and development of ideas, but in the
pedagogical process by which they are transmitted and learned by others (Holyoak &
Thagard, 1996). Analogies are often used by parents and educators to explain abstract, or
unfamiliar ideas, in terms of concrete or familiar ones. For example, analogy to existing
methods of gene editing played a role in the discovery of CRISPR-Cas9 technology (Doudna
& Charpentier, 2014), and its discoverers explain how it works through analogies to a
weapons defence system and a Swiss army knife (Doudna & Sternberg, 2017; Thagard, 2019).
Thus, analogies influence—sometimes misleadingly—how new concepts are understood, and
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 9
developed further. Only network models can account for such lines of creative influence.
Self-organized criticality
Innovation may be indicative of a cognitive phase transition arising through
self-organized criticality (SOC) (Gabora, 1998, 2017; Schilling, 2005; Stephen, Boncoddo,
Magnuson, & Dixon, 2009). SOC is a phenomenon wherein, through simple local interactions,
complex systems tend to find a critical state poised at the cusp of a transition between order
and chaos, from which a single small perturbation occasionally exerts a disproportionately
large effect (Bak, Tang, & Weisenfeld, 1988). In a sense, self-organized criticality in cognitive
enterprises is like kicking the uncertainty down the road; answering one scientific question (or
developing a piece of art or technology) leads to another, which leads to another, and so forth.
The signature of SOC is an inverse power law relationship between the magnitude of a
critical event, and the frequency of critical events of that magnitude. Perhaps the best-known
example of SOC is the theory of which posits that change in
punctuated equilibrium,
biological species is restricted to rare, rapid events interspersed amongst prolonged periods of
stasis (Eldridge & Gould, 1972). It has been suggested that insight constitutes a form of
punctuated equilibrium (Gabora, 2017). SOC gives rise to structure that exhibits sparse
connectivity, short average path lengths, and strong local clustering. Other indications of
SOC include long-range correlations in space and time, and rapid reconfiguration in response
to external inputs. There is evidence of SOC in the human brain, e.g., with respect to phase
synchronisation of large-scale functional networks (Kitzbichler, Smith, Christensen, &
Bullmore, 2009). There is also evidence of SOC at the cognitive level; word association studies
have shown that concepts are clustered and sparsely connected, with some having many
associates and others few (Nelson, Kitto, Galea, McEvoy, & Bruza, 2013; Nelson, McKinney,
Gee, & Janczura, 1998). Thus, conceptual networks exhibit the sparse connectivity, short
average path lengths, and strong local clustering characteristic of self-organized complexity,
and exhibit some aspects of ‘small world’ structure (Bassett & Bullmore, 2006; Steyvers &
Tenenbaum, 2005; Zurn & Bassett, 2020). Like other SOC systems, a mind may function
within a regime midway between order (systematic progression of thoughts), and chaos
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 10
(everything reminds one of everything else). Much as most perturbations in SOC systems
have little effect but the occasional perturbation has a dramatic effect, most thoughts also
have little effect on one’s worldview, but occasionally, one thought triggers another, which
triggers another, and so forth in a chain reaction of conceptual change. This is consistent with
findings that large-scale creative conceptual change often follows a series of small conceptual
changes (Ward, Smith, & Vaid, 1997), and with evidence that power laws and catastrophe
models are applicable to the diffusion of innovations (Jacobsen & Guastello, 2011).
Reflextively Autocatalytic and Foodset Generated (RAF) networks
We now introduce the networks that we will use to model analogical cross-domain
transfer, beginning with the rationale and basic idea behind for the approach, followed by the
mathematical framework.
Rationale for the Approach
The RAF approach offers a number of benefits over other conceptual network, semantic
network, and neural network approaches:
(1) The distinction between foodset items and foodset-derived
Semantic grounding.
elements provides a natural means of grounding abstract concepts in direct experiences;
foodset-derived elements emerge through interactions (which for historical reasons are
sometimes referred to as ‘reactions’), that can be traced back to foodset-items.
(2) The extent to which one MR modifies the meaning of another is
Reactivity of ideas.
referred to here as its . A given MR’s reactivity varies depending on the other
reactivity
MRs present in working memory. MRs activate, or ‘react with’ each other, by aligning
with needs (e.g., the need to resolve uncertainty or cognitive dissonance, or to solve a
problem), and the emotions they elicit. Thus, whereas conventional node-and-edge
network models generally require external input to continue processing, RAF networks
‘catalyze’ conceptual change endogenously, resulting in new conduits by which needs
For example, the degree to which PYLON qualifies as an instance of HAT increases in the context ‘worn to
be funny’ Veloz, Gabora, Eyjolfson, and Aerts (2011).
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 11
and goals can be met. A RAF network self-organizes through conceptual restructuring,
the effects of which can percolate throughout the network, altering its global structure.
The recognition that cognitive networks operate in the service of goals and desires is not
new, but here this relationship serves to maintain a reflexively autocatalytic network.
By recursively inciting interactions amongst each other (which, again for historical
reasons, is sometimes referred to as not inciting but ) MRs self-organize into
catalyzing
new structures that can be formally described. MRs are not only activated by stimuli,
and participate in pattern learning, but form a network that is self-organizing and
entropy-reducing, and conceptual restructuring can percolate throughout the network
and affect its global structure. This is consistent with findings that immersion in a
creative task can be therapeutic, and accompanied by a sense of release (Barron, 1963;
Forgeard, 2013). Treating MRs as not merely passive participants in spreading
activation, but active catalysts of conceptual change is central to our strategy for
capturing the flexibility of human cognition. It enables RAFs to be used to model
cognitive development during childhood of the kind of conceptual structure that actively
participates in the generation of the cultural novelty, i.e., the emergence of new ‘hubs’ in
the cultural evolution machinery (Gabora & Beckage, submitted).
(3) The RAF
Tracking innovation within and across conceptual networks.
approach tags mental representations with their source, i.e., whether they were (1)
innate, or acquired through social learning or individual learning (of
pre-existing
information), or (2) the result of creative thought (resulting in information). This
new
demarcation makes it possible to trace innovations back to the individuals that
generated them, and describe and track how new ideas and creative outputs emerge from
previous ones. Creative thought gets lumped in with individual learning, but there is
an important distinction between them. In —obtaining pre-existing
individual learning
We note that in the cultural evolution literature, much has been made of ‘Rogers’ paradox’ (that social
learning can invade a population without increasing its fitness). However, the apparent ‘paradox’ is an artifact
of assumptions built into Rogers’ simulation (Gabora & Tseng, 2017; Kharratzadeh, Montrey, Metz, & Shultz,
2017), including that it incorporates social learning and individual learning (of existing information) but not
the creative generation of new information. In the real world, whether or not the environment is temporally
varying, we benefit from finding creative new ways of conceptualizing and responding to this world.
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 12
information from the environment by nonsocial means through direct perception—the
information does not change form once the individual knows it. Noticing for oneself that
lightning tends to be followed by thunder is an example of individual learning. In
contrast, in —the processing of internally sourced mental contents—the
abstract thought
information is in flux (Barsalou, 2005), and when this incremental honing process results
in the generation of new and useful or pleasing ideas, behaviour, or artifacts, it is said to
be (Basadur, 1995; Chan & Schunn, 2015a; Feinstein, 2006; Gabora, 2017).
creative
Distinguishing between individual learning and creative thought enables us to monitor
at what point in a cultural lineage each new idea (or idea component) first arose, assess
the relative contribution of these different sources on the emerging conceptual networks
of individuals and social groups, and track cumulative change step by step.
(4) The RAF approach offers an established formal framework
Integrative framework.
for integrating creativity research with the explosively growing field of network science,
and embedding this synthesis in the study of self-organizing structures and their role in
evolutionary processes. RAFs replicate and evolve, as demonstrated (both in theory and
in simulation studies), which makes them a viable candidate for explaining how cultural
information replicates and evolves (Gabora & Steel, 2020a). Indeed, the fact that
autocatalytic networks (such as RAFs) have proven useful for modelling the origins of
both biological (Hordijk & Steel, 2016; Steel, Hordijk, & Xavier, 2019; Vasas, Fernando,
Santos, Kauffman, & Szathmáry, 2012; Xavier, Hordijk, Kauffman, Steel, & Martin,
2020), and cultural evolution (Gabora, 1998, 2000; Gabora & Steel, 2017, 2020a,
2020b) , suggests that RAF theory may provide a broad conceptual framework that is
applicable to the origins and early stages of any evolutionary process. The framework is
consistent with the theory that humans possess two levels of complex, adaptive
structure: an organismal level, and a psychological level, with the mind playing the role
in cultural evolution that the soma plays in biological evolution (Barton, 1994;
Maturana & Varela, 1973). This is consistent with the theory that humans possess two
For related approaches, see (Andersson & Törnberg, 2019; Cabell & Valsiner, 2013; Muthukrishna, Doebeli,
Chudek, & Henrich, 2018).
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 13
levels of complex, adaptive, self-organizing structure—an organismal level and a
psychological level (Barton, 1994; Gabora, 2004; Maturana & Varela, 1973). The
self-sustaining, self-protecting nature of a conceptual network is evident in the tendency
to reduce cognitive dissonance, resolve inconsistencies, and preserve existing schemas in
the face of new information. This is not merely an extension of organismal needs;
indeed, these two levels of endogenous control can be at odds (e.g., a scientist immersed
in solving a problem may neglect offspring or forget to eat.) Although the contents of a
conceptual network change over time, it maintains integrity as a relatively coherent
whole. Conceptual structure replicates, in a piecemeal manner, when individuals share
ideas and perspectives. We posit that the generation of cumulative cultural novelty
reflects the capacity for conceptual networks to evolve.
Because a RAF captures the nature of a structure a cognitive RAF is, by
as a whole,
necessity, abstract. It does not distinguish between semantic memory (memory of words,
concepts, propositions, and world knowledge) and episodic memory (personal experiences);
indeed, we are sympathetic to the view that these are not as distinct as once thought
(Kwantes, 2005). For a detailed comparison between cognitive RAFs and other models used
in cognitive science, we refer the reader to papers in which RAFs have been used to model the
origin of cultural evolution (Gabora & Steel, 2017, 2020a), and the transition to behavioural
and cognitive modernity (Gabora & Steel, 2020b).
Autocatalytic Networks
The theory of autocatalytic networks grew out of studies of the statistical properties of
consisting of nodes randomly connected by edges (Erdös & Rényi, 1960). As
random graphs
the ratio of edges to nodes increases, the size of the largest cluster increases, and the
probability of a phase transition resulting in a single giant connected cluster also increases.
The recognition that connected graphs exhibit phase transitions led to their application to
efforts to develop a formal model of the origin of life (OOL), i.e., how abiogenic catalytic
molecules crossed the threshold to the kind of collectively self-sustaining, self-replicating,
evolving structure we call ‘alive’ Kauffman (1986, 1993). In the application of graph theory to
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 14
the OOL, nodes represent catalytic molecules, and edges represent reactions. It is exceedingly
improbable that any catalytic molecule present in the primordial soup of Earth’s early
atmosphere catalyzed its own formation. However, reactions generate new molecules that
catalyze new reactions, and as the variety of molecules increases, the variety of reactions
increases faster. As the ratio of reactions to molecules increases, the probability that the
system will undergo a phase transition increases. When, for each molecule, there is a catalytic
pathway to its formation, the set of molecules is said to be collectively , and the
autocatalytic
process by which this state is achieved has been referred to as
autocatalytic closure
(Kauffman, 1993). Graph theory was also used to model how discrete MRs coalesce into an
integrated understanding of the world capable of generating creative novelty (Gabora, 1998).
In this application, nodes represent, not catalytic molecules, but MRs, and the edges
represent interactions amongst MRs, such as through associative learning or concept
combination. The catalyst often takes the form of a problem, desire, or need. It may be a
biological need, such as the need for food or shelter, or produced by some earlier ‘reaction’, as
when solving one problem leads to another. Very often, a reaction on one MR is catalyzed by
another MR that has become aligned with the underlying need. For example, although
Wilbur Wright’s invention of wing warping was ultimately motivated by the need to create a
flying machine, it was directly ‘catalyzed’ by the notion of a bending box.
Autocatalytic networks have been developed mathematically in the theory of Reflexively
Autocatalytic and Foodset-generated (RAF) networks (Hordijk & Steel, 2016; Steel et al.,
2019). The term is used in its mathematical sense to mean that every element is
reflexively
related to the whole. The term refers to the reactants that are initially present, as
foodset
opposed to those that are the products of catalytic reactions. RAF theory has been used to
model the emergence of a self-sustaining, self-replicating structure (i.e., a living protocell
(Hordijk & Steel, 2015)). Thus, RAFs offer a promising avenue for modelling the OOL, and
thereby understanding how biological evolution began (Hordijk & Steel, 2016; Steel et al.,
2019; Vasas et al., 2012; Xavier et al., 2020). RAFs have also been used to model cognitive
summarizes how RAF theory terminology applies in biological and cultural/cognitive settings.
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 15
The fact that RAFs have proven useful in both these domains suggests that RAF theory may
provide a broad conceptual framework that is applicable to the origins and early stages of
diverse evolutionary processes.
We now summarize the key concepts of RAF theory. A network of interrelated parts,
such as a conceptual network, is referred to as a (CRS), and is
catalytic reaction system
modeled as a tuple = ( ) consisting of a set of interacting elements, a set of
Q X, R, C, F X R
reactions, a catalysis set indicating which types of elements catalyze which reactions, and a
subset of called the foodset. A set—i.e., a
F X Reflexively Autocatalytic and F-generated
RAF—is a non-empty subset of reactions that satisfies the following two properties:
R ⊆ R
1. : each reaction is catalyzed by at least one element type
Reflexively autocatalytic r ∈ R
that is either produced by or is present in the foodset ; and
R F
2. : all reactants can be generated from the foodset through a series of
F-generated F
reactions in itself.
A set of reactions that forms a RAF is simultaneously self-sustaining (by the
-generated condition) and (collectively) autocatalytic (by the RA condition) because each of
its reactions is catalyzed by a molecule associated with the RAF. RAF theory has proven
useful for identifying how phase transitions might occur, and at what parameter values. In
the OOL context, a RAF emerges in systems of polymers (molecules consisting of repeated
units called monomers) when the complexity of these polymers (as measured by maximum
length) reaches a certain threshold (Kauffman, 1993; Mossel & Steel, 2005). The phase
transition from no RAF to a RAF incorporating most or all of the molecules depends on (1)
the probability of any one polymer catalyzing the reaction by which a given other polymer
was formed, and (2) the maximum length (number of monomers) of polymers in the system.
This transition has been formalized and analyzed (mathematically, and using simulations)
and applied to real biochemical systems (Hordijk, Hein, & Steel, 2010; Hordijk, Kauffman, &
Steel, 2011; Hordijk & Steel, 2004, 2016; Mossel & Steel, 2005), as well as cognitive systems
(Gabora & Steel, 2017, 2020a, 2020b). Because of the deep structural or algorithmic
similarity between the OOL and the OOC (as discussed above), much of this analysis can be
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 16
readily imported from the former to the latter.
Hierarchical RAF structure
There are three ways in which subRAFs can combine and expand (Steel, Xavier, &
Huson, 2020):
(1) If a CRS (such as a network of catalytic molecules or a conceptual network) contains a
RAF, then the collection of all its RAFs forms a partially ordered set (i.e., a poset)
under set inclusion, with a unique maximal element: the . A CRS need not
maxRAF
have a RAF, but when it does there is a unique maxRAF. The fact that the maxRAF
may contain many RAFs enables RAFs to evolve, as demonstrated (both in theory and
in simulation studies) through selective proliferation and drift acting on possible
subRAFs of the maxRAF (Hordijk & Steel, 2016; Vasas et al., 2012). The remaining
RAFs are called . The union of any two (or more) subRAFs is a RAF (which
subRAFs
explains why there is a unique maximal RAF). There may be a large number of
blueirreducible RAFs, referred to as : RAFs that cannot be broken down into
irrRAFs
smaller RAFs. It is computationally straightforward to determine if a conceptual
network has a unique irrRAF.
(2) Some RAFs have the additional property of being , meaning that they are stable
closed
unless the reaction or foodset changes. Formally, a closed RAF is a RAF that contains
every reaction in the network that has each of its reactants and at least one catalyst
present either in the foodset or as a product of some reaction in the RAF. The maxRAF
is always closed. A subRAF that is not closed is said to be . A transient RAF
transient
may add additional reactions until it becomes closed. The of any subRAF will
closure
contain the original subRAF, and be larger (unless the original subRAF was already
{r } {r , r } r
1 1 2 3
not become available until later, as it takes place in the mind of a different individual).
(3) may combine with a : a nonempty set of reactions that is not a RAF on its
R co-RAF
own, but that forms a RAF when combined with ’.
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 17
These are the only intrinsic processes by which RAFs can expand. Expansion can also
be extrinsically driven by a change in the foodset, due to the presence of a new
environmental stimulus, or through social learning processes. Extrinsic expansion can
also arise due to a change in the permitted reactions, such as when participants in an
experiment are instructed to ‘think creatively’. Computationally, it is straightforward to
determine if a RAF is the union of two smaller RAFs, and if a set of reactions is a
co-RAF (Smith, Steel, & Hordijk, 2014).
Application of RAF networks to creative cognition
We now introduce the mathematical framework and terminology used in applications of
RAF theory to creative cognition. We emphasize that this is not merely an to the
analogy
OOL scenario. The mathematical framework could have been applied to cognition before it
was to early life; it is simply a way of formalizing the emergence of structure with the
above-mentioned key properties, irrespective of the specifics with which that structure is
realized.
All mental representations (MRs) in a given individual are denoted , and a
i X
particular MR = in is denoted by writing . The ; for individual ,
x x X x ∈ X foodset i
i i i
denoted , encompasses MRs that are either innate, or that result from direct experience in
the world, including natural, artificial, and social stimuli. includes everything in individual
’s long-term memory that did not directly result from thinking something through for oneself.
also includes information obtained by through individual learning by nonsocial
F i
means, so long as this information retains the form in which it was originally perceived, and is
not redescribed or restructured through abstract thought. The crucial distinction between
foodset and non-foodset items is not whether another person was involved, nor whether the
MR was originally obtained through abstract thought (by ), but whether the abstract
someone
thought process originated in the mind of the individual in question. Thus, has two
i F
components:
• S denotes the set of MRs arising through direct experience encoded in individual ’s
memory, including MRs obtained through social learning of an MR by another
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 18
individual , denoted S [ ], and MRs obtained through individual learning, denoted
h x
i h
S [ ].
• denotes any with which individual is born.
I innate knowledge i
The term , denoted , refers to mental contents that are part of
foodset derived ¬F not F
i i
(i.e. consists of all the products of all reactions ). They are the result of
¬F b ∈ B r ∈ R
i i
abstract thought processes such as deduction, induction, divergent thinking, analogical
thinking, and cross-domain transfer. A single instance of conceptual restructuring, or
(RR) in individual is referred to as a and denoted
representational redescription i reaction,
. A stream of abstract thought, involving the generation of representations that go
r ∈ R
beyond what has been directly perceived, is modeled as a sequence of catalytic events.
Following Gabora and Steel (2017), we refer to this as a (CCP).
cognitive catalytic process
Self-organized criticality, discussed above, describes a CCP consisting of recursive RR events,
resulting in a cascade of conceptual change.
The set of reactions that can be catalyzed by a given MR in individual is denoted
x i
[ ]. The entire set of MRs either or is denoted or ,
C x undergoing resulting from r A B
respectively, and a member of the set of MRs undergoing or resulting from reaction is
denoted or . In particular, includes the products of any reactions derived
a ∈ A b ∈ B ¬F
from . Its contents come about through mental operations—RR events—on the foodset.
Thus, includes everything in memory that the result of one’s own CCPs. may
¬F was ¬F
i i
include a MR in which social learning played a role, so long as the most recent modification to
it was a catalytic event, i.e., involved RR. Note that includes information obtained
through social learning from who obtained it through RR. Thus, if invents a
someone else h
game and teaches it to , this knowledge is part of but it is part of .
i F ¬F
i h
The set of possible reactions in individual is denoted . The mental contents of
all i R
the mind, including all MRs and all RR events, is denoted . This includes and .
X ⊕ R F ¬F
i i i i
Recall that the set of all MRs in individual , including both the foodset and elements derived
from that foodset, is denoted . and are not prescribed in advance; because
X R C C
i i i i
This distinction between foodset MRs and foodset-derived MRs may not be so black and white, but for
simplicity, we avoid that subtlety for now.
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 19
includes remindings and associations on the basis of shared properties, different CCPs can
occur through interactions amongst MRs. Nevertheless, it makes perfect mathematical sense
R C
i i
between the OOL and the OOC.
Cognitive RAFs include elements of cognition that have no obvious parallel in the
original application of RAFs to the OOL. We denote the subject of attention at time as ˚ .
t w
It may be an external stimulus, or a MR retrieved from memory. Any other contents of
that are accessible to working memory, such as close associates of ˚ , or recently
X ⊕ R w
i i t
attended MRs, are denoted , with constituting a very small subset of .
W W X ⊕ R
t t i i
Modelling insight
We now show how creative insight through analogical transfer can be modeled using
RAF networks. The focus is not on the mechanisms underlying analogy itself; thus, the model
is consistent with theories that emphasize different aspects of analogy such as structure
mapping (Gentner, 1983), constraint satisfaction (Holyoak & Thagard, 1996), and potentiality
and honing (Scotney et al., 2020). We keep the internal structure of MRs and their
associative links—which can be modeled using existing methods—to a minimum, so as to lay
bare the proposed approach to importing network science into creativity research.
Cross-domain transfer in discovery by analogy
We explain the approach using a simple, striking, and well-known example: Kekulé’s
realization that benzene must consist of a chain of carbon molecules that is circular in shape,
inspired by a reverie in which he envisioned a snake biting its tail (Findlay, 1965). This
insight marked a significant departure from earlier thinking in chemistry, and was critical to
founding the field of organic chemistry. We now present a RAF model of Kekulé’s insight
Kekulé’s insight was preceded
Absorbing the relevant background knowledge.
by a lengthy period sometimes referred to in the creativity literature as . This
preparation
stage involves the acquisition of knowledge of the target domain. In the case of analogy, it
would also include learning of the source domain from which the analogy will be obtained. In
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 20
our example, the target domain is organic chemistry, specifically, knowledge of the structure
and behaviour of carbon-based molecules. One source domain is herpetology, specifically,
knowledge of the elongated shape and flexibility of snakes. Another source domain is
geometry, specifically the knowledge of circular shapes. Since information from the reptile
domain, specifically knowledge of the physical features of snakes featured prominently in
Kekulé’s insight, they are part of the cultural lineage to which he contributed.
We represent the social transmission of general knowledge of snakes and circles, denoted
and respectively, from a parent, individual , to young Kekulé, individual , as follows:
S C h i
S [ ] (1)
F 7→ F ∪ {S , C }, S , C ∈ S , C .
i i i i i i i h h
There is no evidence that Kekulé was exceptional with respect to his knowledge of
snakes, but he was undeniably exceptional with respect to his knowledge of organic chemistry,
and his drive to understand what kind of structure benzene must have to explain its
anomalous behaviour. We represent the social transmission from the teacher, individual , to
Kekulé, individual , of knowledge pertaining to organic chemistry, denoted , as follows:
i O
S [ ] (2)
F 7→ F ∪ {O }, O ∈ O .
i i i i i g
Kekulé also engaged in individual learning of organic chemistry, and this is represented
as follows:
S [ ] (3)
F 7→ F ∪ {O }, O ∈ l .
i i i i i
Kekulé probably also engaged in individual learning of information pertaining to snakes
and circles, but to a lesser degree than individual learning of organic chemistry, so we omit
that detail here.
Creative honing is often (though not always) stimulated by
Insight. problem finding
(Abdulla, Paek, Cramond, & Runco, 2020), which begins with a sense of uncertainty,
incompletion, inconsistency, or need, accompanied by a lingering feeling that compels the
exploration and expression of ideas (Feinstein, 2006). Insight by way of an analogy occurred
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 21
through mapping correspondences between the long, skinny shape of a snake, and its
potential to bite its tail and thereby form a circular shape, to the long, skinny shape of the
benzene molecule, and its potential to similarly close in on itself and form a circular shape.
We model this as a CCP consisting of two reactions. The first involves modification of the
MR of a snake to give a snake biting its tail. The second involves redescription of the MR of
benzene as a linear molecule with a chain of carbon atoms as its backbone, resulting in a
circular structure for benzene. (Note: it is quite possible that Kekulé had been familiar with
the symbolic image of a serpent swallowing its tail, commonly referred to as the (or
uroboros
ouroboros). Were that the case, the uroboros MR would already be part of his foodset, and
there would be no need to derive it from scratch.)
A reaction results in a new non-foodset item, i.e., it transforms an element of into an
element of . In general, for an individual (where = ), we write to denote
¬F k k i, j a −→k c
k k k
the reaction that transforms one MR ( ) to a resulting MR (in ) by catalyst , and
a c ¬F b
k k k k
we let + denote a reaction that combines and transforms two MRs ( ) to a
a a 0 −→k c a , a 0
k k k
k k
resulting MR (in ) by catalyst . In our example, both catalysis events were provoked
c ¬F b
k k k
by the context: , which we denote . In
need to explain the behaviour of the benzene molecule n
the first reaction, , the concepts SNAKE and CIRCLE denoted and , serve as the
r S C
1 i i
reactants. They undergo restructuring during a RR event resulting in a product, the MR of a
snake biting its tail, i.e., a UROBOROS, denoted S ( ). We describe this as follows:
U ∈ l
i i
+ (4)
S C −→i U , F 7→ F ∪ {U },
i i i i i i
The second reaction involves modification of the and LINEAR–BENZENE,
reactants U
denoted , to generate the : RING-SHAPED–BENZENE, denoted S ( ). We
L product R ∈ l
i i
model this as a reaction, , and describe it as follows:
+ (5)
U L −→i R , F 7→ F ∪ {R },
i i i i i i
Since RING-SHAPED–BENZENE is associatively linked to the more abstract concept
MOLECULE, this event expands the affordances of MOLECULE (i.e., it is now perceived as
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 22
something that can be circular). Affordances are a kind of association and, as such, they
increase the connectivity of the conceptual network.
Kekulé’s insight bridged the domains of geometry,
Conceptual network expansion.
herpetology, and chemistry, increasing the density of connections in his conceptual network.
More importantly, it integrated other isolated fragments of conceptual structure—specifically,
mental representations of seemingly inexplicable experimental results into Kekulé maxRAF.
The inertness of the benzene molecule was due to the stability afforded by its ring-shaped
structure. In light of this, his experimental results with benzene now made sense.
The insight was followed by a stage: development of the idea, as
honing and verification
well as evaluation and assessment. This involved assessing and testing the hypothesis that
benzene is circular in shape. The thought processes underlying these activities brought about
further expansion of the maxRAF.
Once Kekulé was confident in the correctness of the
Teaching and social learning.
idea, the next stage was to share it with others. This involved teaching and social learning of
the knowledge of benzene’s shape with peers and students. Kekulé’s insight altered the
structure of their maxRAFs, as it had for Kekulé himself. Note, however, that in the RAF
approach, the impact of this insight is described and depicted quite differently for Kekulé’s
students and peers than for Kekulé himself. For Kekulé the knowledge of benzene’s
ring-shaped structure was obtained through RR, modeled as a ‘reaction’ and therefore it
expanded the set of foodset-derived MRs, . In contrast, for Kekulé’s peers and students,
¬F
this knowledge is obtained as a result of social learning, i.e., it expands the set of foodset
MRs.
Not only did Kekulé’s insight impact the field of chemistry, but it impacted thinking in
psychology as well, by influencing Jung’s views on the role of the unconscious in creative
thought (Jung, Von Franz, Henderson, Jaffé, & Jacobi, 1964). Let us look briefly at this
branch of the benzene–uroboros cultural lineage.
Jung had extensive training in psychology, acquired through both social learning and
individual learning. We omit these here, but they could be described exactly as was done
above for individual . We denote Jung’s knowledge of psychology prior to his contemplation
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 23
of the benzene discovery as . Jung intuited that the unconscious plays a role in creativity;
his uncertainty stemmed from lack of a concrete example of the unconscious presenting its
knowledge to the conscious mind. We denote his new understanding of psychology as a result
of the benzene–uroboros story, as . The context that ‘catalyzed’ these insights was his
, which we denote . We model
desire to understand the role of the unconscious on creativity n
this line of influence as a reaction, , and describe it as follows:
+ j 0 0 (6)
R P −→ P , F 7→ F ∪ {P },
j j j j
j j
The set of nested subRAFs depicting Kekulé insight into benzene is illustrated in
Both and are irrRAFs. ( is a RAF because and are in the foodset of
{r } {r } {r } R P
1 3 3 j j
Jung’s maxRAF). Note that by itself is not a subRAF, since it requires to first
{r } r
2 1
generate in the mind of Kekulé) in order to form. Other subsets also fail to be subRAFs
(for example, ). The subRAF is a closed subRAF, since involves a different
{r , r } {r , r } n
2 3 1 2 j
individual (Jung) from the individual (Kekulé) associated with . On the other hand,
{r , r }
1 2
is not a closed subRAF (since and the reactants of were available to Kekulé after
{r } n r r
1 i 2 1
occurred, so could proceed).
Note that although the RING-SHAPED-BENZENE MR was not a member of the
foodset in Kekulé’s conceptual network (because it originated in his mind), it a member
was
of the foodset in Jung’s mind (since he acquired it through social learning and did not have to
derive it from scratch). Note also that this is not a definitive model of how the discovery of
benzene’s ring structure occurred. The uroboros story may have induced SOC, such that it
had a ‘snowball effect’ on Jung’s understanding of psychology, with one insight giving rise to
another. The process may also have been more bidirectional than implied here; it is possible
that the image of a line bending around to form a circle was initially interpreted by Kekulé’s
dreaming mind as a snake, and only afterward understood to be the benzene molecule. The
important point is that the concept of the uroboros played a key role in this discovery, which
fundamentally revolutionized our understanding of organic chemistry, and impacted
psychology, and thus constitutes a critical juncture in our collective history. More generally,
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 24
analogies have played a significant role in the insights and discoveries that mark transition
points in human history, and this model provides a means of formally describing them. A
valuable feature of this model is that, by enabling MRs to align with needs and desires, and
thereby play the role of a catalyst that prompts the occurrence of a particular thought
process, each new idea (or modification of an existing idea) can be traced to its point of origin.
Thus, each contribution to a particular ‘lineage’ of creative thought retains its connection
with a particular innovator in a particular set of motivating circumstances, despite that it
may change form drastically as it ‘encounters’ the conceptual networks of other individuals.
Collaborative Learning Environments as higher-level RAFs
A complementary process to that of learning others, is learning others (Kittur
from with
et al., 2019; Shteynberg, Hirsh, Bentley, & Garthoff, 2020; Tomasello, Kruger, & Ratner,
1993), as often occurs in an educational context. Transitions in understanding often result not
from the efforts of single individuals but from diads or larger groups, with or without an
explicit teacher, and RAFs are well-suited to model this. The RAF approach lends itself to a
formal model of this.
An illustrative example of creative insight in a collaborative learning context involving
described by four reactions: the first occurs entirely in the mind of Individual A. The next
reaction involves all three individuals. The third reaction involves B and C, and the fourth
takes place in the mind of B but also involves A. The resulting group-level collaboration is
described by a maxRAF consisting of several subRAFs.
Insights arising from a Continuous Process
The RAFs examined thus far have provided a mechanism for the sudden transitions in
understanding, yet the underlying model involves dynamics based on continuous-time
cognitive processes. This is not so surprising in light of self-organized criticality (discussed
earlier), and related phenomena associated with nonlinear processes. The emergence of a new
creative insight occurs when certain critical factors coinciding within an individual mind—or
in the case of collaborative learning environments, a group of minds—to allow a cognitive
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 25
RAF to proceed once, after which it serves as catalyst and/or reactant) in subsequent
interactions (within an individual, or between individuals). For example, in Kekulé’s mind,
the fortuitous occurrence of the first reaction allowed the second to proceed; for the
r r
1 2
collaboration shown in Fig. 5, several interactions of particular MRs, in a certain order were
required in the path towards the new concept . We now describe more formally how a simple
stochastic model based on RAFs predicts discontinuous bursts (or cascades).
A simple null model of continuous cognitive change over time would model the
appearance of new creative outputs by a standard Poisson process at a constant rate . In
this case, the times between events are independently exponentially distributed with an
expected value of 1 .
Modifying this null model to incorporate cognitive RAFs allows for the emergence of
‘bursts’ of cognitive change, i.e., self-organized criticality. To see this, first observe that the
null model ignores the possibility that a new creative output from some individual in (or
collaboration within ) can rapidly become the catalyst (or a reactant) for a cognitive
reaction within the mind of one (or more) other individuals in , resulting in a new creative
output that, in turn, can spark further cognitive reactions (and so on). A simple way to
model this cascade effect is to assume that each new creative output has a probability of
enabling a new cognitive reaction to take place in the mind of at least one other individual in
(and the resulting creative output can then give rise to a further reaction in at least one
other individual, again with probability , and so on). Thus, each new creative output arising
from a background Poisson process (with rate ) gives rise to a burst of = 1 2 3
λ N , , , . . .
creative outputs (including the original item from the Poisson process). The size of these
bursts ( ) is variable; in fact, under this simple model follows a geometric distribution
N N
with parameter = 1 . It is therefore described by P( = ) = (1 ), and so has
k−1
p − q N k p − p N
an expected value = 1 = 1 (1 ) and a variance of = (1 ) = (1 )
2 2 2
µ /p / − q σ − p /p q/ − q
(Grimmett & Stirzaker, 2020). In particular, for close to 1, the bursts can be large, and
highly variable in size.
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 26
Discussion and Conclusion
To understand how a creator dissolves uncertainty by thinking ideas through from new
perspectives requires a theoretical framework that incorporates individual differences in the
structuring of knowledge and experience. This chapter presents a new approach to modeling
creative insight and the process by which new ideas emerge from ones, using RAF networks.
RAFs provide a means of formalizing the notion that conceptual change is prompted by
uncertainty, cognitive dissonance, questions, or gaps in understanding, which trigger the
restructuring or redescription of representations, modeled as conceptual interactions, or
‘reactions.’ The approach differentiates between (1) foodset MRs (knowledge that is either
innate, or that results from social learning or individual learning of information), and
existing
(2) non-foodset MRs ( information that results from abstract thought, or interactions
new
amongst other MRs). Treating MRs as ‘reactants’, ‘catalysts’, or ‘products’ enables us to
model the ideation process step by step. This in turn enables us to track trajectories of
conceptual change within and across individuals, and to better understand what prompts
creative thought, and how ideas shape, and are shaped by, the conceptual structure that bear
them. Creative thinking alters the hierarchical structure of RAFs, and provides avenues by
which isolated fragments of knowledge can be assimilated into the maxRAF.
New Directions and Testable Predictions
We mentioned that the RAF approach has been used to model key transitions in the
origins of cultural evolution Gabora and Steel (2017, 2020a, 2020b). In keeping with the
dictum ‘ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny,’ the application of autocatalytic networks to the
cognitive underpinnings of cultural evolution lays the groundwork for an autocatalytic
framework for conceptual change (Gabora & Beckage, submitted). In the course of
development, a child must acquire a coherent, integrated, flexible conceptual network capable
of adapting ideas to new situations, and combining knowledge in appropriate and meaningful
ways. Thus, RAFs can be used to model transitions in cognitive development during
childhood, culminating in the emergence of new participants in the creative culture-generating
‘machinery.’
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 27
The RAF approach could also be used to investigate a number of other issues related to
creativity, learning, and development, such as the relationship between expertise and
creativity, the impact of individual differences on creativity, the relationship between
creativity and the half-life of a creator’s contributions, and whether conceptual network
diversity among members of a social group affects the rate or quality of innovation. It could
be used to model the impact of different kinds of learning experiences on conceptual network
structure, and the impact of this structure on creativity. It would be interesting to study
whether individual differences in reliance on foodset versus foodset-derived information
sourcies (i.e., the propensity to think things through for oneself) sources may culminate in
different kinds of conceptual networks and concomitant learning and/or personality
trajectories.
The RAF approach also generates testable predictions. It predicts that the conceptual
networks of highly innovative individuals have large maxRAFs, and a high ratio of
foodset-derived to foodset MRs. It further predicts that in successful groups and
organizations, such individuals are counterbalanced by individuals with a low ratio of
foodset-derived to foodset MRs, so as not to compromise the capacity to preserve proven
effective solutions.
The RAF framework also predicts that there may be individuals whose conceptual
networks contain roughly the same and but who nevertheless think and
concepts associations
behave quite differently, resulting in markedly different creative outputs. A possible example
would be Mozart and Salieri; while they had similar environments, experiences, and social
circles, their compositions and impact were markedly different. Standard node-and-link
semantic network approaches provide no obvious way of explaining this because there is no
uncertainty-driven ‘catalysis’ of MRs. In the RAF approach, individual differences in MR
reactivities and in relative reliance on foodset versus foodset-derived knowledge are expected
to impact the shape of their conceptual networks, and the result in differences in the number,
kind, and impact of creative outputs. We suggest that the difference between Mozart and
Salieri reflects, not differences in their knowledge of music and understanding of the rules of
composition, but in their proclivity to access life experiences and emotions, mull them over,
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 28
and allow them to serve as reactants and catalysts in the domain of music. Differences in
reactivity may help explain why intelligence is a necessary but not sufficient condition for
creativity (Jauk, Benedek, Beate Dunst, & Neubauer, 2013).
It has been suggested that creative breakthroughs are more likely to arise from
conceptually distant sources than from conceptually close ones (Gentner & Markman, 1997;
Holyoak & Thagard, 1996; Poze, 1983; Ward, 1998). There is evidence that individuals from
different (often adjacent) fields produce the most creative solutions (Franke, Poetz, &
Schreier, 2014; Jeppesen & Lakhani, 2010; Wiley, 1998). Some studies have also shown an
advantage of conceptually distant sources over near ones with respect to novelty, quality, and
flexibility of ideation (Chan et al., 2011; Chiu & Shu, 2012; Dahl & Moreau, 2002; Goncalves,
Cardoso, & Badke-Schaub, 2013; Hender, Dean, Rodgers, & Jay, 2002), while other studies
concluded that there was no such advantage (Chan & Schunn, 2015b; Dunbar, 1997), or were
inconclusive (Enkel & Gassmann, 2010; Malaga, 2000). Despite their potential benefit, distant
sources may be harder to find, and require more iterative processing (Chan & Schunn, 2015b).
A related prediction derived from the RAF approach is that creative collaborations require
not just overlapping yet different conceptual structures, but compatible levels of MR
reactivity. If their joint reactivity is too low, new ideas fail to emerge, but if it is too high,
they lose the thread of continuity necessary for cumulative change.
RAF networks have been used to model the origins of evolutionary processes, biological
(the origin of life) as well as cultural (the origin of cumulative innovation). We think this is
not coincidental; indeed, elsewhere, we showed that both the evolution of early life and
cultural evolution are instantiations of a primitive form of evolution—i.e., cumulative,
adaptive, open-ended change—referred to as Self-Other Reorganization (SOR) (Gabora,
2019). Instead of replication using a self-assembly code, SOR entails internal self-organising
and self-maintaining processes within entities, as well as interaction between entities. The
argument for SOR bolsters the argument that they share a deep structure, and thus
strengthens the rationale for applying RAFs in both domains. In any case, the RAF approach
to creative cognition is consistent with the theory that humans possess two levels of complex,
adaptive, self-organizing structure: an organismal level and a psychological level (Barton,
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 29
1994; Gabora, 2004; Maturana & Varela, 1973). Psychological research tends to be data rich
and theory poor (Fried, 2020), and psychological theorizing remains fragmented (Teo, 2018).
Theories about creativity are disconnected from theories about the relationship between
domain-specific abilities and general intelligence (e.g., (Kovacs & Conway, 2016)), which are
disconnected from theories about how attitudes or personality traits relate to the structuring
of knowledge and experience (Dalege, Borsboom, van Harreveld, & van der Maas, 2018). The
RAF approach offers an established mathematical framework for integrating research on
creative cognition with research on semantic networks, and the kinds of structures that exhibit
cumulative, adaptive, open-ended change, i.e., that evolve. Though still in its infancy, the
RAF approach has the potential to provide a new way of understanding how human history
unfolds, one that embeds creativity research in the formal study of self-organizing structures
and their role in evolutionary processes, and that places creative cognition centre stage.
Acknowledgements
We thank Marcel Montrey for comments on an early version of the manuscript.
Funding
LG acknowledges funding from Grant 62R06523 from the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada.
AUTOCATALYTIC NETWORK MODEL UNCERTAINTY INSIGHT 30