AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 1
Accuracy of Automated Written Expression Curriculum-based Measurement Scoring
1 1 1,2 1 1
Sterett H. Mercer , Joanna E. Cannon , Bonita Squires , Yue Guo , and Ella Pinco
Faculty of Education, University of British Columbia
Faculty of Health, Dalhousie University
Author Note
This is a preprint of an article accepted for publication at the Canadian Journal of School
the article is assigned to an issue.
The research reported here was supported in part by grants from the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada and the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department
of Education, through Grant R305A190100. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and
do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education. We would like to
thank Norlan Cabot, Kate Raven, and the Learning Disabilities Association of Greater Vancouver
for the research partnership that supported the current study. We would also like to thank Eun
Young Kwon, and Ioanna K. Tsiriotakis for their assistance in scoring writing samples
Correspondence concerning thus article should be addressed to Sterett H. Mercer,
Department of Educational and Counselling Psychology and Special Education, University of
British Columbia, 2125 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada. Email:
sterett.mercer@ubc.ca
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 2
Abstract
We examined the extent to which automated written expression curriculum-based measurement
(aWE-CBM) can be accurately used to computer score student writing samples for screening and
progress monitoring. Students (n = 174) with learning difficulties in Grades 1–12 who received
1:1 academic tutoring through a community-based organization completed narrative writing
samples in the fall and spring across two academic years. The samples were evaluated using four
automated and hand-calculated WE-CBM scoring metrics. Results indicated automated and
hand-calculated scores were highly correlated at all four timepoints for counts of total words
written (rs = 1.00), words spelled correctly (rs = .99 – 1.00), correct word sequences (CWS; rs =
.96 – .97), and correct minus incorrect word sequences (CIWS; rs = .86 – .92). For CWS and
CIWS, however, automated scores systematically overestimated hand-calculated scores, with an
unacceptable amount of error for CIWS for some types of decisions. These findings provide
preliminary evidence that aWE-CBM can be used to efficiently score narrative writing samples,
potentially improving the feasibility of implementing multi-tiered systems of support in which
the written expression skills of large numbers of students are screened and monitored.
Keywords: written expression, curriculum-based measurement, automated text
evaluation, screening, progress monitoring
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 3
Accuracy of Automated Written Expression Curriculum-based Measurement Scoring
To effectively support students with learning difficulties, measures that can identify
which students need additional assistance and that can progress monitor the effectiveness of
academic interventions are needed (Jung et al., 2018). Since the 1970s, researchers in special
education have examined curriculum-based measurement (CBM) for these purposes. CBMs are
brief and efficient assessments that can be administered frequently during instruction, with
evidence of reliability and validity for defensible decisions about student progress during
instructional interventions (Deno, 1985). For example, brief assessments of oral passage reading
(i.e., number of words read correctly in 1 minute) work well as a technically adequate indicator
of overall reading proficiency (Reschly et al., 2009), are sensitive to reading skill growth during
intervention (Morgan & Sideridis, 2006), and improve student outcomes when used by teachers
during intervention (Filderman et al., 2018). Compared to reading CBM, research on written
expression CBM (WE-CBM) is less well developed (Tindal, 2013) despite the importance of
writing skills for students’ academic and occupational success (National Commission on
Writing, 2004).
Administration of WE-CBM typically includes presentation of a short story starter (e.g.,
“One day on the way to school, I...”), and then student generation of a three- to five- minute
writing sample following a one-minute planning time (Hosp et al., 2016). Multiple WE-CBM
metrics are utilized to score samples, for example, the total number of words written (TWW),
counts of words spelled correctly (WSC), counts of correct words sequences (CWS, the number
of adjacent words that are syntactically and semantically acceptable in context and spelled and
punctuated correctly; Videen et al., 1982), and counts of correct minus incorrect word sequences
(CIWS; Espin et al., 2000). Although U.S. based norms and data management are available for
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 4
knowledge, no comparable norms or data management platforms are available in Canada, and no
written expression assessments are listed as meeting the National Center on Intensive
and progress monitoring tools.
Two key challenges have hindered the development and use of WE-CBM beyond the
early elementary grades (for a review of CBM for beginning writers, see Ritchey et al., 2016).
First, studies have found, using generalizability theory, that multiple, longer-duration writing
samples are needed to obtain adequate reliability for WE-CBM in Grades 2–5 (Keller-Margulis
et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2017). Second, a recent meta-analysis found that more complex WE-
CBM scores (CWS and CIWS) had higher validity coefficients than simpler WE-CBM metrics
(TWW and WSC) at all grade levels from K to 12 (Romig et al., 2017). In combination, the need
for longer, multiple writing samples and more complex scoring approaches can limit the
feasibility of WE-CBM (Espin et al., 1999), particularly for screening when writing samples are
obtained from all students in multiple grades simultaneously.
To address these feasibility concerns, several studies have investigated automated text
evaluation to score writing samples used for universal screening (Mercer et al., 2019; Wilson,
2018). In Wilson (2018), the commercial Project Essay Grade program (PEG; Page, 2003) was
used to score 60–minute argumentative writing samples from students in Grades 3 and 4. PEG
Total scores, formed from the sum of five-point analytic rubric ratings on six writing dimensions
(development of ideas, organization, style, sentence structure, conventions, and word choice) had
good diagnostic accuracy in predicting whether students met proficiency standards on a state-
mandated English Language Arts assessment. Similarly, Mercer et al. (2019) investigated the
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 5
extent to which composite scoring models based on Coh-Metrix (Graesser et al., 2014), a free
program originally designed to predict text readability, could predict holistic writing quality on
seven-minute screening samples from students in Grades 2–5. Results were that both the
composites based on Coh-Metrix scores and typical WE-CBM scores correlated with holistic
writing quality at r = .73 – .77. In both studies, however, automated text evaluation was used to
generate holistic writing quality scores, either as the sum of scores across analytic rating
dimensions (Wilson, 2018) or through a composite scoring model (Mercer et al., 2019), rather
than to directly generate WE-CBM scores. By simplifying the scoring process, using automated
text evaluation for WE-CBM (aWE-CBM) could potentially remove feasibility barriers to the
use of WE-CBM in schools for data-based screening and progress monitoring decisions.
Current Study
The purpose of the current study is to determine the accuracy of automated scoring for
the most frequently used WE-CBM metrics: TWW, WSC, CWS, and CIWS. Specifically, we
address the following research questions with narrative writing samples from Grade 1–12
students with learning difficulties:
1. How strongly do aWE-CBM scores relate to hand-calculated WE-CBM scores? To
address this question, we calculate Pearson r correlations, with expectations that
correlations would be nearly perfect, r > .90.
2. How precise are aWE-CBM scores? To address this question, we examine root mean
square error (RMSE) values, with values closer to zero indicating smaller discrepancies
between hand-calculated and automated scores. In addition to being useful in practice to
form confidence intervals around predicted WE-CBM scores (± 2*RMSE is a simple
approximation of a 95% prediction interval), RMSE values can be divided by the standard
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 6
deviation of test scores as an indicator of reliability; a standard error of less than one-
third the magnitude of the standard deviation of test scores has been recommended as a
minimal standard for important applied decisions (Nunnally, 1978).
3. To what extent are aWE-CBM scores unbiased? To address this question, we conduct
paired sample t tests to investigate the extent to which aWE-CBM systematically over- or
underestimates WE-CBM scores.
Method
Participants and Setting
For approximately two hours per week, all participants received 1:1 tutoring by a
community-based non-profit organization. In order to track progress and inform further
instruction, the organization collected picture-prompted narrative writing samples at two time
points per year, the fall (September–October) and spring (April–May). For the 2017–2018 school
year, 106 student participants in Grades 2–12 completed at least one writing sample and 40%
were female. The fall writing sample was completed by 103 of the participants and the spring
sample by 83 participants. The majority of participants attended elementary school (Grades 2–7;
n = 85) and the remainder (n = 21) attended secondary school (Grades 8–12). For the 2018–2019
school year, 68 students in Grades 1–12 participated, with 51 and 52 students completing the fall
and spring writing samples, respectively. Eighty–four percent of students were in the elementary
grades (1–7), and 41% were female.
Detailed demographic and disability information about the participants is not provided
because we only had access to extant writing samples. Common demographics among all
participants included the fact that their parents sought community-based tutoring to provide them
with support beyond what their school offered. Most participants attended an urban, culturally
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 7
and linguistically diverse school district in Canada with approximately 52,000 students, 44% of
which reported speaking a language other than English at home. Of the 160 different home
languages within the district, the top five include: Cantonese (17%), Mandarin (11%), Tagalog
(5%), Vietnamese (4%), and Punjabi (4%). Some students in the district, approximately 17%,
were eligible for English language supports, and another 11% received special education
services.
Measures
Writing samples were collected by the organization’s tutors by presenting participants
with an array of travel, recreation, and lifestyle magazine photos (e.g., amusement park rides,
animals, restaurants). The participants selected one picture as a writing prompt, and were
allowed 10 minutes to handwrite a composition with no help from the tutors. Consistent with
Behavioural Research Ethics Board approved procedures, students’ parents or guardians were
asked by the organization for consent to release de-identified writing samples to the research
team. Before scoring, all samples were typed, preserving errors in spelling and grammar, by a
member of the research team, with the accuracy of all transcriptions verified by another member
of the team. Following transcription, we scored these narrative writing samples for hand-
calculated and automated WE-CBM metrics.
Hand-calculated WE-CBM
Based on the Hosp et al. (2016) guidelines, four hand-calculated WE-CBM metrics
(TWW, WSC, CWS, CIWS) were scored. For TWW, we counted the total number of one or
more letters that were separated by spaces, even if these words were used mistakenly in context
or misspelled. To calculate WSC, we counted correctly spelled English words regardless of the
context. For CWS, we counted each sequence of two adjacent words that were spelled correctly
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 8
and were syntactically and semantically acceptable in context; correct punctuation and
capitalization were also considered. For CIWS, we calculated the difference between correct and
incorrect word sequences. Forty-two percent of the writing samples were independently scored
by two raters. Agreement was very strong between the raters for all metrics: TWW (r = 1.00),
WSC (r = 1.00), CWS (r = 1.00), and CIWS (r = .99).
Automated WE-CBM
We used the open-source writeAlizer R package (Mercer, 2020) to generate aWE-CBM
scores based on the output of a text analysis program, Grammar And Mechanics Error
Tool (GAMET; Crossley et al., 2019). GAMET is a free program, based on the open-source
the following metrics: (a) word count, (b) misspellings, (c) grammatical errors, (d) duplication
errors (e.g., “I made made an error.”), (e) typography errors including capitalization and
punctuation, and (f) white space errors such as inappropriate spacing before punctuation or
between words. In addition, writeAlizer generates percentages of misspelled words and
grammatical errors by dividing these counts by the total word count. For automated TWW
scores, writeAlizer uses the word count score generated by GAMET. For automated WSC,
writeAlizer subtracts GAMET-identified misspellings from the word count. Automated CWS
and CIWS scores are based on ensembles of four machine learning algorithms that were trained
on 7 min narrative writing samples from students in Grades 2–5 (see Mercer et al., 2019, for
sample description); the weightings of each of the GAMET metrics, overall and in the individual
algorithms, plus the weightings of each algorithm in the CWS and CIWS scoring models are
(2009).
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 9
Results
Means and standard deviations for all aWE-CBM and WE-CBM scores by timepoint are
95% confidence intervals for correlations and full details of the paired sample t tests, are
Total Words Written
At all four timepoints, automated TWW scores were perfectly correlated with hand-
calculated TWW scores at r = 1.00. RMSE values (.47 – 2.98) were small relative to mean TWW
scores (58.03 – 79.10) and also well below Nunnally’s (1978) recommendation that error
magnitude be less than one-third of the TWW score standard deviations, with proportions of .07,
.04, .01, and .07, respectively, by timepoint. Automated TWW scores were not statistically
different from hand-calculated TWW scores at any timepoint, indicating no systematic over- or
under-estimation of scores.
Words Spelled Correctly
Automated WSC scores were nearly perfectly correlated (r = .99 – 1.00) with hand-
calculated WSC scores at all timepoints. RMSE values (1.69 – 4.77) were small relative to mean
WSC scores (50.49 – 71.75) and also small relative to the WSC standard deviations, with
proportions of .12, .08, .05, and .09, respectively, by timepoint. Automated WSC scores were not
statistically different from hand-calculated WSC scores for three of the four timepoints. In fall of
2018–2019, automated scores were on average .98 below hand-calculated WSC (p < .001), but
this difference was of trivial magnitude (d = .03).
Correct Word Sequences
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 10
Correlations between automated and hand-calculated CWS scores were nearly perfect at
all timepoints (r = .96 – .97). RMSE values (9.16 – 12.15) were moderate relative to the CWS
means (38.37 – 59.79) but less than one-third of the CWS standard deviations at all timepoints,
with proportions of .26, .23, .29, and .29, respectively. There was a tendency toward over-
estimating hand-calculated CWS; automated CWS scores were significantly higher at all
timepoints (p < .05) by 2.30 to 6.65 CWS. These differences were of small magnitude with d =
.18, .08, .27, and .09, respectively, by timepoint.
Correct Minus Incorrect Word Sequences
Correlations between automated and hand-calculated CIWS scores were very strong (r =
.86 – .92), but noticeably lower than for other WE-CBM metrics. RMSE values (16.77 – 20.48)
were moderate relative to the adjusted CIWS means (68.12 – 120.81) and above the one-third
recommendation for the magnitude of error relative to the CIWS standard deviation, with
proportions of .51, .40, .44, and .46 by timepoint. Automated CIWS scores were significantly
greater than hand-calculated CIWS at all timepoints (p < .01) by 9.55 to 16.27 CIWS. These
differences were of small to moderate magnitude with d = .41, .20, .43, and .22, respectively, by
timepoint.
Discussion
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the accuracy of automated text evaluation as an
alternative to hand-calculated WE-CBM scores. Overall, accuracy differed by WE-CBM metric.
For TWW and WSC, automated and hand-calculated scores were nearly perfectly correlated at
all timepoints (rs = .99 – 1.00), with very little prediction error and little evidence of systematic
over- or underestimation of scores. Similarly, automated CWS scores were nearly perfectly
correlated with hand-calculated CWS scores (rs = .96 – .97), but with some small overestimation
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 11
of scores. By contrast, automated CIWS scores were less strongly correlated with hand-
calculated scores (rs = .86 – .92), with evidence of small to moderate overestimation of scores
contributing to RMSE values of approximately half the size of the CIWS score standard
deviations.
Utility of aWE-CBM for Relative and Absolute Decisions
To interpret these accuracy statistics for aWE-CBM, it is helpful to differentiate between
relative and absolute decisions (see Shavelson & Webb, 1991). In relative decisions, the primary
purpose is to rank order students, with the specific scaling of scores not important. In educational
contexts, screening decisions are typically relative, specifically when a certain percentage of
students are identified as having at risk status based on their performance relative to peers.
Research with correlational designs would also involve relative decisions because variable
scaling would not be important. The correlations between automated and hand-calculated scores
provide strong to very strong evidence that all aWE-CBM scores can be used as a substitute for
hand-calculated WE-CBM scores for relative decisions. In absolute decisions, the scaling of
scores is important—some examples of absolute decisions are comparing student score growth
over time, comparing average performance between groups, or comparing student scores to
specific benchmark scores. In the current study, the RMSE values and t tests inform the
appropriateness of aWE-CBM scores for absolute decisions. In general, there is strong evidence
for automated TWW and WSC scores as substitutes for hand-calculated scores in absolute
decisions and also good evidence that automated CWS scores can be used for absolute decisions,
with the caveat that CWS scores may be somewhat overestimated. By contrast, the greater
overestimation of CIWS scores plus the high ratio of RMSE to SD indicate that automated CIWS
scores should not be used for absolute decisions.
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 12
Limitations
Limitations of the current study include (a) limited information on fidelity of assessment
administration procedures, (b) unavailability of detailed demographic data, and (c) the small
numbers of students at each grade level. Fidelity of administration procedures was not
documented—the tutors who administered the writing samples followed the non-profit
organization's written assessment instructions; however, we only had access to the writing
samples the organization provided. Although this is a limitation for internal validity, it may
increase external validity because educators are likely to administer writing prompts in varied
ways across different settings. Another limitation is that detailed demographic information about
the participants was unavailable, including whether students had a formal disability designation
and to what extent students received school-based special education services. A final limitation
included the small numbers of students at each grade level, precluding separate analyses by
grade level. Considering that WE-CBM validity coefficients tend to be smaller when based on
within-grade compared to across-grade analyses (McMaster & Espin, 2007), additional research
will be needed to evaluate validity of aWE-CBM scoring at specific grade levels.
Future Research
The current findings highlight several areas to be addressed in future research. First, our
finding that automated CWS and CIWS scoring tended to systematically overestimate hand-
calculated values may be related to the use of output from the GAMET program for the aWE-
CBM scoring models. A prior study (Crossley et al., 2019) comparing GAMET and human
scoring of grammatical and mechanical errors on essays from secondary students and adults
found that although the majority of errors found by GAMET were rated as accurate and
meaningful, GAMET failed to identify a large number of errors identified by human raters,
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 13
particularly concerning punctuation. For this reason, more research to refine the accuracy of the
underlying text analysis applications (GAMET and LanguageTool) will be needed to improve
aWE-CBM scoring of CWS and CIWS.
Second, although accuracy of aWE-CBM scoring for TWW, WSC, and CWS was good
in the current study, it is notable that the writeAlizer scoring models were trained based on
shorter-duration writing samples from Grade 2–5 students largely without disabilities (only 6%
of students in Mercer et al., 2019), in contrast to the current sample of Grade 1–12 students with
substantial learning difficulties. It is possible that the accuracy of aWE-CBM varies depending
on the writing skill level of students, and differences in writing skill levels between the training
and current samples may have contributed to the overestimation of CWS and CIWS scores.
Future efforts to train aWE-CBM scoring models on samples from a more diverse set of learners
may further improve scoring accuracy.
Third, our research thus far has focused on the accuracy of the scoring model, and
additional software development will be necessary before aWE-CBM is ready for more
widespread use. In the current study, we transcribed handwritten samples, batch submitted the
samples for processing in GAMET, and then imported the GAMET output into the R program to
generate predicted WE-CBM scores using syntax. These steps are likely to be too complex for
the average potential user. As we continue our work in this area, we plan to (a) continue to refine
and evaluate the scoring models, (b) develop software to simply the workflow of generating
scores from samples, (c) explore options for online data management and report generation, and
(d) establish norms and standards for performance. All of these steps will need to be completed
for aWE-CBM to be practically and feasibly used for screening decisions in schools.
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 14
Fourth, and most importantly, additional research is needed on the validity of WE-CBM,
whether scored by hand or computer. In a meta-analysis of criterion-related validity evidence for
WE-CBM (Romig et al., 2017), only the CIWS metric approached the r > .60 validity standard
for screening tools of the National Center for Intensive Intervention. Because most of the studies
included in the meta-analysis did not base student skill estimates on multiple, longer duration
samples, which have been identified as necessary for adequate WE-CBM reliability (Keller-
Margulis et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2017), these validity coefficients are difficult to interpret. For
this reason, future research will need to be conducted to investigate the validity of WE-CBM
when based on more substantial samples of student writing, and it is possible that aWE-CBM
scoring may improve scoring feasibility in these research efforts.
Relevance to the Practice of School Psychology
The present study demonstrates that automated scoring of TWW, WSC, and CWS can be
accurately used in place of WE-CBM hand scoring, and these efficiency gains may support more
widespread implementation of response-to-intervention (RTI) models and multi-tiered systems
of support (MTSS; Jimerson et al., 2016) to support student writing skills. In these models, all
students should be regularly screened to identify students in need of more support, with data used
to determine if provided supports are adequately supporting student skill development (Jung et
al., 2018). Although screening assessments in written expression are relatively brief to
administer, the time required to hand score WE-CBM metrics can be substantial. In the current
study, we did not collect systematic data on hand or automated scoring time for each 10-minute
sample; however, prior studies have reported average WE-CBM hand scoring times of 2.0–2.5
minutes per sample for 3-minute samples (Gansle et al., 2002; Malecki & Jewell, 2003).
Considering that multiple, longer-duration writing samples per student are needed for reliable
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 15
estimates of student writing skill (Keller-Margulis et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2017), the time to
score writing samples from students in multiple classes and grades, as is done in universal
screening, is likely to a barrier to more widespread adoption of these practices (Espin et al,
1999).
As emphasized in practice guidelines in Canada (e.g., Ontario Psychological Association
Section on Psychology in Education, 2013) and the United States (National Association of
School Psychologists, 2017), school psychologists have the data-based decision making and
instructional consultation skills to support these screening and monitoring practices as part of
MTSS/RTI, and an automated scoring option may facilitate these efforts. Given that, to our
knowledge, only one U.S.-based provider offers norms and data management options for WE-
CBM and no Canada-based norms or providers are available, aWE-CBM scoring may also
facilitate the widespread data collection needed to conduct the validity studies and develop the
local norms (Patton et al., 2014) that will be required to use these scores for defensible
instructional decisions.
AUTOMATED WRITTEN EXPRESSION SCORING 16