Which narrative strategies durably reduce prejudice?
Evidence from field and survey experiments
supporting the efficacy of perspective-getting*
† ‡
Joshua L. Kalla David E. Broockman
Forthcoming, American Journal of Political Science
Running title: Which narrative strategies durably reduce prejudice?
Keywords: Prejudice reduction, narrative persuasion, perspective-taking, immigration attitudes
*We thank Geoff Cohen, Tal Eyal, Dave Fleischer, Don Green, Dan Hopkins, Michael Kraus, Betsy Levy Paluck,
Adeline Lo, Matt Lowe, Vincent Pons, Takuya Sawaoka, and Gabor Simonovits as well as participants at the Yale
University Social/Personality Psychology Colloquium and the InterGroup Relations Workshop for helpful feedback.
All errors are our own. Study 1 was conducted by affiliates of People’s Action Institute: We Are Down Home,
Michigan United, and Pennsylvania Stands Up Education Fund. Studies 2 and 3 were conducted by the Orange
County Congregation Community Organization and the Tennessee Immigrant and Refugee Rights Coalition. The
California Immigrant Policy Center provided operational support. The New Conversation Initiative provided training
and implementation support for all three studies. All studies were reviewed by the Yale University IRB.
Assistant Professor, Department of Political Science and Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale Univer-
Associate Professor, Travers Department of Political Science, University of California, Berke-
david-broockman, 210 Social Sciences Building, Berkeley, CA 94720-1950.
Abstract
Exclusionary attitudes towards outgroups contribute to social and political challenges
worldwide. Previous field experiments found that interpersonal conversations employing
multiple narrative strategies can durably reduce exclusionary attitudes. We theoretically
distinguish between three of these narrative strategies: narratives which promote analogic
perspective-taking, vicarious perspective-giving, and perspective-getting. Previous research
has assigned these strategies together in a compound treatment, leaving open important the-
oretical and practical questions about each’s effectiveness. We present results from three
field studies and a survey experiment that individually manipulate their presence. Across the
field studies, we find omitting prompts to engage in analogic perspective-taking and vicari-
ous perspective-giving does not diminish effects; conversations employing only perspective-
getting narratives durably reduce exclusionary attitudes. Results from within-subject analyses
and a survey experiment similarly show that perspective-getting consistently reduces exclu-
sionary attitudes and activates multiple mechanisms. These results refine theoretical under-
standings of prejudice reduction and support facilitating perspective-getting in conversations
intended to reduce exclusionary attitudes.
The data and materials required to verify the computational reproducibility of the results, pro-
cedures and analyses in this article are available on the American Journal of Political Science
MMYAOY.
Which Narrative Strategies Reduce Exclusionary Attitudes?
Exclusionary attitudes—intergroup prejudices and opposition to policies that promote outgroups’
wellbeing—contribute to significant challenges worldwide. A growing number of Americans ex-
press a desire to take action to combat these attitudes (e.g., the movement to be “anti-racist”).
Unfortunately, social science research does not offer clear guidance about how to do so. In par-
ticular, most strategies for reducing exclusionary attitudes have never been shown effective in the
field; or, to the extent they have, often have effects that rapidly decay (Paluck et al. 2020). However,
recent field and natural experiments have uncovered several strategies that organizations and indi-
viduals can use to durably reduce exclusionary attitudes towards stigmatized groups (e.g., Lowe
2021; Broockman and Kalla 2016). One line of research has shown that exchanging narratives that
encourage individuals to consider an outgroup’s perspective in interpersonal conversations can
durably reduce exclusionary attitudes towards that outgroup (Broockman and Kalla 2016; Kalla
and Broockman 2020). Moreover, it has found that these narratives are responsible for the effects
of these conversations, as removing this exchange of narratives extinguishes their effects (Kalla
and Broockman 2020, Study 1).
But which narrative strategies effectively reduce exclusionary attitudes? In this paper, we the-
oretically distinguish between several distinct narrative strategies to encourage individuals to con-
strategies, which differ by the source of the narrative (whether self-generated, recalled, or re-
ceived from another) and the topic of the narrative (an outgroup’s experience or one’s own expe-
rience). First, lab- and survey-based research has studied traditional perspective-taking, wherein
individuals imagine a narrative as if they themselves were the outgroup member experiencing it
(e.g. Galinsky and Moskowitz 2000; Simonovits, Kezdi and Kardos 2018; Adida, Lo and Platas
2018; Williamson et al. 2021). Next, Broockman and Kalla (2016) consider “analogic perspective-
taking,” a form of perspective-taking in which “perceivers try to understand the target’s experience
by recalling a different situation from their own experience that is presumed to parallel the target’s
situation” (Gehlbach and Brinkworth 2012). However, that study’s intervention, and interventions
in other studies of analogic perspective-taking, also contain what we term vicarious perspective-
giving and perspective-getting. Vicarious perspective-giving involves recounting the experiences
of an outgroup member. By contrast, perspective-getting involves hearing a narrative about an
outgroup member’s perspective (e.g., Bruneau and Saxe 2012).
These narrative strategies are conceptually distinct and evidence supporting their efficacy
would have different theoretical and practical consequences. Unfortunately, existing research does
not offer clear guidance about the efficacy of these strategies in real-world contexts. For instance,
previous field studies have always employed multiple of these strategies simultaneously in com-
pound treatments (Broockman and Kalla 2016; Kalla and Broockman 2020). This has left unclear
to what extent each of these narrative strategies effectively reduces exclusionary attitudes. This
leaves open important theoretical questions. It also means practical questions remain—given that
prejudice reduction interventions are often expensive and difficult to scale, which components of
these interventions should practitioners focus their scarce resources on implementing?
In this paper, we present evidence from three original field studies and a survey experiment that
seek to disentangle the impacts of these narrative strategies. Our field studies consider interven-
tions that sought to reduce Americans’ exclusionary attitudes towards a highly stigmatized group,
unauthorized immigrants. Stigma against immigrants and hostile elite rhetoric contribute to hos-
tile government policies that negatively impact immigrants (e.g., Hainmueller, Hangartner and
Pietrantuono 2017). Unfortunately, previous research also suggests that attitudes towards immi-
“Perspective-getting” is most associated with studies of person perception, not exclusionary attitudes (e.g., Eyal,
Steffel and Epley 2018). However, Bruneau and Saxe (2012) have a condition where a “responder” listens to and sum-
marizes the experience of an outgroup member, and, consistent with our findings, this reduces exclusionary attitudes
under some conditions. They call this “perspective-taking” but we call it “perspective-getting” to distinguish it from
traditional perspective-taking.
If the effects of different narrative strategies are additive, it could be optimal to deploy all of them, but if they are
non-additive, it could be optimal to focus on the strategy that is easiest to implement.
We use the term unauthorized instead of undocumented or illegal because it is considered a neutral term. Our
survey instruments rotate between using all three terms.
(a) Definition and Examples
Strategy Definition Example
Imagining an experience from the Imagining what it would be like to
Traditional Perspective-
perspective of an outgroup member. experience a story if one were the
Taking
(e.g., Galinsky and Moskowitz (2000)) outgroup member in that story.
Recalling a similar situation Thinking about a time when one was
Analogic Perspective- from one’s own experience. discriminated against to help understand
Taking (e.g., Gehlbach and Brinkworth (2012), what it is like for outgroup members
Broockman and Kalla (2016)) when they face discrimination.
Hearing about the experiences of an
Listening to an ingroup friend tell a
outgroup member (from them or
Perspective-Getting story about the experiences of
others). (e.g., Bruneau and Saxe (2012),
their friend in the outgroup.
Eyal, Steffel and Epley (2018))
Vicarious Perspective- Recounting the experiences Describing the experiences of a friend
Giving of an outgroup member. or family member in the outgroup.
(b) Key Differences
Strategy Source of Narrative Topic of Narrative
Traditional Perspective- Outgroup Member’s
Self-generated (imagined)
Taking Experiences
Analogic Perspective-
Self-generated (recalled) Own Experiences
Taking
Outgroup Member’s
Perspective-Getting Received from another
Experiences
Vicarious Perspective- Outgroup Member’s
Self-generated (recalled)
Giving Experiences
grants are typically durable and resistant to lasting change (e.g., Hopkins, Sides and Citrin 2019).
What narrative strategies might effectively reduce exclusionary attitudes against highly stig-
matized groups such as unauthorized immigrants? Our original field studies consider three of the
narratives strategies we identified in prior field experiments on interpersonal conversations: narra-
tives promoting perspective-getting, vicarious perspective-giving, and analogic perspective-taking
evidence in favor of the efficacy of narratives that promote perspective-getting, or hearing about
the experiences of an outgroup member. This stands in contrast to how some prior research has
interpreted its findings. We also find that these narratives are similarly effective whether deliv-
ered directly by an outgroup member or shared by a third-party discussing the experiences of an
outgroup member.
on these narrative strategies, organizing prior studies’ interventions into our typology of narra-
tive strategies. Broockman and Kalla (2016) contained only one treatment condition which in-
volved all three narrative strategies (perspective-getting, vicarious perspective-giving, and analogic
perspective-taking) and found durable reductions in transphobia. Broockman and Kalla (2016)
speculated that analogic perspective-taking was chiefly responsible for the effects, but did not sep-
arately randomize its presence. Kalla and Broockman (2020, Study 1) replicated these effects in
the context of unauthorized immigrants, and also found that removing all three narrative strategies
extinguished the effects. Existing work has therefore shown that these three narrative strategies
are effective in combination, but has not established to what extent each of them is individually
effective.
To disentangle the effects of the three strategies, we first present two original field experiments
on door-to-door canvassing interventions that build on this work.
Study 1 presents results from a field experiment on a door-to-door canvassing intervention
that aimed to reduce prejudice against unauthorized immigrants and increase support for includ-
ing them in government health insurance programs. Study 1’s Full Intervention condition mirrors
prior studies by deploying all three narrative strategies. As compared to a Placebo condition, this
Full Intervention durably reduced prejudice for at least several months and increased support for
including unauthorized immigrants in Medicaid. However, in an Intervention without Analogic
Perspective-Taking condition, the conversations omitted analogic perspective-taking and had ef-
fects that were similar to, if not slightly larger than, the Full Intervention. This result suggests
that narratives promoting Analogic Perspective-Taking are not necessary for interpersonal conver-
sations to reduce exclusionary attitudes.
Broockman This Paper, Study 3
Kalla and Broockman (2020),
Study and Kalla This Paper, Study 1 This Paper, Study 2 (Difference-in-
Experiment 1
(2016) differences)
Unauthorized
Topic Transphobia Unauthorized Immigrants Unauthorized Immigrants Unauthorized Immigrants
Immigrants
Intervention
Perspective- Full
Full Full Abbreviated Full w/o Analogic Full
Condition Name Getting Intervention,
Intervention Intervention Intervention Intervention Perspective- Intervention
Only by Phone
Taking
Intervention Contents
Narratives Strategies...
Perspective-Getting YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES
Vicarious Perspective-
YES YES NO YES YES YES NO YES
Giving
Analogic Perspective-
YES YES NO YES NO YES NO YES
Taking
Address concerns and
YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES
deliver talking points
Results
Null effects
(d = 0.02, p = 0.27),
Positive Positive Positive Positive Positive Positive Positive
statistically
effects effects effects effects effects effects effects
ITT distinguishable
(d = 0.16, (d = 0.08, (d = 0.09, (d = 0.12, (d = 0.08, (d = 0.10, (CACE d = 0.15,
from Full
p < 0.001) p < 0.001) p < 0.001) p < 0.001) p < 0.01) p < 0.001) p < 0.001)
Intervention
(d = 0.06, p < 0.01)
Notes: All studies except for Study 3 contained a placebo condition, not shown, to estimate the effect sizes shown.
†Results are intent-to-treat (ITT) estimates from an Overall Index averaged across survey waves. Because the studies use different survey items, the estimates are not
directly comparable across studies. Study 3 is a difference-in-differences without an uncontacted control group, so the estimate is most comparable to a Complier Average
Causal Effect (CACE), as it describes the effects among the subset of individuals who completed the conversation.
Next, in Study 2, we present results from another field experiment conducted by a separate or-
ganization. This study’s Full Intervention condition again mirrors the previous studies and involved
exchanging all three forms of narratives. However, a second Perspective-Getting Only condi-
tion only deployed narratives promoting Perspective-Getting, omitting both Analogic Perspective-
Taking and Vicarious Perspective-Giving narratives. The Full Intervention condition had signif-
icant effects on reducing exclusionary attitudes, but the Perspective-Getting Only condition had
similar effects. These results support the efficacy of conversations that focus on sharing narra-
tives about outgroup members (Perspective-Getting), as including Vicarious Perspective-Giving
and Analogic Perspective-Taking narratives does not appear to increase effects.
We then present several additional results that are further consistent with the efficacy of
perspective-getting.
First, we conduct a meta-analysis of our new studies and previous field experiments which
confirms their collective implications with respect to the efficacy of perspective-getting.
Next, we present within-subject analyses from our two original field experiments and a third
original field study, a difference-in-differences design that evaluated a version of the Full Inter-
vention conducted by phone. Using records canvassers kept about what occurred during each
conversation, we compare pre-post differences across individuals who had conversations that did
and did not involve each of the intended narrative approaches. Across all three studies, we consis-
tently find that participants were more supportive after conversations in which they heard a story
about an outgroup member (perspective-getting), but were no more supportive if participants also
told a story of their own (vicarious perspective-giving and analogic perspective-taking).
Finally, we present a survey experiment that tests these approaches and traditional perspective-
taking. We again find that perspective-getting consistently reduces exclusionary attitudes, whereas
the other approaches have less reliable effects.
We close by discussing the theoretical implications of our findings and presenting data from
our field- and survey-based studies on the mechanisms that these narratives activated. We find
that in both field and survey contexts, perspective-getting activates multiple mechanisms that have
been found to reduce prejudice. However, our work cannot determine to what extent the effects of
the interventions we study operate through these mechanisms, and we discuss how future research
could examine this.
Theoretical Perspectives
Exchanging narratives in interpersonal conversation represents a promising paradigm for reducing
exclusionary attitudes for several reasons (Kalla and Broockman 2020). First individuals often
“transport” themselves into narratives they find interesting, reducing motivation to counter-argue
and heightening emotional responses (Green and Brock 2000). Second, interpersonal conversation
represents a natural setting to encourage individuals to effortfully process the implications of a
narrative. Finally, interlocutors can approach the conversation non-judgmentally, showing respect
to an individual and listening to their views without counter-arguing, which could reduce resistance
to persuasion by reducing threat to the self (e.g., Kalla and Broockman 2020).
Consistent with these expectations, Kalla and Broockman (2020) find that removing the non-
judgmental exchange of narratives from interpersonal conversations extinguishes their effects on
exclusionary attitudes. However, this research does not establish which narrative strategies produce
the effects in the first place. This is important to understand for two reasons. First, on a practical
level, existing approaches with multiple narratives require intensive training and long conversa-
tions. Second, on a theoretical level, understanding to what extent these narratives are effective in
the field would help elucidate the underpinnings of successful prejudice reduction efforts and can
help guide the development of future interventions.
In this paper, we draw theoretical distinctions between four specific kinds of narratives that
Traditional Perspective-Taking. Perspective-taking is one of the most common approaches
studied to reduce prejudice in lab and survey settings (e.g., Adida, Lo and Platas 2018; Galin-
sky and Moskowitz 2000; Simonovits, Kezdi and Kardos 2018). When engaging in traditional
perspective-taking, individuals self-generate a narrative about an outgroup member’s experience,
in particular imagining themselves as if they were another person, seeing what they see and expe-
riencing what they experience. This has often been found to make the outgroup seem more similar
to the perspective-taker (“self-other merging” or “self-other overlap”) (Todd and Galinsky 2014).
There are two challenges with deploying traditional perspective-taking in a field context. First,
on a practical level, while volunteers for experiments may be willing to imagine a narrative from
another person’s perspective, it may be difficult to prompt a stranger encountered as part of a
political campaign to do the same. Second, prior research on perspective-taking has found that
potential perspective-takers may resist taking the perspective of stigmatized outgroups (Todd and
Galinsky 2014), such as unauthorized immigrants, precisely the outgroups where interventions
to reduce exclusionary attitudes are most necessary. Consistent with this, some studies find that
perspective-taking can fail to produce attitude change (e.g., Adida, Lo and Platas 2018, who also
find effects on behavior).
Analogic Perspective-Taking. Other narrative strategies may overcome these challenges.
Analogic perspective-taking involves the perspective-taker recalling an experience from their own
life (self-generating a narrative they recall about their own experiences), which they are then en-
couraged to use to assist them in better understanding the perspective of a target. For example,
in Broockman and Kalla (2016), canvassers asked voters to think about a time when they had felt
judged as a way to help them better understand the discrimination that transgender people face.
Analogic perspective-taking could then reduce prejudice by increasing self-outgroup overlap (by
increasing perceived similarity between oneself and the outgroup) and reactive empathy (by seeing
parallels between the outgroup’s emotions and one’s own).
Analogic perspective-taking may be more practical to employ in a field context than traditional
perspective-taking, as individuals may be more willing to recount an experience from their own
life than to imagine themselves as a member of a highly stigmatized group. Even if an analogy
is available, the potential perspective-taker may still resist admitting that their life experiences are
similar to those of a highly stigmatized outgroup.
Perspective-Getting. Perspective-getting involves hearing a narrative about the experiences of
an outgroup member (not necessarily from an outgroup member first-hand). It is the only of the
three strategies we study where the source of the narrative is another person and the narrative is
not self-generated.
Perspective-getting has not received a great deal of direct attention in the study of prejudice
reduction (Bruneau and Saxe 2012; Audette, Horowitz and Michelitch 2020), but is also supported
by a long tradition of psychological literature. First, literature on the identifiable victim effect (e.g.,
Redelmeier and Tversky 1990) has found that identifying particular individuals instead of a larger
group can trigger stronger emotional responses, promoting reactive empathy. Second, narratives
may also combat the fundamental attribution error, changing attributional thinking by allowing
individuals to realize that disadvantaged outgroup members may face hardships due to external,
situational challenges, not negative personal attributes. Third, it could lead individuals to see the
outgroup more as a collection of individuals, and less as an overall group (so-called “entitativity”).
Finally, such narratives may also promote self-outgroup merging if individuals feel they can relate
to the outgroup member in the narrative. The mechanisms activated would likely depend on the
content of the narratives.
At the same time, perspective-getting may be a less active cognitive process since it does not
involve self-generating a narrative, and so could result in less durable reductions in prejudice
than either analogic or traditional perspective-taking. Individuals might also engage in subtyp-
ing and avoid generalizing a positive narrative to their views about a stigmatized outgroup at large
(Richards and Hewstone 2001).
Vicarious Perspective-Giving. The final narrative strategy we consider is vicarious
perspective-giving. In this strategy, people self-generate a narrative about an outgroup member
that they recall—i.e., they are asked to share a story about an outgroup member they know. For
example, Broockman and Kalla’s (2016) intervention also asked individuals if they knew any trans-
gender or LGBTQ people and, if so, to tell a story about them.
Vicarious perspective-giving could activate the same mechanisms as perspective-getting (re-
active empathy, changing attributional thinking, and promoting self-outgroup merging), again de-
pending on the content of the narratives. But it may be more effective than analogic or traditional
perspective taking because the subject does not need to be willing to see themselves as similar to
the outgroup, which as noted above, may backfire or be resisted if the outgroup is stigmatized.
Instead, the subject can recall an experience of an outgroup member that promotes understanding
or empathy while still maintaining a distance from the outgroup. However, vicarious perspective-
giving may fail in practice if the receiver of the conversation does not know an outgroup member
well enough to recount an experience that outgroup member had, or engages in subtyping that
leads them to resist generalizing to the outgroup at large.
Given the competing expectations of the various narrative strategies, we present evidence from
multiple field studies and a survey experiment attempting to disentangle the different impacts of
deploying these strategies in interpersonal conversations.
Study 1: Door-to-door Canvassing Experiment
In the fall of 2019, we conducted a pre-registered, randomized, placebo-controlled experiment to
measure the effects of a door-to-door canvassing intervention. This experiment was conducted in
Michigan, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina.
The canvass intervention in Study 1 attempted to increase public support for including unau-
thorized immigrants in government health care programs such as Medicaid and to reduce prejudice
against unauthorized immigrants. When the intervention was deployed in late 2019, the issue of
including unauthorized immigrants in public programs had recently become salient; many candi-
dates for the Democratic Presidential nomination had announced they supported the policy and
then-President Trump criticized their support.
Canvass Intervention
The canvass intervention had several steps.
1. Establish contact. The canvasser knocks on the door and says, “Hi, are you [subject’s
name]?” If the subject identifies themself, the canvasser marks ”Voter came to door” on
their walk list. This qualifies the voter to be targeted for resurveying. Note that this first step
is identical in the placebo and treatment conditions.
2. Inform subject about policy being discussed. The canvassers began by engaging in a series
of strategies to elicit participants’ opinions in a non-judgmental manner. First, canvassers
informed voters that they were at the door to discuss universal healthcare. Canvassers then
asked voters about their opinion on the policy and asked them to explain their position.
They then did the same about including unauthorized immigrants in universal healthcare.
Canvassers were trained to ask these questions in a non-judgmental manner, not indicating
they were pleased or displeased with any particular answer, but rather to appear genuinely
interested in the subject’s opinions.
3. Vicarious Perspective-Giving. The canvasser then asked the voter if they know anyone who
is an immigrant and, in particular, an unauthorized immigrant. If the voter knew someone,
the canvasser asked the voter to talk about how they knew this person, their story, and how it
must feel to be an immigrant.
4. Perspective-Getting. The canvasser would share a story about an immigrant. This might be
their own story or a story about a friend or family member (most of the canvassers were not
themselves immigrants).
5. Analogic Perspective-Taking – removed in Intervention Without Analogic Perspective-Taking.
The intervention also attempted to encourage analogic perspective-taking towards unautho-
rized immigrants. To do this, canvassers asked voters to share a time when they needed care
or support. In particular, they were prompted to share about “a time when you or a loved
one had to pay for or access healthcare in the past.” Canvassers would also share their own
stories of struggling in order to make voters feel comfortable sharing a story of their own.
Canvassers’ goal was for this non-judgmental exchange of narratives to end with individuals
self-generating and explicitly stating aloud implications of the narratives that ran contrary to
any exclusionary attitudes individuals previously stated.
6. Provide arguments and information. The canvasser would then reiterate for the voter why
they hoped the voter would become more supportive of including unauthorized immigrants
in a universal healthcare system.
7. Discuss. The canvasser would note any contradictions in the voter’s opinions and talk
through them.
8. Address concerns. The canvasser would return to any concerns about unauthorized immi-
grants and universal healthcare that the voter may have mentioned earlier. The canvasser
would talk through these concerns and provide talking points in response to them.
9. Encourage active processing. The intervention ended with canvassers asking voters if and
why the conversation changed their attitudes towards including unauthorized immigrants in
a universal healthcare system. The canvasser then thanked the subject and left.
The experiment had a placebo condition and two treatment conditions.
The first treatment condition contained all the steps above (“Full Intervention” condition). The
second treatment removed the analogic perspective-taking step (“Intervention without Analogic
Perspective-Taking” condition), allowing us to assess the marginal effect of including analogic
perspective-taking by comparing this condition with the Full Intervention condition. Everything
else was the same between these two treatment conditions.
In the placebo condition, canvassers initially established contact in a manner identical to the
treatment conditions (see step 1), but then had a short conversation about an unrelated topic (a brief
one-question survey about rent control in North Carolina and the minimum wage elsewhere). The
purpose of this condition is to identify voters who could have been delivered the treatment (but
were not due to their random assignment).
Experimental Design
We measured the effects of these conversations with an ostensibly unrelated survey, using the
design in Broockman, Kalla and Sekhon (2017). The experiment began by recruiting registered
voters (n = 369, 317) via mail for an online survey, presented as the first in a series of surveys not
specifically about immigration or health care and which made no reference to any potential can-
vassing. We gathered voters’ mailing information from public lists of registered voters. We also
collected respondents’ email addresses in this baseline survey so that we could email follow-up
survey invitations. We next randomly assigned baseline survey respondents to the Full Interven-
tion (n = 2, 973), Intervention without Analogic Perspective-Taking (n = 2, 975), or Placebo
conditions (n = 2, 977). Blocked random assignment was conducted at the household level, such
that participants within the same household were always assigned to the same condition.
To deliver the intervention, staff and volunteers affiliated with the partner organizations went
door-to-door from September – November, 2019 to visit individuals’ homes at their addresses in the
voter registration database. Canvassers began by knocking on voters’ doors unannounced. Before
revealing the purpose of the conversations, canvassers asked to speak with the person on their list
who had enrolled in the study and confirmed the person’s identity. Next, canvassers implemented
the experimental condition corresponding with the person’s random assignment. We define those
individuals who confirmed their identities as compliers who are eligible for recruitment to the
post-treatment surveys.
Among those who began the conversation, the conversations took an average of 18.5 minutes
in the full intervention group and 15.5 minutes in the group without analogic perspective-taking.
One week, 7 weeks, and 4.5 months after the conversation took place, we emailed ostensi-
bly unrelated invitations to participate in post-treatment surveys to all individuals who identified
themselves at the door before the intervention began. The post-treatment surveys contained several
dependent variables of interest but also many unrelated items intended to disguise the connection
between the survey and the intervention.
The post-treatment surveys contained several survey items to gauge the effects. We pre-
registered that we would combine these items into two primary outcome indices: a policy index
gauging support for including unauthorized immigrants in government programs and a prejudice
index. As we pre-registered, we formed these indices at each wave by taking the first factor from a
factor analysis of all the items in the index and then standardizing the index to standard deviation
one. Online Appendix B contains the survey items (p. 5-6 and 16-17), tests of design assumptions,
and a link to the pre-registration and intervention scripts and training materials.
Results
We estimate the effects of the intervention by comparing post-treatment survey responses among
those assigned to the two treatment conditions to those assigned to the placebo condition who iden-
tified themselves at the door before the conversation began (Nickerson 2005). We use OLS with
pre-treatment covariates and standard errors clustered by household. The results on the prejudice
anything, the intervention without analogic perspective-taking may have been slightly more effec-
Effects are among those who came to the door. Of these, 81% of voters in the treatment conditions entered into
the conversation, as measured by providing a “first rating” where they initially told canvassers how they felt about the
policy. The estimates presented here should therefore be multiplied by ≈ 1.23 to compute the effect among those who
enter into the conversation.
tive. These effects also persisted at least 4.5 months, at which point we stopped fielding additional
surveys.
The intervention did not merely strengthen existing support but created new support for poli-
cies to include undocumented immigrants in government programs. To demonstrate this, we di-
chotomize variables capturing support for these policies such that the variables are set to 1 if the
participant expressed any support and 0 otherwise (either not sure or disagreed). We find that both
interventions caused a large number of people to become supporters of these policies, even months
items, we find increases of 5-9 percentage points. Notably, the effects of the Intervention Without
Analogic Perspective-Taking are always similar, if not slightly larger, than the Full Intervention.
Online Appendix B presents the results on all the individual items of interest we had pre-
registered, representativeness assessments, and heterogenous treatment effects (p. 5 and 8-14).
sampling frame produces estimates that are larger. This indicates that any unrepresentativeness of
our sample, if anything, appears to lead us to underestimate the size of the effect in the population
we attempted to recruit, perhaps because of the high levels of education and political engagement
of whether the canvasser is personally an immigrant or not, meaning the results cannot be attributed
effects among those who did and did not approve of Donald Trump at baseline.
In summary, Study 1 replicated the effect of interpersonal conversations involving the exchange
of narratives about outgroup’s perspectives. However, we found that the conversations had these
effects regardless of whether they included analogic perspective-taking, contrary to Broockman
and Kalla’s (2016) interpretation that analogic perspective-taking narratives drive the effects of
these conversations. We also found that these effects persisted, again regardless of the presence of
Effect of Full Intervention vs. Placebo
Prejudice Index
1 Week
7 Weeks
Policy Index
4.5 Months
Pooled
Overall Index
0.0 0.1 0.2
Treatment Effect in Standard Deviations
Effect of Intervention without Analogic Perspective−Taking
vs. Placebo
Prejudice Index
1 Week
7 Weeks
Policy Index
4.5 Months
Pooled
Overall Index
0.0 0.1 0.2
Treatment Effect in Standard Deviations
Effect of Full Intervention vs.
Intervention without Analogic Perspective−Taking
Prejudice Index
1 Week
7 Weeks
Policy Index
4.5 Months
Pooled
Overall Index
−0.10 −0.05 0.00 0.05
Treatment Effect in Standard Deviations
Notes: Thick lines are one standard error (household clusters), thin lines are 95% confidence
intervals.
Effects on Any Agreement
The government should provide
illegal immigrants healthcare
coverage under a new program
that would provide all
Americans healthcare coverage
1 Week
7 Weeks
Low−income undocumented
4.5 Months
immigrants in [STATE] should
be allowed to receive
Medicaid
Intervention without
Analogic Perspective−Taking
Full Intervention
Health insurance coverage
provided by the government
should be available to
unauthorized immigrants
living in the US
−5% 0% 5% 10% 15%
Treatment Effect in Percentage Points
Notes: Thick lines are one standard error (household clusters), thin lines are 95% confidence
intervals. Outcome is set to 1 if the individual agreed with the policy and 0 otherwise.
the analogic perspective-taking prompt.
Study 1: Within-Subject Results
Study 1’s research design only randomly manipulated whether canvassers attempted to encourage
analogic perspective-taking, but did not separately manipulate the presence of perspective-getting
or vicarious perspective-giving; nor, within the full intervention condition, did it separately ma-
nipulate the presence of canvassers or voters actually sharing an analogic narrative. However,
canvassers from Study 1 maintained detailed records about which narratives were exchanged dur-
ing the canvassing interactions. These records allow us to further probe the effects of each of the
In particular, to explore which of these narratives might have driven the effects we observed
in Study 1, we conducted a non-pre-registered within-subject analysis. We first formed an overall
index of all of the items in both the prejudice and policy index, using factor loadings estimated
from the pre-treatment wave of survey data. We then estimated a difference-in-differences regres-
sion within both treatment groups with this index as the outcome. This regression includes fixed
effects for survey wave and for each individual respondent and clustered the standard errors at the
individual respondent level. To estimate the change in the overall index associated with each nar-
rative being exchanged, we estimated an interaction between an indicator for whether the survey
wave was conducted post-treatment with the presence of each narrative strategy. Note that in this
analysis the presence of a narrative strategy is determined by whether the voter engages in it and is
not randomly assigned.
grant they knew (vicarious perspective-giving) had similar values on the overall index in follow-up
surveys to those who did not; the point estimate is negative and insignificant. Second, however,
we find that individuals who heard a narrative about an immigrant (perspective-getting) had signif-
icantly higher values on the overall index than those who did not. Finally, respondents who either
told or were told an analogic story did not have significantly larger changes in their overall index.
In summary, the experimental results suggested that a condition with both vicarious
perspective-giving and perspective-getting could produce the same effects as a condition also in-
cluding analogic perspective-taking. Observational, within-subjects results suggest that attitude
change in the treatment group only occurs among those who were told a story about an immi-
grant (perspective-getting), and regardless of whether subjects shared their own story about an
immigrant (vicarious perspective-giving) or a related topic (analogic perspective-taking and ana-
logic perspective-getting). This supports perspective-getting as the “key ingredient” responsible
for the effects. However, as these are within-subject results and not randomized, they are open to
alternative interpretations; Study 2 therefore presents a randomized field experiment of whether
conversations which use no other narrative strategies but perspective-getting would have similar
effects.
Vicarious Perspective−Giving
(Voter Shared Immigration Story)
Perspective−Getting
(Voter Received Immigration Story)
Analogic Perspective−Taking
(Voter Shared Analogic Story)
Analogic Perspective−Getting
(Voter Received Analogic Story)
−0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
Change in Overall Index
in Standard Deviations
Notes: Tails are 95% confidence intervals.
Study 2: Door-to-door Canvassing Experiment
In the winter and spring of 2020, we conducted a second pre-registered, randomized, placebo-
controlled field experiment to measure the effects of a door-to-door canvassing intervention in
California and Tennessee. The canvass attempted to reduce prejudice towards immigrants and
increase public support for including unauthorized immigrants in government programs: in-state
college tuition (Tennessee) and Medicaid (California).
Canvass Intervention
We designed Study 2 to conduct a more focused test on the efficacy of perspective-getting alone by
including a new condition that included perspective-getting only and no other narrative strategies.
In particular, in addition to a Full Intervention condition similar to Study 1’s, Study 2 contained a
Perspective-Getting Only condition that omitted all narratives except perspective-getting, as well
as many of the other conversational elements. This condition followed steps similar to the steps in
Study 1’s Full Intervention (see above), but omitted the “Vicarious Perspective-Giving,” “Analogic
Perspective-Taking,” “Provide arguments and information”, “Discuss” and “Address concerns”
steps (steps 4-8 noted above). In this condition, canvassers focused on asking the voter their
current view, telling a narrative about an immigrant (perspective-getting), and making their case
based on the narrative.
Whereas the Full Intervention took an average of 17.1 minutes among those who began the
conversation, the Perspective-Getting Only Intervention took an average of only 7.3 minutes—less
than half as long.
In the Perspective-Getting Only Intervention, canvassers did not usually do all of the talking for
over 7 minutes. Although many of the parts of the script that encouraged a two-way exchange were
removed (e.g., the canvassers no longer asked voters to rate their opinion or to tell a story of their
own), canvassers reported in debriefs that it was still very common for voters to spontaneously re-
spond with their views and reactions, and canvassers had been trained to engage with these. There-
fore, it would be inaccurate to conceive of this interaction as involving only perspective-getting;
rather, perspective-getting was the only narrative that was typically shared in the conversations, but
this narrative was still embedded in a two-way conversation with a “non-judgmental” tone (Kalla
and Broockman 2020).
Experimental Design
Similar to Study 1, we measured the effects of these conversations in an experiment with a parallel
survey measurement. The experiment began by mailing registered voters (n = 336, 023) an invi-
tation to an ostensibly unrelated online baseline survey, presented as the first in a series of surveys
not specifically about immigration, college tuition, or health care and which made no reference
to any potential canvassing. n = 9, 340 voters completed the first baseline survey and provided
a valid email address. We then conducted a second baseline survey, to which n = 6, 163 voters
responded. We next randomly assigned the people who had responded to both the first and sec-
ond baseline surveys to the Full Intervention (n = 2, 053), Perspective-Getting Only Intervention
(n = 2, 054), or Placebo conditions (n = 2, 056). Blocked random assignment was conducted at
the household level.
As in Study 1, to deliver the intervention, canvassers affiliated with the partner organizations
went door-to-door to visit individuals’ homes at their addresses in the voter registration database.
Canvassing was originally scheduled to continue through May 2020, but was cancelled in March
due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
As in Study 1, canvassers began by knocking on voters’ doors unannounced. Canvassers then
asked to speak with the person on their list who had enrolled in the study and confirmed the
person’s identity. Next, canvassers implemented the experimental condition corresponding with
the person’s random assignment, using the approach described above.
One week, 11 weeks, and 4.5 months after the conversation took place, we sent ostensibly unre-
lated invitations to participate in post-treatment surveys to all individuals who identified themselves
at the door before the intervention began. The post-treatment surveys contained several dependent
variables of interest but also many unrelated items intended to disguise the connection between the
survey and the intervention.
As in Study 1, the post-treatment surveys contained several survey items to gauge the effects.
We pre-registered that we would combine these items into two primary indices: one gauging sup-
port for including unauthorized immigrants in government programs and another on prejudice. As
we pre-registered, we formed these indices at each wave by taking the first factor from a factor
analysis of all the items in the index and then rescaling the index to mean zero standard devia-
tion one. Online Appendix B contains the full survey items, intervention scripts, tests of design
assumptions, and a link to the pre-registration (p. 15 and 18-25). Treatment effects are estimated
using OLS with pre-treatment covariates and clustered standard errors.
Results
interventions had similar, statistically significant effects. In particular, in the one-week follow-up
survey, the Perspective-Getting Only intervention is estimated to be most effective. In the follow-
up surveys, the effects of the Full Intervention are slightly (but not significantly) larger on the
policy index, while on the prejudice index, the effects of the Perspective-Getting Only intervention
remain larger. On the overall index pooling all items and pooling across all three follow-up survey
waves, the point estimates of the two interventions are nearly identical, with the point estimate of
the Full Intervention being only very slightly larger, although the confidence intervals are wide
enough that they may include meaningful differences (the 95% confidence interval on the com-
parison of the Full to Perspective-Getting Only intervention ranges from 0.09 to -0.05 standard
deviations). Given that Study 1 found the Full Intervention had slightly lower point estimates,
we expect this is due to statistical noise, but this comparison warrants replication. Although the
standard errors are slightly larger than in Study 1 because Study 2 had to be stopped early due to
COVID-19, the results suggest that the two conditions were both essentially equally effective at
durably reducing exclusionary attitudes. While the treatment effects for both interventions clearly
persist for at least 11 weeks, the effects are somewhat smaller and fall short of conventional levels
at 4.5 months are associated with a p-value of 0.07 for the Full Intervention and 0.24 for the
Perspective-Getting Only Intervention.) However, the comparison between treatment effects at 11
weeks and 4.5 months is not sufficiently powered due to the early stopping.
As in Study 1, dichotomizing the individual policy items shows that the intervention created
shows effects across several dichotomized policy outcomes (finding increases in the proportion of
individuals who support rather than do not support various pro-immigrant policies). For example,
in the first post-treatment survey, we find a 12.7 percentage point increase in support for making
Full Intervention vs. Placebo
Prejudice Index
1 Week
11 Weeks
Policy Index
4.5 Months
Pooled
Overall Index
0.0 0.1 0.2
Treatment Effect in Standard Deviations
Perspective−Getting Only vs. Placebo
Prejudice Index
1 Week
11 Weeks
Policy Index
4.5 Months
Pooled
Overall Index
0.0 0.1 0.2
Treatment Effect in Standard Deviations
Effect of Full Intervention vs. Perspective−Getting Only
Prejudice Index
1 Week
11 Weeks
Policy Index
4.5 Months
Pooled
Overall Index
−0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
Treatment Effect in Standard Deviations
Notes: Thick lines are one standard error (household clusters), thin lines are 95% confidence
intervals.
unauthorized immigrants eligible for college scholarships at state colleges, and a 7.4 percentage
point increase in support for offering them in-state tuition at state colleges.
Online Appendix B presents the results on all the individual items of interest we had pre-
registered, representativeness assessments, and heterogeneous treatment effects (p. 15 and 18-25).
sampling frame produces estimates that are if anything larger. This indicates that any unrepresen-
tativeness of our sample, if anything, appears to lead us to underestimate the size of the effect in the
ilar effects regardless of whether the canvasser is personally an immigrant or not, indicating that
that the intervention had similar effects among those who did and did not indicate they planned to
vote for Donald Trump in the 2020 election at baseline.
In summary, the results of Study 2 further support the efficacy of perspective-getting. Even
when removing many other elements of the intervention besides perspective-getting, including
both of the other narrative strategies in the Full Intervention condition, the effects of the con-
versations remain statistically significant and substantively similar. This result suggests that a
perspective-getting exercise is a key condition for the efficacy of interpersonal conversations to
reduce exclusionary attitudes. Moreover, underscoring the practical implications of these findings,
the Perspective-Getting Only intervention took half as long to implement as the Full Intervention
despite having similar effects.
Estimates are among those who came to the door. Of these, ≈ 82% of voters in the treatment conditions entered
into the conversation. The estimates should therefore be multiplied by ≈ 1.22 to compute the effect among those who
enter into the conversation.
Further Evidence Supporting Perspective-Getting
Meta-analysis of Existing and Original Field Experiments
for the effects of interpersonal conversations that seek to reduce prejudice: across existing studies
and our new studies, all conditions with perspective-getting have statistically significant effects,
but conditions without it (e.g., Kalla and Broockman 2020, Study 1) do not. To more formally test
this, we conduct a meta-analysis using the results of all of the treatment arms involving narrative
exchange in all of the experiments reported in Broockman and Kalla (2016), Kalla and Broockman
(2020), and this paper (n = 9). We code whether each arm included each of the three narratives
and use these indicators as independent variables in a meta-regression. The dependent variable is
the estimate of the treatment effect as compared to placebo on an index of all of the items pre-
registered as primary outcomes, pooled across all of the post-treatment survey waves. We cluster
the standard errors at the study level and use a random-effects model.
getting has a large and statistically significant effect. The second two coefficients can then be
interpreted as the marginal effect of adding additional narrative strategies. We find that conditions
which add vicarious perspective-getting or analogic perspective-taking do not have effects that are
greater; in fact, both point estimates are negative (but insignificant). The body of results produced
by these studies therefore does indeed support the efficacy of perspective-getting.
Within-Subject Evidence from Studies 1, 2 and 3 (New study)
We next present further within-subject evidence that supports the efficacy of perspective-getting.
In doing so, we introduce results from a new Study, Study 3. Study 3 is reported in full in
the Online Appendix (p. 27-30) and briefly reviewed here. After Study 2 was ended early due
Prespective−Getting
...Adding Vicarious Perspective−Giving
...Adding Analogic Perspective−Taking
0.0 0.1
Estimated Effect on Overall Index
in Standard Deviations
to the COVID-19 pandemic precluding in-person canvassing, the organizations that implemented
Study 2 switched to delivering the intervention by phone. The organizations sought to use the
sample recruited for Study 2 who had not yet been canvassed to evaluate the impacts of these
phone calls. Power calculations revealed that a randomized experiment would not have sufficient
statistical power due to the limited number of individuals in Study 2 with known phone numbers.
In the Study, the organizations attempted to reach everyone with a phone number from the Study
2 sample who had not been reached at their doors. We then surveyed everyone who could have
been attempted (whether reached or not) and conducted a comparison of the change over time in
attitudes among those who were and were not successfully reached on the phone using a difference-
in-differences analysis. The results of Study 3 again replicate the effects of the intervention, finding
effects of approximately 0.12 standard deviations on an overall index of policy and prejudice items
In order to disentangle the impacts of the different narratives present in the conversations in
Studies 1, 2, and 3, we conduct observational (i.e., non-randomized) within-subjects analyses with
the data from these studies. In particular, in all three studies we gathered records canvassers kept
during the conversations that recorded whether voters and whether canvassers shared a story during
the conversations. The data from Study 2 and 3 does not record which narratives were shared, only
who shared them, so in this analysis we cannot distinguish between analogic perspective-taking
for within-subject results from Study 1 that do allow us to distinguish between types of narratives.)
When canvassers share narratives, though, this nearly always means that canvassers shared a story
about an immigrant (producing perspective-getting), since this is the very first story on the script in
all three studies. Note that the presence of a narrative strategy is not randomly assigned. Instead,
voters chose whether to engage in each strategy.
To estimate how the changes in exclusionary attitudes differed based on the presence of can-
vasser narratives (perspective-getting) or voter narratives (either analogic perspective-taking or vi-
carious perspective-giving), we estimate a difference-in-differences model for each study. Each
model uses an index of all post-treatment items pre-registered as outcomes asked in all post-
treatment survey waves as the outcome variable. The regressions include individual and survey
wave fixed effects, as well as coefficients on an interaction between the survey wave occurring
post-treatment and whether canvassers and voters shared a story, the coefficients of interest. The
standard errors are clustered at the individual level. We include data from the treatment groups
only. This analysis was not pre-registered.
much more when canvassers share stories (perspective-getting) than when they do not. However,
in all three studies, we find little evidence that the changes are larger if voters shared a story (i.e.,
engaged in either analogic perspective-taking or vicarious perspective-giving). The final row shows
a precision-weighted average of the results of the three studies. We again find strong evidence that
the conversations had much larger effects when canvassers shared stories, but that the effects do
not differ based on whether voters also shared stories.
In summary, within-subject changes support the efficacy of voters hearing the perspective of
immigrants (perspective-getting), and suggest there is little added benefit from voters engaging in
Vicarious Perspective−Giving
Perspective−Getting
or Analogic Perspective−Taking
Study 1
Study 2
Study 3
Pooled
−0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
Change in Overall Index in Standard Deviations
Notes: Each study’s data is from a separate model. The pooled row is a precision-weighted average
of the first three coefficients. Tails are 95% confidence intervals.
analogic perspective-taking or vicarious perspective-giving. However, this comes with the caveat
that this is an observational (i.e., non-randomized) analysis.
Study 4: Survey-Based Experiment
The results of our field studies have supported the efficacy of perspective-getting. However, two
questions remain open. First, our intervention conditions always contain perspective-getting, leav-
ing open the question of whether analogic perspective-taking might have independent effects, but
not effects that are additive to perspective-getting—i.e., it may be that either approach is sufficient
to reduce exclusionary attitudes among those whose attitudes can be changed, meaning there is no
additive effect of either. Second, our results so far have left relatively open the question of what
mechanisms these narrative approaches engage due to limited survey space and concerns about sus-
picion on post-treatment surveys in the field studies. We therefore conducted survey experiments
that separately manipulated the presence of these narrative strategies.
To investigate the conditions under which various forms of encouraging the consideration of
outgroup’s perspectives are effective at reducing prejudice, and through what mechanisms they
might operate, we conducted a follow-up, large-N survey experiment on Lucid.
Experimental Conditions
The experiment was a 6x2 factorial design. The first factor was the prejudice reduction strategy,
with a placebo and five treatment conditions. The second factor randomly assigned whether the
experiment concerned attitudes towards transgender people or undocumented immigrants.
picture of an outgroup member. We then gave respondents instructions that generally followed the
• Our baseline condition is the Identified Photo condition, in which respondents saw a photo
of an outgroup member and were told that this person was a member of the outgroup.
• We then included a second placebo condition, the Write Essay About Photo condition, in
which respondents were instructed to write an essay about what they saw in the photo. This
was intended as an additional placebo which would hold constant the presence of writing
prompts.
• The third condition was Traditional Perspective-Taking, in which we gave respondents a
prompt similar to Galinsky and Moskowitz’s (2000).
41d59fa7b51e4f439d412d2d3bac9bab. It followed two prior survey experiments where we found
evidence of demand effects. This study added the “Identified Photo” placebo in an attempt to reduce demand.
There was also a pure control condition containing an unidentified photo. However, we found that the Identified
Photo condition appeared to have its own effects, which we interpreted as consistent with demand. We therefore use
the Identified Photo condition as the baseline condition.
• In the Analogic Perspective-Taking condition, we asked people to tell a story about a time
when they were showed compassion (unauthorized immigration arm) or were discriminated
against (transgender people arm) and what this made them think about how members of
the outgroup should be treated, mirroring the tasks in Broockman and Kalla (2016) and our
studies.
• Finally, there were two perspective-getting arms in which people read a story about an out-
group member, drawn from Broockman and Kalla (2016) (transgender arm) or adapted from
a story that a canvasser told in our studies (unauthorized immigrant arm). There were two
versions of this condition, one where respondents were asked to summarize the story and
one in which they were not, in order to hold constant the presence of a writing task.
After the outgroup perspective task, we asked a series of filler questions about subjects’ per-
sonality. We then moved on to ask the DVs. We created a separate scale for both outgroups
(transgender people, undocumented immigrants).
Results
We estimate the effects of each condition using a linear regression with a series of pre-registered
pre-treatment covariates included to increase precision. The Identified Photo condition is used as
the baseline. The dependent variable is the prejudice index, with higher values being coded as
lower prejudice.
traditional perspective-taking did not appear to have effects in our survey experiments (similar to
Adida, Lo and Platas’s (2018) findings for effects on attitudes, but not behavior). Future research
should attempt to replicate and investigate this result further, including in the field (which our study
We did not include a vicarious perspective-giving condition because in pre-tests we found few respondents told
such a story.
c1f01a3d53c749b2bd5a83aaff3bad80.
Essay Task
Condition Name Perspective Received
(Perspective Given)
Identified Photo (Placebo) - -
Write Essay About Write essay about
Photo (Additional Placebo) what is in photo
Traditional Perspective-
- Write essay from outgroup perspective
Taking
Transgender group: Time when other
showed self compassion, what this
suggests for how outgroup
should be treated
Analogic Perspective-
Taking
Undocumented immigrant group:
Time when other discriminated
against self, what this suggests for
how outgroup should be treated
Summarize story about
Perspective-Getting Story about
outgroup member
(Essay) outgroup member
just read in survey
Perspective-Getting Story about
(No Essay) outgroup member
does not). However, analogic perspective-taking appears to be effective for both groups, as does
perspective-getting.
These results suggest a slightly less pessimistic take-away with respect to analogic perspective-
taking in particular. Study 1 and 2’s results seem to suggest analogic perspective-taking is inef-
fective, since adding it does not increase effect sizes. However, in Study 4 we found that on its
own, it does have effects, at least in a survey context when outcomes are measured immediately.
This suggests that analogic perspective-taking and perspective-getting (both done in the full inter-
vention in Studies 1-3) may both be effective but that there may be no additional effect of doing
both. However, we emphasize that there is no evidence that analogic perspective-taking is better
than perspective-getting, and in fact our field studies consistently find evidence that, if anything,
Unauthorized Immigrants Transgender People Pooled
Identified Photo (Placebo)
(Baseline Category)
Write Essay about Photo
(Additional Placebo)
Traditional Perspective−Taking
Analogic Perspective−Taking
Perspective−Getting
(Without Essay)
Perspective−Getting
(With Essay)
0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1
Estimated Effect on Prejudice Index in Standard Deviations
Notes: Positive coefficients correspond with decreased prejudice. 95% confidence intervals sur-
round point estimates.
the conversations may be more effective if they focus on perspective-getting alone. In all, then, the
evidence supports the efficacy of perspective-getting.
Another suggestive finding is that perspective-getting with an additional essay task may have
been more effective, although this result is not statistically significant. Our field experiments did
not contain conditions that specifically sought to alter the presence of active processing and instead
always contained efforts to encourage active processing, but these results suggest active processing
could bolster the size of the effects of perspective-getting, even as it does not appear necessary for
them.
Evidence on Mechanisms
Why does perspective-getting reduce exclusionary attitudes? In both Studies 1 and 4, we asked sev-
eral survey questions to measure potential mechanisms identified in prior literature and discussed
above: attributional thinking, entitativity (in Study 4 only), reactive empathy, and self-outgroup
merging.
focus on the evidence provided by the survey experiments as these separately manipulate each
narrative strategy and so are less ambiguous.
an Additional Placebo that involved writing an essay about a photo and of Traditional Perspective-
Taking (consistent with the null results on attitudes, but not behavior, documented by Adida, Lo
outgroup merging and, in the case of traditional perspective-taking, on attributional thinking. This
suggests that the effects of the other interventions on reducing prejudice are unlikely to be due to
self-outgroup merging or changing attributional thinking, as two conditions (Additional Placebo
and Traditional Perspective-Taking) that successfully manipulated these potential mediators had
no effect on prejudice. In summary, although we hypothesized in line with prior literature in psy-
chology that traditional perspective-taking would reduce prejudice primarily through self-outgroup
merging, we found it did lead to self-outgroup merging but did not reduce prejudice. And, although
it unexpectedly changed attributional thinking, this still did not decrease prejudice in our survey
experiments either.
Next, we hypothesized that analogic perspective-taking would activate the mechanisms of self-
outgroup merging and reactive empathy, but found that it only activated self-outgroup merging—
The question wordings were: Self-outgroup merging: “I think I have a lot in common with [GROUP].” Reactive
empathy: “The suffering of some [GROUP] concerns me.” Attributional thinking: “[GROUP] face big challenges that
are no fault of their own.” Entitativity: “When you think about the term [GROUP], do you think about individual
people or do you think about a group of people?”
(a) Study 1 (Door-to-door Canvassing Field Experiment)
DV = Attributional Thinking DV = Reactive Empathy DV = Self−Outgroup Merging
Full Intervention
Intervention w/o APT
Either Treatment vs. Placebo
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15
Estimated Effect on DV in Standard Deviations
(b) Study 4 (Survey Experiments)
DV = Attributional Thinking DV = Entitativity DV = Reactive Empathy DV = Self−Outgroup Merging
Identified Photo (Placebo)
(Baseline Category)
Write Essay about Photo
(Additional Placebo)
Traditional Perspective−Taking
Analogic Perspective−Taking
Perspective−Getting
(Without Essay)
Perspective−Getting
(With Essay)
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.2
Estimated Effect on DV in Standard Deviations
Notes: 95% confidence intervals surround point estimates.
the same mechanism which our Additional Placebo and Traditional Perspective-Taking conditions
suggest were ineffective. This suggests that it activated an additional mechanism we did not mea-
sure, which future research could investigate.
Third, we hypothesized that perspective-getting could activate all four of the mechanisms we
considered. Our results are consistent with this hypothesis for all but entitativity, where our re-
sults are null. Especially when perspective-getting is accompanied by a prompt for respondents
to actively process the implications of the perspective (by writing a short essay), there is evidence
that the mechanisms of attributional thinking, reactive empathy, and self-outgroup merging are ac-
tivated. Together with our prior result about the likely non-effects of self-outgroup merging and
attributional thinking, this suggests that perspective-getting reduces prejudice by prompting em-
pathy towards that group or through other unmeasured mediators. But our finding that a more
passive form of perspective-getting (Perspective-Getting Without Essay) did not appear to engage
reactive empathy even though it did appear to have effects on prejudice (at the borderline of sta-
tistical significance) suggests that unmeasured mediators not considered as central mechanisms by
the literature are most likely responsible.
Overall, these results point toward our survey-based treatments likely working through media-
tors that existing related literature has not previously pinpointed as central; although our treatments
affected many of our hypothesized mediators, none of them appear to be sufficient for reducing
prejudice in our experiments.
This suggests that the next step for future research might be to take an inductive approach. In
particular, research investigating the mechanisms underpinning perspective-getting could proceed
by crafting or sourcing a number of different perspective-getting narratives that seek to engage
different mechanisms. Then, researchers could generate and test hypotheses about mechanisms
based on which of these narratives is most effective. For instance, are narratives that focus more
on making emotional appeals or in providing new information more effective? Another possibility
is that multiple of these mechanisms are jointly necessary.
In investigating these questions, future research can also address questions such as what contex-
tual, individual, or outgroup-level attributes represent scope conditions for its effects. For instance,
are fictionalized or entertaining narratives more effective than documentaries? To what extent does
the quality of the delivery (e.g., canvasser quality or actor quality) matter?
Discussion
In this paper, we first presented a framework to theoretically distinguish between different nar-
rative strategies intended to encourage individuals to consider outgroups’ perspectives that had
been used in prior research. We then presented results from a series of field studies and a sur-
vey experiment. These results were all consistent with the efficacy of one of these strategies in
particular—perspective-getting, or hearing the perspective of an outgroup member. In field ex-
periments manipulating the presence of various narrative strategies, within-subject analyses, and
survey experiments, we consistently find that perspective-getting effectively reduces exclusionary
attitudes, whereas other strategies we considered have less reliable impacts. Importantly, our field
studies found that canvassers prompting perspective-getting were effective regardless of whether
they were themselves members of the outgroup, indicating our results were not due to contact.
Theoretically, these results support the efficacy of perspective-getting and related theoretical per-
spectives (e.g., Redelmeier and Tversky 1990; Audette, Horowitz and Michelitch 2020). More
generally, our consistent finding that perspective-getting can durably reduce attitudes towards a
highly stigmatized group suggests that predispositions towards outgroups, often regarded by po-
litical scientists as highly durable throughout the life-course, may be more malleable than often
thought.
Our findings have several practical implications. Most importantly, they suggest a way forward
for individuals who seek to reduce prejudice and exclusionary political attitudes in interpersonal
conversations. Prior work has found that changing these attitudes can have important consequences
for immigrants (Hainmueller, Hangartner and Pietrantuono 2017). Previous studies would suggest
that such conversations require extremely extensive training on how to elicit multiple narratives
from voters—it is not easy to knock on a stranger’s door and get them to tell a story about their
life. Our findings suggest that it may also not be necessary. There still remains great difficulty in
talking about sensitive topics with others, but our results do suggest a more feasible and practical
approach for future interventions: focusing on narratives that facilitate perspective-getting.
Our findings suggest several fruitful inquiries for future research. First, how important is it for
perspective-getting narratives to be embedded in non-judgmental conversations or conversations
that promote active processing? Might its effects be just as strong in field contexts if delivered
passively to individuals in a one-way interaction (e.g., canvassers had simply told a story and left)?
Second, these studies were limited to measures of explicit attitudes. What, if any, are the effects on
actual voting, prejudicial behavior, or implicit attitudes? Second, although our research did study
a highly salient topic at a time when elites were seeking to activate anti-immigrant sentiment,
would perspective-getting narratives remain effective when respondents are also faced with more
forceful counter-narratives or competing frames? Third, how much does the medium matter—
would it be more efficient, for example, to embed narratives in mass media instead of door-to-door
campaigns? Future field research, including research on more impersonal modes such as mass
media campaigns, could help elucidate these questions. Last, how might the effects of perspective-
getting narratives vary across outgroups and the degree of stigma associated with them?