The Importance of Environmental Materials in the Indonesian Language
Learning Process
Novia Rahma Rindha / 19016182
nrahmarindha@gmail.com
Environmental education is an effort to preserve, protect the environment and
ecosystems of living things in order to provide a balance in the sustainability of
life. Environmental education is very important in human life because environmental
education can prevent damage to the natural environment. According to Ramadhan, Sukma,
and Indriyani (2019), environmental damage will result in an ecological crisis which causes a
series of natural resource, climate, pollution, food and economic problems because the
environment determines life, public health, as well as spiritual and moral development.
According to Sukma, Ramadhan, and Indriyani (2020) that environmental education
is a field of education that appears when environmental distortions occur due to human
efforts to control nature. Most humans only think about themselves without caring about
the impact that is generated if they do not protect the environment. For example, people
often throw garbage into rivers which results in flooding. Therefore, self-awareness is needed
to protect this environment. This can be done by connecting the environment with the
Indonesian language learning process.
According Kridalaksana language (in Suardi , Syahrul, and Yasnur Asri , 2019) is the
epitome of sound arbitrary system used by members of a social group to collaborate,
communicate, and identify themselves. Social development and social identity formation of
children associated d e n gan language acquisition . The relationship between language
acquisition and language learning is usually different. Language acquisition obtained in
lin g kungan everyday life while learning the language formally obtained by complying with
the concepts. The environment around children, especially the family environment, plays an
important role in language acquisition because after language acquisition , children
experience language learning. Therefore, the family environment plays a major role
in imparting knowledge, values and attitudes about the environment to
children. Because according to Ramadhan, Sukma, and Indriyani (2019) environmental
education aims to invite children to participate in protecting the environment and so that
children can participate in protecting the environment .
One of learning has an important role in the educational environment of human life is
learning Indonesian . In addition, learning Indonesian also plays a very important
role in mastering science and technology. The environment in Indonesian language learning
is beneficial for students or children in conveying ideas and feelings
using good language . Therefore, it is necessary to use good and correct Indonesian in order
to be able to increase the knowledge of students or children about the environment that can
be used as well to develop thinking and communicative skills in using environmental
materials.
In environmental education, teachers also play an important role in teaching
environmental education because teachers produce knowledge, beliefs, and skills in
environmental conservation and nature protection. Teacher b ahasa Indonesia has penyinh
role because the danger is not only used to communicate but the Indonesian had to do with
problems sciences others. Kiyanti stated that literary works have a connection with
educational and learning problems. Therefore, it is very wrong if the world of education
always considers the exata field to be more important than social sciences or
humanities ( In Sukma, Elfia and Ahmad , 2016) . Therefore, with
m eng incorporate environmental education into the classroom language can increase the
interest and motivation of students in environmental education through meaningful language
learning process.
Based on the author's research, 63.6% strongly agree and 36.4% agree that Indonesian
is very much needed in environmental education . A total of 31.8% of respondents strongly
agreed and 68.2% agreed that p embelajaran Indonesian uses environmental materials that
can be applied in everyday life . 68.2% of respondents agree and 31.8% strongly agree that
the use of environmental materials can develop and increase interest and enthusiasm
in learning Indonesian . 68.2% agree and 31.8% strongly agree that Indonesian language
learning plays a major role in environmental education. 77.3% agree and 22.7% strongly
agree that environmental material in Indonesian language learning is useful for
communicating well between students and the environment. 59.1% agree and 40.9% strongly
agree that during the Indonesian learning process the teacher invites students to protect and
preserve the environment. 72.7% agree, 18.2% strongly agree, and 9.1% disagree that the
most preferred Indonesian language learning media is about the environment . 68.2% agree
and 31.8% strongly agree that learning Indonesian by observing the environment can be used
as a source of inspiration for making literary works. 68.2% agreed, 27.3% strongly agreed,
and 4.5% less agree that u ntuk increase the interest and motivation of students in
environmental education necessity of learning the Indonesian language . 59.1% strongly
agree, 36.4% agree, and 4.5% disagree that teachers and parents play a very important role in
increasing student interest and motivation
If the interest and motivation of students is important to provide guidance and
encouragement in fostering student interest and motivation in learning Indonesian. If the
interest and motivation of students in learning Indonesian is high, it will result in students
who are communicative and master the use of the language well. Sardiman stated that
motivation to learn is a desire or encouragement to learn (in Zulhafizh, Atmazaki, and
Syahrul , 2013 ). If the child has motivation to learn, it will produce maximum learning and
the child understands Indonesian learning because the child is given encouragement that can
arouse enthusiasm by the surrounding environment.
Based on the results of the study, it can be concluded
that environmental education plays an important role in life. Therefore, to protect and
preserve the environment requires understanding and knowledge of the
environment. Learning Indonesian has an important role in environmental education because
it is the teacher who produces environmental knowledge and is conveyed to students. In
addition, parents also play an important role in helping students or children care more about
the environment . Parents who provide encouragement and enthusiasm for students to
increase their care for the environment.