Choice blindness and choice-induced preference change in groups
Jorina von Zimmermann
Philip Pärnamets*
ID
Ramsey Raafat
Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet,
University College London, University of London, UK.
Sweden.
Department of Psychology, New York University, USA.
Cognitive Science, Lund University, Sweden.
Gabriel Vogel Nick Chater
Lars Hall
Behavioural Science Group, Warwick Business School,
Cognitive Science, Lund University, Sweden. University of Warwick, UK.
Petter Johansson
Cognitive Science, Lund University, Sweden.
This is a pre-print and it has not yet undergone peer-review.
Contrary to common belief, our preferences do not only shape our decisions but are also shaped
ff
by what decisions we make. This e ect, known as choice-induced preference change, has been
extensively studied in individuals. Here we document choice-induced preference change in
groups. We do so by using the choice-blindness paradigm, a method by which participants
are given false feedback about their past choices. Participants are given a second round of
choices following the choice blindness manipulation´measuring preference change resulting
from accepting the manipulation. In Experiment 1 (N 83), we introduce a roommate selection
task used in this paper and use it to replicate choice-induced preference change using choice-
blindness in individuals. In Experiment 2 (N 160), dyad members made mutual choices in the
roommate selection task and then receive either veridical or false feedback about what choice
they made. The majority of the false feedback trials were accepted by the dyads as their own
choices, thereby demonstrating choice blindness in dyads for the first time. Dyads exhibited
choice-induced preference change and were more likely to choose the originally rejected op-
tion on trials where they accepted the manipulation compared to control trials. In Experiment 3
= ff
(N 80), we show that the preference e ect induced by the choice blindness manipulation at the
group level does not generalize back to follow up choices made by individual participants when
removed from the group. In all studies, response time analyses further support our conclusions.
Choice-induced preference change exists for both individuals and groups, but the level at which
the choice was made constrains the influence of that choice on later preferences.
Keywords: choice blindness, decision making, preference change, group decisions,
self-perception, cognitive dissonance
Few findings have been as influential in the history of to classical decision theory in which choices almost by def-
psychology as the discovery of choice-induced preference inition have been thought to follow preferences (Edwards,
ff
change - that choices not only reflect an individual’s prefer- 1954; Slovic, Fischho , & Lichtenstein, 1977). Moreover,
ences but also shape them (Bem, 1972; Brehm, 1956; Chen many of life’s decisions are not made by individuals by them-
& Risen, 2010; Egan, Bloom, & Santos, 2010; Festinger, selves but by individuals within and embedded in groups.
1962; Gerard & White, 1983; Harmon-Jones & Mills, 2019; The processes involved in group decision making have been
Izuma & Murayama, 2013). Part of this influence stems from extensively investigated, including the steps leading up to
how it contradicts our common sense understanding of our how decisions are reached (Kerr & Tindale, 2004; Kugler,
choices and their relation to our desires and beliefs. Choice- Kausel, & Kocher, 2012), and how group members’ pref-
induced preference change has also been theoretically in- erences align (Cialdini & Goldstein, 2004; Raafat, Chater,
fluential, both for the development of cognitive dissonance & Frith, 2009). But what happens when the group is asked
theory (Brehm, 1956; Festinger, 1962) and as a challenge to make a second choice - will the previous decision shape
PÄRNAMETS ET AL.
the present one analogous to the individual case? Using the tive aspects of the selected alternative. This experience of
choice blindness paradigm - a novel methodological tool in dissonance may be reduced by changing ones preferences
the study of choice-induced preference change - we test if so as to make the chosen alternative more desirable, and the
choice-induced preference change also occurs in the smallest non-chosen option less desirable, than they were before the
possible group structure, the dyad. choice. By contrast, self-perception theory (Bem, 1972) ex-
plains choice-induced preference change without recourse to
conflicting internal states. Instead, the theory posits that the
Choice-induced preference change
decision-maker infers that their preferences for one option
is likely larger, given that they just choose it, in the same
Choice-induced preference change was originally intro-
way they would have inferred it if observing another decision
duced with the free choice paradigm (Brehm, 1956). In the
maker.
free choice paradigm participants first rate their preference
While the competing frameworks of self-perception the-
for a number of options, then make choices between pairs of
ffi
ory and cognitive dissonance theory are notoriously di cult
options closely matched in rated preference. Finally, par-
to adjudicate between, one thing they have in common is that
ticipants rate the options a second time post-choice. The
the mechanisms they posit operate at an individual level. But
key finding, indicating choice-induced preference change, is
what would happen if a group makes a collective decision,
that the chosen option is rated higher and the non-chosen
would the group’s preference then also change as a result?
lower than previously, resulting in a "spreading" of the pref-
And if so, what consequences would it have for the prefer-
erence distance between the two options. Choice-induced
ences of the constituent individuals? For example, an indi-
preference change challenges a core assumption about the
vidual as a member of group can influence the preferences
relationship between preferences and decisions. In standard
of that group, and hence is expected to be consistent with
economic and psychological decision models, choices are
the decisions of the group in their later choices. But the
assumed to result from decision-makers’ preferences (Ed-
group’s decision may also present an independent influence
wards, 1954; Slovic et al., 1977), and these preferences
on constituent individuals’ preferences, also driving consis-
should only change if new information is gained about the
tency with the group choice. These causal questions are dif-
choice options. But nothing new is added in the mere act of
ficult to disentangle experimentally. One way to circumvent
selecting one of the options, which indicates the presence of
ffi
this di culty is to dissociate the link between the dyad mem-
some form of feedback loop between decision outcomes and
bers’ initial preferences and the outcome of their choice. To
valuation.
do so, we turn to the choice blindness paradigm, which we
The free choice paradigm was introduced to test a predic-
introduce next.
tion from cognitive dissonance theory (Brehm, 1956; Fes-
tinger, 1962; Harmon-Jones & Mills, 2019), and is usually
Choice blindness and preference change
invoked as evidence in support of that theory. According to
cognitive dissonance theory, the act of choosing between two
The choice blindness paradigm, originally introduced to
similarly valued options induces a conflict in the decision-
study self-knowledge about one’s own choices (Johansson,
maker following the choice. The source of this conflict is the
Hall, Sikström, & Olsson, 2005), involves giving participants
cognitive inconsistency of previously having entertained the
false feedback about their choices through sleight-of-hand or
positive aspects of the non-chosen alternative and the nega-
other forms of manipulation. For example, in Johansson et al.
(2005), participants chose which of two presented faces was
most attractive to them. Following their choice, their selec-
Author contributions: P.P., P.J, L.H & N.C. developed the study tion was re-presented to them and participants were asked to
concept and all authors contributed to the study design. J.vZ. G.V.& state the reasons for their choice. Unknown to them, on cer-
P.P performed testing and data collection. P.P. performed the data
tain trials, a double-card conjuring trick was used to covertly
analysis. P.P. & P.J. drafted the manuscript and all authors provided
exchange one face for the other. On the great majority of tri-
critical revisions and approved the final version of the manuscript
als, participants failed to notice the mismatch between choice
for submission.
ff
and outcome, while still being prepared to o er introspec-
Funding information: N.C. was supported by ERC grant
tive reasons for why they chose the way they thought they
295917-RATIONALITY, the ESRC Network for Integrated Be-
had. Choice blindness is not limited to attractiveness deci-
/ /
havioural Science [grant number ES K002201 1], the Leverhulme
sions but has been extended to moral and political attitudes
Trust [grant number RP2012-V-022], Research Councils UK Grant
/ / (Hall, Johansson, & Strandberg, 2012; Strandberg, Sivén,
EP K039830 1, and the Templeton Foundation. P.J. and L.H. was
Hall, Johansson, & Pärnamets, 2018), eye-witness identifica-
supported by the Swedish Research Council (2014-1371). P.P was
supported by Swedish Research Council (2016-06793). tion (Sagana, Sauerland, & Merckelbach, 2014), memory re-
Conflicting interests: The authors report no conflicts of interest. ports (Cochran, Greenspan, Bogart, & Loftus, 2016), as well
*Corresponding author: philip.parnamets@ki.se
as economic and consumer decisions (Cheung et al., 2016;
PREFERENCE CHANGE IN GROUPS
McLaughlin & Somerville, 2013). group setting. As the mechanisms proposed for cognitive
Results from the choice blindness paradigm not only show dissonance and self-perception theory operate at the individ-
that participants often fail to correct the manipulation and ual level, we turn to the literature on group performance and
confabulate reasons for making a choice they in fact never group decision making to garner predictions for what may
made, but also that accepting the false feedback has down- occur in our task.
stream consequences on participants’ cognition. In Johans-
On the one hand, groups may be less successful in correct-
son, Hall, Tärning, Sikström, and Chater (2014), partici-
ing the choice blindness manipulation as individual members
pants made preferential choices between pairs of faces, as
may be prone to social loafing (Ingham, Levinger, Graves,
described previously. However, in this experiment, following
& Peckham, 1974), possibly brought about by a diminished
the first round of choices, participants were also asked to take
sense of shared responsibility over the decision (Weldon &
part in a second round of choices using the same face pairs.
Gargano, 1985). On the other hand, there are several rea-
The pattern found was that in manipulated trials, and partic-
sons to believe that groups may be more successful at de-
ularly for accepted manipulations, the initially rejected faces
tecting the choice blindness manipulation compared to in-
were chosen more frequently in the second round. This is a
dividual participants. Social interaction during deliberation
clear demonstration of a choice-induced preference change,
may promote processing at a deeper level, making correction
as the participants come to prefer the alternative they were
more likely through enhanced memory performance (Lejar-
led to believe they had previously chosen.
raga, Lejarraga, & Gonzalez, 2014; Olsson, Juslin, & Ols-
In this situation, it is also clear that it cannot be the de-
son, 2006; Shteynberg, 2015). Compared to individuals,
ff
cision process itself which a ects the later preference, but
groups are also better at visual search (Brennan, Chen, Dick-
rather the belief about a previous choice. In support of
inson, Neider, & Zelinsky, 2008; Malcolmson, Reynolds, &
this interpretation, research has shown that participants form
Smilek, 2007a, 2007b). In line with this, dyads have been
false memories of past choices following acceptance of the
found to outperform individuals in standard change blindness
manipulation in the choice blindness paradigm (Pärnamets,
experiments, but only if they are allowed to communicate
Hall, & Johansson, 2015). Furthermore, choice-induced
during the task (Knott, Nelson, McCroskey, & Miller, 2007).
preference change in the choice blindness paradigm is repli-
Correcting the choice blindness manipulation can be char-
cable (Izuma et al., 2015; Luo & Yu, 2017; Taya, Gupta,
acterized as one of independent aggregation of judgments, a
Farber, & Mullette-Gillman, 2014), and extends to manip-
case where groups typically outperform individuals through
ff
ulations of political attitudes with e ects lasting a week post
ff
’wisdom of the crowds’ e ects (Tindale & Winget, 2019). In
manipulation (Strandberg et al., 2018).
sum, we expect higher correction rates for groups compared
In sum, the choice blindness paradigm provides a robust
to individuals, and we cannot a priori discount the possibility
method to study choice-induced preference change. In the
ffi
that correction levels will be so high so as to make it di cult
present study we used the choice blindness paradigm to study
ff
to study preference e ects in groups using it.
choice-induced preference change in dyads. We let two
If groups are susceptible to the choice blindness manipu-
people make a joint decision and sometimes manipulated
lation, we hypothesize, based on previous work on choice
the outcome of their choices. We measured to what extent
blindness and preference change (Johansson et al., 2014;
they correct the manipulation, and if accepting the manipu-
Luo & Yu, 2017; Strandberg et al., 2018; Taya et al., 2014),
lation led to preference change as measured in subsequent
that the dyads will also exhibit preferential shifts. This is
choices. The novel factor of false-feedback at the group
ff
a far from trivial prediction. A key di erence to individ-
level introduces an unknown element into the choice blind-
ual decision-making is the necessarily public nature of de-
ness paradigm. To date, no studies employing this paradigm
liberation preceding group choices. The group members, to
have been performed on groups, and it is therefore unknown,
form a mutual decision, will need to discuss and argue for
ff
not only if there will be a preference change e ect in such
ff
the di erent options. In our task, where participants chose
a set-up, but also whether moving into the social domain of
between one of two persons as a potential future roommate,
groups will impede, dilute or indeed remove any suscepti-
this means that both visual features of the chosen person as
bility to the choice blindness manipulation in the first place.
well as other reasons underpinning the group’s choice will
Discovering that choice blindness transfers from individuals
be highlighted and made public to all members of the group.
to groups opens up avenues for new research on groups and
Additionally, groups have been found to have superior mem-
choices, including the question investigated here if choice-
ory to individuals in decision tasks (Lejarraga et al., 2014;
ff
induced preference change a ects groups decisions.
Olsson et al., 2006). Likewise, individual members of a
group can calibrate to one another as well as correct each
Group decisions and performance
other’s mistakes (Bahrami et al., 2010). These two charac-
Our study is an attempt to use the choice blindness teristics ought to enforce preferential consistency with the
paradigm to study choice-induced preference change in a original choice. Nevertheless, if the choice blindness manip-
PÄRNAMETS ET AL.
ulation is accepted and the members of the dyad shift their received either course credit or a payment of £3 (UCL)
beliefs about their past choice, the same mechanisms of con- or a cinema voucher (Lund) for participation. Experiment
ff
sistency may work to enhance the preference e ect. 1 was approved by UCL Departmental Ethics Committee
/ /
(CPB 2010 006) and the Ethics Committee of Lund Univer-
Overview of present study sity (D.nr. 2016-1046).
Materials and procedure. Participants undertook a
We report the results from three experiments. First, we
novel computerized CB task, programmed in PsychoPy
adapt the standard choice blindness task (Johansson et al.,
(Peirce, 2007) , during which they were asked to imagine
2005), in which participants make preferential choices based
that they shared an apartment with a spare room, and were
on attractiveness. While beauty norms can be shared, they
now looking for a new female roommate. We presented the
are also a domain where group deliberation is not common-
participants with twenty pairs of pictures of female faces, and
place and there is considerable room for locked disagree-
they had to decide who in each pair they would rather live
ments. In the current experiment, we therefore let partici-
with. Participants were video-taped throughout the exper-
pants look at pairs of faces and decide who they think would
iment to allow classification of manipulated trials after the
make the best roommate, a domain where our participants,
experiment had completed. Each face pair was presented on
being college students, ought to have some experience and
virtual playing cards for 2s on the screen, before the cards
be in possession of a common language for negotiating a
flipped over to conceal the faces. The participant selected
mutual decision. Participants then complete a second round
their preferred candidate by button press (see Fig. 1). After
of choices allowing us to measure choice-induced preference
participants had chosen, they completed a seven-point Likert
change. In experiment 1 we test this novel task on individu-
scale indicating how high their individual confidence was in
ff
als, e ectively creating a baseline to compare both correction
their choice. This provides a natural occlusion time between
and preference change rates in groups against.
the original choice and the manipulation which is a crucial
In our second and main experiment, we had pairs of par-
feature of the choice blindness paradigm. Finally, we pre-
ticipants make mutual decisions in the roommate task and
sented the chosen face a second time to the participants. Dur-
gave the dyad false feedback about their choices on some
ing this second presentation, an onscreen question prompted
trials, before letting the dyad do a repeated set of choices.
participants to discuss their reasons for choosing the person
Doing so gave us opportunity to test if choice blindness and
they had selected, and specifically to do so in the context
choice-induced preference change extends to groups. In Ex-
of a personality trait rating presented onscreen. The traits
periment 3 we again have pairs of participants undergo the
prompted were from the list of: reliable, desirable, friendly,
choice blindness manipulation, but they make their second
humorous, and, easy-going. To ensure that the participants
round choices individually. This allowed us to investigate
attended the question and thus the chosen face during the
what happens to individual preferences following a manipu-
second presentation, these trait options were randomly dis-
lation of the group preference. In addition, we investigated
tributed across trials. The chosen face was visible throughout
second round choice response times. Choice response times
the participants’ explanation until they completed the rating.
have a long history in psychology for inferences about cogni-
On four trials, out of the total of 20 trials, we surrepti-
tive processes and strength of preference (Konovalov & Kra-
tiously altered the participants’ choices, so that they received
ff
jbich, 2019; Link, 1975; Ratcli & Rouder, 1998; Tyebjee,
false feedback about their selection and the rejected candi-
1979). However, little is known about how false-feedback
date was presented to them as the preferred one (hereafter
ff
might a ect follow-up choice response times in the choice
manipulated trials). For the manipulation, we used eight
blindness paradigm. By comparing choice response times in
possible ‘target’ pairs, positioned in the following trial pairs:
corrected and accepted manipulated trials with control trials
< > < > < > < >
5,6 , 9,10 , 13,14 and 18,19 (see Supplementary
ff
we aimed to gauge similarities or di erences in how choices
are made and to what extent the false-feedback is integrated
lected four of these trials, one from each trial pair, to be
into participants’ preferences.
manipulated, while the four non-selected trials were used as
non-manipulated control stimuli in the subsequent analyses.
Experiment 1: Individuals in the roommate selection
Following the twenty initial choices, a second, previously
task
unannounced choice phase commenced in which the eight
target pairs were presented a second time in a random or-
Method
der. We asked participants to make a second choice be-
Participants. A total of 83 participants were recruited
tween the candidates in each pair. Participants were asked
from the student populations at University College London
to imagine that the pool of available candidates had reduced
and Lund University. Sample size was selected to be dou-
(SD 5.9). 25 participants were male. All participants y6hkx/
PREFERENCE CHANGE IN GROUPS
viewed candidates presented pairwise for 2s. After viewing they selected their preferred candidate by clicking the choice box
beneath the card where the candidate had been presented. Participants then indicated their confidence in their choice. Finally
their chosen candidate was represented to them and participants were asked to discuss and rate one personality feature of
that candidate. In 4 trials (manipulated trials) the non-chosen candidate was presented instead of the chosen one (pictured).
In Experiments 2 & 3 (pictured) participants were dyads, who had to come to a mutual agreement to make their choices.
Second choice phase. A second choice phase followed the first. Participants were asked to make choices and give confidence
ratings for 8 target pairs – the four manipulated and four non-manipulated. In Experiments 1 & 3 the phase was completed
individually while in Experiment 2 participants remained in their dyad and continued to make mutually agreed decisions.
and simply once again choose whomever they thought would For all analyses we report the the parameter estimate,
make the best roommate. All participants, therefore, chose the 95% Highest Density Interval (HDI) and probability of
between 4 previously manipulated pairs and 4 control pairs direction (pd; proportion of posterior in the region shar-
which had not been manipulated previously. Their previous ing sign with the parameter estimate). HDI and probabil-
choices were not indicated to the participants and no further ity of direction were calculated using the bayestestR pack-
manipulations were performed during this phase. Following age (Makowski, Ben-Shachar, & Lüdecke, 2019). We addi-
each choice, the participant indicated their confidence in their tionally report Savage-Dickey Bayes Factors to quantify ev-
ff >=
choice, after which the next trial commenced. idence of an e ect and interpret Bayes Factors 3 as weak
ff >=
evidence for an e ect and 10 as strong evidence for an
At the end of the experiment participants were fully de-
ff
e ect.
briefed, signed informed consent, rewarded, and thanked for
their participation. We report analyses on participants’ correction of the ma-
nipulation as well as their second round choices and response
Statistical analysis. All analyses were performed in the
times. See the Supplementary Materials for analyses involv-
R statistical language using the brms package (Bürkner et al.,
ing confidence.
2017). We analyzed the data using Bayesian multi-level re-
gression. All analyses included varying intercepts and slopes Data and code availability. Experimental data and
grouped by participant ID and by stimulus ID, as well as, analysis code for this and all following experiments are avail-
PÄRNAMETS ET AL.
y6hkx/ To test these patterns statistically we performed a mixed-
ff
e ects regression on the log-transformed choice response
ff
Results times. We found evidence for a di erence in choice response
times between consistent and inconsistent choices, such that
Correction of manipulation. Using the audio and
inconsistent choices were on average slower than inconsis-
video recordings as evidence, a manipulated trial was clas-
= = =
tent choices (b 0.55, SE 0.17, HDI [0.22, 0.90], pd
sified as having been corrected if the participants voiced sus-
= = ff
0.9983, BF 23.13). On average, there were no di er-
picion that a switch of pictures had taken place and as a result
ences in choice response times between trial types (all BFs
clearly questioned that their chosen picture was the one being
0.35). We next computed contrasts between consistent and
displayed.
inconsistent choices separately for each trial type. We found
Of the 332 manipulated trials, 78 (23%) were corrected,
evidence for inconsistent choices being slower than consis-
253 (76%) were accepted and 1 trial was not classified due to
= =
tent choices for both control trials (b 0.47, SE 0.20, HDI
equipment malfunction. 41 (49%) participants failed to make
= = =
[0.09, 0.87], pd 0.9930, BF 4.88) as well as for cor-
any corrections, while on average each participant made 0.95
= = =
rected trials (b 1.14, SE 0.40, HDI [0.33, 1.91], pd
corrections (SD 1.19).
= =
0.9972, BF 23.09). Critically, for accepted trials we
Choice consistency. We defined choice consistency as
ff
instead found evidence favoring the null of no di erence (b
congruence between first and second choice. Participants
= = = =
0.039, SE 0.18, HDI [-0.32, 0.41], pd 0.59, BF
made second round choices consistent with their original de-
= 2
0.197) . In sum, for control and corrected trials there is
cision in 83.4% of control trials. For corrected manipulated
ff
a choice response time di erence between consistent and in-
trials, consistency was higher, 94.9%, while for accepted ma-
consistent choices, while for accepted trials there is no such
nipulated trials consistency was lower 70.0%, see Fig 2A.
ff
di erence.
ff
We analyzed second round choices using mixed-e ects lo-
gistic regression, taking control trials as the reference level
Summary Experiment 1
and adjusting for first round choice confidence.
In line with our hypothesis, we found strong evidence that We introduced the roommate selection task where partic-
participants were less consistent when accepting the manip- ipants chose between pairs of faces presented to them who
ulation, both compared to non-manipulated control trials (b they would rather have as a roommate. Participants had no
= = =
-0.82, SE 0.28, HDI (95% Highest Density Interval) problem accepting and performing the task as intended, and
[-1.36, -0.26], pd (probability of direction) 0.9976, BF were able to make choices as well as verbalize reasons for
(Bayes Factor) 12.7) and compared to corrected trials (b their decisions. On some trials we gave false feedback to par-
= = = =
-2.11, SE 0.55, HDI [-3.21, 1.08], pd ≈ 1.0, BF ticipants about who they had selected and found, consistent
732). Participants were also more consistent in choices fol- with the predictions of previous choice blindness research
lowing corrected trials compared to control trials (b 1.29, (Johansson et al., 2005, 2014; Pärnamets et al., 2015), that
= = = =
SE 0.54, HDI [0.26, 2.38], pd 0.9956, BF 10.82). participants accepted the manipulation in the majority of tri-
ff
Overall the model indicated only an anectodal e ect of first als further extending the choice blindness paradigm into this
= =
round confidence on subsequent consistency (b 0.37, SE domain of choices.
= = =
0.18, HDI [0.00, 0.74], pd 0.9722, BF 1.29), and
On trials where participants accepted the manipulation,
ff
there was no evidence for any di erences by trial type in this
participants were also more likely to switch their preference
regard (all BFs 0.35).
in a second round of choices. This choice-induced prefer-
Second round choice response times. We analyzed ence change was specific to accepted trials, consistent with
choice response times to the second presentation of the faces recent findings from manipulating political attitudes in the
(i.e. when consistency is measured) split by trial type and choice blindness paradigm (Strandberg et al., 2018). More
if the choice was consistent or not. By comparing the ma- generally, these findings replicate previous work on prefer-
nipulated trials against control trials we explored the degree ence change following choice blindness, testifying to the ro-
inconsistent choices in accepted trials shared looked like con- bustness of the paradigm in this context (Johansson et al.,
sistent choices in general. For control trials (consistent: M 2014; Luo & Yu, 2017; Strandberg et al., 2018; Taya et al.,
= = =
1.2s, SD 0.9, inconsistent: M 2.3s, SD 3.5) and cor- 2014).
= =
rected trials (consistent: M 1.0s, SD 1.0, inconsistent: M
We also explored the second round choice response times
= =
3.5s, SD 2.3) a pattern emerged where participants were
and found a striking pattern of results. For both control and
considerably slower on inconsistent trials than on consistent
corrected trials inconsistent round two choices were con-
trials (see Fig 2B). By contrast on accepted trials participants
siderably slower compared to consistent choices. In other
had similar choice response times when they were consistent
words, changing one’s mind takes longer time than to reaf-
= = =
(M 1.6s, SD 1.6) as when they were inconsistent (M
= =
1.4s, SD 1.4). 2BF 5.06
PREFERENCE CHANGE IN GROUPS
errors. B] Average choice response times for second round choices in Experiment 1, split by consistency with first round
choices. Circles represent inconsistent choices and squares consistent choices. Error bars indicate standard errors.
firm a previously made decision. However, for the accepted the dyads to make sure that members were not acquainted
ff
manipulated trials the choice response time di erence be- with each other. Experiment 2 was approved by UCL De-
/ /
tween consistent and inconsistent second round choices dis- partmental Ethics Committee (CPB 2010 006) and the Ethics
appeared almost completely. Following an acceptance of Committee of Lund University (D.nr. 2016-1046).
the manipulation, inconsistent choices - where preference Procedure. Procedure was identical to Experiment 1
change is observed - are not changes of mind but rather repre- with minor changes to accommodate dyads instead of indi-
ffi
sent an a rmation of a false belief about the original prefer- viduals. Participants were left on their own in the experiment
ence (cf. Pärnamets et al., 2015). This is further evidence that room at the start of experiment, and their interaction was
the participant has fully integrated the accepted manipulated solely captured by audio and video. Roommate selection,
choice. both in the first and the second round, was a mutual decision.
We told the participants that they had to discuss and agree
Experiment 2: Preference change in groups
on a choice, but no instructions were given as to how they
should reach an agreement. After the participants had cho-
Having established the roommate selection task, we
sen, they each completed a seven-point Likert scale indicat-
turned to our main question - investigating choice-induced
ing how high their individual confidence was in their mutual
preference change in groups. In Experiment 2 we tested if
ff
choice, in e ect measuring how much they agreed with the
groups are susceptible to the choice blindness manipulation,
group choice. When presented with their choice a second
and if accepting the false feedback would similarly lead to
time - when on manipulated trials false feedback was given -
preference changes in a second round of choices.
participants were instructed to discuss with one another why
they had chosen the option they did, and in the context of this
Method
discussion to rate how reliable, desirable, friendly, humor-
Participants
ous, or easy going they thought the chosen candidate would
be. See also Fig. 1.
A total of 160 participants (80 dyads) were recruited
from the student populations at University College London,
Results
Malmö University and Lund University and of these 152
participants (76 dyads) were successfully recorded. Aver- Correction of manipulation. Using the audio and
age age was 24.9 (SD 5.3). 63 participants were male. video recordings as evidence, a manipulated trial was classi-
35 dyads were mixed, 27 were female only, and 14 male fied as having been detected if at least one of the participants
only. All participants received £4 (UCL) or a cinema voucher voiced suspicion that a switch of pictures had taken place and
(Malmö Lund) for participation. Dyads were formed by par- if as a consequence both participants came to agree that the
ticipants signing up to time slots we made available through picture they were seeing was not the one they had originally
an online booking system. Before participating, we vetted chosen.
PÄRNAMETS ET AL.
Of the 304 M-trials across the 76 dyads, 107 (36%) were between consistent and inconsistent choices, such that in-
corrected, 194 (64%) were accepted and 3 trials were not consistent choices were on average slower than inconsistent
= = = =
classified due to equipment malfunction. 30 (39%) dyads choices (b 0.44, SE 0.098, HDI [0.25, 0.64], pd
= ff
failed to make any correction, while on average each dyad 0.9999, BF 318). Similarly, there again were no di er-
made 1.41 corrections (SD 1.38). ences in average choice response times between trial types
(all BFs 0.46). We next examined contrasts between
The correction rates are higher in Experiment 2 than in
consistent and inconsistent choices separately for each trial
Experiment 1. However, our correction rates appear consis-
type. As in Experiment 1, we found evidence for inconsis-
tent with the individual corrections rates combining to pro-
tent choices being slower than consistent choices for both
vide the correction rates for dyads. If two individuals in Ex-
= = =
control trials (textitb 0.83, SE 0.13, HDI [0.56, 1.09],
periment 1 are considered separately, then the chance that
neither correct the manipulation is 0.76 ∗ 0.76 = 0.58. The pd ≈ 1.0, BF = 2.39 ∗ 10 4 ) as well as for corrected trials
= = = =
(textitb 0.54, SE 0.21, HDI [0.11, 0.95], pd 0.9942,
number of trials not detected by the dyads in Experiment 2
BF 6.15). Critically, for accepted trial we instead found
was very close to this value (0.64). Thus, choice blindness
ff =
evidence favoring the null of no di erence (textitb -0.039,
appears to extend linearly from individuals to dyads.
= = = = 3
SE 0.15, HDI [-0.35, 0.26], pd 0.60, BF 0.165) .
Choice consistency. Participants made second round 10
In sum, in Experiment 2, as in Experiment 1, for control and
choices consistent with their original decision in 85.9% of
ff
corrected trials there is a choice response time di erence be-
control trials. For corrected manipulated trials consistency
tween consistent and inconsistent choices, while for accepted
was similar, 81.3%, while for accepted manipulated trials
ff
trials there is no such di erence.
consistency was lower 62.9%, see Fig 3A. We analyzed sec-
ff
ond round choices using mixed-e ects logistic regression,
Summary Experiment 2
taking control trials as the reference level. To adjust for con-
fidence in first round choices, total confidence (i.e. the sum
Pairs of participants made mutual decisions in the room-
of both participants’ ratings) was used.
mate selection task and received false feedback about which
As hypothesized, we found strong evidence that partici-
person they had selected on some trials. Remarkably, de-
pants were less consistent having accepted the manipulation
spite being two individuals monitoring the choice feedback,
= = =
compared to control trials (b -1.40, SE 0.40, HDI [-
and despite the explicit and discussion based nature of the
= =
2.21, 0.63], pd 0.9992, BF 66.79) and weak evidence
10 prior choices, we found that participants accepted the false
= =
when compared to corrected trials (b -1.06, SE 0.47, HDI
feedback in the majority of trials. This extends the choice
= = =
[-0.60, 1.31], pd 0.9873, BF 4.87). We found no
10 blindness paradigm beyond the study of intrapersonal deci-
ff
evidence for a di erence in consistency comparing control
sion processes to an interpersonal context. The observed cor-
= = =
trials to corrected trials (b 0.35, SE 0.49, HDI [-0.60,
rection rates matched those which would be expected if two
= =
1.31], pd 0.7726, BF 0.45). Unlike Experiment 1, the
10 independent individual observers corrected the false feed-
ff
model indicated weak evidence for an e ect of first round
ff
back, indicating no facilitation or additive e ects from the
= =
confidence on subsequent consistency (b 0.52, SE 0.20,
group setting.
= = =
HDI [0.12, 0.94], pd 0.9918, BF 5.04). However, as
Our primary aim was to investigate choice-induced prefer-
ff
in Experiment 1 we found no evidence for any di erences by
ence change in groups. As hypothesized, our results showed
trial type in this regard (all BFs 0.66).
that accepting the choice blindness manipulation led to the
Second round response times. We again analyzed sec-
group preference shifting. These findings are, to the best
ond round choice response times split by trial type and choice
of our knowledge, the first demonstration of choice-induced
consistency. As in Experiment 1, a pattern emerged where
preference change at the group level. As with individuals,
= =
for control trials (consistent: M 6.4s, SD 6.8, inconsis-
analysis of the second round choice response times strength-
= =
tent: M 14.5s, SD 12.4) and corrected trials (consistent:
ened our interpretation that the inconsistent choices in the
= = = =
M 8.0s, SD 7.6, inconsistent: M 16.0s, SD 13.9) par-
accepted manipulated trials reflects processes related to the
ticipants were considerably slower on inconsistent trials than
preference change seen in the dyad. We again observed large
on consistent trials (see Fig 3B). By contrast on accepted tri- ff
di erences in choice response times between consistent and
als participants had similar choice response times when they
inconsistent choices for control and corrected manipulated
= =
were consistent (M 9.7s, SD 9.0) as when they were
trials and none such for the accepted manipulated trials. Im-
= =
inconsistent (M 9.5s, SD 10.7).
portantly, we found the same patterns of consistency and
ff
We next tested these patterns using a mixed-e ects regres-
choice response times in individuals (Experiment 1). To-
sion on the log-transformed choice response times. The pat-
gether, these patterns in our data corroborate the interpre-
terns of evidence were remarkably similar to those reported
tation that accepting the manipulation leads to a preference
in the analysis of Experiment 1. We again found strong evi-
ff =
dence, on average, for a di erence in choice response times 3BF 6.06
PREFERENCE CHANGE IN GROUPS
errors. B] Average choice response times for second round choices in Experiment 2, split by consistency with first round
choices. Circles represent inconsistent choices and squares consistent choices. Error bars indicate standard errors.
shift in the dyad. We return in the general discussion to the separate terminals. They then completed the second round
question of how to accommodate our findings in current ex- on their own without communicating with each other.
planations of choice-induced preference change and beyond.
Results
Experiment 3: From groups back to individuals
Correction of manipulation. Of the 160 M-trials
across the 40 dyads, 61 (39%) were corrected, 97 (61%) were
An outstanding question from Experiment 2 concerns
accepted and 2 trials were not classified due to equipment
what happens to the manipulated preference when individ-
malfunction. 11 (28%) dyads failed to make any correction,
uals leave the dyad. Do they keep the constructed preference
ff while on average each group made 1.54 detections (SD
from the group? Or do they display a di erent choice be-
1.31).
havior, reflecting their own individual preferences? In Ex-
Choice consistency. We defined individual preference
periment 3 we tested this by again manipulating the choices
consistency as congruence between the dyad’s first choice
of dyads in the roommate selection task but then having the
and the individual’s second choice. Participants made sec-
participants make the second round choices individually.
ond round choices consistent with their original decision in
75.3% of control trials. For corrected manipulated trials con-
Method
sistency was similar, 77.0% as was it for accepted manipu-
Participants. A total of 80 participants (40 dyads) were lated trials 70.1%, see Fig 4A. We analyzed second round
ff
recruited from the student population of Lund University. choices using mixed-e ects logistic regression, taking con-
Average age was 22.6 (SD 2.6). 29 participants were male. trol trials as the reference level. Since each individual in the
15 dyads were mixed, 18 were female only, and 7 male only. dyads give their confidence following the mutual choice, we
Sample size was set so the number of participants (unit of could adjust for individual confidence in the analyses.
analysis for the preference change) would match that of Ex- Unlike in Experiments 1 and 2, we found weak evidence
ff
periments 1 & 2. All participants received a cinema voucher in favor of the point null for di erences between all three trial
< ff
for participation. Dyads were formed by participants signing types (all BFs 0.33). Instead, we found a strong e ect of
up to timeslots we made available through an online booking confidence in the first round choice predicting consistency (b
= = = =
system. Before participating, we vetted the dyads to make 0.80, SE 0.17, HDI [0.45, 1.15], pd 0.9999, BF
= ff
sure that members were not acquainted with each other. Ex- 440). Again, there were no di erence by trial type in the
ff <
periment 3 was approved by the Ethics Committee of Lund e ect of confidence on consistency (all BFs 0.37).
University (D.nr. 2016-1046). Second round response times. Finally we analyzed
Procedure. The first phase of the experiment was iden- second round choice response times split by trial type and
tical to that of Experiment 2. At the start of the second round choice consistency. Like the the previous experiments, in-
of choices each dyad was split up and each participant sat at consistent choice response times were longer for control tri-
PÄRNAMETS ET AL.
errors. B] Average choice response times for second round choices in Experiment 3, split by consistency with first round
choices. Circles represent inconsistent choices and squares consistent choices. Error bars indicate standard errors.
= = =
als (consistent: M 1.5s, SD 1.5, inconsistent: M 2.1s, ming from manipulating the dyad’s belief in their own past
= = =
SD 1.8), and corrected trials (consistent: M 1.7s, SD choice did not transfer to individual preferences. The second
= =
1.4, inconsistent: M 2.4s, SD 2.5). However, unlike the round choice response times corroborated this interpretation
previous experiments, the same pattern was seen for accepted as we, unlike in the previous experiments, found small or
= = = ff
trials (consistent: M 2.0s, SD 3.1, inconsistent: M 2.8s, no di erences in the response time patterns between control,
SD 5.3), see also Fig 4B. correct and accepted trials depending on choice consistency.
ff
Analyzing the data using a mixed-e ects regression on
the log-transformed choice response times indicated weak General Discussion
ff
evidence for a di erence in choice response times between
We investigated if choice-induced preference change is
consistent and inconsistent choices, such that inconsistent
found in groups by giving dyads false feedback about mutual
choices were on average slower than inconsistent choices (b
decisions using the choice blindness paradigm. To do so, we
= = = =
0.20, SE 0.064, HDI [0.083, 0.33], pd 0.9985, BF
introduced a novel choice task - the roommate selection task
= ff
8.90). Again, there were no di erences in average choice
- in which dyads are presented with two pictures of faces and
response times between trial types (all BFs 0.16). We
have to decide which of the two people they prefer to share
ff
found weak evidence for a di erence between response times
an apartment with. Using this task, we demonstrated that
when making consistent and inconsistent choices in the con-
dyads are susceptible to choice blindness manipulations as
= = =
trol trials (textitb 0.28, SE 0.10, HDI [0.079, 0.48],
they often both accept and argue for a choice they were led
= =
pd 0.9960, BF 5.12), but not in the corrected (textitb
to believe they had made. Importantly, we found that dyads
= = = = =
0.18, SE 0.14, HDI [-0.10, 0.46], pd 0.90, BF
when accepting the false feedback about their decisions were
= =
0.37) or in the accepted trials (textitb 0.15, SE 0.12, HDI
more likely to select the believed to have been chosen option
= = =
[-0.079, 0.38], pd 0.9045, BF 0.30).
in a second round of choices, thereby also exhibiting choice-
induced preference change. Finally, we found that individu-
Summary Experiment 3
als, once separated from the dyad, did not exhibit the same
We replicated our findings of choice blindness in dyads
preference change as measured in subsequent choices.
from Experiment 2, as the dyads accepted the false feed-
back at similar levels as previously found and thus again
Choice blindness in groups
demonstrating that the choice blindness paradigm extends
to dyadic decision making. Novel in Experiment 3 was The first contribution of this study is to demonstrate that
that the second round choices were done by the individual the choice blindness paradigm can be used to study decision
ff
dyad members separately. In this case we found no e ect making in a group setting. The correction rate was notably
of the choice blindness manipulation on choice consistency. higher in dyads than for the individual participants in Ex-
In other words, the choice-induced preference change stem- periment 1. However, it was not higher than what would
PREFERENCE CHANGE IN GROUPS
be expected if two independent observers had aggregated back, they take the same amount of time to reach that deci-
ff
their scores, suggesting no additive e ects from group mem- sion as when making a decision consistent with their original
bership. This result is in contrast to findings from related choice. This indicates that the change in preference observed
areas, in which groups systematically outperform the indi- in choice behavior has become an integrated part of the joint
vidual (Bahrami et al., 2010; Knott et al., 2007; Malcolm- preferences of the dyads. Having thus established choice-
son et al., 2007b; Tindale & Winget, 2019). These results induced preference change in groups, we next turn to how to
are promising for scaling choice blindness manipulations to interpret these results in light of extant theories of preference
larger groups, which could allow for novel ways of study- change.
ing the impact of false feedback and erroneous beliefs in so-
Cognitive dissonance. In the standard interpretation of
cial settings. Moreover, these results suggest that it should
choice-induced preference change, individuals alter their
be possible to investigate how groups perform in other tasks
preferences in line with the choice to reduce cognitive dis-
where choice blindness has been used, for example to study
sonance arising from having entertained positive aspects
political attitudes (Strandberg et al., 2018), eye-witness testi-
of the rejected option and negative aspects of the chosen
mony (Sagana et al., 2014) or financial decisions (McLaugh-
option during deliberation (Brehm, 1956; Festinger, 1962;
lin & Somerville, 2013).
Harmon-Jones & Mills, 2019). This post-choice reevaluation
Choice blindness was originally introduced as a method-
is thought to take place immediately following the choice,
ology to study self-knowledge in individual decision mak-
since the experienced dissonance would be the largest when
ing, with a focus on the verbal reports of the participants
the just rejected option is still salient to the decision-maker.
and comparisons between manipulated and non-manipulated
Given the structure of the choice blindness paradigm, this
trials (Johansson et al., 2005; Johansson, Hall, Sikström,
type of explanation does not seem to fit the preference change
Tärning, & Lind, 2006). In this context, it is a puzzle as
seen in Experiments 1 and 2, or previous work on choice
to why people would rationalize choices they never made
blindness and preference change (Johansson et al., 2014; Luo
and what function this type of confabulation could serve. It
& Yu, 2017; Strandberg et al., 2018; Taya et al., 2014). What-
has recently been argued that rationalization functions to aid
ever drives the change, it can not be the relationship between
communication between cognitively encapsulated behavioral
the deliberation and the actual - originally intended - out-
controllers, for example informing a conscious decision sys-
come of the choice, since this would predict a shift in pref-
tem about the preferences of a habitual system (Cushman,
erence in the opposite direction of what we observe. Instead,
2020). We have proposed that a primary function of rational-
preference change must arise in relation to the presented op-
ization rather is to smooth interpersonal communication and
tion, conditional on its acceptance, during the false-feedback
facilitate coordination necessary for joint action (Pärnamets,
portion of the experimental trial.
Johansson, & Hall, 2020). The experiments described here
According to the basic definition of cognitive dissonance
demonstrate collaborative confabulation - rationalization -
theory, dissonance arises whenever two conflicting cogni-
in the service of representational exchange (Cushman, 2020)
tions are held (Festinger, 1962). To accommodate the results
between two decision makers. This is then another path of
of the experiments here within the dissonance framework,
exploration opened by the current results, one that may con-
the moment of dissonance could be the presentation of the
nect to prior work on memory reshaping following conversa-
false feedback, with the memory of the actual choice and the
ff
tions (Hirst & Echterho , 2012).
prospect of accepting the manipulated outcome as the two
cognitions in conflict. If this is the case, then when the dyad
Choice-induced preference change in groups
accepts the manipulated choice, both members respond to
Our second main contribution is that in Experiment 2 the dissonance this entails and alter their preferences in line
we demonstrated the first experimental evidence of choice- with the manipulation. While prima facie reasonable, we be-
ff
induced preference change for group rather than individual lieve that the lack of a preference e ect in our Experiment
choices. Dyads were more likely to change their preferences 3 cautions against adopting this interpretation. If both in-
during the second round of choices as a result of accepting dividuals experience dissonance and adjust their preferences
false feedback about which option they had previously cho- to escape it, then we should have expected this preference
ff
sen. The e ects of accepting the false feedback were also change to be expressed also in Experiment 3. Instead we do
evident in the time it took for the dyads to reach a deci- not find that accepting the manipulation alters preferences
sion when making the choices the second time. In control when dyad members make their second round choices indi-
trials, the second round choice response times of inconsis- vidually. The situation is further complicated by the findings
tent choices are drastically higher than those of consistent in the cognitive dissonance literature that group membership
ff
choices, presumably due to an increased cognitive e ort re- tends to shield members from dissonance (Cooper & Stone,
versing a previously held position. But when dyads reverse 2000; McKimmie, 2015), in which case the theory should
their initial preferences as a result of accepting the false feed- not predict preference change in Experiment 2 either. While
PÄRNAMETS ET AL.
we agree with the general perspective of dissonance theory, While self-perception theory and cognitive dissonance the-
ffi
i.e. that agents seek consistency or coherence in their cog- ory are notoriously di cult to separate, we have previously
nitions (see also Hornsby & Love, 2020), as far as we can argued that choice blindness lends itself towards interpreta-
tell, the theory is currently under-specified to fully explain tion through the lens of self-perception theory when it comes
the experimental results presented here. As such, this study to individual choices (Johansson et al., 2014; Strandberg et
presents a challenge for cognitive dissonance explanations of al., 2018). But how should the "self" in self-perception be
choice-induced preference change. understood in the context of the current result, when it is a
dyad shifting it’s preference? And how should we interpret
The role of memory. Several recent studies have sug-
the results of Experiment 3, when the change in dyadic pref-
gested explaining choice-induced preference change directly
erence did not translate to the individual level?
with reference to memory processes (Chammat et al., 2017;
Salti, El Karoui, Maillet, & Naccache, 2014; Voigt, Mu- We suggest that our pattern of results indicate that the
rawski, Speer, & Bode, 2019). Generally, people remem- dyads construct a shared preference that is adhered to in the
ber items better if they are given a choice, or even the illu- dynamic of their follow-up decisions. This mutual prefer-
ff
sion of choice (Murty, DuBrow, & Davachi, 2015). In line ence is a ected by the mutual perception of what the dyad’s
with this, choice-induced preference change has been shown past preference was. However, when removed from the con-
to correlate with increased activity in dorsolateral prefrontal text of the mutual choice the belief about what the dyad
cortex during choice (Voigt et al., 2019), but only for items choose no longer binds the individual. This is akin to the
that are remembered post-choice (Chammat et al., 2017; Salti classic findings in the study of decision making that changing
et al., 2014; Voigt et al., 2019). Memory for past chosen the mode of elicitation - how and what questions are asked -
items has additionally been show to correlate with hippocam- will change the preference, value or attitude expressed (Fis-
ff
pal activation, but only for accurately remembered items in chho , Slovic, & Lichtenstein, 1988). We know that in indi-
a rate-choice-rate preference change condition (Chammat et vidual decision making, acceptance of false feedback about
al., 2017; Voigt et al., 2019). Recent research has found that past choices alters the memory of those choices (Cochran et
preferences are updated during the act of choosing (Voigt al., 2016; Henkel & Mather, 2007; Pärnamets et al., 2015).
et al., 2019), indicating that memory consolidation mech- But in the dyad, the individual level memories and beliefs
anisms endogenous to the choice process play part in ex- must be negotiated and agreed upon when the two partici-
plaining choice-induced preference change, in line with re- pants jointly accept and explain the manipulated choice.
cent computational modeling of behavioral data (Hornsby &
The response time for the second round choices also sup-
Love, 2020; Lee & Daunizeau, 2019).
port this interpretation. When the individuals in Experiment
Whatever merits this perspective on choice-induced pref- 1 and the dyads in Experiment 2 reverse their initial pref-
erence change brings with it, it too has trouble accounting erences after having accepted the false feedback, they take
ff
for choice blindness and the consequent e ects of accepting the same amount of time to reach a decision as when mak-
false feedback about choices. First of all, if chosen items ing a decision consistent with the original choice. But when
are remembered better, this makes choice blindness in both we look at trials with individual preference change in Ex-
individuals and dyads even more remarkable, as it would in- periment 3, the participants take significantly longer time to
crease the probability of detection of the manipulated feed- reach a decision compared to trials in which they stay con-
back (Lejarraga et al., 2014; Olsson et al., 2006). Secondly, sistent with the original choice. This indicates that not only
iterating the argument presented above in relation to cogni- is less preference change at the individual level in Experi-
tive dissonance, the choice blindness manipulation lead to a ment 3, but that when it occurs it is not accompanied with the
preference change in the opposite direction to what memory- same cognitive ease observed in Experiment 1 and 2. Taken
based theories predict. The false feedback occurs several sec- together, our findings provide a demonstration of the sepa-
onds following the original choice, it implies that regardless rability of the preferences of the individual and preferences
of the plausibility of choice-induced preference change stem- of the individual as a member of a group following a group
ming partly from cognitive processes operating at the mo- decision.
ff
ment of choice, the e ects we obtained must arise from pro-
In sum, choice-induced preference change as a phe-
cesses taking place after the original choice has been made.
nomenon generalizes to groups and it does so through af-
This interpretation accords with research suggesting that hip-
fecting shared representations of the group’s preferences. If
pocampal correlates of choice-induced preference change re-
this wasn’t the case, and group decisions merely aggregated
ff
flect consistency e ects occurring during the remembering
individual preferences, our patterns of results would not be
psot-choice (Chammat et al., 2017; Salti et al., 2014).
obtained. Social interactions add an additional domain to
Collaboratively confabulating shared preferences. how we how we interpret or infer our own behaviour, an ex-
Choice-induced preference change can also be explained tra domain for which the brain must account for in its model
by reference to processes of self-perception (Bem, 1972). of the world. The putative computational substrates of how
PREFERENCE CHANGE IN GROUPS
these shared domains are formed or inferred and modulated tively giving only some participants false feedback may pro-
in the choice blindness paradigm is an area we wish to ex- vide important avenues to perturb perceived group consensus
ff
plore in the future (Bolis & Schilbach, 2020; Kelly, Kriznik, and an e ective avenue for testing theories of deliberation
Kinmonth, & Fletcher, 2019; Ramstead, Veissière, & Kir- and norm following. As group decision making is critical
mayer, 2016). in for example legal settings such experiments may prove of
Preference change in choice blindness. Our findings considerable societal value.
follow and build on a growing number of similar results In future studies we aim to further elucidate how this el-
showing that accepting false feedback about past choices in- ement of “collaborative confabulation” compares to individ-
fluence future choices and behaviors (Johansson et al., 2014; ual rationalizations, and how it might relate to the direction
Luo & Yu, 2017; Strandberg et al., 2018; Taya et al., 2014). and magnitude of preference change in groups. For example,
Recently, Bortolotti and Sullivan-Bissett (2019), suggested in (Strandberg et al., 2018) we found that for political atti-
ff
two interpretations of the general choice blindness e ect. tudes, the attitude change observed following a choice blind-
They contrast a ’choice error’ interpretation whereby choice ness manipulation was increased as a factor of how much
blindness reveals that people can be mistaken about their pre- the participants had discussed and verbalised their reasons
vious choices, with a ’choice change’ interpretation whereby for the accepted manipulated choice. This pattern of results
choice blindness reveals that people can be manipulated into would be of high interest to explore in a group setting. An-
reversing their choices within minutes of first making them. other key outstanding question is to understand when a mu-
In their preferred second alternative, Bortolotti and Sullivan- tual preference acquires binding force to the constituent in-
Bissett argue that when defending and explaining a manip- dividuals. For example, according to shared reality theory
ff
ulated choice, the participants should be understood as ac- (Echterho , Higgins, & Levine, 2009; Rossignac-Milon &
tually changing their choice, by aligning their preferences Higgins, 2018), cognitions arrived at interpersonally should
with the reasons they produce. The results of the present have a stronger force than non-socially acquired cognitions.
study support this interpretation, both in individuals (Experi- By manipulating participants motivations together with their
ment 1) and in dyads (Experiment 2). We see a significant beliefs about their past choices, key predictions from shared
preference change in line with the accepted manipulation, reality theory could be tested to deepen our understanding
and we see that subsequent choice deliberation is influenced, of how shared preferences are constructed and promulgated
as measured in choice response times. We have previously back to constituent individuals.
found that the memory of the choice is influenced by false Above we discussed the many findings linking simple acts
feedback manipulation (Johansson, Hall, & Sikström, 2008; of choosing to enhanced memory (Murty et al., 2015) and to
Pärnamets et al., 2015), and we have every reason to believe choice-induced preference change in individuals (Chammat
that a similar result would have been found here. This sug- et al., 2017; Salti et al., 2014). An important topic for future
ff
gests that, when the manipulation is accepted, the preference research would be to link the dyadic e ects observed here
actually changes and becomes the new psychological reality back to the neural level, using fMRI hyperscanning tech-
of the participants. We have previously argued (Strandberg et niques. Doing so can help arbitrate explanations for what
al., 2018) that preference change in choice-blindness reflects happens at the individual level, as well as paint a better pic-
a rational response to an actual change in beliefs about past ture for how group choices are represented and processed.
choices (see also Luo & Yu, 2017; Pärnamets et al., 2015); it In the present study we allowed dyads to freely negotiate
appears to us that the "choice change" interpretation of Bor- their individual preferences; in future work, by modelling
tolotti and Sullivan-Bissett can be naturally aligned with that natural social roles, for example where one member is given
position. a leadership position or social status is otherwise manipu-
lated, we can gain further insights into preference formation.
Limitations and future directions A more applied example would be to use choice blindness
to study collaborative search procedures, such as those fol-
Our study is not without limitations. Chief of these is
lowed during security screening at airports (cf. Malcolmson
that in the present experiments we limit our study to dyads
et al., 2007a, 2007b).
(Moreland, 2010). There is likely an upper limit of num-
ber of participants monitoring the same mutual choice blind-
Conclusion
ness decision before it no longer can be performed unnoticed;
however, with increasing group sizes come increasing social Many of life’s important decisions are made in pairs or
ff
and normative pressures to conform to the group which may groups - from where to meet for a first co ee to picking a
ff
counteract the e ects of pure aggregation of monitoring in- wedding venue; from replacing a flat-mate to appointing a
dividuals (Bond, 2005; Raafat et al., 2009). Utilizing choice new head of department. Here we showed that dyads will
blindness in larger groups would provide other important re- accept false feedback about their past choices and that do-
ff
search opportunities. For example, in larger groups, selec- ing so a ects their later choices. This result extends the
PÄRNAMETS ET AL.
phenomenon of choice-induced preference change to groups, S0140525X19001730
ff
and reminds us that in this hyper-connected social media age Echterho , G., Higgins, E. T., & Levine, J. M. (2009). Shared
reality: Experiencing commonality with others’ inner states
to be ever vigilant of the accuracy of the group feedback that
ff about the world. Perspectives on Psychological Science,
we receive (Allington, Du y, Wessely, Dhavan, & Rubin,
4(5), 496–521.
2020; Van Bavel et al., 2020).
Edwards, W. (1954). The theory of decision making. Psychological
bulletin, 51(4), 380.