PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
The added value of perceived values:
Partner’s perceived values predict own behavior in interdependent interactions
Sari Mentser
The Open University of Israel &
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Adi Amit
The Open University of Israel
This research was supported by grants from the Research Fund of the Open University of
Israel to the first (Grant No. 31832) and second (Grant No. 31055) authors. We thank Lilach
Sagiv, Sharon Arieli, Andrey Elster, Adva Liberman, Lena Shafir, and Anna Schwartz for
their support and insightful comments on earlier drafts of this paper. All studies reported in
this manuscript were approved by the IRB of The Open University of Israel. Consent for
participation in the study was received from all participants. Research data and code are
Cite as:
Mentser, S. & Amit, A. (in press). The added value of perceived values: Partner’s perceived
values predict own behavior in interdependent interactions. European Journal of Social
Psychology.
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
Abstract
Personal values have been widely recognized as important determinants of individuals’
behavior. But can behavior be shaped by the values one attributes to others? Focusing on
interdependent interactions, this research integrates literature on personal values and the role
of expectations in social dilemmas to investigate the overlooked effect of value perceptions
on people’s choices. In Study 1, players in a prisoner’s dilemma (a game capturing
cooperation vs. competition) who were informed that their partner prioritized self-
transcendence values tended to cooperate more than players informed that the partner
prioritized self-enhancement values. In Study 2, players in the same game who assumed their
partner was higher in self-transcendence values and lower in self-enhancement values were
more likely to opt for the cooperative choice. In Study 3, players in a chicken game (a game
capturing risk-taking vs. risk-avoidance) who assumed their partner was higher in
conservation values and lower in openness-to-change values were more likely to opt for the
riskier choice in the game. Study 4 indicated that the effect of perceived values on behavior is
mediated by assumptions regarding the partner’s choice. Perceived values of the other side
predicted behavior beyond the perceiver’s own values. We discuss the relationships between
own and perceived values and our contributions to the values literature and conflict research.
Keywords: personal values, value perception, interdependent interaction, cooperation, values
and behavior
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
Introduction
Consider a scenario where your professional team welcomes two new members from
a neighboring department: Jenny and John. Word has it that Jenny is known for her caring
nature and eagerness to help others, while John is reputed to prioritize personal
accomplishments and self-advancement. Given these value perceptions, with whom would
you feel more inclined to share knowledge and collaborate? And with whom might you be
more cautious in extending your insights and expertise? This research aims to study how
perceptions of the values of others shape our behavior towards them in situations involving
interdependency.
Reviewing value research at the time, Rohan (2000) suggested an important
distinction between two sets of value systems: personal value priorities—people's own value
priorities, their own judgments regarding how best to live, and social value priorities—
people's perceptions of others' value priorities, others' judgments about how best to live.
Rohan further claimed that “distinguishing between personal and social value priorities is
grounded in the assumption that not only will personal value priorities influence perceptions
and behavior, but so too will social value priorities” (p. 265). Two decades later, an
examination of the field reveals no shortage of research investigating the impact of people’s
own values on behavior. In striking contrast, however, research linking perceptions of others'
values to one’s own behavior is surprisingly scarce.
The perceived values of others are especially likely to impact behavior in situations
involving social interactions, and even more so when the interacting partners are
interdependent. Research on interdependent interactions has demonstrated the impact of what
we know about others based on their specific and relevant past behavior (e.g., reputation). We
extend this line of investigation to values—abstract, desirable principles that transcend
specific situations. We suggest that how people perceive others’ values may shape their own
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
behavior. This study aims to take a step toward bridging the gap in values literature by
investigating how people’s perceptions of others’ values shape the actions we take toward
them.
Personal Values and Behavior
Values are abstract, desirable goals. They are broad, trans-situational and enduring
motivations that serve as guiding principles in people's lives, representing what they consider
good and worthy (Kluckhohn, 1951; Rokeach, 1973; Schwartz, 1992). As such, values are
distinct from other attributes such as traits, needs, orientations, and interests (Arieli et al.,
2019; Bilsky & Schwartz, 1994; Roccas et al., 2002; Sagiv, 2002). Individuals vary in the
importance they ascribe to different values. The more important a value is to a person, the
more likely that person will engage in actions promoting the attainment of its underlying
goals (Roccas & Sagiv, 2017; Rokeach, 1973; Sagiv & Schwartz, 2021; Schwartz, 1992).
To conceptualize values, we draw on Schwartz’s theory of personal values (1992).
Schwartz’s model identifies ten basic human values. The congruencies and conflicts among
the ten values are represented in a circular structure described by two dimensions. The first
dimension contrasts "self-transcendence" and "self-enhancement" values. It captures the
conflict between values that emphasize care for the welfare and interests of others and for
nature (universalism, benevolence), on the one hand, and values that emphasize the pursuit of
one's own interests, relative success, and dominance over others (power, achievement) on the
other. The second dimension captures "openness to change" and "conservation," and contrasts
values that emphasize independence of thought or action and readiness for change (self-
direction, stimulation) with values that emphasize order, self-restriction, preservation of the
past, and resistance to change (security, conformity, and tradition).1 Data from hundreds of
samples from over 80 countries have provided support for the meaning and structure of the
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
ten value types across cultures (Davidov et al., 2008; Schwartz & Boehnke, 2004; Schwartz
& Rubel, 2005; Sortheix et al., 2019; Spini, 2003; Vauclair et al., 2011).
A large body of research suggests that personal values are linked with an array of
behaviors. To mention a few, personal values have been associated with political activism
and voting (Barnea & Schwartz, 1998; Pacheco & Owen, 2015; Schwartz, 2010; Schwartz et
al., 2010), proactivity (Lipponen et al., 2008), creative performance (Dollinger et al., 2007;
Kasof et al., 2007), tolerance of deviance (Roccas & Amit, 2011), national identification
(Roccas et al., 2010), helping and charitable giving (Daniel et al., 2015; Maio & Olson, 1995;
Maio et al., 2009; Verplanken & Holland, 2002), cooperation (Lönnqvist et al., 2013; Sagiv
et al., 2011), and more (Bardi & Schwartz, 2003; see Roccas & Sagiv, 2017, for a recent
review). Here, we propose that behavior is not only affected by one’s own personal values
but sometimes also by what people perceive to be the values of others.
Perceived Values and Behavior
Compared to research on personal values, the body of work on perceived values is
conspicuously small. Nonetheless, existing findings suggest that the structure of perceived
values is similar to the structure of own values, whether the perceived values are attributed to
an individual (Skimina & Cieciuch, 2017) or to a social entity such as the country (Hanel,
Wolfradt et al., 2018). Reports on the perceived values of well-acquainted others are also as
stable across time as self-reported values (Dobewall & Aavik, 2016).
Much of the existing research on value perceptions has focused on their level of
accuracy. Some studies found moderate-to-high self–other agreement in value perception
(Dobewall et al., 2014; see similar findings in Skimina & Cieciuch, 2017), while others
pointed to potential bias in perception (Hanel, Wolfradt et al., 2018). Another set of studies
suggested that accuracy in value perceptions depends on the attributes of the perceiver
(Feather & Cross, 1975) and the perceived (Knafo & Schwartz, 2003). Finally, value
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
perceptions may reflect, in part, a projection of own values (Eicher et al., 2013; Lee et al.,
2009).
Only few studies investigated how perceived values affect attitudes or behavior,
focusing on perceptions of social groups. Perceived values of the surrounding culture have
been found to predict voting (Sanderson et al., 2019; see also Caprara et al., 2012), cultural
estrangement (Bernard et al., 2006; Sanderson et al., 2019), and norm-governed behaviors
(Fischer, 2006), sometimes to the extent that they outweighed the effect of own values.
Incorrect assumptions regarding the degree to which societies collectively endorse altruistic
and biospheric values have been proposed to impede consistent pro-environmental action
(Bouman & Steg, 2019). Studies have also found associations between the values attributed
to various groups of immigrants and attitudes toward those groups (Wolf et al., 2019).
Particularly relevant to the current investigation is a study by Schwartz et al. (1990), who
found that perceptions of the values endorsed by an outgroup were associated with
motivations to allocate resources to that group.
The perceived values of social groups may predict behavior directed toward the group
as a whole. However, they are less informative in predicting behavior towards individuals
within that group. Furthermore, the perceived values of social groups are likely to be
informed by shared knowledge of group stereotypes. By contrast, the perceived values of
individuals are not necessarily informed by explicit knowledge and are likely to also be
influenced by the immediate context. To the best of our knowledge, no studies have yet tested
how the perceived values of a specific individual affect behavior. To study the effect of
perceived individual values on the behavior directed toward a specific person, we focus on
choices in interdependent interactions.
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
Own and Perceived Values in Interdependent Interactions
Two or more parties to an interaction are said to be interdependent if outcomes for all
parties are affected by the decisions or behavior of each. To model such interactions,
researchers often employ social dilemma games. In a typical game, two players
simultaneously choose between two courses of action. Each player’s outcome depends on
both that player’s own decision and the unknown decision made by the other side. Past
research has relied on social dilemma games to model various real-world conflicts and trade-
offs such as nations’ decision-making in times of conflict and war (e.g., Halevy et al., 2006),
international negotiations on climate change (Pittel & Rübbelke, 2012), and individuals’
behavior in everyday negotiations and bargains (e.g., Halevy et al., 2012).
Personal values have been shown to influence decisions in social dilemma games. For
instance, Gärling (1999) showed that universalism (a self-transcendence value) predicted a
pro-social orientation and a preference for cooperation. Sagiv et al. (2011) found that
participants who prioritized self-transcendence values were more inclined to donate an
endowment to a group, whereas participants who emphasized self-enhancement preferred
keeping it. A meta-analysis by Lönnqvist et al. (2013) revealed associations between personal
values and behavior in an array of social dilemmas, such that cooperation was positively
associated with benevolence and universalism (self-transcendence values) and negatively
associated with achievement and power (self-enhancement values). Thus, in the absence of
any clue pointing to the partner’s intended choice, those prioritizing self-transcendence tend
to cooperate, whereas those prioritizing self-enhancement tend to compete.
Notably, those studies focused on how one’s own values affect decisions. To the best
of our knowledge, no studies have tested the effect of the perceived values of others in social
dilemma games. However, many studies have shown that people are willing to behave pro-
socially toward others who have demonstrated pro-sociality in other contexts – a mechanism
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
known as indirect reciprocity (Nowak & Sigmund, 2005). Furthermore, evidence suggests
that providing players with information about their partner’s personal attributes induces
expectations regarding the partner’s intended behavior, which in turn influence players’
choices. For example, Insko et al. (2005) found that cooperation was higher with partners
presented as high in trustworthiness. Similarly, players in social dilemmas expected partners
described to them as honest (moral) to be more cooperative than those described as dishonest
(immoral), and in turn, exhibited more cooperativeness toward the presumably honest (moral)
partners (De Bruin & Van Lange, 1999a, 1999b; Van Lange & Kuhlman, 1994). In addition,
these studies showed that competitors tended to exploit partners they believed to be lower in
intelligence and, therefore, more likely (in their view) to cooperate (although this effect was
weaker overall).
Note that the above studies investigated perceptions of past behaviors and traits, the
latter reflect enduring behavioral dispositions (McCrae & Costa, 1990). Because both past
behaviors and behavioral dispositions refer to concrete actions, they can directly inform
expectations about the partner’s future behavior. In contrast, values are abstract goals
reflecting what is important to an individual rather than what that person actually does
(Roccas et al., 2014). This distinction results in differences in how traits and values influence
behavior. For example, studies showed that the impact of traits on behavior is stronger when
the behavior is automatic, whereas the impact of values on behavior is stronger when the
behavior is planned and requires elaboration (Roccas et al., 2002; Sagiv et al., 2011). The
uniqueness of values calls for a specific inquiry of their perceptions.
The Current Research
We suggest that perceptions of a partner’s values play a role in determining behavior
in interdependent interactions. Our broad expectation is that value perceptions are assumed to
have implications for the type of strategy the partner is likely to adopt. This reduces the
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
ambiguity inherent in interdependent interactions and promotes a specific response by the
player.
We adopt a broad definition of value perceptions, referring to people’s cognitive
representations regarding the lifelong, abstract principles that motivate others. Such
perceptions may be grounded in valid value-relevant information, reflecting others’ actual
values (e.g., people’s accurate reports on what is important to them), or they may be a
product of subjective interpretations of value-irrelevant information, reflecting only
assumptions about others’ values (e.g., behavioral demonstrations that could be driven by
multiple motivations). Either way, we suggest that once perceptions are created, they gain the
potential to affect the perceiver’s behavior. We specifically study the perceived values of
other individuals, rather than social groups or institutions.
Whereas previous studies focused on a limited range of traits, we employ Schwartz’s
values theory—a comprehensive theory of human values. Using this extensive framework
allows us to investigate the full spectrum of value perceptions, and may inform us as to which
perceived values are important for behavior and which are not. We propose that the relevance
of specific perceived values depends on the features of the situation. Sizing up the situation
(i.e., the game), players intuitively grasp the value types that underlie the choices in the game.
They then base their own choices on their perceptions of the relevant values of their
interdependent partner. We hence employ two games, capturing different value-based
choices. To demonstrate the influence of perceived self-transcendence vs. self-enhancement
values, in Studies 1, 2, and 4 we employ the prisoner’s dilemma game, in which players’
choices reflect cooperation or competition. The first and last studies establish the causal
effect of perceived self-transcendence vs. self-enhancement values by showing participants
elements of a virtual partner’s (manipulated) value profile. The second study expands this
investigation to measured value perceptions. Study 3 explores the influence of perceived
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
openness-to-change vs. conservation values using the chicken game, in which players’
choices reflect risk-taking or risk avoidance. Again, this study is based on measured value
perceptions.
In all studies we investigate value perceptions alongside own values. This allows us to
study the unique contribution of each, and to test whether own or perceived values better
explain choices in interdependent interactions, while excluding the possibility that perceived
values are fully accounted for by own values. Finally, studying perceived values vis-à-vis
own values also allows us to show that their effects may operate in the same or different
directions, depending on the situation modeled in the game.
Study 1
In the classic prisoner’s dilemma, two players simultaneously choose between
cooperation and competition. For each player individually, competition always yields a better
payoff than cooperation, making it the “rational” choice (i.e., a strongly dominant strategy).
Yet, if both players compete, they are worse off than if both cooperate. Rational or not,
empirical research shows that cooperation is the choice players make about 50% of the time
(Sally, 1995). Players who choose to cooperate aim at maximizing the benefit for themselves
and the other player as a team. However, the team’s benefit is only maximized if the other
player also opts to cooperate.
Previous research has studied the effect of own values on behavior in the prisoner’s
dilemma, finding a tendency for individuals who emphasize self-transcendence values to
prefer the cooperative choice and for those who emphasize self-enhancement values to favor
the competitive one (e.g., Lönnqvist et al., 2013). This result reflects the greater concern
among individuals prioritizing self-transcendence (vs. self-enhancement) values for other
people’s outcomes. We expect to replicate these findings.
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
H1a: Cooperation in the prisoner’s dilemma will be positively associated with own
self-transcendence values and negatively associated with own self-enhancement
values.
Because cooperation with cooperators is relatively rewarding, while cooperation with
competitors results in the worst possible outcome for the cooperator, a belief that one’s
partner will cooperate (as opposed to compete) should result in a higher preference for
cooperation on the part of the player. We propose that perceptions of the partner’s values
generate subtle expectations about the choices the partner is likely to make, and thus also
direct the player’s choice in the game. Because self-transcendence values express a
motivation to care for others while self-enhancement values reflect a focus on personal
success, we reason that players will be more likely to cooperate with partners perceived as
high in self-transcendence values than with partners perceived as high in self-enhancement
values.
H1b: Cooperation in the prisoner’s dilemma will be higher with partners perceived as
high in self-transcendence values than with partners perceived as high in self-
enhancement values.
In contrast to self-transcendence and self-enhancement values, openness-to-change
and conservation values do not reflect motivations related to cooperation or competition. We
thus do not expect values of this dimension (own or perceived) to relate to the players’
choices. These value types, however, can serve as a baseline comparison, allowing us to
verify that the effects are unique to the relevant value dimension.
Method
Design, Participants, and Procedure
Employing an experimental between-subjects design, we randomly assigned
participants to one of four higher-order perceived values conditions (self-transcendence, self-
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
enhancement, openness to change, conservation). In addition, for each participant, we
measured all four of the higher-order own values. We conducted a power analysis using
G*Power (Faul et al., 2017) to determine the sample size required to detect the effect of the
manipulation. Having no previous data on the influence of perceived values on choices in
social dilemmas, we assumed a small-to-medium effect in a chi-squared test (Cohen’s w =
0.25; see Cohen, 1988). We chose the conventional power level of 80% and the standard 5%
alpha. For our main prediction, involving the contrast between the perceived self-
transcendence and self-enhancement conditions, the analysis suggested that we should recruit
126 participants. We aimed to recruit 126 additional participants for our secondary analysis
contrasting the perceived openness to change and conservation conditions. The total target
sample size was therefore 252 participants (see full protocol for all power analyses in the
Supplementary Materials, henceforth SM). Two hundred and fifty Israeli students (184
females, M = 31.45, SD = 9.59) were recruited to participate anonymously in an online
age
study for course credit; no one was excluded.
Participants first completed a short values questionnaire gauging their own personal
values. Then, they were informed that they would be connected with another participant to
play a computerized game together. Participants were shown their purported partner’s
highest-rated questionnaire items, ostensibly so that participants could get to know their
remote partners. They were told that their partner would receive the questionnaire items that
were highly rated by them. In reality, the partner was a virtual character manipulated to
express one of the four higher-order values. After reading the items conveying the partner’s
value ratings, the participants participated in a single-round prisoner’s dilemma game.
Demographics were collected at the end.
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
Measures and Manipulation
Own values. To assess participants’ own values, we employed the Short and Broad
Schwartz Value Survey (SBSVS; Sekerdej & Roccas, 2016; see full item list in the SM,
self-transcendence value, “It is important to me to care for the welfare of people I am
connected to. I wish to be responsible, loyal, honest, and forgiving”). Participants rate their
values on a scale from -1 (opposed to my values) through 0 (not at all important) to 7 (of
supreme importance). We averaged items measuring own values to obtain four higher-order
value scores that correspond to the four higher-order value conditions (self-transcendence:
two items, α = .51, self-enhancement: two items, α = .61, openness to change: two items, α =
.46, conservation: three items, α = .62).2 Following Schwartz’s recommendation (1992;
2003), we centered each value on an individual basis. For the interested reader, we report the
results of each of our studies using individual (rather than higher-order) values in Tables
SM2-SM4, SM6-SM8, and SM10-SM11. Results using non-centered values are also
available in the SM.
Perceived values. Participants were randomly assigned to one of four perceived-
values conditions: self-transcendence, self-enhancement, openness to change, and
conservation. In each condition, the SBSVS items related to the respective higher-order
values were presented to the participants as the values that were most highly rated by their
partner. For example, in the self-transcendence condition, the participants were told that their
partner’s highest-ranked items were: (a) “It is important to me to care for the welfare of
people I am connected to. I wish to be responsible, loyal, honest, and forgiving”; (b) “It is
important to me to understand and accept all people and to care for their welfare and equality.
I wish to be intellectually and emotionally open to the environment and to care for nature.”
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
We expected participants to form value perceptions congruent with the information given to
them.
Choice in the game. The outcome variable was a one-time choice in the prisoner’s
dilemma game. Participants were asked to choose between X (representing competition,
coded as 0) and Y (representing cooperation, coded as 1). The results for the choice, in
combination with the choice of the other player, were presented in a payoff matrix. Choosing
X could endow the participant with 100 points (if the partner chose Y) or 20 points (if the
partner also chose X). Choosing Y could endow the participant with 60 points (if the partner
also chose Y) or 0 points (if the partner chose X). The exact wording of the instructions and
payoff matrix are available in the SM. No material incentive was tied to the outcome of the
game. The participants were told their decision was final, with no further opportunity to
change it.
Results and Discussion
Overall, 43.6% of the participants opted to cooperate in the prisoner’s dilemma.
Logistic regressions predicting choice in the game from each of the higher-order own values
revealed that own self-transcendence predicted cooperation positively (b = 0.31, SE = 0.14,
Wald = 4.53, odds ratio = 1.36, 95% CI = [1.02; 1.80], p = .033), whereas own self-
enhancement predicted cooperation negatively (b = -0.26, SE = 0.11, Wald = 5.85, odds ratio
= 0.77, 95% CI = [0.62; 0.95], p = .016). These findings replicate previous results and
support H1a. By contrast, and in line with our reasoning, neither own openness to change (b
= -0.06, SE = 0.13, Wald = 0.21, odds ratio = 0.94, 95% CI = [0.74; 1.21], p = .646) nor own
conservation (b = 0.21, SE = 0.15, Wald = 1.88, odds ratio = 1.23, 95% CI = [0.92; 1.65], p =
.170) significantly predicted choices.
We further compared cooperation across the perceived partner’s value conditions
using chi-squared tests. We first compared cooperation in the perceived self-transcendence
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
condition versus the perceived self-enhancement condition, including in the analysis only
participants who were assigned to these value conditions (n = 125). We then compared
cooperation in the perceived openness-to-change condition versus the perceived conservation
condition, including in the analysis only participants who were assigned to either (n = 125).
Cooperation with partners presented as high in self-transcendence values (35 out of 62
participants, 56.5%) was more frequent than with partners presented as high in self-
enhancement values (25 out of 63 participants, 39.7%), although this hypothesized effect
(H1b) was non-significant (χ2(1) = 3.52, ϕ = .17, z = -1.88, p = .061). Furthermore,
contrasting cooperation in the perceived openness-to-change condition (24 out of 63
participants; 38.1%) versus the perceived conservation condition (25 out of 62 participants;
40.3%) revealed no significant difference (χ2(1) = 0.07, ϕ = -.02, z = -0.26, p = .799). All
other (non-hypothesized) pairwise comparisons conducted using Bonferroni correction were
non-significant as well.
To test whether both own and perceived values predict unique variance in choices, we
carried out a broader logistic regression. As predictors we entered a continuous variable
reflecting own self-transcendence vs. self-enhancement values (computed as the difference
between the two), and a binary condition variable contrasting perceived self-enhancement
(coded 0) with perceived self-transcendence (coded 1). We also entered the interaction
between them (computed as a product of mean-centered variables) to exclude the possibility
that any main effects are limited to specific values of the predictors. The criterion variable
was the choice in the game. Our resulting model predicted a significant portion of the
variance in choices (χ2(3) = 10.36, p = .016, Nagelkerke R2 = 0.11). Furthermore, we found a
significant effect for both own (b = 0.24, SE = 0.10, Wald = 6.31, odds ratio = 1.27, 95% CI
= [1.05; 1.53], p = .012) and perceived (b = 0.79, SE = 0.38, Wald = 4.33, odds ratio = 2.20,
95% CI = [1.05; 4.60], p = .037) self-transcendence vs. self-enhancement values, but not for
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
their interaction (b = -0.001, SE = 0.19, Wald = 0.00, odds ratio = 1.00, 95% CI = [0.69;
1.45], p = .997).
In summary, this study provides partial support for our contention that partners’
perceived values influence behavior in interdependent interactions. It suggests that when
controlling for own values, the perceived values of others contribute to own decisions. Our
next studies aim to replicate and extend this investigation in order to test for statistical and
methodological robustness.
Study 2
Study 1 examined the causal effect of perceived values on individuals’ behavior in an
interdependent interaction. There, perceptions were formed based on explicit information
pointing to what appeared to the participants as the partner’s actual values. In Study 2, we
study perceptions in the form of assumed values, asking participants to subjectively derive
value perceptions from a value-irrelevant stimulus. We aim to show that once assumptions
about other people’s values are created, they remain to serve the perceiver in later judgments.
As in Study 1, we examine choices in the prisoner’s dilemma as the focal behavior.
We expect to replicate previous findings linking own self-transcendence vs. self-
enhancement values with opting for the cooperative choice. We also reason that players who
attribute self-transcendence values to their partner will be more likely to cooperate, while
players who perceive their partner as being motivated by self-enhancement values will be
more likely to compete.
H2a: Cooperation in the prisoner’s dilemma will be positively associated with own
self-transcendence values and negatively associated with own self-enhancement
values.
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
H2b: Cooperation in the prisoner’s dilemma will be positively associated with
perceived self-transcendence values and negatively associated with perceived self-
enhancement values in the partner.
Method
Design, Participants, and Procedure
For this study, we used a correlational design, with the four higher-order perceived
values serving as our main predictors and the four higher-order own values as additional
predictors of choice. All the participants reported both their perceived and own values. The
minimum sample size required for detecting a small-to-medium directional effect in a simple
logistic regression (odds ratio = 1.33) with 80% power while assuming 53.0% probability of
cooperation at the mean of the predictor (see De Heus et al., 2010) is 318 participants
(G*Power; Faul et al., 2017). We recruited 329 Israeli students (182 females, M = 29.47,
age
SD = 8.57; no exclusions) who participated for course credit in a series of unrelated
experiments.
At the outset of the study, participants completed a questionnaire gauging their own
value hierarchy. Participants were then informed that they were about to play a computerized
game with another participant. They were presented with a set of 24 avatar cartoons (see
game. After the game’s rules and payoff matrix were explained, participants were presented
were shown an identical male avatar that was not part of the set of 24 avatar cartoons
presented to them.3 This allowed for variation in perceptions of the partner’s values while
keeping the “partner” constant. At this point, participants were asked to guess their partner’s
likely answers on his values questionnaire based on his avatar choice. They were told that
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
they were not expected to make accurate evaluations. Participants were then reminded of the
payoff matrix, and played the game. Finally, they provided demographic information.
Measures
Own values. See Study 1. Cronbach’s αs were .55, .55, .63, .47 for own self-
transcendence, self-enhancement, openness to change, and conservation, respectively.
Perceived values. Perceived partner’s values were also measured using the SBSVS
but with items rephrased to refer to the participant’s assigned partner. For example, the item
gauging benevolence was phrased as “It is important to the other player to care for the
welfare of people he’s connected to. He wishes to be responsible, loyal, honest, and
forgiving.” As done for own values, we averaged ratings for items measuring the same
perceived higher-order value and centered the scores on an individual level. Cronbach’s αs
were .77, .56, .60, .57 for perceived self-transcendence, self-enhancement, openness to
change, and conservation, respectively. Analyses using individual value types and non-
centered values can be found in the SM.
Choice in the game. The choice in the game was measured as in Study 1.
Results and Discussion
As only few studies have previously examined assumptions regarding other people’s
values (e.g., Hanel, Wolfradt, et al., 2018; Skimina & Cieciuch, 2017), we first conducted an
1, panel 1 presents descriptive statistics and inter-correlations for the four higher-order
values, both own and perceived. As predicted by value theory, own self-transcendence
negatively correlated with own self-enhancement (r = -.54, p < .001), and own openness to
change negatively correlated with own conservation (r = -.60, p < .001). More importantly,
similar associations were observed between perceived self-transcendence and perceived self-
enhancement (r = -.59, p < .001), and between perceived openness to change and perceived
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
conservation (r = -.67, p < .001). These findings show that people expect others to have an
internally consistent value hierarchy (i.e., not prioritize contradicting values). Interestingly,
we did not find significant associations between own and perceived values, indicating that the
participants did not rely on their own values to infer the values of the other player.
Forty-eight percent of the participants opted to cooperate in the prisoner’s dilemma.
We performed four logistic regressions to test for the hypothesized role of own values in
opting for cooperation versus competition. In line with our hypothesis (H2a), own self-
transcendence values predicted cooperation positively (b = 0.25, SE = 0.12, Wald = 4.45,
odds ratio = 1.29, 95% CI = [1.02; 1.62], p = .035). The association between own self-
enhancement values and cooperation was negative, as expected, but not significant (b = -0.15,
SE = 0.10, Wald = 2.64, odds ratio = 0.86, 95% CI = [0.71; 1.03], p = .104). These results
partially support H2a. We did not hypothesize or find significant effects for own openness to
change (b = -0.01, SE = 0.12, Wald = 0.02, odds ratio = 0.99, 95% CI = [0.78; 1.24], p =
.904) or own conservation (b = 0.07, SE = 0.13, Wald = 0.31, odds ratio = 1.07, 95% CI =
[0.84; 1.37], p = .579).
We carried out another four logistic regressions to test for the role of perceived values
in players’ game choices. Supporting H2b, perceived self-transcendence in the partner
predicted cooperation positively (b = 0.22, SE = 0.10, Wald = 4.83, odds ratio = 1.24, 95%
CI = [1.02; 1.51], p = .028), whereas perceived self-enhancement predicted cooperation
negatively (b = -0.32, SE = 0.10, Wald = 9.81, odds ratio = 0.73, 95% CI = [0.60; 0.89], p =
.002). By contrast, and in line with our reasoning, neither perceived openness to change (b =
0.03, SE = 0.10, Wald = 0.09, odds ratio = 1.03, 95% CI = [0.85; 1.25], p = .759) nor
perceived conservation (b = 0.003, SE = 0.12, Wald = 0.001, odds ratio = 1.00, 95% CI =
[0.79; 1.27], p = .979) significantly predicted players’ choices.
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
As in Study 1, we also examined a broader model testing the unique predictive power
of own and perceived values above and beyond each other. Because self-transcendence and
we created difference-score predictors that remove the shared variance between them, thus
allowing us to avoid multicollinearity. We therefore entered a variable reflecting own self-
transcendence versus self-enhancement values (computed as the difference between the two),
a variable reflecting perceptions of the self-transcendence versus self-enhancement values
held by the supposed partner (also computed as the difference between the two), and their
interaction (computed as a product of mean-centered values) as predictors of the participant’s
choice in the game (cooperate over compete). Overall, our model predicted a small but
significant portion of the variance in choices (χ2(3) = 14.99, p = .002, Nagelkerke R2 = 0.06).
Furthermore, we found a significant effect for both own (b = 0.15, SE = 0.06, Wald = 5.51,
odds ratio = 1.16, 95% CI = [1.02; 1.31], p = .019) and perceived (b = 0.18, SE = 0.06, Wald
= 9.95, odds ratio = 1.20, 95% CI = [1.07; 1.34], p = .002) self-transcendence versus self-
enhancement values, but not for the interaction (b = -0.004, SE = 0.03, Wald = 0.02, odds
ratio = 1.00, 95% CI = [0.95; 1.05], p = .881). The results indicate that own and perceived
values independently contribute to the prediction of players’ choices.
To examine the relative contribution of own and perceived values, we conducted a
logistic regression predicting choice in the game from all four higher-order own values
(entered at step 1), all four higher-order perceived values (entered at step 2), and all four
interactions between own and perceived higher-order values of the same type (entered at step
3). Overall, the model predicted 8% of the variance in choice. Own values contributed 2.4%
of the explained variance, perceived values added a substantial portion (ΔR2 = 5.1%), and the
interactions added a minor portion (ΔR2 = 0.5%), pointing to the importance of perceived
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
regression for each of the 10 value types, predicting choice in the game from own and
perceived values. Perceived benevolence, achievement, and power significantly predicted
Generally, the results of Study 2 support our hypotheses. Not only are personal values
associated with behavioral choices, but values attributed to the partner in this social dilemma
game are similarly associated with players’ choices, and uniquely explain a portion of the
variance in this behavior. Our data further show that only relevant value perceptions (in this
case, self-transcendence vs. self-enhancement) affect behavior.
Study 3
By definition, self-transcendence and self-enhancement values concern the
relationship between individuals and their social environment and are thus natural candidates
for investigating the role of own and perceived values in interdependent situations. In our
third study, we examined whether perceptions of values unrelated to pro-sociality or
selfishness—namely openness-to-change and conservation values—may too provide
meaningful information about the partner’s intended actions in a way that shapes behavior.
To that end, we employed a game that has not yet been studied in the context of
personal values—the chicken game. Like the prisoner’s dilemma, the chicken game involves
a choice between cooperation and competition, where the outcome of each choice depends on
the choice of the other player. Each player receives the highest reward when they compete
while the other cooperates. Nevertheless, if both players choose to compete, they end up
worse off than if they had both chosen to cooperate. This game is commonly exemplified by
a scenario involving two drivers speeding towards each other on a collision course. The first
to swerve away, thereby avoiding the crash, is labeled the “chicken.” However, if neither
driver swerves, a crash (the worst outcome) is inevitable. This game has proven useful in
modeling real-life situations. For instance, consider two individuals bidding on a property at
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
an auction. If one bidder decides not to raise their bid (cooperates) while the other continues
to compete, the competitor wins. However, if both compete by continually raising their bids,
they could significantly inflate the price, potentially paying more than the property’s actual
worth.
The chicken game differs from the prisoner’s dilemma in two important ways. First,
in the chicken game, one course of action is clearly riskier than the other (De Heus et al.,
2010): while cooperation (i.e., choosing Y) yields a small payoff, a choice to compete
(choosing X) may yield either a much greater reward (if the other player cooperates) or a total
loss (if the other player also competes). Thus, cooperation in this game is a safer choice than
competition. Risk-taking is theoretically compatible with openness-to-change values, which
emphasize excitement, daring, and curiosity, while avoiding risk is compatible with
conservation values, which emphasize stability, security, and preservation of the status quo
(Borg et al., 2011; Schwartz et al., 1997; Schwartz et al., 2012).
However, only a handful of studies have empirically tested the association between
values and risk-taking behavior. The findings point to greater risk-taking in the forms of
alcohol use, risky sexual behavior, and cyber risk-taking among individuals prioritizing
openness-to-change values (e.g., Gandal et al., 2020; Goodwin et al., 2002; Schwartz, 2003;
see also Goodwin et al., 2005 for the effect of values on perceptions of threat). Hence,
individuals prioritizing openness-to-change values may be more likely to opt for the risky
choice in the game, whereas individuals prioritizing conservation values may be more likely
to opt for the safe one:
H3a: Safe over risky choices in the chicken game will be positively associated with
own conservation values and negatively associated with own openness-to-change
values.
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
A second difference between the prisoner’s dilemma and the chicken game pertains to
the optimal relationship between the actor’s and partner’s choices in the game. In the
prisoner’s dilemma, the best strategy for all players is to always compete with their partner.
In the chicken game, by contrast, a more successful strategy is to opt for the opposite of the
choice their partner is likely to make (e.g., Halevy et al., 2012). Thus, players who believe
their partner values openness to change should choose the safer choice (Y) on the assumption
that the partner will make the riskier choice (X), while those who believe their partner favors
conservation values should choose the riskier choice (X), on the assumption that the partner
will follow the safer path (Y). We hence hypothesize:
H3b: Safe over risky choices in the chicken game will be positively associated with
perceived openness-to-change values and negatively associated with perceived
conservation values in the partner.
As mentioned, the choices in the chicken game are either risky and competitive or
safe and cooperative. One may thus expect self-transcendence and self-enhancement values
to predict choices as well. However, the case for these values, particularly the perceived
values, is complex: Because optimal choices in the chicken game require anti-coordination
(i.e., making the opposite of the partner’s choice), perceiving the partner as high in self-
transcendence warrants own competition (on the assumption that they would cooperate),
whereas perceiving the partner as high in self-enhancement warrants own cooperation (on the
assumption that they would compete). This pattern of competing with “cooperators” and
cooperating with “competitors” defies the fundamental drive for reciprocity (e.g., Bowles &
Gintis, 2004; Fehr et al., 2002). We therefore avoid setting explicit hypotheses regarding this
set of values. We nonetheless tested their effects for the sake of completeness.
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
Method
Design, Participants, and Procedure
The design of this study was identical to the design of Study 2. Providing participants
with a bonus payment contingent on their performance in the game, we expected better
engagement in the study and hence less noisy measurement and a slightly larger effect size
than in Study 2 (odds ratio = 1.50). Drawing on De Heus et al. (2010), we assumed an overall
cooperation rate of 74.5% in this game. A power analysis (G*Power; Faul et al., 2017)
suggested that 207 participants were needed to achieve 80% power in a directional test of a
simple logistic regression.
Participants were 205 Israeli students (136 females, M = 26.36, SD = 5.19, no
age
exclusions) who took part in a testing session involving several unrelated studies. Participants
were paid the equivalent of about $12 per hour, plus a small bonus based on their choice and
the choice of another randomly chosen player (to create interdependency, see method
section). The procedure was identical to that of Study 2 except for using the chicken game
rather than the prisoner’s dilemma. In addition, we used a new set of avatars and replaced the
avatar ostensibly representing the partner (Figures SM3 & SM4).4
Measures
Own and perceived values. We used the same measures as in Study 2. Cronbach’s αs
were .56, .64, .61, .68 for own self-transcendence, self-enhancement, openness to change, and
conservation, respectively, and .77, .64, .62, .62 for perceived self-transcendence, self-
enhancement, openness to change, and conservation, respectively.
Choice in the game. To indicate their choice in the game, participants chose between
Choosing X could endow the participant with 10 NIS (if the partner chose Y) or 0 NIS (if the
partner also chose X); choosing Y could endow the participant with 4 NIS (if the partner also
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
chose Y) or 2 NIS (if the partner chose X). Thus, X represented a risky choice, whereas Y
represented a safe choice.
Results and Discussion
assumed values. The associations found are practically identical to those found in Study 2,
supporting, again, the idea that the structure of perceived values resembles that of personal
small and non-significant.
Sixty-two percent of the participants chose the safer option in the chicken game.
Logistic regressions predicting participants’ choices from each of the higher-order own
values revealed that contrary to H3a, neither own openness-to-change (b = 0.002, SE = 0.12,
Wald = 0.00, odds ratio = 1.00, 95% CI = [0.79; 1.28], p = .984) nor own conservation values
(b = 0.17, SE = 0.15, Wald = 1.32, odds ratio = 1.19, 95% CI = [0.89; 1.58], p = .251)
predicted safe over risky choices. Likewise, we did not hypothesize nor find significant
effects for own self-transcendence (b = 0.20, SE = 0.16, Wald = 1.71, odds ratio = 1.23, 95%
CI = [0.90; 1.66], p = .191) or own self-enhancement values (b = -0.21, SE = 0.12, Wald =
3.43, odds ratio = 0.81, 95% CI = [0.64; 1.01], p = .064). Thus, own values could not
distinguish risk takers from those avoiding risk in the chicken game.
We carried out another four logistic regressions to test for the role of perceived values
in game choices. Supporting H3b, perceived openness to change in the partner predicted safer
choices (b = 0.47, SE = 0.14, Wald = 10.84, odds ratio = 1.60, 95% CI = [1.21; 2.11], p <
0.001), whereas perceived conservation predicted riskier choices (b = -0.46, SE = 0.17, Wald
= 7.07, odds ratio = 0.63, 95% CI = [0.45; 0.89], p = .008). We did not hypothesize nor find
significant effects for perceived self-transcendence (b = -0.07, SE = 0.14, Wald = 0.23, odds
ratio = 0.94, 95% CI = [0.72; 1.22], p = .631) or perceived self-enhancement values (b = -
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
0.11, SE = 0.13, Wald = 0.79, odds ratio = 0.89, 95% CI = [0.69; 1.15], p = .375). The results
suggest that in interdependent interactions like those modeled by the chicken game,
perceptions related to risk-taking, rather than those related to pro-sociality, are useful in
making decisions about how to behave toward the partner.
As in Studies 1 and 2, we also examined a broader model testing the unique variance
predicted by own and perceived values, above and beyond each other. We predicted the
participants’ choice in the game (safe over risky) from own openness-to-change versus
conservation values (computed as the difference between the two), perceptions of the
openness-to-change versus conservation values held by the supposed partner (also computed
as the difference between the two), and their interaction (computed as a product of mean-
centered values). Overall, our model predicted a significant portion of the variance in
participants’ choices (χ2(3) = 12.51, p = .006, Nagelkerke R2 = 0.08). The analysis yielded a
significant effect for perceived openness-to-change versus conservation values (b = 0.29, SE
= 0.09, Wald = 11.13, odds ratio = 1.34, 95% CI = [1.13; 1.59], p < .001), but not for own
openness to change versus conservation values (b = -0.06, SE = 0.08, Wald = 0.61, odds ratio
= 0.94, 95% CI = [0.80; 1.10], p = .433), or the interaction between own and perceived (b =
0.002, SE = 0.04, Wald = 0.00, odds ratio = 1.00, 95% CI = [0.92; 1.09], p = .963). These
findings suggest that in the chicken game, only perceived values contribute to the prediction
of players’ choices.
Logistic regression predicting choice in the game from all four higher-order own
values (entered at step 1), all four higher-order perceived values (entered at step 2), and all
four interactions between own and perceived higher-order values of the same type (entered at
step 3) predicted 13.2% of the variance in choice. Own values contributed 2.9% to the
explained variance, perceived values added a substantial portion (ΔR2 = 8.0%), and the
interactions added a minor portion (ΔR2 = 2.3%), pointing again to the importance of
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
values of different types is available in the SM.
Finally, as exploratory analyses, we conducted a separate logistic regression for each
of the 10 value types, predicting choice in the game from own and perceived values. Of the
ten own values, only power significantly predicted choice. The perceived values of
conformity, self-direction, stimulation, and hedonism significantly predicted choices beyond
In contrast to Studies 1 and 2, in which participants’ own values predicted their
choices in the prisoner’s dilemma, in this study, using the chicken game, none of the
hypothesized effects of own values were found. One possible explanation for this finding lies
in the greater interdependency characterizing the chicken game: Since no strategy in the
chicken game leads to the best outcome for the player regardless of the partner’s strategy
(i.e., there is no dominant strategy), the partner’s expected action is even more relevant to
one’s own decisions. Allocating more attention to the partner may result in decisions that are
primarily based on perceived, rather than own, values. Another explanation pertains to the
double implications of choices in the chicken game: While the game predominantly models a
preference for safe versus risky behavior, it also models a preference for cooperation versus
competition. Expressing two orthogonal values in a single choice could interfere with finding
associations between values and choices.
This study provides additional support for our contention that the perceived values of
others matter when people make decisions about their own behavior. It also demonstrates
how perceptions of values of openness to change versus conservation—values that are not
directly related to individuals’ relationships with others—can affect choices in interdependent
situations. The effect of perceived values is independent of the effect of own values in both
magnitude and direction.
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
Study 4
The objective of Study 4 was to replicate the results of Study 1 in a large pre-
registered study while providing additional insight into the process through which perceived
values influence behavior. In building our argument for a perceived values effect, we
proposed that value perceptions lead to expectations regarding the partner’s behavior, which
in turn impact own behavior. Here, we empirically test this mediation process by directly
measuring assumptions about the partner’s action. In addition to testing the process, we
sought to strengthen our general argument by refining several aspects of the method. First, as
in Study 3 (and in contrast to Studies 1 & 2), we tied participants’ compensation to the
outcome of the game, thus heightening the personal stakes for them. Second, we introduced
the information on values alongside information on traits. Presenting participants with richer
information about their partner may reduce the chance that participants would feel compelled
to make use of the value information. Third, we probed for any suspicion to examine whether
awareness of the study's goals encouraged compliant reactions.
This study focused again on the prisoner’s dilemma. As a replication of Study 1, our
first two hypotheses were identical to those of Study 1:
H4a: Cooperation in the prisoner’s dilemma will be positively associated with own
self-transcendence values and negatively associated with own self-enhancement
values.
H4b: Cooperation in the prisoner’s dilemma will be higher with partners perceived as
high in self-transcendence values than with partners perceived as high in self-
enhancement values.
In addition, we tested our reasoning that perceived values impact own choices by
influencing the perceived likelihood of the partner’s cooperation (or competition):
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
H4c: The assumed likelihood of cooperation on the partner’s side will mediate the
impact of perceived self-transcendence versus self-enhancement values on own
choices.
Method
Design, Participants, and Procedure
experimental between-subjects design, assigning participants randomly to one of four
perceived values conditions (self-transcendence, self-enhancement, openness to change,
conservation). In addition, for each participant we measured own values and expectations
regarding the partner’s behavior. Based on the results of Study 1, our power analysis assumed
an effect size w (equivalent to ϕ) of 0.17. We used the conventional alpha (α = .05) but opted
for higher power than in previous studies (1–β = .85). The analysis suggested that 311
participants were required per comparison and 622 participants were required in total. Six
hundred forty-nine adults (315 males, 329 females, five non-binary, M = 31.21, SD =
age
10.13) were recruited on Prolific Academic for a base compensation of £1.20 and a chance to
win an additional bonus, depending on their result in the game. Following the pre-registered
exclusion criteria, we filtered out 13 respondents (10 failed an attention check, 3 gave the
same rating to all items in the value/trait questionnaires, no participant indicated disfluency in
English).
The participants first completed two short questionnaires gauging their own personal
attributes: a short trait questionnaire and the values questionnaire used in Study 1. Then, they
were informed that they would be connected with another participant to play a computerized
game in which each of them makes a decision. Participants were displayed with the
prisoner’s dilemma payoff matrix, which elaborated their potential bonuses. They were then
shown their purported partner’s highly-rated trait and value questionnaire items, ostensibly so
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
that they could get to know their unfamiliar partners. In reality, the partner was a virtual
character manipulated to express one of the four higher-order values. After reading the items
conveying the partner’s trait and value ratings, participants received details about the game
(the prisoner’s dilemma), practiced its rules, and made their decisions. We then measured
assumptions regarding the partner’s choice in the game, attention to the manipulation,
attention to the instructions, suspicions, and demographics.
Measures and Manipulation
Own traits and values. Although we were not interested in the effect of own traits per
se, the study began with nine trait items to ensure that the subsequent presentation of the
partner’s traits would seem natural (see below). The items were sampled from the
International Personality Item Pool (IPIP) to represent each of the “big five” traits with 1–3
items (for example, “I am easy to satisfy” measured agreeableness). Ratings were made on a
scale from 1 (very inaccurate) to 5 (very accurate). To assess the four higher-order own
values, the page continued with the same own values questionnaire used in Study 1. The
same computation procedure was used to create the value indexes. Cronbach’s αs were .67,
.66, .48, .64 for own self-transcendence, self-enhancement, openness to change, and
conservation, respectively.
Perceived traits and values. The participants were informed that they were about to
see the items in which their partner scored particularly high as compared to the population.
All the participants were then presented with the same trait items, while the value items
varied by condition. The trait information was introduced in order to reduce demand
characteristics. To create sound profiles with internal consistency between the values (which
differ per condition) and (constant) traits, we chose two trait items unrelated to values (see
Roccas et al., 2002): “I amuse my friends” (measuring extraversion) and “I can’t make up my
mind” (measuring neuroticism). Below the two trait items, we presented the values items. As
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
in Study 1, these value items corresponded to the perceived values condition that the
participants were assigned to. All items were presented in the same font and size, with traits
presented first, followed by values.
Choice in the game. The outcome variable was a one-time choice in the prisoner’s
dilemma game. Participants were asked to choose between X (representing competition,
coded as 0) and Y (representing cooperation, coded as 1). Choosing X could endow the
participant with £1.00 (if the partner chose Y) or £0.20 (if the partner also chose X).
Choosing Y could endow the participant with £0.60 (if the partner also chose Y) or £0.00 (if
the partner chose X; see also SM). The actual choice was preceded by four practice questions.
The participants were explicitly told that the game included a single round.
Assumed partner’s choice. The participants were asked “What do you think is the
choice of the other player?” They indicated their response by placing a button on a
continuous analog scale ranging from very likely X (coded -100) to very likely Y (coded 100).
We introduced this measurement only after gauging own choices to ensure that own choices
are not determined solely by this measurement.
Manipulation check. To check whether the presented values items manipulated the
intended perceptions, we asked the participants to indicate which of the following was most
important to their partner: caring for other people (compatible with self-transcendence),
being successful and rich (self-enhancement), experiencing variety and excitement (openness
to change), or sticking to the safe and known (conservation).
Suspicion check. Participants were asked to indicate, in an open format, whether they
found anything strange or odd about the experiment. Forty-one participants (6.4%) mentioned
doubts regarding being paired with a real partner. Unless otherwise noted, the results were
robust to their exclusion.
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
Results and Discussion
Overall, 48.3% of the participants opted to cooperate in the prisoner’s dilemma. We
first conducted logistic regressions predicting choice in the game from each of the higher-
order own values. Replicating previous results and supporting H4a, we found that that own
self-transcendence predicted cooperation positively (b = 0.35, SE = 0.08, Wald = 18.87, odds
ratio = 1.42, 95% CI = [1.21; 1.67], p < .001), whereas own self-enhancement predicted
cooperation negatively (b = -0.24, SE = 0.07, Wald = 12.80, odds ratio = 0.79, 95% CI =
[0.69; 0.90], p < .001). By contrast, and in line with our expectations, neither own openness
to change (b = 0.06, SE = 0.08, Wald = 0.64, odds ratio = 1.06, 95% CI = [0.92; 1.23], p =
.422) nor own conservation (b = -0.04, SE = 0.08, Wald = 0.28, odds ratio = 0.96, 95% CI =
[0.82; 1.13], p = .600) significantly predicted choices.
Next, we conducted a manipulation check to ensure that the text displays (in the form
of questionnaire items) manipulated the intended perceived values. As expected, a chi-
squared test verified the dependency between the perceived values condition and the value
category chosen as most characterizing of the partner (χ2(9) = 952.00, Cramer’s V = .71, p <
.001). Specifically, 89% of the participants in the self-transcendence condition indicated that
their partner ascribed the highest importance to ‘caring for other people’ and 85% of the
participants in the self-enhancement condition indicated that their partner ascribed the highest
importance to ‘being successful and rich’. As we intended, 77% of the participants in the
openness-to-change condition indicated that their partner ascribed the highest importance to
‘experiencing variety and excitement’. However, only 52% of the participants in the
conservation condition indicated that their partner ascribed the highest importance to
‘sticking to the safe and known’. Another 42% of the participants in this condition chose
‘caring for other people’ as most important to their partner.
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
We next compared cooperation across the perceived partner’s value conditions using
chi-squared tests. As in Study 1, we first compared cooperation in the perceived self-
transcendence condition versus the perceived self-enhancement condition, including in the
analysis only participants who were assigned to these value conditions (n = 314). We then
compared cooperation in the perceived openness-to-change condition versus the perceived
conservation condition, including in the analysis only participants who were assigned to
either (n = 322). Supporting H4b, cooperation with partners presented as high in self-
transcendence values (78 out of 158 participants, 49.4%) was more frequent than with
partners presented as high in self-enhancement values (54 out of 156 participants, 34.6%),
χ2(1) = 7.01, ϕ = .15, z = 2.65, p = .008. Unexpectedly, cooperation in the perceived
conservation condition (97 out of 162 participants; 59.9%) was more frequent than in the
perceived openness-to-change condition (78 out of 160 participants; 48.8%), χ2(1) = 4.02, ϕ =
-.11, z = -2.00, p = .045. This difference may be explained by the tendency to categorize
partners in the conservation condition as prioritizing self-transcendence values (see the
results of the manipulation check).
To test whether both own and perceived values predict unique variance in choices, we
carried out a broader logistic regression. As predictors we entered a continuous variable
reflecting own self-transcendence vs. self-enhancement values (computed as the difference
between the two), and a binary condition variable contrasting perceived self-enhancement
(coded 0) with perceived self-transcendence (coded 1). We also entered the interaction
between them (computed as a product of mean-centered variables) to exclude the possibility
that any main effects are limited to specific values of the predictors. The criterion variable
was the choice in the game. Our resulting model predicted a significant portion of the
variance in choices (χ2(3) = 13.28, p = .004, Nagelkerke R2 = 0.06). Furthermore, we found a
significant effect for both own (b = 0.15, SE = 0.06, Wald = 5.75, odds ratio = 1.16, 95% CI
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
= [1.03; 1.31], p = .016) and perceived (b = 0.65, SE = 0.24, Wald = 7.60, odds ratio = 1.91,
95% CI = [1.21; 3.04], p = .006) self-transcendence vs. self-enhancement values, but not for
their interaction (b = -0.09, SE = 0.12, Wald = 0.56, odds ratio = 0.91, 95% CI = [0.72; 1.16],
p = .454).
Finally, to probe for the mediating role of assumptions regarding the partner’s action
(H4c), we conducted a mediation analysis using process function for R (version 4.3, Model 4;
Hayes, 2017). Contrasting the effect of perceived self-transcendence and perceived self-
enhancement, the analysis included the participants assigned to these two conditions (n =
314). First, perceived self-transcendence versus self-enhancement values predicted, in linear
regression, assumptions regarding the partner’s action, such that the likelihood of cooperation
was assumed to be higher in the self-transcendence (vs. self-enhancement) condition (b =
16.88, SE = 7.90, t = 2.14, p = .034, 95% CI = [1.33; 32.42]). Second, when predicting own
choices from both the perceived values condition and the assumed partner’s action using a
logistic model, only the assumed partner’s action remained a significant predictor (b = 0.01,
SE = .002, z = 7.64, p < .001, 95% CI = [0.01; 0.02]). Lastly, assessing the indirect effect
using 10,000 bootstrap samples yielded a significant result (b = 0.25, SE = 0.12, 95% CI =
[0.02; 0.51]).5 Thus, the hypothesized mediation process through assumptions regarding the
partner’s actions was supported.
In summary, this study replicates our previous findings using a more robust design.
The results further extend our previous studies, supporting the suggested underlying process,
according to which value perceptions induce assumptions regarding the partner’s action, and
these assumptions are related to own choices. The study bears, however, two main
limitations. First, the assumed partner’s choice was measured after own choices. This order of
measurement makes it possible that the assumed choice was constructed post-hoc as a means
to justify own choice. On the other hand, measuring the assumed choice before own choice
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
might have drawn participants’ attention to the partner’s choice in an artificial manner, which
could then account for own choices. Future studies may seek to temporally distance the two
measurements in order to fully verify the suggested process. Second, because our suspicion
check did not directly test for participants’ awareness of the hypothesis, it remains possible
that demand characteristics played a role in this and/or the preceding studies. Future studies
may systematically examine participants’ meta-perceptions of the experiment.
General Discussion
The current study was motivated by Rohan’s (2000) observation that perceptions of
other individuals’ values are likely to influence the perceiver’s behavior. Four studies
supported this association, demonstrating the effect of perceived values in two types of
interdependent interactions. In the prisoner’s dilemma, attributing higher self-transcendence
and lower self-enhancement values to the other party is associated with more cooperative
behavior. In the chicken game, attributing higher openness-to-change and lower conservation
values to the other party is associated with safer choices. The effect of perceived values
emerges regardless of own values: in the prisoner’s dilemma, perceived values predicted
behavior above and beyond the player’s own values; and in the chicken game, only perceived
values affected the player’s decisions.
Our research delves into the understudied topic of perceived values, and specifically,
the link between perceived values and behavior. Past studies have examined how the
perceived values of social groups may affect behavior. We add to this literature by revealing
the effect of values perceived to be espoused by particular individuals. We also focus on
decisions in interdependent interactions—a type of behavior that has not been examined in
the context of perceived values, yet one to which perceptions are highly relevant, as they may
help guide own decisions.
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
Broadly speaking, perceived values were slightly better predictors of behavior than
own values. Indeed, in Studies 2 and 3, the individual values effects were stronger for
perceived than own values (in Studies 1 & 4 the effects could not be compared).
Contemporary values research works toward identifying moderating factors that buffer or
amplify value–behavior relationships (see review in Sagiv & Roccas, 2021). This line of
work has found that values are less likely to influence behavior when strong norms prevail
(Benish-Weisman & McDonald, 2015; Knafo et al., 2008) and among individuals high in
conformity (Lönnqvist et al., 2006). The current study could suggest that in interdependent
interactions the perceived values of the partner may take precedence over one’s own values.
The uncertainty surrounding such interactions could prompt agents to make assumptions
about the other party, leading to decision-making that is driven more by expectations about
the other’s behavior than by people’s own personal tendencies.
Our findings also have implications for research on cognitive representations of
value–behavior relationships. More precisely, our findings suggest that the partner’s
perceived values are interpreted as indicators of the partner’s likely choice in the game. The
perceiver must thus cognitively represent a link between abstract motivations (values) and
concrete behavior. This is the case even though the impact of one’s own values on behavior
does not require a representation of a value–behavior link. Past studies have assumed that
people associate certain values with particular behaviors. For example, Bardi and Schwartz
(2003) captured such perceptions by asking naïve participants to generate a list of behaviors
that express each type of values. Our findings support these mental links and show that
people act on them.
As few studies have investigated perceived values, our study included an exploratory
analysis of their structure. Our findings are in line with other work showing that the internal
structure of perceived values mirrors that of own values (Hanel, Wolfradt et al., 2018;
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
Skimina & Cieciuch, 2017). Values reflecting the same higher-order dimensions were
positively inter-correlated (see Tables SM3 & SM7). For example, partners who were
assumed to prioritize power were also assumed to emphasize achievement (both self-
enhancement values). Likewise, negative associations emerged between conflicting values,
such that partners assumed to prioritize self-enhancement values were also presumed to be
low in self-transcendence values.
Interestingly, we did not find consistent associations between own and perceived
their values onto their partner. Research has shown that although social projection pervades
many social contexts, it is weak to non-existent in competitive and conflictual situations
(Riketta & Sacramento, 2008; Toma et al., 2010). It is possible that at least some of the
participants in our study construed their partner as an opponent in a conflict and were thus
motivated to psychologically distance him from the self.
Notably, the participants in Studies 2 and 3 were asked to guess their partner’s values
based on his (alleged) avatar choice. Despite the inevitable inaccuracy of their perceptions,
and although they were likely aware of this inaccuracy (see Biesanz et al., 2011), they
nonetheless regarded their guesses as valuable for making decisions. Our findings suggest
that these low-confidence perceptions were associated with behavior in the same way as the
very high-confidence perceptions investigated in Studies 1 and 4. Future studies could
explore other operationalizations of perceived values. For example, studying the value
perceptions of acquaintances may allow researchers to probe whether the effect generalizes to
settings where perceivers make inferences about actual individuals, and to compare the effect
of the perceived vs. actual values of the partner. The effect of perceived acquaintances’
values may differ from that of strangers’, as familiarity introduces many additional elements
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
(e.g., emotional connection, prospect of future interactions) that could intervene in the
decision-making process.
Future studies could also investigate the influence of perceived values in
interdependence situations outside the lab, such as negotiating and bargaining. It would be
interesting, for example, to investigate whether job candidates perceived to be high in self-
transcendence values get better first offers from potential employers. In addition, based on
the results of Studies 1 and 4, one may consider developing an intervention that encourages
individuals to construe their partners as characterized with values that promote cooperation.
For example, team leaders may prompt members to think about each other as individuals
prioritizing self-transcendence. This, in turn, may promote group cooperation and reduce
competition.
While our investigation focused on the content of perceived values, it would be
intriguing to study how perceptions of similarity between own and partners’ values influence
behavior. Given that even negligible similarity may create a sense of shared group
membership (Tajfel et al., 1971), it is possible that game partners who appear to share the
same values with a participant could be categorized as ingroup members (experienced as
closer to the self), which could lead to stronger cooperation with them (see Balliet et al.,
2014). Our own studies included a test of the interaction between own and perceived values,
yielding non-significant effects. This outcome might result, however, from insufficient power
to detect such interactions. Future research may investigate this question in a well-powered
experiment.
Conclusion
We present a systematic investigation of how perceived values influence behavior in
interdependent settings. Although perceptions of others’ personal values have been
highlighted as potentially important (Rohan, 2000), and this claim has received some
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES
empirical support in the study of larger social entities, scholars have not yet demonstrated the
effect of individual-level perceived values. Our findings show that perceptions of the value
dimensions prioritized by others influence relevant behavior: In situations that can be
modeled as a prisoner’s dilemma, perceptions of self-enhancement versus self-transcendence
values stimulate cooperative over competitive choices, and in situations that can be modeled
as a chicken game, perceptions of openness-to-change versus conservation values stimulate
safe over risky choices. We call for incorporating perceived values in theorizing and research
in the fields of values and interdependency.
PARTNER’S PERCEIVED VALUES