Accelerated Cognitive Warfare via The Dual Use of
Large Language Models *
The short version for OpenAI Preparedness Challenge.
Tam n. Nguyen
tom.nguyen@ieee.org
Abstract—Cognitive Warfare (CogWar) is another form of Heuristics is another mechanism supporting the survival ob-
warfare where the goal is to exploit cognition facets to dis-
jective of making decisions with lower accuracy but at higher
rupt, undermine, influence or modify human decisions. Famous
speeds. Heuristics give certain event types unreasonably higher
examples include “Operation Gidlock” meddling with the US
probability chances. Those are events with highly available
2016 election, and CogWar campaigns assisting the annexation
data, with strong links to emotional responses, with strong
of Crimea. As Large Language Model(LLM)-based applications
expand, reaching more users and their cognitive states, stealth links to certain cultural / personal values, with preceding
Malicious Cognitive Behavioral Tactics (MCBT) can be embed-
expectations, with great similarity to higher probability events,
ded in trusted application sessions to systematically profile, then
with emitting illusion of control, or with emitting illusory true
alter, each individual’s cognition over time. Successful MCBT can
effect [3]. Last but not least, MCBTs may also abuse So-
create more cases like Snowden, mass shootings, or January6.
cial Identity Theory, Symbolic Interaction Theory, Structural
This short-form paper discusses a novel MCBT threat model, a
novel kill chain, and an on-going prototype for demonstration. Functionalism, Conflict Theory, Framing Theory, Structural
Index Terms—cognitive warfare, large language model, artifi- Strain Theory, Rational Choice Theory, Chaos Theory, and
cial intelligence, cognitive behavioral therapy
Complexity Theory [4].
I. B II. T MCBT T M , K C ,
ACKGROUND HE HREAT ODEL ILL HAIN AND AN
E P
ARLY ROTOTYPE
CogWar is mainly about changing human cognition to influ-
Tactic (MCBT). MCBT begins with the understanding of perform stealthy MCBTs. Improved upon NATO’s OODA
system 1 and 2. System 1 is the subconscious “automatic model [4], the proposed threat model begins with the flow
mind” where decisions are fast and automatic [1]. System 2 of human’s observation-mental process-decision. Contributing
is the “reflective mind” where decisions are slow, conscious, to this main flow, we assume that humans will also regularly
and controlled [1]. Persuasion technology was designed to seek LLMs’ services to better observe each human’s version of
subtly influence users’ behaviors without their awareness [1] reality. The main flow’s result is an act or a non-act. A correct
targeting mostly system 1. Since LLM-based applications act or non-act is the result of a deliberate cognitive process.
(LLMs) can reach many users while being able to understand The acts or non-acts trigger downstream processes and/or
each user’s cognitive behavioral patterns, LLMs can customize produce results, all of which contribute to the actualization
persuasion techniques for each user for maximum cognitive process which moves reality to a new state, initiating the
behavioral-influencing effects [2]. Besides persuasion tech- begins of new behavioral cognitive flows.
niques, MCBTs may also abuse cognitive biases and heuristics. The Persistent Adversarial Agent (PAA) mostly performs
Cognitive biases are the systematic patterns deviating away legitimate service to humans’ requests and earns legitimate
from careful cognition processes. Cognitive biases may orig- income. This is how PAA can persist and recruit more potential
inate from our ancestors’ need to make fast yet accurate victims. While serving its users legitimately, PAA carefully
enough decisions based on limited cognitive resources while constructs user cognitive profiles. In particular, while this
living in the dangerous wild. There are four common cognitive cognitive profile is the actualization of users’ decisions, a
biases [3]. The anchoring bias is when a person gives the lot of contributing details may also come from legitimate
most reference weight to the first information piece about a service chat sessions between the users and the PAA. At a
subject. The belief persistence bias is when a person sticks certain point, the PAA decides whether a user with certain
to a previously held idea despite contradicting evidence. The cognitive profile is “probable” and is worth attacking. With
confirmation bias is when a person only seek confirmation the targeted users, the PAA then carefully embeds stealthy
of a previously held idea. The availability bias is when a MCBT into legitimate service sessions over time. This MCBT
person makes judgement based only on the currently available proccess ultimately ends with the users performing actions
information. of catastrophic consequences to the general public while
Fig. 1. Threat Modeling of Persistent Adversarial Agents
Fig. 2. Cognitive Warfare Kill Chain Targeting Individuals’ Cognitive System 2
the specific kill chain.
1) Synthesizing relevant cognitive behavioral theories to
In this proposed kill chain, step 1 and 2 can be empirically
form a unifying framework.
verified by statistics from smart agent market places like
2) Synthesizing empirical evidence based on the unified
OpenAI’s GPT store. Step 5 and 6 can be indirectly verified
framework and identifying the core cognitive profiles.
by numerous scientific reports showing the effectiveness of
3) Teach AI models to recognize the core profiles and
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy. The frontier challenges lie in
related permutations.
Steps 3 and 4 with key questions of:
4) Validate and measure the AI models’ performance.
1) How can PAA profile users’ cognitive profiles at a high
The first phase is done with results [5] published in the
level of granularity from noisy texts?
Journal of Medical Internet Research (7.5 impact factor). In
2) How can PAA embed MCBT without users’ recogni-
this work, I formally documented 108 behavioral psychology
tion?
constructs and thousands of related paths based on 20 time-
3) How can PAA capitalize on users’ trust and build
tested psychology theories most relating to criminology and
misplaced trusts? An example of engineering misplaced
cybersecurity. The synthesized framework was packaged as
trust from legitimate trust is “I successfully defend your
Cybonto — a novel ontology with high ontological commit-
information systems for years. Therefore, you can trust
ments.
me with all of your top secret data.”
In the recently done second phase, I engaged more than
A prototype is being developed for solving the first re- 1000 Prolific participants and mapped out their cognition states
search challenge - profiling users’ cognition with high gran- to identify the most common cognitive profiles within the
ularity within the context of cybersecurity compliance/non- context of cybersecurity compliance/non-compliance. Specifi-
cally, I selected the most cybersecurity relevant constructs of
Group norms, Moral, Self-efficacy, Attitude, Belief, Knowl-
edge, Intent, Costs, Benefits, Control, Subjective norms, Mo-
tivation, Goal, Norms, Commitment, Affect, Social based on
Cybonto - the first phase’s published framework [5]. For
cognitive behavioral measurement, I built an adaptive online
survey involving a hypothetical scenario of a professional
employee working in a large company. Adaptive scenario
development options were picked from peer-reviewed publish
research repositories and map to the selected constructs. By
participating in the survey, each participant builds out his/her
cognitive path towards his/her final commitment to being
complied or not complied with the hypothetical company’s
cybersecurity policies. Each path consists of the participant’s
selected constructs as the nodes and the nodes’ relationships
are the edges. Graph science methodologies were then used on
a database of collected paths to identify candidates for core
cognitive behavioral profiles. I will publish the results in a
conference or journal paper.
Parts of phase 2 and 3 are being developed in parallel in
iterations of capability development + capability validation of
which results will be shared in separate papers.
EFERENCES
[1] A. T. Adams, J. Costa, M. F. Jung, and T. Choudhury, “Mindless
computing: designing technologies to subtly influence behavior,” in
Proceedings of the 2015 ACM international joint conference on pervasive
and ubiquitous computing, 2015, pp. 719–730.
[2] H. Zhong, “Regulating AI manipulation: Applying Insights from behav-
ioral economics and psychology to enhance the practicality of the EU AI
Act,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02041, 2023.
[3] F. Mun˜oz Plaza, M. A. Sotelo Monge, and H. Gonzalez Ordi, “Towards
the Definition of Cognitive Warfare and Related Countermeasures: A
Systematic Review,” ACM International Conference Proceeding Series,
2023.
[4] NATO, Mitigating and Responding to Cognitive Warfare, 2023. [Online].
[5] T. N. Nguyen, “Toward human digital twins for cybersecurity simulations
on the metaverse: Ontological and network science approach,” JMIRx
Med, vol. 3, no. 2, p. e33502, 2022.