NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 1
Review Article
Embedding Research on Emotion Duration in a Network Model
Jens Lange
University of Hamburg
Manuscript before copyediting in press at Affective Science
words (main text): 2,881
Author Notes
Correspondence should be addressed to Jens Lange, University of Hamburg, Von-
Melle-Park 5, 20146 Hamburg, Germany, E-mail: lange.jens@outlook.com.
I thank Jonas Dalege, Janis H. Zickfeld, and the members of the Scientific Network
Explicit Causal Inference in Personality Research for feedback on an earlier version of the
manuscript and for helping me to better understand aspects of formal network models.
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 2
Abstract
Contrary to early theorizing, emotions often last for longer periods of time. Variability in
people’s emotion duration contributes to psychopathologies. Therefore, emotion theories need to
account for this variability. So far, reviews only list predictors of emotion duration without
integrating them in a theoretical framework. Mechanisms explaining why these predictors relate
to emotion duration remain unknown. I propose to embed research on emotion duration in a
network model of emotions and illustrate the central ideas with simulations using a formal
network model. In the network model, the components of an emotion have direct causal effects
on each other. According to the model, emotions last longer (a) when the components are more
strongly connected or (b) when the components have higher thresholds (i.e., they are more easily
activated). High connectivity prolongs emotions because components are constantly reactivated.
Higher thresholds prolong emotions because components are more easily reactivated even when
connectivity is lower. Indirect evidence from research on emotion coherence and research on the
relationship of predictors of emotion duration with components outside of emotional episodes
supports the usefulness of the network model. I further argue and show in simulations that a
common cause model, in which a latent emotion causes changes in emotion components, cannot
account for research on emotion duration. Finally, I describe future directions for research on
emotion duration and emotion dynamics from a network perspective.
Keywords: emotion duration, network model, emotion theory, emotion coherence, formal
model
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 3
Emotions are commonly defined as relatively short-term experiences (e.g., Ekman &
Cordaro, 2011; Keltner & Gross, 1999). However, evidence indicates that the duration of
emotional episodes is highly variable (Frijda et al., 1991; Verduyn et al., 2012). Differences
between people in how long their (negative) emotions last are indicative of psychopathological
states (e.g., Houben et al., 2015; Lapate & Heller, 2020). Hence, emotion theories need to
account for varying patterns of emotion duration. Reviews primarily list predictors of emotion
duration without integrating the findings into a broader theoretical framework (Verduyn, 2021;
Verduyn et al., 2015). Mechanisms underlying the relation between these predictors and emotion
duration remain largely unknown. My goal is to provide an integrative theoretical framework of
emotion duration by embedding it in a network model of emotions.
1 Emotion Duration
Initially, theorizing argued that emotions are short-term experiences (e.g., Ekman, 1992).
Emotions synchronize people’s feelings, cognition, physiology, motivation, and expression in
response to personally relevant situations (e.g., Keltner & Gross, 1999; Levenson, 1994). The
entire process was argued to last only a few seconds (e.g., Ekman, 1999; Ekman & Cordaro,
2011). However, studies soon showed that actual emotional episodes often last for minutes or
even hours (Sonnemans & Frijda, 1994; Verduyn et al., 2012).
Notably, there is substantial variability between persons, emotions, or episodes of the
same emotion in how long the episode lasts. Accordingly, research started investigating
predictors of emotion duration, identifying multiple characteristics of the person, the emotion, or
comprehensive reviews, see Verduyn, 2021; Verduyn et al., 2015). For instance, people higher in
neuroticism or rumination have longer negative emotional episodes, people higher in depression
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 4
have longer negative and shorter positive emotional episodes, people higher in extraversion have
longer positive emotional episodes, and people higher in trait reappraisal or who currently
reappraise the situation have shorter positive and negative emotional episodes. Furthermore,
emotional episodes are longer when they are intense and the emotion-eliciting event is highly
relevant.
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 5
Predictors of Emotion Duration And Their Potential Relation to Network Connectivity And Component Thresholds
Predictor Relation to Emotion Duration Relation to Network Connectivity Relation to Component Thresholds
(suggested by emotion coherence research) (suggested by component-focused research)
Neuroticism ↑ negative emotions ↓ for negative emotions ↑ for negative emotions
Extraversion ↑ positive emotions ? for positive emotions ↑ for positive emotions
Depression ↑ negative emotions; ↓ positive emotions ↓ for negative and positive emotions ↑ for negative emotions; ↓ for positive emotions
Rumination ↑ negative emotions ? for negative emotions ↑ for negative emotions
(Trait) Reappraisal ↓ for negative and positive emotions ↓ or 0 for negative and positive emotions ↓ for negatives and positive emotions
Emotion Intensity ↑ for negative and positive emotions ↑ for negative and positive emotions cannot be determined
Event Relevance ↑ for negative and positive emotions ↑ for negative emotions; ? for positive emotions ↑ for negative and positive emotions
Note. ↑ implies that relation is positive. ↓ implies that relation is negative. ? implies that relation is unclear.
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 6
Compiling lists of central predictors is of utmost importance. However, the mechanisms
explaining why these predictors relate to emotion duration remain unknown. Embedding these
findings in a theoretical framework would go beyond specific predictors toward a more general
understanding of the dynamics of emotions (Muthukrishna & Henrich, 2019). It may also
provide intervention strategies for dealing with problematic emotion duration in
psychopathologies. I argue that embedding research on emotion duration in a network model of
emotions promises to advance the field.
2 Emotion Duration in a Network Model of Emotions
The central idea of a network model of emotions is that the components of an emotion
have direct causal effects on each other (Lange et al., 2020; Lange & Zickfeld, 2021; see also
Suri & Gross, 2022). When visualized, these causal relationships look like a network. For
instance, a person may perceive an insult as unfair, leading to hostile feelings and to the
motivation to yell, for which the body mobilizes energy by accelerating heart rate and starting to
frown, while frowning feeds back into feelings via facial feedback. The entire episode represents
experience is. Importantly, there is no monolithic network structure for a particular emotion.
Instead, there is variability between persons and situations (Lange et al., 2020).
Research on other kinds of psychological networks indicates that variability in two
connectivity—how strongly the components are connected—and (b) each component’s
threshold—the state in which a component tends to be (e.g., Cramer et al., 2016; Dalege et al.,
2016). When conceptualizing emotional episodes as networks of causal relationships, the same
characteristics should affect the dynamics of emotions.
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 7
If the components of an emotion’s network are more strongly connected, activation of
one or more components also more quickly activates other components of the network. Once the
network is active, its activity is sustained by reactivation via feedback loops between
components. Thus, higher connectivity will prolong the duration of an emotional episode.
Moreover, a component’s threshold indicates in which state the component tends to be.
When the threshold is high, the component tends to be active and can, hence, be more easily
activated all else being equal. For instance, for components of anger, does a person often
consider situations unfair or tends to yell a lot? If thresholds of a network are high, its
components will be more easily activated and also more easily reactivated even when the
network’s connectivity is lower. Thus, high component thresholds will also prolong the duration
of an emotional episode.
To specify and explore these ideas, I varied the two characteristics in a formal network
model (inspired by Cramer et al., 2016; Lunansky et al., 2020; technical details are available in
the Supplementary Materials and code is on OSF). To base the formal model on realistic emotion
networks, I took network structures from another study. Specifically, I used common methods
for estimating networks from data when researchers aim to investigate theoretical causal network
models (for a discussion of the limitations of these methods, see Lange & Zickfeld, 2021). I
estimated two networks with data from a study in which participants rated sets of components of
awe and fear after watching movies of threatening natural events (e.g., tornados Lange &
Zickfeld, in press). I then simulated an external event that activates all components of the
respective network (e.g., watching a movie) and that then faded over arbitrary units of time as if
the emotional person is occupied with the event for some time. Once the external activation
vanished, the emotion will return to its baseline at some point. The first return to baseline is a
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 8
straightforward definition of the end of an emotional episode (Verduyn, 2021). I tracked the
intensity of the emotion as the mean activity of all components. For instance, when seven of 10
components are active, the emotion’s intensity is 0.7. Once the intensity after the event, was no
longer significantly larger than the mean intensity prior to the event, the emotion ended. In
separate simulations, I varied the respective network’s connectivity or thresholds.
for fear than for awe. Both higher connectivity (for both emotions) and higher thresholds (only
for fear) led to higher emotion duration. For higher connectivity, the network also kept its high-
intensity state for longer. Beyond these primary findings, higher thresholds also resulted in
higher baseline intensity because the components tend to be active. In contrast, higher
connectivity even reduced the baseline intensity because the initially inactive components keep
each other in check.
An alternative model inspired by affect program theories (Levenson, 1994; for a similar
argument, see Coan, 2010) fails to account for research on emotion duration (full description of
the model and simulation results reported in the Supplementary Materials). In this model, there is
a common cause that affects all emotion components, while the components have no causal
relationships among each other. Independent of the strength of relationships between the
common cause and the components, the emotion always ends once the external activation
vanished because the components cannot reactivate each other. This finding complements other
evidence that people’s self-rated experiences of emotions are best captured by a network model
as compared to such alternative models (Lange & Zickfeld, in press).
2.1 Predictors of Emotion Duration, Network Connectivity, and Thresholds
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 9
Fully embedding research on emotion duration in a network model of emotions requires
evidence that predictors of emotion duration relate to network connectivity and component
thresholds. Such research is nonexistent. However, there is indirect evidence from two separate
lines of research. First, the notion of network connectivity is reminiscent of the notion of
emotion coherence. Emotion coherence indicates how strongly the component changes of an
emotion (e.g., feelings and expressions of anger) are correlated in an emotional episode. Notably,
there is substantial variability between persons and situations in how strongly emotions cohere
(e.g., Mauss & Robinson, 2009). If predictors of emotion duration are also predictors of emotion
coherence, then research on emotion coherence provides indirect evidence that these predictors
relate to differences in network connectivity.
Second, the component changes of an emotion can occur in non-emotional situations. For
instance, people differ in how unfairly they tend to perceive situations or in how frequently they
yell also in situations in which they do not experience anger. Akin to thresholds, people would
therefore more easily experience such a component all else being equal. If evidence indicates
that predictors of emotion duration are also predictors of general tendencies for component
changes outside of emotional episodes, then this research provides indirect evidence that these
predictors relate to differences in thresholds.
Indeed, the two lines of research provide indirect evidence that predictors of emotion
Neuroticism predicted less coherence of facial expressions and physiology in sadness (Wu et al.,
2021), yet neuroticism predicted higher thresholds for various components associated with many
negative emotions (Kuppens & Tong, 2010) such as lower autonomy, more worrying, and being
pessimistic (Soto & John, 2017) as well as being motivated to avoid (Smits & Boeck, 2006). For
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 10
extraversion, no research linked it to emotion coherence of positive emotions, yet it predicted
higher thresholds for components associated with many positive emotions such as higher control,
being assertive, higher power, and being active (Soto & John, 2017) as well as being motivated
to approach (Smits & Boeck, 2006). Depression predicted less coherence of various components
for both positive and negative emotions (Bendezú et al., 2022; Brown et al., 2020; Kahn et al.,
2021; Mauss et al., 2005; Sommerfeldt et al., 2019) and predicted higher thresholds for
components associated with many negative emotions such as inactivity or loss of interest
(American Psychiatric Association, 2000) as well as a cognitive style predisposing to experience
negative emotions (Hankin et al., 2005). For rumination, no research linked it to emotion
coherence of negative emotions, yet it predicted higher thresholds for components associated
with many negative emotions such as a maladaptive cognitive style and lower motivation to act
(Nolen-Hoeksma et al., 2008) as well as appraisals of intrusive thoughts about the likelihood of
challenging relevant situations (Watkins, 2004). (Trait) reappraisal had a mixed relationship with
emotion coherence for various components for both positive and negative emotions (Brown et
al., 2020; Butler et al., 2014), yet it, by definition, predicts a lower threshold of appraisals
involved in an emotional episode because the activation of appraisals is attenuated or opposing
appraisals are activated.
Similar findings exist for research on characteristics of the emotional situation. Emotion
intensity predicted higher emotion coherence of various components for both positive and
negative emotions (Bonanno & Keltner, 2004; Brown et al., 2020; Mauss et al., 2005; Rosenberg
& Ekman, 1994; Schaefer et al., 2014). The relationship of emotion intensity and thresholds
cannot be determined because emotional intensity cannot occur outside of an emotional episode.
Finally, event relevance predicted more coherence of various components for negative emotions
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 11
(Calvo & Miguel-Tobal, 1998; Lohani et al., 2018), while there is no research on emotion
coherence for positive emotions, and event relevance also predicted a higher threshold for
components associated with positive and negative emotions such as perceiving potentially
emotion-eliciting cues more quickly, and a higher motivation to prioritize, think about, and
respond to such cues (Klinger & Cox, 2004).
Thus, different predictors may change emotion duration via different mechanisms.
Neuroticism, depression, and (trait) reappraisal may primarily predict differences in thresholds as
implied by research on their relationship with emotion components outside emotional episodes.
In contrast, they may predict network connectivity, if anything, negatively, as implied by
research on their relationship with emotion coherence. Even though evidence is less strong, the
same conclusions may apply to extraversion and rumination. Emotion intensity and event
relevance may further positively predict network connectivity as these predictors also positively
relate to emotion coherence.
3 Future Research Directions
Beyond providing a theoretical framework for embedding research on emotion duration,
mechanism, the shape of the intensity profile of an emotional episode should differ. If a predictor
relates to higher emotion duration via higher connectivity (emotion intensity, event relevance),
the intensity profile should show an abrupt decrease, while the intensity should remain rather
high throughout. This pattern results because strongly connected components prefer to be in the
same state, either active or inactive. Hence, they will tend to be all activated as long as possible
and once the external activation becomes low enough, they will all tend to deactivate quickly. If
a predictor relates to higher emotion duration primarily via higher thresholds (neuroticism,
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 12
extraversion, depression, rumination), their intensity profile should show a more steady decrease
over time. For lower thresholds (reappraisal), the decrease should be quicker because the
components tend to be inactive and therefore strive to reach that state quicker. Some evidence
supports these predictions (Heylen et al., 2015; Verduyn et al., 2012).
Second, depending on the mechanism, a predictor may also relate to other patterns of
emotion dynamics (for background, see Cramer et al., 2016; Dalege et al., 2016; Gilmore, 1981).
emotion intensity before the end of an emotional episode because the highly interconnected
components reactivate each other from time to time. Furthermore, they should predict lower
variance in emotion intensity outside of emotional episodes because components keep each other
in check. For predictors relating to higher thresholds, variance outside emotional episodes is
even higher.
Moreover, depending on the mechanism, one should encounter different emotional states.
That is, different states are probable. Imagine asking a person multiple times how intensely they
currently experience fear and tracking how often they experience each level of intensity. Or
imagine asking multiple persons in only one situation and tracking how many persons experience
each level of intensity. Both these approaches result in frequencies of different emotional
intensities. Different people or situations lead to different frequencies (Haslbeck et al., 2023) and
these differences may result from differences in the underlying networks. Hence, different
predictors of emotion duration may also result in different frequencies of probable states. As is
especially low and high intensity states, whereas for predictors relating primarily to differing
thresholds one should encounter many high intensity states with a skewed tail of low intensity
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 13
states. Relatedly, intervening on network characteristics (e.g., Blanken et al., 2019; Haslbeck et
al., 2021) may allow shaping people’s emotion dynamics, helping them to deal with problematic
emotion duration in psychopathologies. For instance, regulating a strongly connected component
should have a larger effect on emotion duration than regulating a weakly connected component.
Future research should test these patterns directly and intervene on them.
One limitation, however, is that the evidence relating predictors of emotion duration to
network connectivity and thresholds is only indirect. Therefore, before investigating additional
patterns, research should determine emotion networks separately for different persons or
situations using tools from network science (e.g., Borsboom et al., 2021; Frewen et al., 2012;
Lange & Zickfeld, 2021, in press) and relate the predictors to network connectivity and
thresholds directly. Complementarily, future research could extend and explore the formal
network model used for the simulations (see Supplementary Materials for details and avenues for
future research).
Moreover, contrary to predictions, higher thresholds did not lead to higher emotion
duration for the awe network. Potentially, the awe network featured too many weak relationships
between components. Then, even if the components tend to be active, the network cannot sustain
its active state with reactivation via feedback loops. I tested this reasoning in another simulation
reported in the Supplementary Materials. Indeed, increasing thresholds in the high connectivity
awe network led to higher emotion duration.
Finally, the causal direction of various relationships is unknown. For instance, maybe
neuroticism causes changes in thresholds. However, maybe neuroticism is a state defined by
differences in thresholds (Cramer et al., 2012) or emotional processes cause changes in
neuroticism (Lunansky et al., 2020). Relatedly, in line with evidence that various relationships
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 14
between components of emotions are bidirectional (Scherer & Moors, 2019) and that
components of an emotion are only partly connected (Mauss & Robinson, 2009), I used partly
connected, bidirectional networks estimated from data for the simulations. However, in actual
networks, at least some relationships may be in only one direction, which could be investigated
with directed acyclic graphs (for an accessible introduction, see Rohrer, 2018). Moreover, the
networks may have specific structures (e.g., a small world; Lange et al., 2020). Thus, research
should clarify the causal role of predictors of emotion duration as embedded in even more
realistic causal network models.
4 Conclusion
People often experience emotions over extended periods of time, while various
characteristics of the person, the emotion, or the emotion-eliciting event predict variability in
emotion duration. I argued that all the predictors may relate to emotion duration via only two
mechanisms: network connectivity and component thresholds. By embedding research on
emotion duration in a network model, I thereby integrated scattered findings and paved the way
towards new research on emotion dynamics.
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 15
Statements and Declarations
This project was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German
Research Foundation) Grant 461127198 awarded to Michael P. Grosz for the scientific network
behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 16
Fig. 1
An Emotion Network And It’s Characteristics Affecting Emotion Dynamics
Note. The top network represents a simplified network of an anger episode. The nodes represent
components of anger and the relationships represent positive causal relationships between the
components. The bottom networks illustrate the two network characteristics affecting the
dynamics of an emotion, namely higher connectivity (i.e., average strength of the causal
relationships; illustrated with stronger relationships) and higher thresholds (i.e., the state in
which the component tends to be; illustrated with the filling level of the border of a component).
unfair – cognitive appraisal of unfairness, hostile – hostile feelings, yell – motivation to yell,
heart – accelerated heart rate, frown – frowning.
Fig. 2
Illustration of The Central Ideas With Simulated Data
Note. Base networks were estimated with data from Lange and Zickfeld (in press). Each node in
the network represents an item measuring one of the components of the respective emotion,
while the filling level of the border illustrates the estimated threshold. Blue/red relationships
represent positive/negative relationships between the components, while thicker relationships
represent stronger relationships. To generate networks with higher connectivity, relationships
were multiplied with a factor. To generate networks with higher thresholds, a constant was added
to the thresholds. For each network, the second column shows simulated data for the duration of
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 17
an emotional episode with such a network. The white dots, connected by a black line, show the
mean intensity of the emotion. The grey area around the line represents ±25 SE of the mean
intensity across multiple runs of the simulation. The Baseline represents the mean emotion
intensity prior to the emotion-eliciting event. The First Return to Baseline represents the first
emotion intensity that is no longer significantly larger than the Baseline (i.e., the end of the
emotional episode). For each network, the third column shows simulated data for probable states
one would encounter over multiple persons or situations for such a network. Details on the data
set, formal model, and the simulations are available in the Supplementary Materials. A – awe, F
– fear, T – Time.
NETWORK MODEL AND EMOTION DURATION 18