Understanding Dyad, Person, and Contextual Effects in Dyadic Analysis
Robert E. Wickham
Department of Psychological Sciences, Northern Arizona University
Pre-print of article in press at Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal.
Authors’ Note: Correspondence regarding this article should be addressed to Robert E. Wickham
(robert.wickham@nau.edu), 1100 S. Beaver St., SAS Bldg. 60, Flagstaff, AZ 86011
KEYWORDS: Dyadic Analysis, Common-Fate Model, Contextual Effect, Multilevel SEM
Abstract
Several interesting variations on the Common Fate Model (CFM) for dyadic analysis have
emerged over the past decade. For instance, the multilevel-CFM is characterized by directional
paths between Person level observed X and Y variables in addition to the Dyad level direct path
between the corresponding latent variables. Although this model appears to provide a
decomposition of the Y on X regression into Dyad and Person level components, close
examination reveals that this specification yields a Dyad level coefficient that captures the
contextual effect, or the discrepancy in the between- and within-cluster coefficients. The present
work elucidates key features of the multilevel-CFM that produce the contextual effect
parametrization, and introduces an alternative specification, the between-within-CFM that yields
a decomposition of the Y on X regression consistent with the general multilevel SEM literature.
These variations on the CFM are illustrated using empirical examples, supported by syntax for
commonly used SEM software.
Understanding Dyad, Person, and Contextual Effects in Dyadic Analysis
The number of studies sampling dyads has increased dramatically since the 1980s and
several analytic approaches have emerged to accommodate dyadic designs (Kenny, Kashy, &
Cook, 2006). At present, the actor-partner interdependence model (APIM) is the most widely
applied procedure, which provides researchers insight into Person level processes through
parameters that reflect the degree to which partners may influence one another, as well as the
extent to which specific combinations of partner attributes shape individual outcomes (Campbell
& Kashy, 2002; Kenny, 1996; Wickham & Knee, 2012). At its core, the APIM is a multivariate
regression model in which the outcome response for partner a ( Y) is regressed on their own
predictor ( X; an actor effect) and their partner’s predictor ( X; a partner effect), and the outcome
a b
for partner b ( Y) is regressed on their own ( X) and their partner’s predictor ( X). Although
b b a
methodologists continue to introduce new applications and variations on the APIM (Ledermann
& Kenny, 2012; Wickham & Macia, 2019), there has been growing interest in another approach
to dyadic analysis known as the common-fate model (CFM; Kenny, 1996). In contrast to the
APIM, the CFM primarily focuses on Dyad level (i.e., between dyads) processes captured by the
regressions among latent variables that reflect dyad members’ similarity on individual level
attributes (Wickham & Macia, 2019).
Ledermann and Kenny (2012) describe several variations on the standard CFM aimed at
incorporating Person level (i.e., within dyad) coefficients into the model. Although these
extensions to the CFM provide some insight into how the model specification affects the
magnitude of coefficient linking the Dyad level latent variables, important issues surrounding
these alternative CFMs remain unresolved. For instance, the multilevel-CFM described by
Ledermann and Kenny’s (2012) appears to provide a decomposition of the Y on X regression
into Dyad and Person level components. However, closer examination of the model suggests that
the Dyad level coefficient describes the contextual effect, or the discrepancy in the Dyad and
Person level effects. The present work seeks to clarify the key features of the multilevel-CFM
that produce the contextual effect parametrization. It introduces an alternative specification, the
pure Between-Within-CFM (BW-CFM) that yields a decomposition of the Y on X regression
consistent with the broader multilevel SEM literature.
The present work begins by reviewing the notion of contextual effects in nested designs
characterized by many units per cluster, as well as the techniques that researchers have used to
isolate contextual, pure between, and pure within cluster effects. Next, the essential elements of
the standard CFM, as well as extensions to the basic model are discussed. A generalization of
contextual effects to dyadic designs is provided, along with a re-interpretation of a known CFM
specification and an introduction of a between-within common fate model (BW-CFM), which
produces the pure between and pure within dyad coefficients. Example analyses are provided for
each model and the implications for theories of dyadic interaction and close relationship
processes are discussed, along with future extensions and applications.
Nested Designs and Contextual Effects
Research designs featuring hierarchically nested units (e.g., students in schools, romantic
partners in couples) are ubiquitous in the behavioral sciences (Raudenbush & Bryk, 2002;
Snijders & Bosker, 2012). These designs are characterized by a statistical dependency among
observed responses at the lower levels such that responses obtained from members of the same
cluster (e.g., school, couple) tend to be more similar than those produced by members of
different clusters (Kenny & Judd, 1986). For example, standardized test scores for students
attending the same school are often more similar than scores produced by students selected from
different schools. In the context of research using dyadic designs, romantic partners tend to
report more similar levels of relationship satisfaction than individuals selected from different
couples. Although this data structure violates the independence of residuals assumption imposed
by the general linear model (Kenny, 1996), other modeling approaches allow researchers to
explicitly account for the dependency among outcome responses produced by nested designs.
For instance, a multilevel model can be used to partition variability in observed variables
measured at the lowest level (e.g., math score on a standardized test for children in the same
school, relationship satisfaction for partners in the same relationship) into unique components
corresponding to each level of the design.
Multilevel modeling also allows researchers to examine how the relationship between a
predictor and outcome at the lowest level may differ at the upper level(s) of the design
(Raudenbush & Bryk, 2002). For example, the association between student socio-economic
status (SES) and standardized test scores may be positive and relatively weak at level 1
(students), but positive and very strong at level 2 (schools). Prior work illustrates that the choice
of centering scheme for the level 1 predictor, and the incorporation of a level 2 aggregate version
of the level 1 predictor determines the interpretation of the corresponding coefficients at each
level (Kreft, De Leeuw, & Aiken, 1995). Specifically, applying a cluster-mean centering (CMC;
each level 1 SES score minus the average SES score from corresponding classroom) scheme to
the level 1 predictor, and including an upper-level aggregate version of the predictor (average
student SES in each school) produces coefficients representing the pure within effect for the
level 1 predictor, and pure between clusters effect for the level 2 predictor (Hox, 2010; Kreft et
al., 1995). In contrast, applying a grand-mean centering (GMC; each level 1 SES score minus
grand mean of SES) scheme to a level 1 predictor still produces a level 1 coefficient
corresponding to the pure within effect, however, under this centering scheme the coefficient for
the level 2 predictor describes the contextual effect, or the discrepancy in the pure within and
between coefficients (see also Lüdtke, Marsh, Robitzsch, Tratwein, Asparouhov, & Muthén,
2008). Conceptually, the presence of a contextual effect is theoretically compelling because it
signals that the functional significance of a predictor variable depends on the level of analysis.
The conceptual framework described by Kreft and colleagues (1995) generalizes well to
dyadic data, but the procedures for implementation are less straightforward. For instance, adding
an observed Dyad level variable formed from the mean of each partner’s observed predictor to
an APIM will likely lead to excessive collinearity and interpretative difficulties. These
challenges arise in part from the fact that the APIM is essentially a single-level multivariate
model characterized by the simultaneous regression of each dyad member’s outcome on their
own and their partner’s predictor (i.e., X + X → Y; X + X → Y), which differs considerably
a b a b a b
from the traditional multilevel regression model in which the outcome for each level 1 unit is
regressed only on their own predictor. Therefore, the coefficient for a Dyad level predictor
created from both partners’ predictors (i.e., M[ X, X]) in an APIM cannot be interpreted in the
a b
same way as the coefficient for a level 2 aggregate predictor in a traditional multilevel model
(pure between-effect or contextual effect). In contrast, drawing on an analytic framework that
more explicitly represents dyadic responses as a multilevel data structure may provide more
concrete platform to examine contextual effects.
The Common Fate Model
Traditionally, procedures for analyzing dyadic data parameterize Person or Dyad level
coefficients as part of distinct statistical models. For example, the actor-partner interdependence
model (APIM; Kenny, 1996) produces Person level effects describing the association between a
dyad member’s own predictor and their outcome (actor-effect), the association between their
dyadic partner’s predictor and their own outcome (partner-effect). In contrast, the common fate
model (CFM; Kenny, 1996; Griffin & Gonzalez, 1995) more closely resembles a traditional
multilevel model by isolating the Dyad level effect describing the association between latent
predictor and outcome variables that are measured by observed variables provided by each dyad
member. Although it is possible, and at times theoretically or empirically necessary, to
incorporate Person level parameters in a standard CFM, they often play to an auxiliary role and
may be challenging to interpret in a theoretically relevant manner. To better understand the more
recent extensions to the CFM that allow for directly interpretable Dyad and Person level
coefficients, it is important to first establish how the CFM partitions variance in the observed
responses provided by each dyad member.
Separating Person and Dyad Level Variance
Research designs featuring dyads (e.g., romantically involved couples, sibling pairs,
practitioners and patients) are distinct from other nested designs because the number of lower-
level units per cluster is fixed at two. The relative simplicity of the design provides researchers
with greater flexibility in modeling the statistical dependency between dyad member responses.
aY bY
statistical dependence) between residuals (ε , ε ) for outcome variable Y obtained from dyad
aYbY
members a and b is captured by covariance parameter θ . Although the covariance method
provides a straightforward approach for modeling non-independence, it does not explicitly
partition the total variance in observed responses ( Y, Y) into Person (level 1) and Dyad (level
a b
2) components in a manner that allows Dyad level variance to be used as a predictor or outcome
variable (Wickham & Macia, 2019). In contrast, the random intercept approach illustrated in the
a b
Y Y
and Dyad level variance components using a latent variable (η ). More specifically, η captures
the Dyad level mean for each cluster by extracting cross-dyad variability in observed Y scores
(i.e., degree to which members of same dyad are similar) . Moreover, the residuals for each
aY bY
member of the dyad (ε , ε ) reflect variability that is unique to each person, independent of
their Dyad level score. As a result, the variance of the latent variable (ψ ) describes the degree of
aY bY
variability between-dyads, and the variance of the Person level residuals (θ , θ ) reflects
variability within dyads (Wickham & Macia, 2019). Mixed effects modeling, traditional
structural equation modeling (SEM), and Multilevel-SEM (ML-SEM) may each be used to apply
the covariance or random intercept approach to dependent variables. However, only SEM or
ML-SEM may be used to specify a random intercept for predictor variables (Wickham & Macia,
2019). As a result, the present work draws on SEM notation, equations, and path diagrams when
describing these models, and applies the traditional SEM heuristics for model identification
(Bollen, 1989).
parameters associated with each dyad member’s observed response variable, indicating that
members are distinguishable, or uniquely identifiable based on an attribute that only varies
within the dyad (e.g., gender for heterosexual couples, birth order for non-twin siblings).
However, researchers often investigate questions involving dyads composed of members that are
indistinguishable, that is, they cannot be uniquely identified (e.g., same-gender couples,
monozygotic siblings). Under most conditions, conformable models for distinguishable and
indistinguishable dyads can be obtained by imposing the appropriate equality constraints across
role-specific parameters (e.g., Person level residual variances, intercepts) to account for the
arbitrary assignment of members to subscripts (Griffin & Gonzalez, 1995; Olsen & Kenny,
2006). In the present work, models are presented using distinguishable subscripts, and when
applicable, the constraints that allow the model to be adapted for indistinguishable dyads are
described.
It is important to note that the path diagrams presented here represent residuals explicitly
aY bY
as latent variables (ε , ε ) linked to an observed variable ( Y, Y) via an identity relationship
a b
aY bY
(coefficient fixed at 1) with a variance parameter (θ , θ ) attached to the explicit residual
variable. It is also common to omit this explicit residual variable from path diagrams and express
the residual implicitly by attaching the variance parameter directly to the observed variable.
Some SEM software packages (i.e., SAS PROC CALIS, EQS, AMOS) require the user to adopt
the explicit specification, whereas others (i.e., Mplus, R/lavaan) incorporate an implicit
representation into their model specification, but also allow the user to override the default and
implement an explicit residual variable. In most standard applications, the specification of the
residual as implicit or explicit is inconsequential, as both approaches render models with
identical parameter estimates. However, the present work illustrates that the estimation of
regression paths among observed Person level indicators, or among their explicit residuals
variables, in a common-fate model plays a critical role in determining the interpretation of the
Dyad level relationship among the predictor and outcome construct. As a result, the path
diagrams provided in the present work feature the explicit residual variable representation for all
models.
Standard CFM Specification, Assumptions, and Interpretation
The Standard CFM is composed of two Dyad level latent factors linked by a structural
CFM is expressed by the following equations:
aX X aX
(1) X = ν + 1*η + 1*δ
bX X bX
(2) X = ν + 1*η + 1*δ
aY Y aY
(3) Y = ν + 1*η + 1*ε
bY Y bY
(4) Y = ν + 1*η + 1*ε
The ν terms represent the measurement intercepts (means) for each observed indicator and the
X Y
coefficients linking the Dyad level latent variables, η and η , to their respective indicators are
fixed at 1 to identify the latent factors. Conceptually, this feature of the model equally weights
the contribution of each dyad member’s observed response when estimating the Dyad level latent
variable. The δ and ε terms represent (explicit) person-specific residuals for the X and Y
variables (respectively), which describe the deviation of the observed scores from their Dyad
level average score. Individuals with positive deviations for δ or ε have observed scores on X or
Y that are higher than the other dyad member, and those with negative deviations are lower, after
aX bX aY bY
accounting for any mean differences (i.e., ν , ν , ν , ν ). Collectively, these residuals are
assumed to follow a multivariate normal distribution with a mean of 0 and their dispersion is
aX bX aY bY
described by residual variance parameters, θ , θ , θ , θ .
The structural components of the Standard CFM can be expressed using a single
equation:
Y X Y
(5) η = β *η + 1*ζ
Dyad
Y X Y
where β is the regression coefficient linking Dyad level latent variables η and η , and the ζ
Dyad
term describes the latent residuals for η . The mean structure is fully described by the
aX bX aY bY
measurement intercepts (ν , ν , ν , ν ), and therefore the latent factor means are fixed at 0.
X X Y
The variance of factor scores for η are described by ψ , and the ψ parameter describes the
residual variance of factors scores for η . In the case of indistinguishable dyads (e.g., same-
gender couples, monozygotic twins), the role-specific subscripts (a, b) are omitted from all
X Y X Y
Person level parameters, thereby reducing the number of estimated values (i.e., ν , ν , θ , θ ).
Standard CFM specification. Complete input statements for Mplus, as well as the lavaan
(Rosseel, 2012) R library (R Core Team, 2022) are provided in Appendix A and on the Open
linking the Dyad level latent variables to the observed response variables with factor loadings
fixed at 1. The second block of commands create the explicit residual variables at the Person
level, which are identified by fixing the factor loading at 1 to link each latent to the
corresponding observed variable and fixing the residual variance of the observed indicator at 0.
The next two command blocks fix the covariances among all latent variables (Dyad and Person
level) at 0, and the final block corresponds to Eq. 5 by describing the structural regression
between the Dyad level latent variables. It was not necessary to overtly specify the intercept
parameters in the MODEL statement because they are freely estimated for all observed
indicators.
The diagram suggests that the directional path linking the Dyad level latent variables
serves as the focal parameter for this model, and an initial interpretation of this coefficient may
suggest that it reflects the component of the Y on X regression that is purely between-dyads.
However, this coefficient is only interpretable when the specified model accurately replicates the
observed sample data. More specifically, the use of a single coefficient to account for the
association among four observed variables assumes that the direction and magnitude of these
relationships are uniform (Kenny, 1996; Wickham & Macia, 2019). Indeed, when the four cross-
construct covariances (i.e., cov( X, Y), cov( X, Y), cov( X, Y), cov( X, Y)) describing the
a a b b a b b a
relationships among the X and Y constructs across dyad members differ substantially from one
another, the standard CFM provides a poor fit to the observed data and β will be biased
Dyad
(Wickham & Macia, 2019). Fortunately, this limitation of the standard CFM has been understood
since the model’s initial introduction (Kenny, 1996), and modifications to the standard
specification have been proposed.
Modified CFM Specification and Interpretation
aXaY bXbY
covariance parameters linking the residuals of X and Y for partner a (θ ) and partner b (θ )
at the Person level. These residual covariance parameters accommodate a pattern of
relationships in which the association between X and Y for the same person (i.e., cov( X, Y),
a a
cov( X, Y)) differs from the association between X and Y for different dyad members (i.e.,
b b
cov( X, Y), cov( X, Y)). In this scenario, the β coefficient describes the relationship
a b b a Dyad
between the Dyad level variance components for X and Y, or the extent to which dyad clusters
with higher (average) scores on X tend have higher Dyad level scores on Y. The covariance
aXaY bXbY
parameters (θ , θ ) describe the same-person different-variable associations between
Person level residuals, or the degree to which people with larger deviations from their Dyad level
score on X (and by extension their dyadic partners) exhibit higher or lower deviations from the
Dyad level score on Y. For example, if type a partners (e.g., male members of heterosexual
romantic couples) who were higher on X than would be expected based on their estimated η
aX aY
(i.e., δ > 0), also reported higher than expected scores for Y (i.e., ε > 0), the corresponding
aXaY
residual covariance parameter (θ ) would need to be included to model this Person level
dependency.
If the pattern of same-person different-variable covariances in the sample data have the
aXaY bXbY
same sign and are similar in their magnitude, θ and θ will be estimated near 0 and
therefore unnecessary. In contrast, when there is substantial heterogeneity in these covariances,
aXaY bXbY
estimates for θ and θ will depart from 0 to account for Person level associations between
aXaY
X and Y that are not accounted for by the β coefficient. In addition, these non-zero θ and
Dyad
bXbY
Dyad
describes a scenario where the same-person differen-variable (i.e., cov( X, Y), cov( X, Y))
a b b a
covariances are larger than the different-person different-variable covariances (i.e., cov( X, Y),
a b
cov( X, Y)), however, it is also possible (and quite common) to observe a pattern of Person level
b a
associations characterized by stronger cross-dyad member covariances relative to same-dyad
member covariances.
For indistinguishable dyads, the observed covariances describing the associations within
the same person should be identical (i.e., cov( X, Y) = cov( X, Y)), as should the covariances
a a b b
describing associations across different persons (i.e., cov( X, Y) = cov( X, Y)). As a result, any
a b b a
residual covariance parameters introduced to account for discrepancies in the same person and
across person relationships will also need to be constrained to equality by omitting the role
aXaY bXbY XY
specific subscripts (i.e., θ = θ → θ ).
Modified CFM specification. The first three command blocks within the Measurement Model
section, as well as the command specifying the Structural Model are identical to the Standard
fourth command block describing the covariance parameters among Person level explicit
residuals. Specifically, the * located in the WITH statements defining covariances between
Delta_a_X and Epsilon_a_Y, and Delta_b_X and Epsilon_b_Y indicate that these parameters are
now freely estimated. The residual covariances specified in this example connect different
variables for the same person, however, alternative patterns of residual covariances connecting
different variables across different people (e.g., Delta_a_X and Epsilon_b_Y, Delta_b_X and
Epsilon_a_Y) may be necessary.
Worked Example
The relationship between the pattern of observed covariances and the specification of
Standard or Modified CFM is best illustrated using a worked example. The example draws on
responses to the Partner Understanding (PU; “My partner and I understand each other perfectly”)
and Successful Relationship (SR; “Our relationship is a perfect success”) survey questions
administered to N = 340 heterosexual cohabitating and married couples from the 500 Families
Project (Schneider & Waite, 2000). Participants responded to these questions using a 5-point
provides the corresponding sample correlations, covariances, and means. A Standard CFM was
specified using PU as the predictor and SR as the outcome, and parameters were estimated using
Mplus 8.8 (Muthén & Muthén, 2022) using maximum likelihood estimation with robust standard
errors (MLR).
The raw data, input, and output files for all worked examples using Mplus and lavaan are
the Standard CFM, the Dyad level regression coefficient emerged as positive and significant
(β = 1.267 [1.040, 1.493], Z = 10.96, p < .01) suggesting that couples reporting higher levels
Dyad
of PU also exhibited higher scores on the SR latent variable. However, this initial specification
did a poor job of replicating the observed sample data (χ (3) = 65.456, p < .01, RMSEA = .247
[.197, .301], CFI = .832, TLI = .665), and yielded an out-of-bounds estimate was for the residual
variance of the latent outcome representing successful relationship appraisals at the Dyad level
SR
1 suggests that the same person covariances (cov( PU, SR) = .760, cov( PU, SR) = .824)
m m f f
appear to be substantially stronger than the covariances describing across person relationships
(i.e., cov( PU, SR) = .504, cov( PU, SR) = .513), which violates the over-identifying restriction
m f f m
stipulating that these same and across persons covariances are equal.
A Modified CFM including covariance parameters linking the Person level residuals for
PU and SR was also estimated. As expected, the new parameters emerged as positive and
mPUmSR
statistically significant, suggesting that both male (θ = .251 [.134, .368]) and female
fPUfSR
(θ = .315 [.188, .442]) partners with higher than expected levels partner understanding
(based on their Dyad level scores) also reported higher than expected levels of successful
relationship. The β coefficient was significantly different from zero (β = 0.994 [0.833,
Dyad Dyad
1.155], Z = 12.08, p < .01), again suggesting that couples reporting higher levels of PU at the
Dyad level also reported higher levels of SR appraisals. In contrast to the Standard CFM, a
SR
positive estimate was observed for the residual variance of SR (Ψ = 0.148 [0.050, 0.247]), and
overall, the model provided a near perfect fit to the sample data (χ (1) = 0.016, p = .90, RMSEA
= .000 [.000, .064], CFI = 1.000, TLI = 1.000).
mPUmSR fPUfSR
The residual covariance parameters (θ , θ ) estimated in the Modified CFM
account for heterogeneity in the same-person different-variable covariances, resulting in a β
Dyad
coefficient that captures the relationship between Dyad level variance components of PU and SR.
Although the β corresponds to the level 2 or between-clusters coefficient from a multilevel
Dyad
modeling perspective, this specification does not provide comparably scaled level 1 coefficients
for each dyadic partner. Fortunately, the flexibility of the SEM framework allows us to estimate
these within-dyad parameters in a way that allows for direct comparison with β .
Dyad
Summary
The Standard CFM provides a valid estimate of the Dyad level regression coefficient
when heterogeneity in the same-person different variable and different-person different-variable
covariances have the same sign and are approximately equal in magnitude. In practice, these
covariances often differ in size, which can lead to estimation problems and introduce bias into
the estimate of the Dyad level coefficient. The Modified CFM incorporates covariance
parameters among the residuals of the observed indicator variables to account for heterogeneity
in these covariances. When properly specified, the Modified CFM produces a valid estimate for
the Dyad level regression coefficient, even when the observed covariances differ in magnitude.
mPUmSR fPUfSR
In addition, the presence of non-zero residual covariance parameters (θ , θ ) also
suggests the presence of Person level associations that differ from the Dyad level relationship
between X and Y.
Contextual and Between-Within CFM
The following section describes the specification of interpretation of two recent
extensions to the Standard and Modified CFM. Ledermann and Kenny (2012) introduced a novel
variation on the CFM that also accommodates heterogeneity in the same-person different-
variable associations by incorporating directional paths (regression coefficients) linking observed
examination of the underlying model specification reveals that the simultaneous regression of
observed Y on X, conditional on the Dyad level latent variables, results in a parameterization
that resembles the contextual effects interpretation discussed in the multilevel modeling
5), which incorporates structural regressions among the Person level explicit residuals, yielding a
parameterization comparable to the between-within effects interpretation from multilevel
modeling. A careful dissection of the underlying equations is essential to understanding the
diverging interpretation of these models.
Contextual CFM Specification and Interpretation
The Contextual CFM retains the same measurement model equations for the X variables,
however, equations for the Y variables must be updated:
aY Y aY
(6) Y = ν + 1*η + κ * X + 1*ε
a aWithin a
bY Y bY
(7) Y = ν + 1*η + κ * X + 1*ε
b bWithin b
Equations describing observed outcomes Y and Y are now comprised of the direct effect of
a b
their respective X and X, as well as Dyad level influence via the latent variable η . As a result,
a b
the κ coefficient represents the pure within-dyad coefficient for partner a, describing the
aWithin
extent to which those with higher X scores report higher or lower Y scores, after accounting for
a a
their Dyad level standing on η . Similarly, κ represents the within-dyad coefficient for
bWithin
partner b, also conditional on their score for η . This parameterization arises because the random
X Y
intercepts η and η measure Dyad level variance in X and Y without removing these
components of variability from the indicators. As a result, the observed X and X still contain a
a b
X Y
mixture of Dyad and Person level variance, whereas the η and η latent variables contain only
Dyad level variance. The resulting specification is comparable to applying a grand mean
centering approach to level 1 predictors in a traditional multilevel model. More specifically, the
κ coefficients are conditional on the measurement relationships involving η , which
Within
accounts for the Dyad level variance in Y and Y, yielding coefficients that represent a pure
a b
within effect.
Y X
Although the components of the Dyad level structural equation linking η and η do not
appear to differ from the Standard CFM, the “centering scheme” introduced by the regression of
observed Y on X leads to a notable shift in the interpretation of the Dyad level coefficient:
Y X Y
(8) η = β *η + 1*ζ .
Contextual Dyad
Because this Dyad level regression is conditional on the directional relationships at the Person
level, β represents the dyadic contextual effect, or the difference in the pure within-
Contextual Dyad
and between-dyad relationships between X and Y. The primary advantage of this specification
mirrors that of the contextual effects specification in traditional multilevel modeling, namely
providing the researcher with the ability to obtain an inferential test of the potential discrepancy
in within- and between-cluster (dyad) coefficients. Although it is also possible to recover the
pure between-dyad coefficient through simple addition (i.e., β = β + κ ),
Dyad Between Dyad Contextual Within
a minor re-specification of the Modified CFM, illustrated in the following section, allows one to
directly estimate the pure between-dyad coefficient. In addition to the constraints applied to the
Standard CFM, when analyzing indistinguishable dyads, the role-specific subscripts must also be
omitted from the κ coefficients in order to obtain a single pooled estimate of the within-dyad
Within
effect.
CFM, and the first four syntax blocks describing the measurement model specification are
Level regression, the final syntax segment now contains regressions of each observed outcome
indicator on the observed predictor indicator (a_Y ON a_X; b_Y ON b_X), which correspond to
the newly updated elements of Eq. 6 and Eq. 7 (κ * X κ * X). It is also important to
aWithin a , bWithin b
note that the explicit residual variables specified in the measurement model (i.e., Delta_a_X,
Epsilon_a_Y, Delta_b_X, Epsilon_b_Y) are not involved in any structural regressions.
Between-Within CFM Specification and Interpretation
aX bX
structural coefficients linking the explicit residual variables for X and X (δ , δ ) to the
a b
aY bY
explicit residual variables for Y and Y (ε , ε ), respectively. We can better understand the
a b
nuanced association between these latent residuals by constructing another set of equations
describing these regressions:
aY aX εaY
(9) ε = κ *δ + 1*e
aWithin
bY bX εbY
(10) ε = κ *δ + 1*e
bWithin
aY bY
Under this specification, the explicit residual variables for Y (ε , ε ) are linked to the explicit
aX bX
residual variables for X (δ , δ ) by within-dyad regression coefficients κ and κ . The
aWithin bWithin
εaY εbY
error terms for these regressions (e , e ) are explicit in equations 9 and 10, but are represented
implicitly in the path diagram. In addition, the labels corresponding to the variances of these
eεaY eεbY
“residuals of residuals” (θ , θ ) illustrated in the path diagram have been updated to
differentiate them from the unconditional versions illustrated in Figures 2-4. Recall that the
explicit residuals are comprised only of Person level deviations from each individual’s Dyad
level score, therefore the regression coefficients, κ and κ , which link the explicit
aWithin bWithin
aX bX aY bY
residual predictors (δ , δ ) to their corresponding explicit residual outcomes (ε , ε ),
represent pure within-dyad effects. As with the Contextual CFM, pure within-dyad coefficients
must be pooled (i.e., κ = κ κ ) whenever dyad members are indistinguishable.
aWithin bWithin = Within
Although the components of the structural regression equation linking Dyad level
predictor and outcome variables remain unchanged, the coefficient now represents the “pure”
between-dyads effect:
Y X Y
(11) η = β *η + 1*ζ
Between Dyad
This shift in interpretation arises because the Dyad level variance components, and the
corresponding between-dyads regression, have been disconnected from the Person level variance
components and corresponding within-dyads regressions. More specifically, the BW-CFM
explicitly sequesters the variance components across Dyad (level 2) and Person (level 1),
mirroring the process of cluster mean centering from traditional multilevel modeling. This yields
orthogonal regressions at each level of the model, expressed on the same underlying scale, which
also allows their magnitudes to be directly compared.
Within CFM, and as before, the measurement model specification is identical to the Standard
former is that the Between-Within CFM illustrated here is characterized by structural regressions
linking the explicit residual variables for the predictors (Delta_a_X, Delta_b_X) to the explicit
residuals for the outcomes (Epsilon_a_Y, Epsilon_b_Y), which correspond to the coefficients
aX bX
described in Eq. 9 (κ *δ ) and Eq. 10 (κ *δ ). It is important to note that the observed
aWithin bWithin
indicator variables ( X, X, Y, Y) are not directly involved in any structural regression
a b a b
relationships.
In addition, the analyst can create auxiliary parameters to directly evaluate the
significance of contextual effects, along with potential differences in the magnitude of the Person
level coefficients when partners are distinguishable. For example, the researcher can evaluate
whether the within-dyad effects for partners a and b differ from one another by specifying a new
parameter representing the difference between these two coefficients: WithinDiff = κ –
aWithin
κ . If the WithinDiff is not statistically different from zero, then the Person level coefficients
bWithin
for partners a and b can be pooled (as with indistinguishable dyads) and subtracted from the
Dyad level coefficient to obtain an estimate and statistical test for the contextual effect using an
auxiliary parameter, PooledContextual = β – ([κ – κ ] / 2), which will be
Dyad Between aWithin bWithin
equal to β .
Dyad Contextual
Worked Example
A Contextual CFM was specified for the Partner Understanding (PU) and Successful
Person level coefficients emerged for both male (κ = .453 [.337, .568], Z = 7.70, p < .01)
mWithin
and female (κ = .467 [.348, .587], Z = 7.66, p < .01) partners, suggesting that individuals
fWithin
reporting PU scores above their dyad mean tended to report SR scores above their dyad mean. In
addition, the contextual effect coefficient emerged as significant (β = .534 [.308,
Contextual Dyad
.760], Z = 4.63, p < .01), suggesting that relationship between PU and SR is approximately than
two times stronger (more positive) at the Dyad level, relative to the Person level. Examination of
model fit statistics revealed that the parameters of the Contextual CFM did a good job of
replicating the observed sample covariance matrix (χ (1) = 0.052, p = .82, RMSEA = .000 [.000,
.088], CFI = 1.000, TLI = 1.000).
2. Person level coefficients for male (κ = .440 [.287, .594], Z = 5.62, p < .01) and female
mWithin
(κ = .479 [.318, .640], Z = 5.82, p < .01) partners were nearly identical to their
fWithin
corresponding estimates from the Contextual CFM (–2.9% and +2.6%, respectively), and retain
the same interpretation. The pure between-dyads coefficient also emerged as significant (β
Between
= .994 [.832, 1.155], Z = 12.07, p < .01), indicating that couples reporting higher (average)
Dyad
levels of partner understanding were more likely to have higher scores on successful relationship
at the Dyad level. As expected, the evaluation of fit indices suggested that the BW-CFM
provided an excellent fit to the sample data (χ (1) = 0.016, p = .90, RMSEA = .000 [.000, .064],
CFI = 1.000, TLI = 1.000).
We can evaluate the veracity of our claims regarding the interpretation of the Dyad level
coefficients by using the terms from the Contextual CFM to manually recover the corresponding
parameters from the BW-CFM. The auxiliary parameter describing the difference between the
within-dyads coefficients for male and female partners (WithinDiff = κ – κ ) suggests
mWithin fWithin
that the Person level effect does not differ for male and female partners, WithinDiff = –.038 [–
.274, .197], Z = –0.32, p = .749. A closer look reveals that the pure between coefficient from the
BW-CFM (β = .994), minus the pooled Person level coefficient from the BW-CFM
Between Dyad
([κ + κ ] / 2 = [.440 + .479] / 2 = .460), is equal to the contextual effect coefficient
mWithin fWithin
(.994 – .460 = .534 = β ). Examination of the auxiliary parameter estimating the
Contextual Dyad
contextual effect from the BW-CFM parameters confirms this prediction, PooledContextual =
.534 [.309, .759], Z = 4.65, p < .001. In addition to recovering the same point estimate for the
contextual effect, the standard error estimate, associated confidence intervals and Z-test for the
PooledContextual auxiliary parameter were identical (within rounding error) to the
corresponding estimates for the β coefficient estimated directly from the Contextual
Contextual Dyad
CFM.
Summary
The Contextual CFM allows the researcher to directly assess the degree to which Dyad
and Person level associations differ from one another by evaluating the magnitude of the Dyad
level coefficient (i.e., β ), which represents the discrepancy in the pure Dyad and
Contextual Dyad
Person level relationships between X and Y. Relatedly, the Between-within CFM produces a
Dyad level coefficient that describes the association between X and Y that is purely between-
dyads (i.e., β ), and both specifications produce Person level coefficients representing
Between Dyad
the Y on X regression that is purely within-dyad. In this way, these complementary
specifications of the CFM mirror the two principal centering strategies, grand-mean and cluster-
mean centering (respectively), which produce a comparable interpretation of level 2 coefficients
in the traditional multilevel modeling paradigm.
It is important to note that the Contextual and Between-within CFMs are only estimable
when at least one of the observed same-person different-variable (i.e., cov( X, Y), cov( X, Y))
a a b b
or different-person different variable (i.e., cov( X, Y), cov( X, Y)) covariances differs from the
a b b a
others, because when these covariances are uniform there is no additional Person level process to
be modeled. In addition, the example illustrated here featured a scenario in which both same-
person different-variable covariances were larger than the different-person different-variable
covariances, resulting in a Contextual and Between-within CFMs featuring directional paths
linking X and Y for the same individual. However, any combination of deviant covariances is
possible, and researchers should investigate the most appropriate combination of Person level
associations to fit their data.
Discussion
The present work sought to integrate fundamental ideas from the multilevel modeling
literature with a novel adaptation of an established dyadic analysis approach using structural
equations modeling. After reviewing core concepts from the multilevel modeling and dyadic
analysis literatures, the well-established Standard and Modified Common-Fate Models (CFM)
were described using SEM equations and path diagrams. Next, we demonstrated that the
“multilevel-SEM” version of the CFM presented in prior work (Ledermann & Kenny, 2012,
model 2b) produces a Dyad level coefficient that represents the contextual effect, or the
discrepancy in the pure between- and within-dyads relationships. Next, a variation on this earlier
model was developed, which provides a Dyad level coefficient reflecting the pure between-dyads
relationship between the predictor and outcome variable. The consequences of these different
model configurations and the interpretation of the corresponding model parameters were
illustrated using a large sample of romantic couples drawn from the 500 Families Project
(Schneider & Waite, 2000).
Connections to the Multilevel SEM Specification
The Between-Within CFM (BW-CFM) described in the present work can also be
conceptualized as a less restrictive form of the multilevel latent covariate model for contextual
studies discussed by earlier methodological work using Multilevel SEM (MLSEM; Lüdtke et al.,
2008; Muthén & Asparouhov, 2009). Under the MLSEM specification dyad members (i) are
assumed to be indistinguishable, and the Person level variables describing the same attribute for
each dyad member (e.g., X, X, Y, Y) are treated exchangeable indicators (e.g., X, Y) of their
a b a b i i
X Y
respective Dyad level latent variables (e.g., η , η ). In addition, the Person level explicit
aX bX aY bY
residuals from our BW-CFM model (δ , δ , ε , ε ) are comparable to the “observed” level 1
variables under the MLSEM specification (i.e., the %WITHIN% level in Mplus) that have been
subjected to latent mean centering via the level 2 Dyad variables (i.e., the %BETWEEN% level
in Mplus).
To verify the conformability of these specifications, the BW-CFM from the worked
example using partner understanding (PU) and successful relationship (SR) appraisals was re-
mPU
specified with parameter constraints that treat dyad members as indistinguishable (i.e., θ =
fPU εmSR εfSR aPU bPU aSR bSR
θ , θ = θ , κ = κ , ν = ν , ν = ν ). The resulting model had six degrees
mWithin fWithin
of freedom but provided a good fit to the data (χ (6) = 4.810, p = .57, RMSEA = .000 [.000,
.062], CFI = 1.000, TLI = 1.000), suggesting that male and female partners may not be
empirically distinguishable on these variables. As expected, the coefficients produced by this
constrained version of the BW-CFM differed from to the pooled auxiliary parameters described
PU SR
in the earlier worked example by no more than .002 (β = .995, κ = .462, Ψ = .511, Ψ
Dyad Within
PU εSR
= .148, θ = .618, θ = .555).
The multivariate dataset used in the previous example was transposed into long format
(i.e., partners nested within dyads) and an ML-SEM version of the BW-CFM was estimated
using TYPE = TWOLEVEL in Mplus. Because lower level (Person) units are regarded as
inherently indistinguishable, the MLSEM approach applies different rules for calculating degrees
PU
of freedom and model fit (i.e., df = 0). However, the parameter estimates for β , κ , Ψ ,
Dyad Within
SR PU εSR
Ψ , θ , and θ were identical to the values produced by the constrained BW-CFM, as were
the estimated standard errors. It is important to note that the ML-SEM procedure was valid in the
present example because dyad members were empirically indistinguishable, however, a
researcher would only know this to be a reasonable assumption by first evaluating the
distinguishability constraints using the multivariate specification. As a result, we recommend
that researchers applying this approach to theoretically distinguishable dyads adopt the
multivariate specification for their initial analysis.
Implications for Dyadic Researchers
The insights provided here provide dyadic researchers with new opportunities to model
intra- and inter-dyadic phenomena in compelling ways. Although the CFM has grown in
popularity among researchers in recent years, the perception that it primarily provides insight
into Dyad level processes may have led researchers to discount its utility. The present work
demonstrates the flexibility of the CFM by illustrating the potential for simultaneously modeling
and comparing the magnitude of relationships both between dyads (i.e., Do couples reporting
more constructive communication also report more successful relationships?) and within dyads
(i.e., Do male partners reporting more constructive communication also report more successful
relationships, relative to their female counterpart?). Implementing a CFM that casts dyadic data
structures in this light may be useful from a theory building and testing perspective because it
encourages researchers to think of dyadic interdependence from a multilevel perspective.
Whereas the predominant analytic approach to dyadic data, the actor-partner interdependence
model (APIM; Kenny, 1996; Wickham & Knee, 2012), parameterizes interdependence in the
form of direct paths leading from partner a’s X variable to partner b’s Y variable (and vice
versa), as well as the interaction between both partners X variables, the BW-CFM captures
interdependence through both Dyad and Person level coefficients. More specifically, the Dyad
level coefficient describes the extent to which each Person level outcomes can be explained by a
higher-level process transmitted through the dyadic latent variables.
The present work also clarifies critical differences between an earlier extension of the
CFM (i.e., Ledermann & Kenny, 2012, model 2b) that focused on the contextual effect, and the
Between-Within-CFM introduced here, which provides the pure between-clusters effect. The
present work further clarifies these distinctions by providing a detailed account of the model
specification and interpretation of both models, which should allow researchers to apply both
models across a wide range of SEM software platforms.
Limitations and Future Directions
The present work treated CFM indicators as continuously scaled response variables.
Although the majority of CFM applications feature multiple-item composite variables as
indicators, situations often arise when the attribute of interested is measured using an ordinal or
binary indicator. Unfortunately, the parameterization of explicit residual latent variables that play
a critical role in the BW-CFM become more complicated for ordinal response models. Future
work should focus on generalizing these concepts to Probit and Logit models to handle ordinal
data, as well as Poisson and Negative Binomial link models to accommodate count indicators.
As with any regression model, measurement error in both the predictor and criterion
variables inhibit our ability to accurately estimate Person level effects (and by extension
contextual effects). In addition, complications regarding comparability of κ coefficients for
Within
distinguishable dyads arise when reliability of response variable differs across dyad members
X X
(e.g., ρ ≠ ρ ). Although, SEM allows for the specification of measurement models to derive
M F
CFM indicators that are error-free. This solution introduces the need to ensure factor loading
invariance when dyad members are distinguishable, though this would not be a concern for
indistinguishable dyads. Although researchers adopting this approach could borrow from the
existing literature describing sample size requirements for estimating hierarchical CFAs, more
focused simulation studies should be conducted to understand study design characteristics that
will optimize power to detect the structural relationships in the BW-CFM.
Conclusion
Thoughtful specification of the Common-fate Model (Kenny, 1996; Ledermann &
Kenny, 2012) allows researchers to estimate models comprised of Person level coefficients that
represent pure within-dyad effects, and a Dyad level coefficient representing either the
contextual effect (Contextual CFM) or a pure between-dyads (BW-CFM) effect. The present
work described the rationale linking these CFM specifications to well-established techniques for
investigating contextual effects from the multilevel modeling literature. The application of these
models to evaluate dyadic processes has the potential drive theoretical innovation and spawn
novel research questions.
Footnotes
The random intercept approach can also be re-parameterized to capture dissimilarity when dyad
members are less similar to one another than randomly selected pairs (Wickham & Macia, 2019).
The application of these models to indistinguishable dyad members also requires modifications
to the model fit indices (see Olsen and Kenny, 2006).
The Figures and Appendix provide syntax for the explicit residual variable representation,
however, syntax corresponding to the implicit residual specification is provided on the OSF page
for models in which the explicit and implicit specifications produce the same parameter
estimates.
The intercept parameters are included in all models but have been omitted from Figures 3-5 to
reduce clutter.
Mplus and lavaan syntax for the auxiliary parameters is provided in Appendix A.
Moreover, the average of the Person level coefficients from the Contextual CFM ([κ +
mWithin
κ ] / 2 = [.453 + .467] / 2 = .460), plus the Dyad level contextual effect (β = .534),
fWithin Contextual Dyad
is equal to the pure between coefficient from the BW-CFM (.460 + .534 = .994 = β ).
Between Dyad