Think your way to happiness? Investigating the role of need for cognition in well-being
through a three-level meta-analytic approach
1,2 2 2 2
Verity Y. Q. Lua , Wei Ming Ooi , A’isyah Najib , Christine Tan ,
3 2 2
Nadyanna M. Majeed , Angela K.-y. Leung , Andree Hartanto
Stanford University, United States of America
Singapore Management University, Singapore
National University of Singapore, Singapore
Correspondence: Verity Y. Q. Lua, verity.lua.2021@msps.smu.edu.sg /
vyqlua@stanford.edu
Author note: Wei Ming Ooi and A’isyah Najib share equal second authorship to this work.
The final coding sheet used in the analyses, the exclusion sheet, and the analytic code for the
current work has been made publicly available on ResearchBox (#800;
work were presented at the Society for Personality and Social Psychology 2022 convention
Author Contributions: VYQL: Conceptualization, Data Retrieval, Formal Analysis, Writing
- Original Draft; WMO & AN: Data Retrieval, Coding of Data, Writing - Review & Editing;
CT: Coding of Data, Writing - Review & Editing; NMM: Formal Analysis, Writing - Review
& Editing; AL: Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision; AH: Funding Acquisition,
Conceptualization, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by Singapore Management University
through research grants from the Ministry of Education Academy Research Fund Tier 1 [20-
C242-SMU-001 & 21-SOSS-SMU-023] and Lee Kong Chian Fund for Research Excellence.
The sponsors had no role in determining the study design, data collection, data analysis,
interpretation of data, writing of the report nor decision to submit the article for publication.
We thank Harleen Kaur, Harkiran Kaur and Sandeeshwara Kasturiratna for their assistance in
the initial extraction, manual searches and eligibility screening of records. We also thank Xun
Ci Soh for her assistance in the coding of primary studies for the assessment of risk of bias.
Abstract
While the extent to which individuals engage in and enjoy cognitive abilities, commonly
known as need for cognition (NFC), has been suggested to promote adaptive behaviors
associated with well-being, there has not been a systematic examination of the strength of the
relationship between NFC and well-being. This meta-analysis sought to examine the
association between NFC and well-being. Based on 108 effect sizes extracted from 52
samples (50 records), a small to medium positive relationship (r = .20, 95% CI = [.16, .23], p
< .001) between NFC and well-being was observed. Sub-group analyses revealed that NFC
was associated with different aspects of well-being, including life satisfaction, positive affect,
negative affect, purpose in life, self-acceptance, personal growth, environmental mastery,
positive relations with others, autonomy, depression, anxiety and stress (|r|s = [.07, .45]).
Exploratory moderation analyses showed that age moderated the relationship between NFC
and well-being, whereby the positive relationship was stronger in younger samples. The
gender proportion of the sample also moderated the relationship between NFC and well-being
for certain specific measures of well-being, whereby the positive relationship between NFC
and well-being was stronger among females.
Keywords: Meta-analysis; need for cognition; well-being; ill-being
Well-being is broadly defined to encompass the absence of mental disorders and also
the presence of positive psychological resources (Diener, 1984; Liddel & Guiney, 2015; Ryff
& Singer, 1996). Throughout the decades of research dedicated towards attaining a better
understanding of well-being, a wide range of well-being indicators have been used ranging
from those measuring subjective well-being (i.e., life satisfaction, positive affect, and
negative affect; Diener, 1984) and psychological well-being (i.e., autonomy, positive
relations with others, purpose in life, self-acceptance, personal growth, environmental
mastery; Ryff & Keyes, 1995), to those capturing the presence of mood disorder symptoms
(e.g., anxiety, depressive symptoms, stress). In spite of the heterogeneity of well-being as a
construct, higher levels of positive well-being and lower levels of ill-being have reliably
shown to be positively associated with both mental and physical health (e.g., Boehm &
Kubzansky, 2012; Pressman et al., 2019).
However, levels of well-being tend to vary substantially from person to person (James
et al., 2012; Kardas et al., 2019; Schmutte & Ryff, 1997). As such, identifying individual
differences in dispositions that can predict one’s sense of well-being has been a prominent
research agenda in the fields of personality psychology and positive psychology. Indeed, over
the years, researchers have examined how individual differences in stable dispositions such
as personality (e.g., Schmutte & Ryff, 1997), behavioral dispositions (e.g., Bekalu et al.,
2019), and even value endorsement (e.g., Sagiv & Schwartz, 2000) are associated with
individuals’ sense of well-being. Interestingly, significantly less attention has been given to
examining how individuals’ predominant thinking styles are related to well-being.
Such a knowledge gap is quite surprising, given that there have been many emotion-
related theories proposing that cognitions influence emotions and well-being (e.g., Barrett,
2009; Moors et al., 2013; Russell, 2003; Schachter, 1964). Nonetheless, existing work has
suggested that differences in cognitive styles can explain differences in relevant factors
related to well-being such as attitudes and self-appraisals (e.g., Mittal et al., 2021; Peng et al.,
2006; Petty et al., 2009). For one, dialectical thinking – a type of cognitive style which
emphasizes a belief in contradictions (Peng et al., 2006) – has been proposed to influence
individuals’ attitudes towards positive and negative emotions (Peng et al., 2006; Miyamoto &
Ryff, 2011). In particular, evidence supported that dialectical thinkers tend to view positive
and negative emotions as complementary, and thus show a greater desire to experience a
balance of positive and negative emotions (Peng et al., 2006; Miyamoto & Ryff, 2011). In a
similar vein, analytical thinking – a type of cognitive style which focuses on foreground and
prominent information relative to peripheral and contextual information – has also been
found to be related to poorer appraisals of one’s physical appearance (Mittal et al., 2021), a
factor which has been closely linked to well-being (e.g., Griffiths et al., 2016).
Furthermore, a small but notable pool of studies provide more direct evidence that
cognitive styles are associated with well-being (e.g., Kibal'chenko & Eksakusto, 2020; Frone,
1990; Yang et al., 2016). For example, dispositional tolerance of ambiguity has been found to
exacerbate the relationship between role ambiguity and job stress (Frone, 1990). More recent
work even showed that experimentally manipulating Zhongyong thinking (a Chinese form of
dialectic thinking stye; Yang et al., 2016) resulted in an alleviation of depressive symptoms
(Yang et al., 2016), providing some preliminary empirical support that cognitive styles
influence well-being. Despite these promising findings, a clear understanding of the
relationship between cognitive styles and well-being is still limited.
One important and well-established construct that captures individual differences in
cognitive styles is the need for cognition (NFC). According to Cacioppo and Petty (1982),
NFC is a stable disposition that captures the extent to which individuals engage in and enjoy
cognitive activities such as thinking about abstract ideas, or solving challenging puzzles. NFC
varies substantially between individuals; specifically, individuals with higher NFC tend to
enjoy and spend more time evaluating information (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982). In contrast,
individuals with lower NFC tend to avoid effortful engagement with cognitive tasks and rely
more heavily on heuristics and mental shortcuts (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982; Vidrine et al.,
2007). As such, individuals high on NFC tend to feel an innate desire and intrinsic motivation
to think, whereas those low on NFC may only engage in effortful cognition when necessary.
Notably, while NFC has been found to be related to higher academic achievement (meta-
analytic r = .19, Richardson et al., 2012; see also Cacioppo et al., 1996; von Stumm &
Ackerman, 2013), the magnitude of such relationship suggests that NFC is only moderately
related to cognitive ability. Thus, NFC is more accurately described as the tendency for
individuals to expend cognitive resources on processing information, problem solving, and
decision-making rather than the ability to perform well in those tasks (Cacioppo et al., 1996;
Petty et al., 2009).
Although there has been limited research to systematically examine the effects of
NFC on well-being, there may be some reasons to believe that NFC is beneficial for well-
being. Similar to other cognitive styles, NFC was found to influence behaviors and attitudes
that are associated with well-being. Firstly, research suggests that high levels of NFC can
facilitate well-being by promoting adaptive behaviors such as effortful problem-solving and
introspection (e.g., Bye & Pushkar, 2009; Cacioppo et al., 1996; Nishiguchi et al., 2018).
Supporting this point of view, there is preliminary evidence that individuals with high NFC
are more likely to engage in effortful problem solving and control (Bye & Pushkar, 2009;
Nishiguchi et al., 2018), which can be adaptive in the face of coping with life challenges.
Relatedly, it was found that NFC is negatively associated with maladaptive behaviors such as
rumination (Nishiguchi et al., 2018; Vannucci & Chiorri, 2018). As individuals with higher
levels of NFC are more likely to purposefully seek out, scrutinize, and utilize relevant
information when making decisions and solving problems and less likely to engage in
maladaptive rumination (Cacioppo et al., 1996), they may be more equipped to handle the
problems they face in life and experience a greater sense of well-being.
Secondly, NFC may help individuals achieve greater self-concept clarity, thus leading
to higher well-being. Individuals with higher levels of NFC are more likely to engage in
introspection and metacognition (i.e., a state of thinking about their own thoughts; Berzonsky
& Sullivan, 1992; Petty et al., 2009). By engaging in introspection more often, those high on
NFC are often more confident in their opinions and attitudes (Barden & Petty, 2008). This
can in turn facilitate greater self-concept clarity, an experience that is closely associated with
improved well-being (DeMarree & Morrison, 2012; Hanley & Garland, 2017).
Notably, examining the effects of NFC on well-being is not straightforward due to the
complicated and multidimensional nature of well-being. Specifically, well-being has been
operationalized in many ways, including the absence of mental disorders, a positive mental
state, people’s subjective evaluation of their life, the presence of positive affect and the
absence of negative affect among other operationalizations (Diener, 1984; Ryff & Singer,
1996). As a result, research concerning well-being has often utilized a host of well-being
indicators which are not always easily comparable.
Nonetheless, an effective method that researchers have employed in attempts to
consolidate research examining predictors of well-being is through the use of systematic
review and integration of the literatures (e.g., Portocarrero et al., 2020). Given different and
sometimes competing theories on the NFC—well-being relationship, such efforts can help
interpret previous findings in a coherent fashion against the backdrop of other related
findings, allowing for a more holistic understanding of the effects of a range of predictors on
different indicators of well-being. Additionally, meta-analytic reviews (e.g., Portocarrero et
al., 2020) are able to meaningfully aggregate the findings of multiple studies, thereby
attaining a more accurate effect size of a phenomenon.
To bridge the gap in the understanding of how NFC is associated with the sense of
well-being, the current investigation sought to determine the overall relationship between
NFC and well-being using a meta-analytic approach. The present work examined a wide
range of operationalizations of well-being to integrate a more holistic understanding of the
relationship between NFC and well-being. In line with previous work (Portocarrero et al.,
2020; Wong et al., 2022), we included positive well-being measures related to the two
dimensions identified by researchers (e.g., Ryan & Deci, 2001), namely, subjective well-
being and psychological well-being. We adopted well-established definitions of subjective
well-being and psychological well-being; we defined subjective well-being as the presence of
pleasure or happiness and the absence of pain (Kahneman et al., 1999; Ryan & Deci, 2001),
and psychological well-being as achieving one’s true potential (Ryff, 1995; Ryan & Deci,
2001). Similarly, following previous work (Portocarrero et al., 2020; Wong et al., 2022), we
also included measures of ill-being which was defined as the presence of negative states and
psychological maladjustment (Diener, 2006). Thus, positive measures of well-being were
classified into 10 categories – positive affect, life satisfaction, the six dimensions of
psychological well-being, composite measures of psychological well-being, and composite
measures of subjective well-being. Accepted ill-being scales were classified into five
categories: negative affect, stress, anxiety, depressive symptoms, and other measures
capturing the presence of mental health symptoms (e.g., composite measures of mental health
symptoms, measures capturing symptoms for mental health disorders aside from anxiety and
depression). We excluded numerous constructs (e.g., self-esteem, loneliness, optimism,
emotional exhaustion) for which there was little consensus regarding whether or not they
were indicators of well-being or tangential constructs. For these variables, some researchers
have conceptualized them as predictors of well-being (e.g., Anasori et al., 2022; Conversano
et al., 2010; Du et al., 2017; Ng et al., 2022; VanderWeele et al., 2012), although others posit
that they are synonymous to well-being. We also excluded constructs that measured context-
specific well-being (e.g., satisfaction at work), given that we were interested in the
association between NFC and one’s global sense of well-being. In line with the view that
NFC can facilitate adaptive behaviors to cope with demanding situations, we hypothesized
that NFC would be positively associated with well-being.
Additionally, the current research examined possible moderators of the relationship
between NFC and well-being, such as the most commonly reported sample characteristics
including the age and gender proportion of the sample, to offer a more nuanced
understanding of the relationship in question. These moderation analyses were exploratory in
nature to examine the robustness of the associations between NFC and well-being. We had no
specific hypotheses regarding the moderators tested in the current study, given that scant
research has theorized differences in the relationship between NFC and well-being among
different groups of individuals.
Method
Search Strategy
A literature search was conducted for all available reports before May 2021 in
PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, EBSCOhost PsycInfo and EBSCOhost ERIC using the
following keywords: “need for cognition” AND (depress OR depressed OR depression OR
depressive OR “life satisfaction” OR affect OR affective OR anxious OR anxiet* OR well-
being OR wellbeing OR “well being” OR mood OR emotion* OR happiness OR sadness OR
happy).
To reduce chances of excluding relevant records in the current meta-analysis, manual
searches were conducted to supplement the aforementioned literature search done in the
th
databases. Manual searches were conducted on the 20 of May 2021, in three major journals
related to individual differences and well-being (Motivation and Emotion; Personality and
Individual Differences; and Journal of Happiness Studies) and ProQuest Dissertations &
Theses Global (to account for non-peer reviewed literature) using the following keywords:
“need for cognition” AND (well-being OR wellbeing OR “well being”). The three journals
were selected by the first and last authors of the paper prior to conducting the manual
searches. The keywords were different from those used for the database searches due to
restrictions on the number of keywords the journals’ search engines could accept. Manual
searches were also conducted in Google Scholar using five different combinations of
keywords: (1) (“well being” OR wellbeing OR “well being”) AND “need for cognition”, (2)
“quality of life”, “need for cognition”, (3) (emotion OR mood), “need for cognition”, (4)
(happiness OR happy), “need for cognition”, and (5) “Life satisfaction”, “need for cognition”.
The keywords were different from those used for the database searches due to restrictions on
the number of keywords Google Scholar’s search engine could accept. All manual searches
were limited to the first 100 hits. The decision to stop at the first 100 hits was made prior to
conducting these manual searches in light of the authors’ previous observations that hits after
th
the 100 result tended to be irrelevant.
Lastly, we also posted a call for unpublished data in the open forum for the Society of
rd
Personality and Social Psychology on 23 October 2021, and contacted the first authors
whose articles were reviewed in the current research via email for additional unpublished
works.
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
this meta-analysis (Moher et al., 2009). The initial search yielded 1780 potentially eligible
records, after which duplicates were removed using Mendeley (Mendeley, n.d.), resulting in a
total of 1049 records. Forty-six more duplicate records were removed manually, leaving a
total of 1003 records. These 1003 full-text records and four unpublished datasets were
screened for inclusion by the authors and a team of research assistants based on the following
criteria:
1. Studies were included if they were in English, Chinese, Malay, or Bahasa Indonesia .
2. Studies were included if trait well-being or ill-being was quantitatively measured.
Specifically, studies were included if they used at least one of the following positive
well-being measures: Subjective well-being or psychological well-being, or at least
one of the following negative well-being measures: negative affect, anxiety,
depression, stress, suicide ideation or composite negative indicators (Portocarrero et
al., 2020). Categories of well-being indicators and the exhaustive list of well-being
measures included in the current meta-analysis are available in ResearchBox #800
(e.g., affect while watching television, burnout, etc.), and state levels of well-being
(e.g., affect in the present moment, depressive symptoms in the past week) were
excluded. We accepted measures that examined well-being in general, or across the
minimum time period of a year.
3. Studies were included if they provided a trait measurement of NFC.
4. Studies were included if they were observational or provided data on both NFC and
well-being before or without any manipulation.
5. No sample prerequisites were placed on studies. Three studies (Bowman & Seifert,
2011; Cole & Korkmaz, 2013; Hitlin et al., 2013) using the Wabash National Study of
Liberal Arts Education (Pascarella & Blaich, 2013) were excluded as the samples of
these studies overlapped with another study which was included in the analysis
(Bowman, 2012). The latter study was included as it included multiple waves of data
1 We attempted to include studies in other languages to improve the inclusivity of the meta-analyses. These
languages were selected based on the authors’ proficiency in these languages.
from the Wabash National Study of Liberal Arts Education and had the largest sample
size among aforementioned studies. One other study (Lamers et al., 2011) was
excluded because the sample (from the LISS panel of CentERdata; Scherpenzeel &
Das, 2010) was a subset of another record included in the analysis which utilized the
full sample of the LISS panel of CentERdata. Information for the latter record was
provided to us during our call for unpublished data .
6. No publication or peer-review prerequisite was placed on records. One unpublished
dissertation record (Karnaze, 2019) was excluded from analyses given that there was
a peer-reviewed, published version of the work (Karnaze & Levine, 2020).
7. Studies were included if they reported relevant statistics or other quantitative
information needed to calculate effect sizes. If any necessary information was
missing, the relevant authors were contacted via email. 44 authors (for a total of 47
records) were contacted, of whom 13 provided the requested information, and 10
indicated that they were unable to retrieve or provide the data requested (52.27%
response rate). The remaining 21 did not respond after two email requests by the
authors.
PRISMA Flowchart
We would like to thank Dr Wiebke Bleidorn and Dr. Ted Schwaba for providing the relevant information from
the LISS panel dataset which were included in the current work.
Note. Records excluded either did not meet the inclusion criteria (n = 908), were excluded
due to overlapping samples (n = 4), or were excluded as two versions of the same work were
available but only the peer-reviewed version was retained (n = 1). Analysis included both
unpublished (n = 14) and published (n = 36) works.
inclusion criteria 1 to 6. Of these 84 records, 34 (40.48%) records were excluded due to
missing data. Hence, 50 (28% of which were non-peer reviewed) met all inclusion criteria,
thus qualifying them for inclusion in the final meta-analysis. Overall, 52 unique samples were
included with a total unique N of 37,967 (Mdn = 268.5, M = 730.13, SD = 1555.86, Range =
30 to 8615). The range of the mean age of samples was 18.21 to 60.25 years (Mdn = 26.53, M
= 32.02, SD = 13.84) with a median female proportion of 57.50% (M = 60.78%, SD =
12.50%, Range = 43% to 88%).
Coding of Variables
Coding was done independently by the second and third authors. The coders first
coded two randomly selected records as a trial to familiarize themselves with the coding
sheet. After the trial, feedback was gathered regarding the sufficiency of the coding sheet,
and coders had the opportunity to clarify any doubts before coding the rest of the records.
The inter-rater agreement after accounting for chance (i.e., Cohen’s kappa) for all coded
(i.e., including trial) records. Any discrepancies in coding were resolved through discussion
after the initial round of independent coding. Studies with incomplete data were still included
as long as there was data on the zero-order Pearson correlation (i.e., without any control
variables) between trait NFC and well-being, as well as the sample size. This information was
needed to calculate the observed effect size and sampling variance. Nonetheless, where there
was incomplete information, authors were emailed up to two times to obtain them. Where the
data of a study (but not the zero-order correlation coefficient between NFC and well-being)
was provided, the first author calculated the relevant correlation coefficients in R version
3.6.3 (R Core Team, 2022).
In addition to the aforementioned critical information, numerous records and study
characteristics were coded for, including the year of publication, and the type of record (e.g.,
journal article, unpublished data). Widely reported sample characteristics including the
country where the study was conducted, mean age of the sample, female proportion of the
sample, and participants’ educational status (i.e., student versus non-student) were also coded
to be examined as potential moderators of the NFC—well-being relationship.
Several methodological variables were also coded for. Specifically, the NFC scale
used, the type of well-being captured (i.e., positive vs. negative valence) and its
corresponding indicator (e.g., life satisfaction, positive affect, negative affect), and the well-
being scale used were coded for examining as potential moderators of the NFC—
well-being relationship. Initially, we also coded for potential mediators (i.e., the scale used to
measure problem-solving, the zero-order correlation between problem-solving and NFC, and
the zero-order correlation between problem-solving and well-being). However, these
variables were dropped because only one study (Berry, 2001) had such information.
Breakdown of Agreement (Cohen’s Kappa) between Coders
Trial Actual Total
Variable Coded
(n = 2; m = 2; (n = 48; m = 50; (n = 50; m = 52;
k = 2) k = 106) k = 108)
Necessary Statistical Information
1.00 .73 .74
Total sample size, N
.33 .95 .95
Zero-order Pearson correlation, r
Record and Sample characteristics
- .99 .99
Record type
1.00 .90 .90
Country
1.00 .84 .84
Education status of sample
1.00 .88 .88
Age (mean)
1.00 .89 .89
Age (SD)
1.00 .80 .81
Female proportion of sample
- 1.00 1.00
Multi-wave study?
Information on Need for Cognition
- .83 .83
Measure: NCS-31, NCS-18, NCS-6, or Other?
- .81 .81
Name of need for cognition measure (for ‘Other’)
- .70 .70
Items in need for cognition measure (for ‘Other’)
Information on Well-being
1.00 .98 .98
Well-being category
1.00 .91 .91
Well-being indicator
1.00 .90 .90
Well-being measure
- .61 .61
Well-being scale created by author?
.86 .86
Average Inter-rater Agreement .93
Note. N = number of records, m = number of samples, k = number of effect sizes. A few
records were randomly selected as part of the “trial” phase for coders to familiarize
themselves with the coding sheet. After the initial “trial” phase, coders had the opportunity to
clarify their doubts before moving on to code for the remaining records independently in the
“actual” coding phase. The raw interrater agreement (not accounting for chance) of the zero-
order Pearson correlation among the two trial records was 50.00%. For the two trial records,
both coders indicated both records to be of the same publication type (i.e., journal articles), to
be single-wave studies, and to have used the NCS-18. Thus, the Cohen’s kappa for these
variables cannot be calculated.
Assessment of Risk of Bias
Additionally, the first and fourth author independently evaluated and coded for each
included record’s quality using a modified version of the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI)
checklist (Moola et al., 2020). The original checklist contained eight items examining the
literature and methodological quality of the research, where a “yes” reflected a positive
evaluation of the study’s quality. However, four of the original eight questions where left out
because of they were either inapplicable to NFC as a construct (“Were objective, standard
criteria used for measurement of the condition?”), were not applicable to the records we
included which often did not set out to examine the relationship between NFC and well-being
(“Were confounding factors identified?”), or were inapplicable because we coded for the
zero-order correlation between NFC and well-being (“Were strategies to deal with
confounding factors stated?” and “Was appropriate statistical analysis used?”). Given these
reasons, we posit that the answers to these checklist items would not have influenced the
conclusions of the current meta-analysis. Hence, all records were judged based on four items
examining the record’s clarity in describing the inclusion criteria for recruiting the sample
(“Were the criteria for inclusion in the sample clearly defined?”) and the study subjects and
setting (“Were the study subjects and the setting described in detail?”), and the validity of the
need for cognition measure (“Was the exposure measured in a valid and reliable way?”) and
well-being measure (“Were the outcomes measured in a valid and reliable way?”) used. For
each item, coders indicated “yes”, “partly”, “unclear”, or “no” (for more details, see
The average inter-rater agreement for each item was calculated by counting the
number of responses that were agreed upon, divided by the total number of responses by each
of the coders (i.e., 108 responses). Cohen’s kappa was inappropriate to use given that the
base rates for each item were skewed. Thus, Guilford’s G, a different index of interrater
agreement that accounts for chance (and has been proposed to be the one of the least sensitive
indices to biased base rates; Xu and Lorber, 2014) was used instead. The interrater agreement
a third independent coder. Of the 108 records, 66 (61.11%) attained at least a “partly” rating
on all four items (i.e., were deemed to be of acceptable quality), seven (6.48%) attained three,
34 (31.48%) attained two, and one (0.93%) attained one.
Breakdown of Agreement (Guilford’s G) between Coders
Trial Actual Total
Item Coded
(n = 2; m = 2; (n = 48; m = 50; (n = 50; m = 52;
k = 2) k = 106) k = 108)
1.00 .80 .81
Inclusion in the sample
.25 .69 .68
Study subjects and setting
1.00 .83 .83
Need for cognition measure
1.00 .80 .81
Well-being measure
.78 .78
Average Inter-rater Agreement .81
Note. N = number of records, m = number of samples, k = number of effect sizes. A few
records were randomly selected as part of the “trial” phase for coders to familiarize
themselves with the coding sheet. After the initial “trial” phase, coders had the opportunity to
clarify their doubts before moving on to code for the remaining records independently in the
“actual” coding phase. The raw interrater agreement (not accounting for chance) of the zero-
order Pearson correlation among the two trial records was 50.00%.
Meta-Analytic Approach
To measure the effect size of the relationship between NFC and well-being, we
computed the zero-order Pearson correlation coefficient r between NFC and positive or
negative well-being from eligible studies. Negative effect sizes indicate that individuals with
higher levels of NFC tend to report lower levels of well-being (i.e., lower positive well-being
and higher ill-being). On the other hand, positive effect sizes indicate that those with higher
levels of NFC tend to report higher well-being (i.e., higher positive well-being and lower ill-
being).
As most samples contributed more than one effect size (due to the wide variety of
well-being indicators accepted in the current study), the statistical assumption that effect sizes
are independent would not hold true. Hence, to account for the dependence of effect sizes
included, three-level multilevel meta-analyses were conducted whereby effect sizes were
nested within samples (Harrer et al., 2021).
Transparency and Openness
The final coding sheet used in the analyses, the exclusion sheet, accepted well-being
categories and measures, and the analytic codes for the current work had been made publicly
3 In multilevel meta-analysis, level 1 refers to the participant level data (which is "hidden"; Harrer et al., 2021;
Pastor & Lazowski, 2018). Level 2 refers to the effect size, while level 3 in our case refers to the sample.
registered. All analyses were conducted using the R package metafor version 4.0-0
(Viechtbauer, 2010) in R version 4.2.2 (R Core Team, 2022). To account for the differences
in populations examined across the studies, all analyses accounted for random and mixed
effects with restricted maximum likelihood estimation (Schwarzer et al., 2015).
Results
Tests of Publication Bias
To ascertain the validity of the overall meta-analytic effect sizes, we tested for the
outlining the details of all included records). Asides from Egger’s test of publication bias,
meta-regression analysis and additional subgroup analyses were conducted to examine if the
relationship between NFC and well-being were moderated by record characteristics that were
theoretically irrelevant to the strength of the NFC—well-being relationship (such as the
publication status of the record, the year the record was published, and the type of NFC scale
used).
Egger’s Test
First, we ran Egger’s test for publication bias on all effect sizes included in the study.
Analysis of the 108 effect sizes extracted from the 52 samples revealed no evidence of
for funnel plot).
Funnel Plot of All Observed Effect Sizes Included in Current Meta-Analysis
Note. Each black dot on the graph represents the effect size observed for each study. Dots
within the gray regions were non-significant, while dots within the white region were
statistically significant at p < .05.
Publication Status of Record
To examine if publication status has any influence on the effect size, we compared the
effect sizes of published and unpublished records. Our results revealed that the meta-analytic
effect size of the 53 effect sizes obtained from the 14 samples from unpublished records (r
= .21, 95% CI = [.16, .27], p < .001) were not significantly different from the meta-analytic
effect size of the 55 effect sizes obtained from the 38 samples from published manuscripts (r
= .19, 95% CI = [.14, .24], p < .001), as indicated by the overlapping confidence intervals.
This suggests that there were no significant differences in the effect sizes of the NFC—well-
being relationship obtained in the published and unpublished records.
Year of Publication
Next, to examine if the year of publication of the records influenced the relationship
between NFC and well-being, a meta-regression analysis was conducted with the year of
publication indicated as the moderator in the model. Based on all 108 effect sizes obtained
from the 52 samples (Mdn = 2012.19 , Mode = 2019, Range = 1986 – 2021), we found that
the magnitude of the association between NFC and well-being did not vary significantly with
the year of publication (b = -0.001, SE = 0.003, 95% CI = [-0.006, 0.005], p = .756).
Need for Cognition Measure
To examine if the need for cognition scale (NCS) used would influence the strength of
the observed relationship between NFC and well-being, subgroup analyses were conducted
measure participants’ NFC: the NCS-34 developed by Cacioppo and Petty (1982), the NCS-
18 by Cacioppo et al. (1984), the NCS-6 as validated by Coelho et al. (2018), or other forms
was concluded that the type of NFC measure used in records did not influence the
relationship observed between NFC and well-being.
Forest Plots of the Need for Cognition—Well-being Effect Size Based on Need for Cognition
Measure Used
Note. m = number of samples, k = number of effect sizes, r = overall effect size (r) for the
sub-group. The black squares and whiskers represent the effect sizes and confidence
intervals, respectively.
Overall Meta-Analytic Effect Size
Based on the 108 effect sizes extracted from the 52 samples in the current study, we
found a significant, small to medium overall relationship between NFC and well-being
(Fisher’s z = 0.20, r = .20, 95% CI = [.16, .23], p < .001). NFC was positively correlated with
well-being, suggesting that individuals higher on NFC also had higher levels of well-being.
As part of sensitivity analyses, the data was re-analyzed including only records that attained
at least a “partly” for all four primary study quality assessment criteria. The overall meta-
analytic effect size obtained from the 66 effect sizes (39 unique samples) which met this
criteria was similar (Fisher’s z = 0.20, r = .19, 95% CI = [.14, .24], p < .001).
Meta-Analytic Effect Sizes by Well-Being Type
Due to the heterogeneity of well-being as a construct, we conducted subgroup
analyses to examine the association between NFC and specific indicators of well-being: life
satisfaction, positive affect, negative affect, purpose in life, self-acceptance, personal growth,
environmental mastery, positive relations with others, autonomy, depression, suicide ideation,
Forest Plots of the Need for Cognition—Well-being Effect Size Based on Well-Being
Indicator Used
Note. m = number of samples, k = number of effect sizes, r = overall effect size (r) for the
sub-group. The black squares and whiskers represent the effect sizes and confidence intervals
(Fisher’s z), respectively.
Life Satisfaction
There were 22 effect sizes from 21 unique samples which examined the association
between NFC and life satisfaction. The most common measure of life satisfaction used was
the Satisfaction with Life Scale (Diener et al., 1985), with 17 of the 22 effect sizes utilizing
this measure. One used the Freiburger Persoenlichkeitsinventar: Life Satisfaction subscale
(Fahrenberg et al., 1973), one used the Generalized Contentment Scale (Hudson & Proctor,
1977), and the remaining three used a single-item measure of life satisfaction. There was a
significant positive association between NFC and well-being as measured by life satisfaction
(Fisher’s z = 0.14, r = .14, 95% CI = [.08, .20], p < .001).
Positive Affect
There were five effect sizes from five unique samples which examined the association
between NFC and trait positive affect. All effect sizes utilized the positive affect subscale of
the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (Watson et al., 1988). There was a significant
positive association between NFC and well-being as measured by positive affect (Fisher’s z =
0.36, r = .35, 95% CI = [.29, .40], p < .001).
Negative Affect
There were five effect sizes from five unique samples which examined the association
between NFC and negative affect. All effect sizes utilized the negative affect subscale of the
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (Watson et al., 1988). There was a significant positive
association between NFC and well-being as measured by negative affect (Fisher’s z = 0.09, r
= .09, 95% CI = [.03, .15], p = .005), whereby higher NFC was correlated with lower levels
of negative affect.
Purpose in Life
There were nine effect sizes from eight unique samples which examined the
association between NFC and purpose in life. Four effect sizes utilized the purpose in life
subscale from the Ryff Scales of Psychological Well-Being (Ryff, 1989), three utilized the
presence of meaning subscale from the Meaning in Life Questionnaire (Sterger et al., 2006),
and the remaining two utilized the existential subscale from the McGill Quality of Life
Questionnaire (Cohen et al., 1995) and the purpose in life subscale of the Life Engagement
Test (Scheier et al., 2006), respectively. There was a significant positive association between
NFC and well-being as measured by purpose in life (Fisher’s z = 0.26, r = .26, 95% CI =
[.15, .35], p < .001), whereby higher NFC was associated with greater perceived purpose in
life.
Self-Acceptance
There were eight effect sizes from seven unique samples which examined the
association between NFC and self-acceptance. Five effect sizes utilized the self-acceptance
subscale from the Ryff Scales of Psychological Well-Being (Ryff, 1989), and the remaining
three utilized the Harmony in Life Scale (Kjell et al., 2013), the Self-Satisfaction Index
(Imamoğlu, 2001), and the Self-Perception Scale (Nelson, 2014), respectively. There was a
significant positive association between NFC and well-being as measured by self-acceptance
(Fisher’s z = 0.20, r = .20, 95% CI = [.16, .23], p < .001).
Personal Growth
There were six effect sizes from six unique samples which examined the association
between NFC and personal growth. Four effect sizes utilized the personal growth subscale
from the Ryff Scales of Psychological Well-Being (Ryff, 1989) and two utilized the
Psychological Flourishing Scale (Diener et al., 2010). There was a significant positive
association between NFC and well-being as measured by personal growth (Fisher’s z = 0.49,
r = .45, 95% CI = [.38, .52], p < .001). In other words, individuals with higher NFC had a
higher sense of continual personal development.
Environmental Mastery
There were six effect sizes from six unique samples which examined the association
between NFC and environmental mastery. Four effect sizes utilized the environmental
mastery subscale from the Ryff Scales of Psychological Well-Being (Ryff, 1989), and the
remaining two utilized the Personality in Intellectual Aging Contexts: Control Beliefs
subscale (Lachman, 1986) and Sense of Control Scale (Lachman & Weaver, 1988),
respectively. There was a significant positive association between NFC and well-being as
measured by environmental mastery (Fisher’s z = 0.35, r = .33, 95% CI = [.23, .43], p
< .001), meaning that individuals higher on NFC had a greater perception that they were able
to affect their own lives and their environment.
Positive Relations with Others
There were six effect sizes from four unique samples which examined the association
between NFC and positive relations with others. Four effect sizes utilized the positive
relations with others subscale from the Ryff Scales of Psychological Well-Being (Ryff,
1989), and the remaining two utilized the Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social
Support scale (Zimet et al., 1988). There was a significant positive association between NFC
and well-being as measured by positive relations with others (Fisher’s z = 0.16, r = .16, 95%
CI = [.07, .25], p < .001).
Autonomy
There were four effect sizes from four unique samples which examined the
association between NFC and autonomy. All effect sizes utilized the autonomy subscale from
the Ryff Scales of Psychological Well-Being (Ryff, 1989). There was a significant positive
association between NFC and well-being as measured by positive relations with others
(Fisher’s z = 0.41, r = .39, 95% CI = [.26, .50], p < .001), signifying that individuals with
higher NFC had a higher sense of self-determination.
Depression
There were five effect sizes from four unique samples which examined the association
between NFC and depression. One effect size utilized the Center for Epidemiological Studies
Depression Scale (Radloff, 1977), one utilized the Beck Depression Inventory (Beck et al.,
1961), one utilized the D-30 Scale of Depression (Dempsey, 1964), one utilized the Feelings
and Concerns Survey (Nelson, 1981), and the final one used the German State-Trait
Depression Scales: Trait subscale (Spaderna et al., 2002). There was a significant positive
association between NFC and well-being as measured by depressive symptoms (Fisher’s z =
0.19, r = .19, 95% CI = [.12, .25], p < .001), whereby higher NFC was correlated with lower
levels of depressive symptoms.
Anxiety
There were 13 effect sizes from 13 unique samples which examined the association
between NFC and anxiety. 12 effect sizes utilized the trait subscale of the State-Trait Anxiety
Inventory (Spielberger et al., 1983), and the remaining one utilized the anxiety subscale of
the Institute for Personality & Ability Testing Scale (Krug et al., 1976). There was a
significant positive association between NFC and well-being as measured by anxiety
(Fisher’s z = 0.18, r = .18, 95% CI = [.11, .25], p < .001), whereby higher NFC was
correlated with lower levels of trait anxiety.
Stress
Finally, there were three effect sizes from two unique samples which examined the
association between NFC and stress. All three effect sizes utilized a single-item stress
measure. There was a significant positive association between NFC and well-being as
measured by stress (Fisher’s z = 0.07, r = .07, 95% CI = [.002, .13], p = .042), whereby
higher NFC was correlated with lower levels of stress.
Summary of Findings Regarding Effect Sizes by Well-Being Type
In sum, NFC was positively associated with well-being as measured by the different
indices of well-being captured in the current meta-analysis. We did not conduct subgroup
analyses for the 16 effect sizes (from 10 unique samples) which used composite measures of
well-being (i.e., composite measures of psychological well-being, composite measures of
subjective well-being, or composite measures of ill-being) given that they would do relatively
little in capturing the nuances of well-being as a construct. Based on the current set of
subgroup analyses, it appears that NFC had the largest positive association with personal
growth (r = .45) and the smallest (but still significant) association with stress (r = .07). In
general, it appears that NFC tended to have larger associations with positive indicators of
well-being (i.e., life satisfaction, positive affect, purpose in life, personal growth,
environmental mastery, positive relations with others, and autonomy, rs = [.14, .45]), and
weaker associations with negative indicators of well-being (i.e., negative affect, depression,
anxiety, and stress, rs = [.07, .19]).
Tests of Moderators
Next, we sought to examine if there were moderators in the relationship between NFC
and well-being. The valence of well-being indicator used and several sample characteristics
including the educational status, mean age, and gender proportion of the sample, were
examined as potential moderators of the relationship between NFC and well-being. Whilst
there has been little investigation looking at the possibility that the relationship between NFC
and well-being would differ between different groups of individuals, such an investigation
would be meaningful in shedding light on the possible demographic moderators of this
relationship.
All moderation analyses were first conducted using the full range of records,
regardless of well-being indicator type. However, to account for the heterogeneity of well-
being as a construct, we replicated the moderation analyses within subsamples of records
grouped by the different indicators of well-being (except for when testing the valence of well-
being indicator as a moderator). To ensure these moderation analyses were sufficiently
powered, we only repeated the moderation analyses on the three most common groups of
well-being indicators: life satisfaction (22 effect sizes), anxiety (13 effect sizes), and purpose
in life (9 effect sizes).
Where moderator variables were categorical in nature (i.e., the valence of well-being
indicator used, and the educational status of the sample), subgroup analyses were conducted.
Significant moderating effects were indicated by non-overlapping 95% confidence intervals
for the effect sizes observed within each subgroup. Where moderator variables were
continuous (i.e., mean age and gender proportion of sample), meta-regression analyses were
conducted. Significant moderating effects were indicated by a significant slope coefficient
associated with the moderator term. A summary of the moderation analyses is presented in
Summary of Moderation Analyses
Moderators m k r or b 95% CI
Valence of Well-Being Indicator a
Positive Indicators 39 78 .22 *** [.17 , .26]
Negative Indicators 21 30 .13 *** [.09 , .17]
Education Status of Sample a
All Well-Being Indicators
Student Sample 30 71 .23 *** [.18 , .28]
Non-Student Sample 19 27 .13 *** [.07 , .19]
Life Satisfaction
Student Sample 13 13 .16 ** [.06 , .26]
Non-Student Sample 6 7 .10 *** [.04 , .16]
Anxiety
Student Sample 8 8 .22 *** [.16 , .28]
Non-Student Sample 5 5 .04 [-.14 , .23]
Purpose in Life
Student Sample 4 4 .35 *** [.23, .45]
Non-Student Sample 3 4 .13 [-.01, .26]
Mean Age of Sample b
All Well-Being Indicators 43 93 -0.00 * [-0.01 , -0.00]
Life Satisfaction 17 18 -0.00 [-0.01 , 0.00]
Anxiety 11 11 -0.00 [-0.01 , 0.00]
Purpose in Life 7 8 -0.01 [-0.01 , 0.00]
Gender Proportion of Sample b
All Well-Being Indicators 42 89 -0.01 [-0.38 , 0.36]
Life Satisfaction 16 16 -0.75 [-1.55, 0.06]
Anxiety 11 11 0.70 * [0.10 , 1.30]
Purpose in Life 7 8 0.99 * [0.05 , 1.93]
Note. m = number of samples, k = number of effect sizes. a For categorical moderators,
subgroup analyses were conducted. Effect sizes of the relationship between NFC and well-
being within each subgroup are reported as Pearson correlations (r). A significant moderation
effect is indicated by non-overlapping confidence intervals; pairs of confidence intervals
which are non-overlapping are bolded. bFor continuous moderators, meta-regression analyses
were conducted. Slope coefficients (b) of the moderators are reported, and a significant
moderation effect is indicated by a p-value less than .05, and a 95% confidence interval
excluding zero; significant slope coefficients are bolded.
Valence of well-being indicator
To examine if the valence of the well-being indicator used would moderate the
relationship between NFC and well-being, subgroup analyses were performed among effect
sizes that utilized measures of well-being (i.e., life satisfaction, positive affect, purpose in
life, self-acceptance, personal growth, environmental mastery, positive relations with others,
autonomy, composite measures of psychological well-being, and composite measures of
subjective well-being or happiness) and effect sizes that utilized measures of ill-being (i.e.,
negative affect, depression, anxiety, stress, and composite measures of negative indicators;
category of well-being measure).
Based on 78 effect sizes utilizing positive indicators of well-being obtained from 39
samples, it was found that NFC was positively associated with well-being (r = .22, 95% CI =
[.17, .26], p < .001). Similarly, based on 30 effect sizes utilizing negative indicators of well-
being obtained from 21 samples, it was found that NFC was associated with improved well-
between NFC and well-being was not significantly stronger when positive rather than
negative indicators of well-being were used, as indicated by the overlapping 95% confidence
intervals.
Education Status of Sample
Next, subgroup analyses were conducted to see if the relationship between NFC and
overall well-being differed significantly among student versus non-student samples. Studies
that utilized mixed samples of student and non-student participants were excluded from the
analyses. Based on 71 effect sizes obtained from 30 student samples, we found that there was
a significant positive relationship between NFC and well-being among student samples (r
= .23, 95% CI = [.18, .28], p < .001). Similarly, based on 27 effect sizes obtained from 19
non-student samples, we found a significant positive relationship between NFC and well-
being among non-student samples (r = .13, 95% CI = [.07, .18], p < .001). The positive
relationship between NFC and well-being found in student samples were not significantly
different compared to that found in non-student samples, as the 95% confidence intervals
were overlapping slightly. This suggested that the education status of the sample did not
significantly moderate the relationship between NFC and overall well-being.
We replicated these moderation analyses on subgroups utilizing specific indicators of
well-being. Namely, we examined if the student status of a sample influenced the relationship
of NFC with life satisfaction, anxiety, and purpose in life. In line with our moderation
analyses utilizing the full range of well-being indicators, we found that the observed
relationship between NFC and each of the aforementioned indicators of well-being did not
differ significantly between student and non-student samples, as indicated by overlapping
Mean Age of the Sample
To examine if the mean age of the sample would moderate the relationship between
NFC and well-being, a meta-regression analysis was conducted. Based on 93 effect sizes
obtained from 43 samples (M = 28.79, SD = 13.22, Median = 22.20) for which we had
age age age
the mean ages of, we found that the magnitude of the association between NFC and well-
being decreased with age (b = -0.003, SE = 0.002, 95% CI = [-0.01, -0.00], p = .038). In other
words, the observed relationship between NFC and well-being was less positive among older
samples, whereby the relationship between NFC and well-being decreased by z = .04 for
every one-year increase in the sample’s mean age. We replicated these moderation analyses
within subsamples of records utilizing life satisfaction, positive affect, negative affect,
depression, and anxiety as well-being indicators. However, we found that the associations
between NFC with life satisfaction, anxiety, and purpose in life were not significantly
moderated by age (ps > .162).
Gender Proportion of the Sample
Lastly, a meta-regression analysis was conducted to examine if the female proportion
of a sample would moderate the relationship between NFC and well-being. Based on 89
effect sizes obtained from 42 samples, we found that the gender proportion of the sample was
not a significant moderator between NFC and well-being (b = -0.01, SE = 0.19, 95% CI = [-
0.38, 0.36], p = .959). This suggested that the NFC—well-being relationship did not differ by
gender. Replicating these analyses within subsamples of records utilizing life satisfaction,
anxiety, and purpose in life as well-being indicators revealed that the gender proportion of the
sample did not moderate the relationship between NFC and life satisfaction (p = .070).
However, the relationship between NFC and anxiety (b = 0.70, SE = 0.31, 95% CI = [0.10,
1.30], p = .022) and purpose in life (b = 0.99, SE = 0.48, 95% CI = [0.05, 1.93], p = .039) did
differ by the gender proportion of the sample, whereby the relationship between NFC and
positive affect was stronger among samples with more females relative to samples with less
females. Nonetheless, given that these findings were not consistently replicated across the
different well-being indicators, these findings may be spurious.
Discussion
Based on the current meta-analysis, we found a significant, small to medium positive
overall relationship between NFC and well-being, in line with our hypothesis. Subgroup
analyses examining the association between NFC and different indicators of well-being (e.g.,
life satisfaction, indices of psychological well-being; rs = [.14, .45]) and ill-being (e.g.,
depression, negative affect; |r|s = [.07, .19]) further supported the hypothesis that higher trait
NFC was associated with higher levels of well-being. Regardless of the type of well-being
indicator used, a significant association between NFC and improved well-being was
observed. Additionally, results from Egger’s test did not reveal any evidence of publication
bias, and subgroup analyses revealed that there were no significant differences in effect sizes
observed based on the records’ publication status, year of publication, nor NFC measure
used. These findings lend evidence of the validity of the studies included in the current
analyses and support the close link between NFC and well-being.
Our notable trend in our finding was that the relationship between NFC and positive
indicators of well-being appeared to be somewhat stronger than the relationship between
rather than reducing feelings of ill-being. These findings support existing work which showed
that well-being and ill-being constructs are likely to be orthogonal constructs rather than two
ends of the same continuum. Indeed, many predictors of well-being factors have also been
found to be differentially related to positive and negative affect (e.g., Costa & McCrae, 1980;
Larsen & Ketelaar, 1991; Lua et al., 2022; Tay & Diener, 2011), suggesting that positive and
negative affect are unlikely to be merely two ends of the same spectrum (Diener & Emmons,
1984; Diener et al., 1995).
One possible reason that NFC may be slightly more strongly associated with positive
well-being relative to ill-being is because NFC facilitates behaviors that are more associated
with the fulfilment of needs, which arguably are more strongly associated with positive rather
than negative emotional states (Tay & Diener, 2011). For example, the fulfilment of mastery
needs (e.g., the experience of learning and doing well at work) has been shown to account for
approximately 18% of variation in positive emotions, but only 9% of variation in negative
emotions (Tay & Diener, 2011). As in the introduction, we theorized that NFC may
encourage behaviors such as introspection and effortful problem solving – behaviors that
facilitate the fulfilment of mastery needs. This may in turn influence one’s sense of positive
well-being more than ill-being. It is also possible that the scales used to measure ill-being in
the included studies were more heterogenous than those measuring positive well-being,
thereby causing the observed relationship between NFC and positive well-being to be
stronger than that for ill-being. Nonetheless, more work is needed to examine the pathways
by which NFC is associated with positive well-being and ill-being to fully understand why
NFC was more strongly associated with positive well-being more than feelings of ill-being.
Of note, NFC was still significantly associated with improved well-being in the subgroup
analyses of effect sizes utilizing negatively valanced measures of well-being. As such, NFC
was still found to be associated with lower levels of ill-being.
Additionally, the current work also tested other potential moderators in the
relationship between NFC and well-being as part of exploratory analyses. An interesting
finding was that the mean age of the sample used was shown to be a significant moderator of
the NFC—well-being relationship when indicators of well-being were pooled together. The
positive relationship between NFC and well-being was stronger among younger samples
relative to older samples. Although differences in age often reflect differences in educational
status (e.g., in the current data, student samples: M = 21.41 years, Mdn = 21.04 years, SD =
3.49, Range = 18.21 to 35.62; non-student samples: M = 44.61 years, Mdn = 44.88, SD =
11.22, Range = 26.53 to 60.25), subgroup analyses revealed that the relationship between
NFC and well-being among student samples and non-student samples had overlapping 95%
confidence intervals, indicating that the educational status of the sample was not a significant
moderator. Nonetheless, the trends for this subgroup analyses were in line with the findings
on age as a moderator – the meta-analytic correlation coefficient between NFC and well-
being was higher in the student sample (r = .23) compared to the non-student samples (r
= .13).
It is reasonable to argue that the mean age of the sample moderated the relationship
between NFC and well-being because there is a stronger association between NFC and
academic success relative to workplace success. Existing works have found that students
higher on NFC perform better academically, as indicated by measures such as higher school
grade point averages, greater satisfaction with their studies, and lesser thoughts of dropping
out (e.g., Elias & Loomis, 2002; Grass et al., 2017; Richardson et al., 2012); in a meta-
analytic review by Richardson and colleagues (2012), it was found that the relationship
between grade point average and need for cognition was significantly positive (r = .19). It
was theorized that a high NFC can facilitate success in academics through heightened
investment and curiosity in academically related areas (Elias & Loomis, 2002; Grass et al.,
2017; Olson et al., 1984). Of note, much work examining predictors of students’ sense of
well-being has found that academic success plays a positive role in promoting their well-
being (meta-analytic r = .16, Bücker et al., 2018; see also Gilman & Huebner, 2006; Ridner
et al., 2016; Sotardi & Dubien, 2019; Steinmayr et al., 2016). As such, beyond aiding
students in day-to-day decisions, problem-solving, and self-concept clarity, NFC may
additionally and indirectly improve students’ well-being through greater academic success.
In contrast, while NFC may benefit employees’ performance in specific tasks and
social contexts (e.g., in heterogeneous teams, Kearney et al., 2009; in sales related jobs,
Deeter-Schmelz & Sojka, 2007), NFC has also been suggested to hinder work performance in
other contexts (e.g., in teams or tasks where unshared information, differential perspectives,
and/or integration of multiple ideas are important; Brodbeck et al., 2007; Henningsen &
Henningsen, 2004; Kearney et al., 2009). This suggests that the benefits of NFC for work
performance may be highly dependent on people’s job scope and workplace interaction
dynamics. Further, work performance may be less dependent on the extent of cognitive
processing as compared to academic performance. Social network, relationship dynamics
with coworkers and supervisors, and job-person fit may go beyond NFC but can impact job
performance and well-being substantially. Given that meta-analytic reviews have suggested
that job performance plays a comparable role to workers’ global well-being (meta-analytic
|r|s = [.16, .47]; Gutiérrez et al., 2020), the less consistent relationship between NFC and
performance among workers relative to students may explain the moderating effect of age
observed in the current meta-analysis. Nonetheless, given the exploratory nature of these
findings, it would be important for future work to replicate these results.
While much of the theorizing discussed in the present work assumes that NFC affects
well-being, the correlational nature of the studies included in the current analyses do not
allow us to draw causal conclusions about the relationship between NFC and well-being. It is
possible that well-being could facilitate individual differences in NFC. It would be of interest
for future studies to examine whether inducing certain mood states can influence individuals’
state levels of NFC, and whether influencing individuals’ levels of NFC in turn affects their
well-being. Longitudinal studies are conductive to providing some preliminary insights into
the directionality of this relationship. Based on the current review, it was evident that there
exists a lack of longitudinal studies examining the association between NFC and well-being –
of the 78 unique samples included in this meta-analysis, only six (7.69%) utilized a multi-
wave longitudinal design. More longitudinal investigations could shed important light onto
the directionality and possible mechanisms underlying the positive association observed
between NFC and well-being in the current meta-analysis.
Some limitations of the search strategy employed for this meta-analysis should also be
acknowledged. Certain functional decisions made on our part during the extraction process
may have caused several relevant studies to be excluded in the present meta-analysis. For
example, due to limited resources, we only included records written in English, Chinese,
Malay, and Bahasa Indonesia, and we only conducted searches within three major journals
and six databases. Additionally, limiting our manual searches to the first 100 hits (due to our
personal observations that hits after the first hundred were often irrelevant) could also have
resulted in the omission of potentially relevant studies beyond this threshold. As a result,
relevant records that were not extracted from the literature may have been excluded from the
present meta-analysis. In a similar vein, non-responses during our calls for supplemental
information and unpublished data would have caused several eligible records and datasets to
be excluded from our meta-analysis. To minimize this, we had allowed ample time for
authors to respond, and had contacted each author at most twice for a response. While a
majority of authors had responded (52.27%), several reported not having the requested data
anymore. Thus, due to these circumstances, there were several relevant records (published
and unpublished) that would have been excluded from the analysis due to these
circumstances. Despite these limitations, we believe that the combination of strategies
employed in this search and relatively large number of records included allowed us to gather
a comprehensive dataset for our meta-analysis.
Finally, it is worth noting that the current work only relied on one well-established
test of publication bias, namely Egger’s test. Whilst other established methods of detecting
publication bias exist (such as the PET-PEESE and WAAP methods; Carter et al., 2019),
there has yet to be an established practice of applying these methods in multi-level meta-
analyses to the best of our knowledge. In light of this, additional subgroup and meta-
regression analyses were conducted to examine if several theoretically irrelevant
characteristics of the records included in this meta-analysis affected the relationship between
NFC and well-being. These analyses found no evidence that that the publication status of
records included, year of publication, nor NFC measure used in each record influenced the
association between NFC and well-being, thereby lending greater confidence to the
robustness of the positive relationship observed between NFC and well-being.
To conclude, the current meta-analysis revealed that there is an association between
NFC and higher levels of well-being as well as lower levels of ill-being. The present findings
are in line with the hypothesis that NFC may facilitate adaptive behaviors that promote well-
being. Although there are existing theories regarding the mechanisms behind the NFC—well-
being relationship, there is a lack of studies measuring potential moderators such as
individuals’ problem-solving tendencies and decision-making abilities in a single study. As
such, the current meta-analytic review was unable to shed light on the mechanisms that may
underlie this positive NFC—well-being association. Nonetheless, the present work is the first
to systematically examine the relationship between NFC and well-being by aggregating all
relevant research that is available to date. Considering the promising findings in the current
meta-analysis, we hope that the present work can inspire more researchers to continue
examining the NFC—well-being link. This line of research will facilitate a greater
understanding of how NFC may influence well-being and reveal the potential of motivating
people towards a stronger need for cognition in order to harness the well-being benefits.