RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
POSTPRINT: This paper was accepted for publication in Psychology, Public Policy,
Rapport-Building in Suspect Interviewing: A Comparison of Relationship- and
Procedure-Based Approaches in a Laboratory Setting
Kuan-Ju Huang and Yee-San Teoh*
Department of Psychology, National Taiwan University, Taiwan.
*Corresponding author: Yee-San Teoh, Department of Psychology, National Taiwan
University, No.1, Roosevelt Road Section 4, Taipei City, 106, Taiwan. Telephone: +886
233663110. E-mail: ysteoh@ntu.edu.tw.
Author Note: Portions of this research were presented at the 12th Annual Conference of the
East Asian Association for Psychology and Law at Ritsumeikan University, Kyoto, Japan.
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
Conflict of Interest Statement: My co-author and I do not have any interests that might be
interpreted as influencing the research, and APA ethical standards were followed in the
conduct of the study.
Acknowledgements: The authors gratefully acknowledge Jui-Ting Sun, Shan-Yu Yeh, Ting-
Yi Liu, Yi-Hsuan Lee, Yu-Shan Chen, Yu-Sheng Chang for their help with data collection.
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
Abstract
Both researchers and practitioners have stressed the importance of developing rapport
in the investigative interviewing of criminal suspects. There is, however, no clear definition
of what constitutes rapport and ways of achieving and maintaining rapport. Most research on
rapport-building with suspects have focused on a positive personal bond between the
investigator and suspect (i.e., relationship-based approach), while more recent research
suggests a neutral type of rapport-building that focuses on developing a mutual understanding
of the interrogation process and roles (i.e., procedure-based approach). The present study thus
aimed to examine the effects of relationship- and procedure-based rapport-building
approaches on suspect interviewing outcome. Using a modified version of Russano et al.
(2005)’s cheating paradigm, ”guilty” participants were interviewed using different rapport-
building approaches in a laboratory setting. We found that participants were more likely to
confess in the procedure-based condition than in the relationship-based and control
conditions. However, both approaches did not have an effect on the number of details
participants were willing to disclose. We also found that the procedure-based approach
affected participants’ perception about the evidence. Theoretical and practical implications
for rapport-building in suspect interviewing are discussed.
Keywords: suspect, interrogation, confession, rapport
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
Rapport-Building in Suspect Interviewing: A Comparison of Relationship- and
Procedure-Based Approaches in a Laboratory Setting
Several decades of research have demonstrated that coercive interrogation practices
are not only unproductive in suspect interviewing, they risk eliciting unreliable or false
confessions (Meissner, Kelly, & Woestehoff, 2015). To avoid miscarriages of justice such as
wrongful conviction and enhance efficiency in criminal investigation, psychologists have
explored and proposed alternative methods for interviewing criminal suspects. In particular,
two broad categories of interrogation have been identified and examined: the accusatorial
approach and information-gathering approach (Meissner, Kelly, & Woestehoff, 2015). The
accusatorial approach (e.g., the Reid Technique; Inbau, Reid, Buckley, & Jayne, 2013) aims
primarily to elicit confessions, thus related techniques tend to be confrontational and guilt-
presumptive in nature. Investigators following this approach tend to use various
psychological manipulation techniques, ask confirmatory and close-ended questions, and
when deemed necessary, bluff or even lie about evidence. On the other hand, the information-
gathering approach (e.g., the PEACE Model; Milne, Shaw, & Bull, 2007) aims to facilitate
suspects’ spontaneous disclosure of case-relevant information. To this end, investigators are
encouraged to establish trust and rapport with suspects, ask open-ended questions as much as
possible, and use direct confrontation with presentation of true evidence. A recent meta-
analytic review of 17 field and laboratory studies (Meissner et al., 2014) revealed that both
approaches appear to be effective in obtaining true confessions, but the accusatorial approach
is more likely to elicit false confessions from the innocent. The authors recommended that
law enforcement investigators adopt an information-gathering approach for more productive
suspect interrogations.
However, issues still remain regarding the effectiveness of specific information-
gathering interrogation techniques in obtaining reliable information and how to implement
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
these techniques, especially when dealing with uncooperative suspects. Historically,
empirical studies on suspect interviewing have focused on the consequences of negative
interrogation methods given the urgency to reduce inappropriate and ineffective interrogation
practices, while in the past decade increasing studies have sought to determine and validate
appropriate techniques for suspect interrogation (Swanner, Meissner, Atkinson, & Dianiska,
2016). Importantly, an ideal interrogation technique should be just as effective in eliciting a
confession or information from real offenders as protecting the innocent. Information-
gathering approaches appear to fulfil this purpose yet more research is needed to support their
use in practice (Swanner et al., 2016). For example, researchers are still trying to identify
how to strategically use evidence to challenge suspects in a non-coercive manner, uncover
more powerful deception cues, as well as facilitate admissions of crime (Sukumar, Wade, &
Hodgson, 2016).
Among the information-gathering techniques found in the literature, rapport-building
has been identified to be a critical component in a successful interrogation (Kelly, Miller,
Redlich, & Klienman, 2013) and has been recommended in major interview protocols such as
the PEACE model (Milne et al., 2007). Though being conceptualized here as an information-
gathering technique, rapport-building has also been recommended by more accusatorial
interrogation approaches such as the Reid technique (Inbau et al., 2013), albeit with the goals
of emotional manipulation and obtaining a confession. However, there is little evidence on
how rapport-building within accusatorial framework could work in suspect interviewing
(Vallano & Schreiber Compo, 2015), and what makes rapport-building a productive
interview technique is its underlying information-gathering ethos. Importantly, compared to
the abundant literature on child and adult witness, experimental examinations of the effects of
rapport-building with criminal suspects are relatively scarce (for reviews, see Abee &
Brandon, 2013; Vallano & Schreiber Compo, 2015). There is also a research gap in
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
understanding the potential variations and approaches in rapport-building techniques.
Therefore, the present study sought to address this gap by distinguishing between two
rapport-building approaches and investigating their effectiveness in suspect interviewing
using a laboratory experiment.
Rapport-Building in Suspect Interviewing
Rapport-building has been cited as one of the most widely-used interview techniques
in suspect interviewing (Kassin et al., 2007). It is important not only to establish rapport in
the first place (Kelly, Redlich, & Miller, 2015; Kelly, Miller, & Redlich, 2016) but also to
maintain throughout the interview (Walsh & Bull, 2012). Rapport has been considered as a
crucial element in the interrogation process and that no other interview techniques would
work as effectively without establishing rapport at the beginning of the interview; also, when
any interview technique fails, interviewers can always go back to basic rapport-building
tactics (Kelly et al., 2013; St-Yves, 2006). Specifically, spending time to establish and
maintain good rapport could make suspects more willing to talk about their case, as well as
provide an opportunity to develop mutual understanding and detect any vulnerability or
special needs of the suspect (Milne et al., 2007). St-Yves (2006) proposed five basic rules of
rapport in investigative interviewing, including (1) being open-minded about the case, (2)
building up rapport in the first place, (3) paying attention and actively listen, (4) keep a
professional and neutral attitude, and (5) knowing how to conclude. That is, in order to ensure
effective communication, the interviewer should go beyond merely being nice but also
maintain a neutral and professional attitude while maintaining rapport throughout the entire
interrogation (St-Yves, 2006). Thus rapport-building is challenging, and success depends
heavily on the skills of the investigative interviewer.
Most law enforcement and legal practitioners acknowledge the benefits of rapport-
building and utilize a battery of verbal and nonverbal techniques to build rapport with
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
criminal suspects (Goodman-Delahunty & Howes, 2016; Kassin et al., 2007; Vallano, Evans,
Schreiber Compo, & Kieckhaefer, 2015). For example, Vallano et al. (2015) surveyed 123
law enforcement investigators from the United States pertaining to their opinions and
experiences of rapport-building. Although all investigators stressed the importance of
rapport-building in suspect interviews, the techniques they use varied considerably. The most
common techniques mentioned focused either on a friendly relationship between the
interviewer and interviewee (e.g., a “small talk” about common interests, self-disclosure,
displaying understanding) or emphasized the interview process and showing respect (e.g.,
being direct about the interview, providing explanations about the case, showing respect).
Relatively few participants mentioned nonverbal techniques such as providing items, making
eye contact, or ensuring a comfortable physical environment (for a list of rapport-building
study, Goodman-Delahunty & Howes (2016) interviewed 123 experienced Asian-pacific
investigative and intelligence interviewers and construed rapport-building as social influence
strategies to persuade suspects into cooperation. Among the six principles of social influence
(Cialdini & Goldstein, 2004), the principles of “liking” and “reciprocity” were most
frequently used by practitioners. Specifically, investigators tried to find common interests or
use humor to elicit liking from suspects; others provided tangible (e.g., food or drink) or
intangible (e.g., exchange of information) materials to facilitate reciprocal interaction. Hence,
despite the variation in techniques adopted by practitioners, the common purpose of rapport-
building seems to be a productive interrogation through the influence of interpersonal
relationship.
However, it is important to note the danger of considering rapport-building techniques
as a means to exert social influence for the purpose of leading suspects to cooperate or
confess during interrogation (Abbe & Brandon, 2013; Goodman-Delahunty et al., 2014;
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
Inbau et al., 2013). Our concern regarding this line of thinking is that when manipulating
rapport as a social influence trick, innocent suspects may submit to interpersonal pressure to
flatter the investigator and ultimately provide a false confession (see also discussion in
Vallano & Schreiber Compo, 2015). For example, if an interviewer resorts to the principle of
reciprocity by providing an innocent suspect with items, he or she might feel the pressure to
repay this favor by fulfilling the interviewer’s request to provide certain information. Such a
situation may be exacerbated when rapport-building (or social influence tactics) are paired
with suggestive questions (Vallano & Schreiber Compo, 2015; Wright, Nash, & Wade,
2015). Importantly, what makes rapport-building a productive interview technique (which
should be effective in eliciting information from real offenders as well as protecting the
innocent) is its underlying information-gathering or person-centered ethos; that is, rapport
between the investigator and suspect should be based on the intention to facilitate
communication and trust rather than to lead the suspect’s behaviors in a certain direction (i.e.,
to provide a confession or incriminating information; Allison et al., 2013; St-Yves, 2006;
Vallano & Schreiber Compo, 2015).
Field studies analyzing real suspect interviews have shown that higher levels of
rapport are associated with higher rates of confessions or detailed denial (Leahy-Harland &
Bull, 2017; Walsh & Bull, 2010, 2012), increased provision of information (Collins &
Carthy, 2019), and less uncooperative behaviors (Alison, Alison, Noone, Elntib, &
Christiansen, 2013; Alison et al., 2014). In their examination of videotapes of suspects,
Leahy-Harland & Bull (2017) found that the use of rapport/empathy was associated with a
higher likelihood of confession in real suspect interviewing, mostly for the offense of murder.
Similarly, Walsh & Bull (2012) examined interviews with benefit fraud suspects, and found
that the quality of rapport-building and maintenance was associated with positive
interviewing outcomes such as more detailed accounts or full confessions. Importantly, they
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
also noted that the ability to maintain rapport when participants gave their account was more
important than rapport-building ability at the beginning of the interview. In the context of
intelligence investigation, Alison et al. (2013, 2014) introduced a new coding framework
called “Observing Rapport-Based Interpersonal Techniques”(ORBIT) in order to capture the
rapport and interpersonal dynamics between the interviewer and suspect in real interrogation
settings. The framework is based on various humanistic or client-centered counselling
approaches such as the Motivation Interviewing (Miller & Rollnick, 2009). Such person-
centered ethos stipulates that interviews with rapport that can facilitate a suspect’s right to
choose what to say or not to say is most effective in eliciting true intelligence information
(Alison et al., 2013). Specifically, the rapport-based skills coded in the framework includes
reflective listening, rapport/resistance, summaries/paraphrasing, developing discrepancies,
and autonomy (Alison et al., 2013). Alison et al. (2013, 2014) analyzed a series of interviews
with convicted suspects of terrorism using the ORBIT framework, and the results revealed
that rapport-based interrogation techniques were associated with more valuable intelligence
information as well as less counter-interrogation techniques such as refusing to look at the
interviewer or answer questions.
Beyond research conducted in Western countries, studies using non-Western samples
also support the positive influence of rapport-based interviewing approaches. For example,
through self-reported questionnaires from both police officers and detainees, Wachi et al.
(2014, 2016) identified and examined the effectiveness of four investigative interviewing
approaches used in Japan. The results showed that a “relationship-focused approach” to
interrogation, which focuses on active listening of suspects’ accounts and building rapport
when discussing the case, was most likely to elicit a confession from those who were
reluctant to confess initially. In other words, by tackling the relationship with suspects,
investigators can induce a “behavioral change” in those who refused to cooperate in the first
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
place. In another study, Goodman-Delahunty, Martchuk & Dhami (2014) interviewed
forensic investigators and detainees in Australia, Indonesia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, and
Norway about their past interrogation experiences. Their results revealed that the number of
social strategies (e.g., rapport and reciprocal tactics) was not associated with self-reported
cooperation but was positively associated with the level of information disclosure. It should
be noted that the rapport or rapport-building techniques measured in the aforementioned
studies varied across studies; some were either adapted from existing interview protocols
(Walsh & Bull, 2012) or designed using a novel coding framework (Alison et al., 2013, 2014;
Wachi et al., 2014, 2016). Despite such variations, these studies have consistently
demonstrated the benefits of rapport-building in real-life suspect interviews.
Only a few studies manipulating rapport-building behaviors or techniques have been
conducted in laboratory settings. In Villalba’s (2014) unpublished study, “guilty” participants
who were coaxed into breaking the rule of the experiment were interviewed with or without a
five-minute rapport-building phase (including self-disclosure, active listening, and displaying
interest of the interviewee). However, rapport-building did not influence confession rates.
More recently, Wachi et al. (2018) examined the effects of “relationship-focused
interviewing” in a laboratory setting using a similar research paradigm. Compared to the
control condition or interviewing approach emphasizing evidence presentation, relationship-
focused interviewing was most effective in obtaining true confessions from suspects without
producing any false confessions in the study. In this research, the relationship-focused
approach included several interviewing techniques identified using factor analysis in prior
research (Wachi et al., 2014, 2016). These included smiling, eye contact, showing a friendly
and respectful attitude, displaying empathy, disclosure of personal information from both
parties, and explaining the purpose of the interview.
Rapport-Building Approaches
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
Despite the prevalence and importance of rapport-building in suspect interviewing,
there is no clear definition of what constitutes rapport and ways of achieving and maintaining
rapport (Abbe & Brandon, 2013; Vallano & Schreiber Compo, 2015). The concept of rapport
originated from clinical settings, which implies a positive personal bond, or “therapeutic
alliance,” among the therapist and client in order to improve the client’s mental health
(Martin, Garske, & Davis, 2000). In the context of investigative interviewing, rapport is
defined as a positive and friendly relationship between the interviewer and interviewee,
which is often operationalized by showing a friendly attitude, a casual small talk, active
listening, and positive nonverbal behaviors such as smiling and eye contact (Abbe &
Brandon, 2013; Vallano & Schreiber Compo, 2015). Following this definition, rapport-
building has been expected to alleviate the anxiety caused by the process of investigative
interview; however, research findings on such anxiety reduction effect in adult witnesses or
suspects are not consistent (Kieckhaefer, Vallano, & Schreiber Compo, 2014; Villalba, 2014).
Most research on the effects of rapport-building on eyewitness memory has followed
this definition and manipulated rapport mainly through casual small talk and positive
nonverbal behaviors (e.g., Collins, Lincoln, & Frank, 2002; Vallano & Schreiber Compo,
2011), although the results are somewhat mixed and inconclusive (Vallano & Schreiber
Compo, 2015). Some studies found that rapport-building can boost the quality and quantity of
information reported by adult witness (Collins et al., 2002; Nash, Nash, Morris, & Smith,
2016; Vallano & Schreiber Compo, 2011), but others failed to find such beneficial effects
(Kieckhaefer et al., 2014; Sauerland, Brackmann, & Otgaar, 2019). In a recent study,
Sauerland et al. (2019) compared the effects of different levels of rapport-building on
children’s, adolescents’, and adults’ memory of a mock theft video clip. Three rapport
conditions were included: no rapport (closed posture and no rapport-building questions),
minimal rapport (neutral posture and scripted rapport-building questions), and extensive
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
rapport (open posture, self-disclosure, offering sweet, open-ended rapport-building questions,
etc.) conditions. The study found that rapport had little effect on memory quality and quantity
in all age groups. There is also evidence that rapport-building can increase eyewitness’s
compliance towards false evidence rather than prevent it (Wright et al., 2015). In short, some
findings have shown beneficial effects of rapport-building techniques on adult eyewitness
memory but more examination is needed.
Considering the legal purpose of an interrogation, it is possible that suspects might
view an interviewer’s attempt to establish a positive personal bond as feigning friendship to
induce a suspect’s cooperation or admission. Reviews on rapport-building in investigative
interviewing (Abbe & Brandon, 2013; Vallano & Schreiber Compo, 2015) have noted that
although the rapport literature has historically focused on building positive and friend-like
relationships, more recent research proposed a more neutral type of rapport-building that
focuses on developing a mutual understanding of the purpose of and roles in the interrogation
(e.g., Kelly et al., 2013). Specifically, some researchers argued that successful rapport does
not mean that there must be affection or friendship between the interviewer and interviewee
and instead defined rapport in suspect interviewing as a “working relationship”, assuming the
interview more as a collaborative task than a personal bond (Kelly et al., 2013). This
definition relates to another aspect of therapeutic alliance in clinical settings, which is an
emphasis on the understanding of the tasks and goals of therapy (Martin et al., 2000). Thus,
what matters is not the level of fondness or liking between the interviewer and interviewee,
but how they work together to complete the interview on the basis of mutual understanding.
This is also in line with the purpose and principles of the Cognitive Interview (Fisher,
Geiselman, & Amador, 1989; Geiselman, 2012), in which the interviewer ensures there is
mutual understanding of the purpose of the interview, which is to help the interviewee recall
as freely and as comfortably as possible.
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
Current Study's Rapport Building Approaches
Details Relationship-based rapport-building approach Procedure-based rapport-building approach
The interviewer seeks to elicit liking and build a The interviewer seeks to facilitate suspect’s
positive personal bond with suspects. The interview understanding of the interrogation procedure and roles,
Description
also tries to relieve any anxiety suspects experienced trying to create an environment that express their
during the interrogation. opinion openly.
• friendly and close attitude (e.g., the use of first • formal and polite attitude (e.g., the use of full name
name, speaking in a casual and warm tone) and/or speak in a professional manner)
• initiating small talk (e.g., asking ‘icebreaking’ • provide explanations with patience (e.g., explaining
questions unrelated to the interrogation process) the rights, purpose, and plan of the interrogation and
Related techniques • bidirectional self-disclosure (e.g., the interviewer asking whether the suspect understands)
talks about his or her background or feelings and • let interviewees have their say (e.g., explaining that
encourages the interviewee to do the same) the interview is an opportunity to give their account
• positive nonverbal behaviors (e.g., smiling, open and/or that they can interrupt anytime)
body posture and/or frequent eye contact) • no obvious positive nonverbal behaviors
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
Based on findings and discussions in the rapport literature, the current study identified
the relationship-based approach focuses on the positive personal bond or relationship with
suspects, with the purposes of relieving the interviewee’s anxiety and eliciting fondness from
interviewees. This is the approach that has been used to build rapport with adult witnesses
(e.g., Kieckhaefer et al., 2014) and suspects (Villalba, 2014) in previous laboratory research.
Interviewing techniques related to this approach include showing a friendly and close attitude
(e.g., the use of first name and/or speaking in a casual and warm tone), initiating small talk
(e.g., asking ‘icebreaking’ questions unrelated to the interrogation process), self-disclosure
from both interviewer and interviewee (e.g., the interviewer talks about his or her background
or feelings and encourages the interviewee to do the same), and displaying positive non-
verbal behaviors (e.g., smiling, open body posture and/or frequent eye contact). On the other
hand, the procedure-based approach pays less attention to a personal bond and positive
nonverbal behaviors but focuses on the procedure and roles both parties play in the interview
process. Specifically, interviewers using this approach work on maintaining a mutually
respectful interaction during which interviewees can talk about and express their thoughts
openly. This approach has been mentioned in the literature but rarely examined (but see
Walsh & Bull, 2012); techniques related to this approach include showing a formal and polite
attitude (e.g., the use of full name and/or speak in a professional manner), patiently provide
explanations of the procedure and case (e.g., explaining the rights, purpose, and plan of the
interrogation and asking whether the suspect understands), and let interviewees have their say
(e.g., explaining that the interview is an opportunity to give their account and/or that they can
interrupt anytime throughout the interview; Walsh & Bull, 2012). Moreover, some
researchers emphasize the role of perceived procedural justice in suspect interviewing as a
potential mediator of the relationship between interviewing techniques and interview
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
outcomes (e.g., Goodman‐Delahunty, Martschuk, & Dhami, 2014; Cleary & Bull, 2019).
Thus we would expect that procedure-based approaches positively affect suspect interviewing
outcomes through enhancing suspects’ perceived level of procedural justice.
The current study aimed to examine the effects of the relationship-based and
procedure-based rapport-building approaches in a laboratory setting. By juxtaposing the two
approaches, we attempted to address the conceptual weakness in the rapport literature and to
inform practice by identifying specific components of rapport-building that affect suspect
interviewing outcomes. Since past laboratory experiments either considered only
relationship-based techniques (Villalba, 2014) or manipulated a battery of techniques from
both approaches (Wachi et al., 2018), we aimed to compare the effects of different rapport-
building approaches. Due to the exploratory nature of the present study, we did not have
specific predictions on the effects of the two rapport-building approaches we examined.
However, recent evidence shows that relational positivity may not be a productive element in
suspect interviewing (Collins & Carthy, 2019), and self-reported data from detainees showed
that jail inmates favored interrogations focusing on neutrality, respect and fact-finding
process more than those focusing on a positive attitude and sympathy (Cleary & Bull, 2019).
For example, Collins & Carthy (2019) coded videos of suspect interviews in terms of three
rapport elements as proposed by Tickle‐Degnen & Rosenthal (1990) and showed that rapport-
building behaviors related to maintaining a positive personal bond (“positivity”) were used
least and unrelated to the number of investigation-relevant information. By contrast, by
showing interest in the suspect’s account (“attention”) and promoting shared understanding
and synchronization of the interview (“coordination”), suspects were more willing to disclose
relevant information. Taken together, the conceptual shift in the rapport-building literature
from relationship-based to procedure-based rapport and some recent evidence support the
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
advantage of the procedure-based rapport-building approach over the relationship-based
approach.
The Current Study
Police officers in Taiwan generally do not receive training in the investigative
interviewing of suspects, and interviews are typically conducted using a standard question-
answer template on which questions regarding legal elements have already been drafted.
Investigative interviews in Taiwan are video-recorded, but police officers are still expected to
submit an interview report in a question-answer format. Suspects in Taiwan can only be
detained up to 24 hours by law, with police investigators having only around 16 hours to
interview and investigate as the remaining eight hours are typically allocated to the
prosecutor’s office. Unless proper preparation and planning has taken place prior to
detention, this leaves investigators with limited time to conduct the interrogation, collect and
evaluate evidence, review all necessary information, and conduct follow-up interviews. Thus
such time constraints have led investigative interviewers to abandon information-gathering
approaches and forego building rapport with suspects.
The present study aimed to examine the effects of two rapport-building approaches on
suspect interviewing outcome. As mentioned earlier, there is a research gap in understanding
how different approaches lead to successful rapport. We adopted the cheating paradigm from
Russano, Meissner, Narchet, & Kassin (2005), in which participants were coaxed into
“cheating” (i.e., violate the rule of the experiment) by a confederate in a problem-solving task
and then interviewed using different rapport-building approaches. The cheating paradigm was
chosen for the current study because the transgression induced during the procedure is a
willful act with responsibility. In addition to confession rates, we also examined how many
details participants were willing to provide during the interviews, as previous laboratory
experiments examined only participants’ decisions to confess (Villalba, 2014; Wachi et al.,
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
2018). Furthermore, we examined participants’ subjective feelings such as feelings of guilt in
order to understand the effects of different rapport-building approaches (Cleary & Bull, 2019;
Wachi et al., 2018).
Method
Participants
87 undergraduate students (60% female; Mean age = 21.04, SD = 1.53, Range = 19 -
26) from a public university in Taiwan were recruited for the study. Participants were
compensated with $NT150 or extra credit for introductory psychology courses. 28
participants were excluded from our analyses because they refused to cheat (i.e. share their
answer with the confederate). We excluded “innocent” participants due to the fact that our
main focus concerned the influence of rapport-building approaches on guilty participants, and
that the small number of innocent suspects prevented us from conducting meaningful
comparisons across conditions. Another two participants were excluded for failing to follow
instructions and withdrawing consent. The final sample included 57 “guilty” participants,
equally assigned to the control condition (7 males and 12 females; Mean age = 20.79, SD =
1.03), relationship-based condition (9 males and 10 females; Mean age = 21.47, SD = 1.92),
and procedure-based condition (9 males and 10 females; Mean age = 20.74, SD = 1.62).
Design
A between-subjects design was used with three rapport conditions: no-rapport control
condition, relationship-based condition, and procedure-based condition. The dependent
variables were whether or not the participant confessed, the number of details they disclosed
in the interview, and measures regarding their experiences during the interview.
Procedure
We adopted Russano et al. (2005)’s cheating paradigm with some modifications.
Unlike the original procedure, interviews in this study were not conducted by the
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
experimenter but another person posing as the research assistant, as it is more natural to build
rapport with someone you have just met rather than someone you have interacted with from
the beginning of the experiment. This can also reduce the confounding effect of any
interaction before the interview such as the conversation they had when obtaining informed
consent. Furthermore, we aimed not only to examine whether or not participants confessed,
but also how many details they disclosed in the interview. The confederates were thus trained
to follow a script with verbal and behavioral prompts when trying to persuade participants to
break the rules of the experiment, making it possible to analyze the number of details they
disclosed during the interview. The current study was approved by the ethical review board
of the university and took approximately an hour to complete.
Problem-solving and cheating phase. Participants were recruited for a study to
“understand the differences in cognitive processing when solving problems individually and
collaboratively.” They were instructed to complete the experiment with a confederate posing
as another participant. After filling in a pre-interview questionnaire measuring state anxiety,
participants were told that there will be four 10-minute problem-solving tasks and that they
should work together on the first and third tasks (i.e., team problem) but solve problems on
their own for the second and fourth tasks (i.e., individual problem). Specifically, the
experimenter warned that they should not discuss or share their answers when working on the
individual problems. They were also told that if they scored above the top 30%, they could
enter a lottery to win extra money.
The experimenter then distributed the team problem sheet for the first task and left the
room. While solving the problems, the confederate introduced himself and tried to have a
brief chat with the participant. After ten minutes, the experimenter returned to the room and
distributed individual problem sheets for the second task. This task contained four questions
designed to make participants feel uncertain about their answers. Importantly, the instruction
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
on the sheet emphasized that they are not allowed to share answers with each other. After the
experimenter leaves the pair in the room, the confederate acted according to script he was
trained to follow. The confederate first asked the participant the meaning of a problem and
then asked whether the participant felt an earthquake, and approximately five minutes later,
the confederate took out his phone and accidentally played a ringtone. We included event-
irrelevant details to compare the disclosure of central and peripheral information (although
we excluded this comparison due to the low number of details reported). The confederate
then approached the participant, stating that he was having difficulty with a problem and
asked the participant for help. Participants who shared or discussed the answers were deemed
‘‘guilty’’ of breaking the rule of the experiment, while those who refused to do so were
labeled as “innocent” and excluded from our analyses. Finally, the confederate told
participants who helped out he will share half of the money with the participant if he wins the
lottery. Following the second task (cheating phase), the experimenter re-entered the room and
a team problem sheet for the third task was given as a filler task.
Interview phase. In the course of the third task, the experimenter entered the room
unexpectedly with the interviewer (posing as the research assistant in charge of the study) and
said that the experiment had to be suspended due to some problems. The experimenter then
explained that the research assistant found that the participant and confederate had the same
wrong answers in the second task, so the research assistant (the interviewer) needed to speak
to them individually. The experimenter then escorted the confederate out of the room, leaving
the interviewer and the participant alone for the interview.
The interviewer (blind to the participant’s guilt or innocence) conducted the interview
according to the condition the participant was randomly assigned to. The interview began
with a rapport-building phase, followed by critical questions about the cheating event. The
interviewers were three female undergraduate students trained to follow an interview script
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
through a series of dyad role-playing, reviewing videotapes of themselves, and a pilot
interview exercise. The interviewer followed different rapport-building scripts (see
Appendix) for the relationship-based and procedure-based conditions, while there was no
rapport-building phase in the control condition where the interviewer asked the critical
questions right after a minimal greeting (“Hello.”). In the rapport conditions, after attempting
relationship-based or procedure-based rapport with the participant, the interviewer then asked
what happened in during the second task and whether they cheated in the experiment. In
particular, three critical questions pertaining to the cheating event were asked in the following
order: “Could you please tell me what happened in the second task?”, “How do you explain
the fact that you have the same wrong answers?”, and “Did you violate the rule of the
experiment and share answers for the individual problem?”. Following the participant’s
response, the interviewer followed up with prompts such as “tell me more” or “anything
else?”. Since the third critical question was a yes-no prompt, if participants did not provide a
straightforward answer (e.g. mentioning only that the confederate asked for their answer to a
problem), they were asked to provide clarification. Finally, the interviewer thanked the
participant and left the room. The interviews were audio recorded and consent to use the
audio recordings were obtained after debriefing the participants.
Post-interview questionnaire and debriefing. After the interviewer left the room,
the experimenter reentered to administer the post-interview questionnaire and debrief the
participant. The experimenter first explained that the true purpose of the experiment was to
understand their experiences during the interview, and that both the other participant and the
research assistant were actually confederates. The participants were also told that the post-
interview questionnaire was the last part of the study, and that further information will be
provided after completing the questionnaire. The post-interview questionnaire comprised a
measure for state anxiety, manipulation checks, and measures regarding their experience of
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
the interview. Finally, participants were fully debriefed about the real purpose of the study
and the necessity of the use of deception (Russano et al., 2005).
Materials
Pre-interview questionnaire. The pre-interview questionnaire measured
participants’ state anxiety level before the interview via the six-item state anxiety subscale of
the short-form Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (Marteau & Bekker, 1992;
Cronbach’s α = .57) using a four-point scale (1 = Not at all, 4 = Very much).
Rapport-building scripts. In the relationship- and procedure-based conditions, the
interviewer established rapport with participants using different rapport-building scripts (see
Appendix) before asking critical questions about the cheating event. In the relationship-based
condition, the interviewer smiled and tried to build a close and personal relationship through
the use of the participant’s first name, self-disclosure, and casual small talk with the
participant. In the procedure-based condition, the interviewer maintained a neutral facial
expression, displayed a formal and polite attitude, provided explanations about the interview
and ensured that the participant had their say. The interviewers were instructed to speak
articulately with pauses between each sentence.
Post-interview Questionnaire. The post-interview questionnaire comprised a
measure for state anxiety, manipulation checks, and measures regarding subjective
experiences during the interview. The six-item state anxiety scale in the pre-interview
questionnaire was used to assess participants’ anxiety level after the interview (Cronbach’s α
= .73). To check for rapport manipulation, participants rated an 11-item rapport scale
(adapted from Duke, Wood, Bollin, Scullin, & LaBianca, 2018; Cronbach’s α = .94) using a
seven-point scale; and two additional yes-no questions about the relationship-based and
procedure-based approaches were also asked to distinguish between the two approaches.
Participants also rated the perceived consequence for themselves (“During the interview, I
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
believed that there will be a severe consequence for admitting cheating in the experiment”)
and the confederate (“During the interview, I believed that if I admitted to cheating I might
get the confederate into trouble”) using a seven-point scale (1 = Strongly disagree, 7 =
Strongly agree).
To examine participants’ subjective experiences during the interview, they were asked
to rate using a seven-point scale (1 = Strongly disagree, 7 = Strongly agree), their feelings of
guilt (“During the interview, I felt guilty about sharing answers”), cognitive load (two items:
“It took a lot of mental efforts to complete the interview” and “It was difficult for me to finish
the interview,” Cronbach’s α = .92), perceived strength of evidence (“During the interview, I
believed that the evidence against me is strong”), perceived procedural justice (three items,
“During the interview, I had a choice over what (not) to say.” (voice), “I think that the
interview is fair.” (fairness), “I believe that the interview followed due process” (due
process), Cronbach’s α = .77).
Coding
The interviews were transcribed verbatim and coded according to whether or not the
participant confessed and the number of details they disclosed in the interview. Half of the
transcripts were coded by two independent coders to measure interrater reliability. Three
categories were coded for confession: “full confession” (admitted to sharing answers in the
individual problems), “partial confession” (implied they had shared answers without a direct
admission), and “denial” (denied they had shared answers), with good interrater reliability
(percentage agreement = 93%, Cohen’s κ = 0.87). Since discrepancies in coding pertained to
the distinction between full and partial confession and less than two cases were coded as
partial confession, the two categories were combined into a single ‘confession’ code. For the
number of details disclosed, we coded whether or not participants mentioned any of the seven
details regarding the confederate’s actions: (a) asked the meaning of a problem; (b)
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
mentioned an earthquake; (c) took out a phone; (d) noise made by the phone; (e) approached
the participant; (f) asked for the answer for a problem; and (g) promised to share the lottery
money with the participant. We achieved good interrater reliability for the details (percentage
agreements = 93% to 100%, Cohen’s κs = 0.67 to 1.00). Discrepancies in coding were
discussed and consensus was reached for all coding categories.
Results
Preliminary Analyses
Interviewer effects. Three interviewers conducted 15, 21 and 21 interviews
respectively. There was no effect of interviewer on participants’ ratings of rapport (F(2,54) =
2 2
2.49, p = .09, η = .09), whether or not the participant confessed (χ (2, N = 57) = 1.49, p
= .48, φ = 0.16), or the number of details disclosed (χ (2, N = 57) = 1.21, p = .54, φ = 0.15).
Manipulation checks. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to
examine whether interviewers successfully established rapport with participants. The results
revealed a significant difference in participants’ rapport ratings across the three conditions
(F(2, 54) = 3.41, p = .04, η = .11). Planned comparisons showed that rapport was higher in
the relationship-based (M = 6.03, SD = 0.80) and procedure-based (M = 5.62, SD = 1.04)
conditions compared to the control condition (M = 5.18, SD = 1.08; t(53) = 2.28, p = .03, d =
0.63), and no difference was found between the relationship-based and procedure-based
conditions (t(53) = 1.28, p = .21, d = 0.44). This indicated that both rapport-building
approaches had led to successful rapport with the interviewees, with little difference in the
quality of rapport.
In addition, all participants (100%) in the relationship-based condition agreed that the
interviewer tried to build a close personal bond with them, while only 26% reported such
experiences in the procedure-based condition. On the contrary, all but one participant (95%)
in the procedure-based condition agreed that the interviewer tried to interact with them in a
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
formal and polite manner, while 47% of the participants reported such experiences in the
relationship-based condition. The results indicated that participants did experience the
rapport-building approaches we manipulated, and the manipulation was thus deemed
successful. Some participants tended to react to both of the descriptions, which implies that
the two approaches may not be mutually exclusive at least in subjective terms.
Since there was no explicit mention of the consequences of admitting to cheating in
the paradigm (Russano et al., 2005), we questioned whether participants perceived the
“cheating” event as a serious transgression with potential negative outcomes. In the post-
interview questionnaire, participants perceived the outcome of a confession to be moderately
high on a seven-point scale (M = 4.51, SD = 1.58) and believed that they might get the
confederate into trouble if they confessed (M = 5.28, SD = 1.77), with no difference across
rapport conditions in both measures (Fs < 1.19, ps > .31). Thus, participants appeared to
perceive the consequence of admission as severe across all conditions.
Interview length. The average length of the interviews was 165.47 seconds (SD =
68.17, range = 55 - 304), and there was a difference across rapport conditions (F(2,54) =
33.18, p < .001, η = .55). Post hoc tests with Bonferroni correction revealed significant
differences between condition pairs (ps < .001). The interview length was longest in the
relationship-based condition (M = 226.37, SD = 35.28), followed by the procedure-based
condition (M = 166.58, SD = 46.33) and was shortest in the control condition (M = 103.47,
SD = 35.28). Since there was no rapport-building phase in the control condition, we then
compared only the duration of the critical question phase. A significant effect of rapport
condition was found (F(2,54) = 6.70, p = .003, η = .20), with the only significant post-hoc
difference found between the relationship-based (M = 152.47, SD = 46.83) and control
condition (M = 103.47, SD = 35.28; p = .002, d = 1.18), with the procedure-based condition
in the middle (M = 119.58, SD = 46.13). That is, participants tended to spend more time
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
answering critical questions after the relationship-based rapport-building phase, while the
procedure-based approach did not have such an impact.
The length of rapport-building also significantly differed between the two approaches
(t(19.97) = 4.59, p < .001, d = 1.49). Interviewers spent much more time building rapport in
the relationship-based condition (M = 73.89, SD = 24.89) than in the procedure-based
condition (M = 47.00, SD = 5.83). The relationship-based script included small talk that
sought to elicit self-disclosure from participants, so the length of rapport-building largely
depended on the reactions and engagement of the participant during small talk. In contrast,
the procedure-based approach did not yield such variation, as evident in the relatively small
standard deviation. Further analyses revealed that length of rapport-building was positively
correlated with the number of details (r = .36, p = .03) but not correlated with confession
outcome (r = -.07, p = .68) and participants’ rating of rapport (r = -.01, p = .97) in the
pb
rapport conditions. It seemed that participants were more willing to disclose information if
the interviewer spent more time building rapport, but length of rapport-building was not
associated with confession outcome.
Interviewee’s Experiences
To examine the effects of rapport approach on participants’ state anxiety level, a 3
(Rapport condition) × 2 (Time: before vs. after interview) mixed ANOVA was conducted.
The main effect of time was significant (F(1,53) = 22.17, p < .001, η = .30), which
indicated that participants’ state anxiety was higher after (M = 14.32, SD = 3.01) than before
the interview (M = 12.11, SD = 2.31). However, the main effect of rapport condition (F(1,53)
= 0.09, p = .91, η < .01) and the interaction term were not significant (F(2,53) = 1.94, p
= .15, η = .07). Since we were interested in whether rapport-building could buffer the
heightened anxiety caused by the interrogation, we conducted separate paired t-tests
comparing anxiety before and after the interview for the three experimental conditions.
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
Throughout the interview, participants’ anxiety level increased in the procedure-based (t(18)
= 15.40, p < .001, d = 0.90) and control condition (t(18) = 10.43, p = .005, d = 0.74), but
remained unchanged in the relationship-based condition (t(17) = 1.19, p = .29, d = 0.26). The
results indicated that participants became more anxious after being questioned about their
transgression, and even though we did not find a significant interaction, separate analyses
revealed that the relationship-based approach might have alleviated some anxiety that could
have been caused by the interrogation process (as those in the other two conditions).
We also conducted multiple one-way ANOVAs to examine the effects of rapport
condition on other measures of participants’ experiences during the interview. As shown in
perceived procedural justice (Fs < 1.21, ps > .46), while a significant difference was found in
perceived strength of evidence (F(2,54) = 7.74, p = .007, η = .22). Post-hoc tests with
Bonferroni correction showed that participants perceived the evidence to be stronger in the
procedure-based condition (M = 4.68, SD = 1.70) compared to either the relationship-based
(M = 2.78, SD = 1.23; p = .001, d = 1.28) or the control conditions (M = 3.26, SD = 1.66; p
= .02, d = 0.85). Unexpectedly, even though there was no explicit reference to evidence in the
rapport-building scripts, the procedure-based approach seemed to affect participants’
perception about the evidence. Further analyses revealed no difference between confessors
That is, even though perceived evidence strength was higher in the procedure-based
condition, it was not associated with confession outcome.
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
Means and Standard Deviations of Measures on Subjective Interview Experiences
Rapport condition Confession
Relationship- Procedure-
F(2, 54) η t(55) d
Control Confessor Denier
based based
(n =19) (n = 24) (n = 33)
(n = 19) (n =19)
Anxiety
Preinterview 12.89 (2.54) 11.79 (1.93) 11.68 (2.38) 1.55 .06 12.13 (2.12) 12.09 (2.48) 0.06 0.02
Postinterview 13.84 (3.13) 14.74 (3.16) 14.42 (2.73) 0.43 .02 15.25 (3.18) 13.67 (2.69) 2.03* 0.54
Changed 0.89 (3.46) 2.95 (3.27) 2.74 (3.69) 1.94 .07 3.13 (2.91) 1.58 (3.83) 1.64 0.46
Feeling of guilt 3.74 (2.00) 4.47 (1.71) 4.11 (1.66) 0.80 .03 4.67 (1.61) 3.70 (1.83) 2.08* 0.56
Evidence strength 2.79 (1.23) 4.68 (1.70) 3.26 (1.66) 7.74** .23 3.58 (1.61) 3.58 (1.82) 0.02 < 0.01
Cognitive load 5.32 (3.40) 6.79 (3.19) 6.42 (2.43) 1.21 .04 6.08 (3.08) 6.24 (3.07) -0.19 0.05
Procedural justice 16.05 (3.85) 17.42 (3.40) 16.37 (2.85) 0.85 .03 16.71 (3.13) 16.55 (3.61) 0.49 0.11
Because of a missing value in the state anxiety measure in the pre-interview questionnaire, the sample sizes are 18 in the relationship-based
condition and 23 for confessor. The degrees of freedom are 2, 53 for F test and 54 for t test.
* p < .05. ** p < .01.
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
Interview Outcomes
Overall, 42% of the participants (24 out of 57) confessed that they had cheated in the
experiment. An omnibus Chi-square test showed a marginal significant difference across
experimental conditions (χ (2, N = 57) = 5.61, p = .06, Cramer's V = 0.31). Specifically,
participants were more likely to confess in the procedure-based condition (63%) than in the
relationship-based (37%) or control (26%) conditions (χ (1, N = 57) = 5.18, p = .02, φ =
conditions (χ (1, N = 38) = 0.49, p = .49, φ = 0.11). Importantly, even though the study
excluded the “innocent” participants who did not cheat in the experiment, an additional
analysis showed that none of the 28 participants confessed. This highlighted the non-coercive
nature of the interviewing techniques we manipulated, as there were no false confessions.
However, rapport-building approach seemed to have little impact on the number of details
disclosed. A Kruskal–Wallis test revealed no difference in the number of details disclosed
across the three conditions (H(2) = 1.49, p = .48, E = .03). For the seven details we coded,
the average number of details was 2.00 (SD = 1.37, range = 0 - 5) in the relationship-based
condition, 1.68 (SD = 1.06, range = 0 - 3) in the procedure-based condition, and 1.42 (SD =
0.84, range = 0 - 3) in the control condition. It is important to note that participants in the
study tended to report very few details regardless of rapport condition.
The confessors in our study reported higher feelings of guilt than non-confessors
likelihood of confession with the feeling of guilt and rapport condition as independent
variables. We found a significant effect when feeling of guilt was entered as the sole
predictor (Wald’s χ (1) = 3.93, p = .048, OR = 1.39 [1.00, 1.92]). Participants who
experienced higher levels of guilt were more likely to confess in the interview. We then
considered both the feeling of guilt and rapport condition (with the control condition as
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
reference category) as predictors. Results showed a significant effect of the procedure-based
condition (Wald’s χ (1) = 4.52, p = .03, OR = 4.68 [1.13, 19.39]) but no effect for the
relationship-based condition (Wald’s χ (1) = 0.72, p = .40, OR = 1.86 [0.44, 7.80]) or the
feeling of guilt (Wald’s χ (1) = 3.34 p = .07, OR = 1.37 [0.98, 1.91]). That is, a stronger
feeling of guilt predicted higher likelihood of confession, but after considering the influence
of rapport condition, the procedure-based condition became the only significant predictor.
That is, compared to the control condition, the procedure-based approach yielded higher
confession rates even after controlling for participants’ feeling of guilt.
condition). * p < .05.
Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, the current study is the first to investigate the
effectiveness of different rapport-building approaches with suspects. Two rapport-building
approaches, relationship-based and procedure-based approaches, were defined and
manipulated based on the existing rapport literature. Our results showed that relationship-
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
based approach had little effect on confession rates, while the procedure-based approach
elicited more true confessions from suspects, even after controlling for the feeling of guilt.
However, both approaches did not influence the number of details participants were willing
to disclose, which might be due partly to the small number of details coded in the study. The
results mirrored previous findings that relational positivity may not be a productive element
in suspect interviewing (Collins & Carthy, 2019), and extended the literature by showing that
rapport-building techniques focusing on the procedure and roles of the interview were
effective in eliciting true confessions. The current study’s findings also suggest that the
discrepancies in previous laboratory studies could be explained by the presence or absence of
manipulation of procedure-based techniques (Villalba, 2014; Wachi et al., 2018).
Relationship-based rapport-building techniques such as the use of first name, self-
disclosure, small talk, and smiling did not have a positive influence on interview outcomes in
our study. Inconsistent with the social influence account (Goodman-Delahunty & Howes,
2016), the affection or fondness between the interviewer and interviewee were unable to
persuade guilty suspects to cooperate or confess during the interview. Techniques that reduce
anxiety may not necessarily be a good strategy in suspect interviewing despite their potential
benefits in interviews with child and adult witnesses (Abbe & Brandon, 2013). Furthermore,
it should be noted that our failure to find a beneficial effect of the relationship-based
approach may be due to the short duration of the rapport-building phase in the current study.
In actual suspect interviewing situations, practitioners reported spending at least 10 minutes
in rapport-building with suspects (Vallano et al., 2015) and thus it might have taken longer
for us to observe positive effects of the relationship-based approach.
We found some benefits of the procedure-based rapport-building approach, which
comprises techniques such as a formal and respectful attitude, providing explanations for the
case, and letting interviewees have their say. Our findings support the notion that a working
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
rapport focused on the task and procedure are more effective than dealing with the personal
bond with suspects (Abbe & Brandon, 2013; Kelly et al., 2013; Vallano & Schreiber Compo,
2015). Through this approach, a shared understanding of the purpose and roles of the
interrogation can be constructed between interviewer and suspect, and they can thus “work
together” to complete the interrogation (Kelly et al., 2013; Tickle-Degnen & Rosenthal,
1990). Thus we speculate that for suspects with prior dehumanizing encounters with the
criminal justice system, the emphasis on procedure-based rapport may be especially effective
as they can contribute to the interview on an equal basis with the interviewer. Such a
‘working relationship’ might facilitate suspects’ cooperative behaviors during an
interrogation. However, contrary to previous research, the benefits of the procedure-based
approach could not be explained by participants’ perceived level of procedural justice during
the interview in our study (e.g., Goodman‐Delahunty, Martschuk, & Dhami, 2014; Cleary &
Bull, 2019). Another possible explanation for the benefits of procedure-based rapport may be
its lack of relational positivity. We suspect that feigned friendliness or friendship can be
viewed by some suspects as weird or artificial, while a formal and neutral attitude might give
an impression that an interviewer is focused on conducting a sound interview rather than
establishing a personal bond. Importantly, as noted by Walsh & Bull (2012), conducting
explanations for the interviews (e.g., the purpose of the interview) is not only a legal
requirement but an opportunity to develop shared understanding. Emphasis on productivity
can also encourage practitioners to follow due process, which may, in turn, lead to positive
interview outcomes. However, we should point out that in many countries, including Taiwan,
interviewers are not legally required to explain why the interrogation or interview is being
conducted.
Despite some significant effects of rapport-building approach on confession outcome,
we did not find corresponding effects on the number of details reported. One possible
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
explanation is that the amount of details reported by the participants in our study tended to be
small and thus floor effects could explain the null results. In the present experimental
paradigm, the transgression was rather simple and contained fewer details compared to those
in the eyewitness literature or in real criminal cases. Thus, it is possible that rapport-building
can influence how much information suspects disclose (Alison et al., 2013, 2014; Goodman-
Delahunty et al., 2014) but our study’s design prevented us from replicating this effect.
Alternatively, given the inclusive results regarding the effects of rapport-building on
eyewitness accounts (Vallano & Schreiber Compo, 2015), the influence of rapport-building
approaches on the amount of details disclosed might not be as straightforward as it seems. It
is possible that rapport itself does not influence level of disclosure, rather it guides suspects to
report certain types of details. In our study for instance, the procedure-based approach may
have led participants to report only central (or crucial) information (as they were reminded
while participants in the relationship-based approaches condition may have been less
constrained in kinds of details they felt they should report (as they were not reminded of the
purpose of the interview). We found that only three participants reported more than four
details (out of seven), and that the confederate had taken out the phone and made a noise.
Interestingly, all three participants were in the relationship-based condition. In this vein, the
null result of detail disclosure may be attributable not only to the small number of details
coded in the study but also to the fact that we did not distinguish between different type of
details. Future research should consider designing events that are richer in detail and measure
effects of detail type.
Interestingly, even though there was no explicit reference to evidence in the rapport-
building scripts, the procedure-based approach seemed to have affected participants’
perception about the evidence. Further analyses revealed no difference between confessors
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
and deniers in their perceived strength of evidence, so the difference in evidence perception
could not explain the effect of rapport condition on confession outcome. We speculate that
the procedure-based approach might have led our participants to think that the interviewer
has secured some evidence against them, therefore the interviewer needed only to follow
procedure rather than trying to persuade the participant to confess through establishing a
personal bond. This possibility is intriguing given the recent focus on exploring ethical ways
to manipulate real offender’s perception of evidence without influencing innocent suspects
(i.e., the strategic use of evidence in Sukumar et al., 2016). Although we did not include
innocent participants in the analysis, there is no reason to assume procedure-based techniques
would change the innocents’ perception of evidence. Notably, none of the innocent
participants in our study gave a false confession or false details. In this vein, it would be an
interesting line of research to examine the interaction of procedure-based rapport and
strategic presentation of evidence. It should, however, be noted that given that perceived
strength of evidence did not differ between confessors and deniers, more research is needed
to understand the relationship between these variables.
An alternative explanation for our findings relates to culture. Previous research has
shown that suspects from different cultural backgrounds may react differently to interviewing
styles (Beune, Giebels, & Sanders, 2009; Giebels, Oostinga, Taylor, & Curtis, 2017; Giebel
& Taylor, 2009). For example, some have found that rational arguments are more effective
interviewing tactics for suspects from low-context cultures, while relational behaviors (e.g.,
active listening) are more effective in interviews with suspects from high-context cultures
(Beune, Giebels, & Sanders, 2009; Giebel & Taylor, 2009). Yet, there is also research
reporting that high-context culture participants responded more negatively to relational
behaviors compared to low-context culture participants (Beune, Giebels, & Taylor, 2010).
Importantly, people from different backgrounds vary significantly in how they perceive
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
attempts to show kindness or establish a relationship (Beune, Giebels, & Taylor, 2010). It is
thus possible that the importance and intricacies of interpersonal relationships in high-context
or collectivist countries such as Taiwan makes attempts to establish a relationship in
interrogations more complicated and subtle (and thus harder to get things right; but see Wachi
et al., 2014, 2016). Furthermore, Giebels, Oostinga, Taylor, & Curtis (2017) found that
references to the law, procedures and moral codes and the use of formal language can
facilitate alignment in investigator-suspect communication, but the beneficial effects were
only found with German suspects but not with Dutch suspects. The authors explained that
Germans are less tolerant of uncertainty compared to the Dutch, so explicitly referring to
rules or using formal language are more favorable to the former. As previous research has
shown that Taiwanese score higher in uncertainty avoidance than participants from Western
countries such as the U.K. and U.S. (Hofstede, 2001), it is reasonable to assume that the
procedure-based approach may be particularly effective in Taiwan.
Some caveats should be mentioned, however, before we can conclude that there is one
rapport-building approach that outperforms another. As we mentioned in the introduction
section, rapport is something that demands versatile efforts and needs to be maintained
throughout the interrogation (St-Yves, 2006; Vallano & Schreiber Compo, 2015). However,
due to the constraints of our experimental design, the rapport script in our study is rather
short and limited to the beginning of the interview. Some may argue that such a manipulation
cannot achieve a level of rapport comparable to that in the real forensic situation. Admittedly,
it is hard to tell from the current data how these two rapport-building approaches would work
in real cases. We believe, however, that it is important to demarcate the difference between
specific rapport-building techniques or components. We also believe that studying the initial
attempts at building rapport (or a working relationship) is valuable, as the approach(es)
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
adopted in the first few minutes of an interrogation may be crucial for the interviewer to
gauge the suspect’s response and strategize subsequent rapport maintenance.
There are some notable limitations in the current study, the most obvious of which is
the artificiality of the laboratory setting. Both the interviewers and participants in the study
were undergraduate students, therefore the participants may have been less convinced of the
authenticity and consequences of being questioned compared to research that recruited
community samples and police officers as interviewers (cf. Wachi et al., 2018). The duration
of the cheating event and the interview were also far shorter than those in real forensic
settings and we thus suggest that the results should be examined in more realistic situations.
In addition, the small sample size limited the interpretation of the findings presented in the
study. A sensitivity power analysis revealed that our sample size (ns = 19) is not sensitive to
detect a difference with small or medium effect size and only large effects with a Cohen’s f
larger than 0.42 can be detected in continuous variables (with a statistical power of 0.80 and
alpha level of 0.05). It is thus possible that some null effects were due to the lack of statistical
power. The robustness of the significant results is also questionable given the small sample
size. Future studies should attempt to replicate our findings in larger samples.
Another important limitation in our study is the ecological validity of the rapport
manipulation. The rapport script was prepared based on the techniques mentioned in the
literature, but we do not know whether practitioners establish rapport in the same way.
Finally, even though we sought to address the conceptual ambiguity in rapport and rapport-
building by identifying and distinguishing between two rapport-building approaches, we
could not overcome problems with ecological validity and independency of the two
approaches. For example, it is possible that the two approaches overlap or can be used
concurrently at different points in an interrogation, but it is difficult for a laboratory
experiment to investigate such a complicated relationship. We therefore urge future field and
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING
laboratory studies to examine rapport as a multifaceted concept and to adopt more fine-
grained coding frameworks and manipulation of rapport-building techniques.
Implications for Research, Practice, and Policy
Despite the limitations of our study, our findings provide further insight into how
specific rapport-building techniques or approaches might affect interview outcomes. Our
results suggest that early rapport attempts aimed at achieving mutual understanding about the
purpose and procedure of the interview may be effective in increasing perceived strength of
evidence and eliciting true confessions. It would be ideal to test this in the field and include
an analysis of the rapport process (e.g. whether initial attempts affect rapport maintenance)
throughout an interview. Our findings contribute to the literature by highlighting the
importance of studying specific components of direct or indirect rapport at different
timepoints in an interview, and they also show the significant impact of initial attempts at
‘connecting’ with a suspect in an investigative interview. In terms of practice, our study
shows the value of even a brief attempt at building rapport with a suspect, and in Taiwan
specifically, the value of providing explanations about the interview right from the beginning.
This is particular significant considering police officers here have very limited time for the
investigative interviewing of suspects, so rather than beginning substantive questioning too
quickly, it may well be worthwhile to attempt building rapport with the suspect. By
highlighting the potential value of rapport-building with suspects, we hope that our findings
emphasize the need to include rapport-building in investigative interviewing guidelines and
training.
RAPPORT-BUILDING IN SUSPECT INTERVIEWING