DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 1
From Intellectual Investment Trait Theory to Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait
and State Theory: Theory Development, Methodological Advancement, and Empirical
Illustration
Lisa Bardach1*, Julian Lohmann2*, Kai T. Horstmann3, Steffen Zitzmann1, Martin Hecht4
*shared first authorship
1 University of Tübingen, Germany
2 Kiel University, Germany
3 University of Siegen, Germany
4 Helmut Schmidt University, Germany
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Lisa Bardach,
University of Tübingen, Hector Research Institute of Education Sciences and Psychology,
Walter-Simon-Straße 12, 72072 Tübingen, Germany; Phone: +49070712976577; Email:
lisa.bardach@uni-tuebingen.de
This manuscript is a pre-print and is currently under review.
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 2
Abstract
This paper introduces Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory, which (a)
centers on dynamic within-person reciprocal relationships between cognitive performance
states and intellectual investment personality states, (b) integrates within-person dynamics
and developmental trajectories in cognitive abilities and intellectual investment traits, and (c)
is embedded in a continuous-time framework. Aligning personality theories with statistical
models, we discuss the most appropriate model for testing Dynamic Intellectual Investment
Trait and State Theory: a continuous-time growth curve model that combines dynamics and
trends. We apply the continuous-time growth curve model in an empirical illustration
involving 204 German adults who were assessed roughly 100 times on cognitive abilities
(working memory) and intellectual investment personality (interest).
Keywords: personality, cognitive ability, Intellectual Investment Trait Theory,
continuous-time model
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 3
From Intellectual Investment Trait Theory to Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait
and State Theory: Theory Development, Methodological Advancement, and Empirical
Illustration
Reciprocal effects between psychological constructs are of central interest in many
theories on personality and individual differences. For instance, Intellectual Investment Trait
Theory posits that mutually reinforcing relationships exist between intellectual investment
traits (selected personality traits such as openness, intellectual curiosity, or interests) and
cognitive abilities. On the one hand, intellectual investment traits are presumed to predict
cognitive abilities over time because individuals scoring high on intellectual investment traits
may seek out and enjoy a wealth of learning opportunities, an action that positively affects
their cognitive development (environmental enrichment hypothesis). On the other hand,
cognitive abilities should also predict greater gains in intellectual investment traits over time
(environmental success hypothesis), for example, because individuals with higher levels of
cognitive abilities are more likely to master challenging new tasks, subsequently rendering
them more likely to seek out similar tasks or situations in the future (Ackerman, 1996; von
Stumm & Ackerman, 2013; Ziegler, 2012, 2018; Roemer et al., 2020). Although clearly
informative, Intellectual Investment Trait Theory is also restricted in some respects; for
instance, it strongly focuses on longer term development and relationships at the between-
person level, whereas the interplay between within-person momentary expressions of
investment personality traits and cognitive performance (i.e., states) has been widely
neglected so far.
In this paper, we therefore introduce Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State
Theory, which represents an important extension of Intellectual Investment Trait Theory.
Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory centers on dynamic within-person
reciprocal relationships between cognitive performance states and intellectual investment
personality states that unfold over shorter periods of time. We use principles from dynamic
personality theories (e.g., DeYoung, 2015; Revelle & Condon, 2015, Revelle & Wilt, 2021)
to inform the reformulation of the environment enrichment and success hypotheses, which
are now referred to as situation exploration and exploitation hypotheses to match the dynamic
processes at the core of Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory. In addition,
Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory integrates within-person dynamics
and average developmental trajectories in cognitive abilities and intellectual investment traits.
The theory further strives for conceptual clarity regarding the understanding and recognition
of “time” by making it explicit that cognitive abilities and intellectual investment traits
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 4
manifest continuously within a person (even though they are observed only at selected time
points).
To demonstrate that solely the precise translation of personality theories into
statistical models can build a better science of personality and individual differences, we
adopted the approach outlined by Lundberg et al. (2021). Hence, we first discuss the
appropriate theoretical estimand for investigating Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and
State Theory’s situation exploitation and exploration hypotheses. The theoretical estimand
comprises a precise statement of the research goal, which goes beyond the statistical model.
Our theoretical estimand informs the concrete target (i.e., the empirical estimand) of the
statistical analyses that we use to test the situation exploitation and exploration hypotheses.
The empirical estimand then guides the selection of the most appropriate estimation strategy
(Lundberg et al., 2021). We introduce the model that is best suited to test Dynamic
Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory: a continuous-time growth curve model
recently proposed by Lohmann et al. (2023). The model combines growth and dynamic
modeling and isolates trends from the dynamic part of the model (Lohmann et al., 2022;
Lohmann et al., 2023). Further, the model is estimated in a continuous-time modeling
framework. Continuous-time modeling is an important modeling technique that holds many
advantages (e.g., the option to explore the unfolding and dissipation of dynamic effects,
Hecht & Zitzmann, 2021a). Although increasingly popular in various disciplines, this
modeling strategy is still relatively unfamiliar within the realm of personality psychology,
and only a handful of initial studies have explored its potential (e.g., Hecht et al., 2023). We
present findings from an empirical illustration in which we employ a continuous-time growth
curve model to examine the reciprocal relationships between cognitive abilities (working
memory) and interest. In our empirical illustration, we show how to align Dynamic
Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory with our statistical model. To this end, we use
data from a sample of 204 German adults who were assessed roughly 100 times (across an
individually varying period of 114 to 251 days) on working memory and interest. The data
originate from the COGITO (“Cognition Ergodicity”) study, which was conducted at the Max
Planck Institute for Human Development in Berlin, Germany (Schmiedek et al., 2010a,
Schmiedek et al., 2010b). Future directions for theory and method development are
discussed.
Intellectual Investment Trait Theory
The interface of personality and cognitive abilities has sparked interest in
psychological research for over a century (e.g., Webb, 1915). Intellectual Investment Trait
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 5
Theory has provided a prominent perspective on associations between personality and
cognitive abilities by proposing that personality traits, particularly so-called investment traits,
are linked to cognitive abilities (Ackerman, 1996; Cattell, 1984; Chamorro-Premuz &
Ackermann, 2004; von Stumm & Ackerman, 2013; Ziegler et al., 2012; Ziegler et al., 2018).
Note that, although we refer to Intellectual Investment Trait Theory, we acknowledge that the
name actually refers to a family of theories (Ziegler et al., 2012). The focus of the present
work is on the temporal interplay between intellectual investment traits and cognitive
abilities, as it is this temporal interplay that is part of all of these theories. The roots of
intellectual investment trait theory date back to Cattell (1943, 1987), who posited that gains
in crystallized intelligence over time accrue from the continued investment of one’s largely
innate fluid intelligence in a specific domain. Cattell (1987) also theorized that higher
intelligence and the success that is related to it prompt increases in certain personality traits
(see also Ziegler et al., 2012). Expanding on this idea, Ackerman (1996) highlighted in his
intelligence-as-process, personality, interests, and intelligence-as-knowledge (PPIK)
framework that selected personality traits, henceforth labeled intellectual investment traits,
contribute to the development of cognitive abilities in terms of crystallized intelligence,
above and beyond the contributions of fluid intelligence (see also, e.g., Chamorro-Premuzic
& Furnham, 2004). Later, von Stumm and Ackerman (2013) advanced the theory by
providing a systematization of intellectual investment traits and proposing that a variety of
constructs span the intellectual investment trait construct space (e.g., need for cognition,
typical intellectual engagement, interests, openness to experience). Further, a decisive
addition to intellectual investment trait theory was made by Ziegler et al. (2012; see also
Ziegler et al., 2015; Ziegler et al., 2018), who introduced the Openness-Fluid-Crystallized-
Intelligence (OFCI) model to the field. Among other processes, the OFCI model hypothesizes
a direct link between intellectual investment traits and fluid intelligence and pays attention to
both openness, and, in later extensions, interests, as proxies for intellectual investment traits
(Ziegler et al., 2018).
Intellectual Investment Trait Theory outlines two key assumptions about the temporal
interplay between cognitive abilities and intellectual investment traits. On the one hand,
according to the environmental enrichment hypothesis, intellectual investment traits should
lead people to experience more learning opportunities, prompting them to invest their time
and effort in their intellect. This investment, in turn, is believed to contribute to cognitive
growth over time (Raine et al., 2002; von Stumm & Ackermann, 2013; Trapp et al., 2019;
Ziegler et al., 2012; Ziegler et al., 2018). On the other hand, the environmental success
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 6
hypothesis captures the opposite influences of cognitive abilities on investment traits (e.g.,
Cattell, 1987; von Stumm & Ackerman, 2013; Ziegler et al., 2012). As such, cognitive
abilities should precede investment traits, as higher levels of cognitive abilities enable
individuals to better engage with and pursue a variety of learning experiences, subsequently
feeding into the development of their intellectual investment traits (Silvia & Sanders, 2010;
von Stumm & Ackerman, 2013). Importantly, the environmental enrichment and success
hypotheses are not mutually exclusive, and instead, reciprocal relationships between
intellectual investment traits and cognitive abilities are assumed (e.g., Bardach et al., 2023;
von Stumm & Ackerman, 2013; Wettstein et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2012).
Although Intellectual Investment Trait Theory has made important contributions to
our understanding of reciprocal relationships between cognitive abilities and personality
traits, it is also limited in some respects. For example, momentary expressions of investment
personality traits and cognitive performance (i.e., states) have been neglected so far, and the
environmental enrichment and success hypotheses have mostly been studied on a between-
person level. To overcome some of these restrictions and generate new ways of thinking
about reciprocities between investment personality traits and cognitive abilities, the present
paper introduces Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory to the field.
From Intellectual Investment Trait Theory to Dynamic Intellectual Investment
Trait and State Theory
Dynamic intellectual investment trait and state theory is a novel yet logical extension
of intellectual investment trait theory. In the following sections, we describe key elements of
Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory and explain how it differs from and
expands on investment trait theory.
States are Central to Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory
Intellectual investment trait theory has often been described as reflecting longer term
developmental processes; hence, its environmental enrichment and success hypotheses and
respective processes are presumed to unfold over longer periods of time (e.g., over several
years), with studies typically employing yearly or biyearly assessments of cognitive abilities
and intellectual investment traits (e.g., Bardach et al., 2022; Bergold & Steinmeyer, 2016;
Wettstein, et al., 2017). In reformulating the initial theory into Dynamic Intellectual
Investment Trait and State Theory, we argue that the shorter term dynamic interplay between
“momentary” intellectual investment traits and cognitive performance should be at the heart
of the theory. Momentary manifestations of personality traits in specific situations are
referred to as personality states (Baumert et al., 2017; Horstmann & Ziegler, 2020). Although
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 7
more commonly used in personality research than in research on cognitive abilities, the
“state” concept is applicable to the cognitive domain as well (e.g., momentary manifestations
of cognitive performance when children or adults participate in cognitive training; e.g.,
Ericson & Klingberg, 2023).
Personality states play an important role in dynamic personality theories, which
conceptualize personality as a dynamic system (e.g., DeYoung, 2015; Revelle & Condon,
2015, for an overview, see Hecht et al., 2023). Not only do these theories offer a way to
describe people in general terms (e.g., someone is an intellectually curious person), but they
also explain how momentary behavior manifests in specific situations. Several propositions
of dynamic personality theories are particularly relevant for the herein presented Dynamic
Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory. For instance, the Cues-Tendency-Action
model (CTA; Revelle & Condon, 2015) specifies—among other things—that within a given
situation, individuals show behaviors that are in line with their personality traits if they
encounter cues that trigger such behaviors. In other words, a person perceives a situational
cue, and, depending on the person’s tendency to react to this cue, a specific action is shown
(Revelle & Condon, 2015, Revelle & Wilt, 2021; see also Hecht et al., 2023). Applying this
reasoning to Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory, we propose that a
situation involving a challenging cognitive task will serve as a natural activator of
intellectual-investment-trait-related states. As such, when faced with a challenging cognitive
task, a person who is intellectually curious will “react” to the task by immersing themselves
deeply in it, an action that, in turn, will raise the person’s cognitive performance. CTA further
includes learning processes. For instance, when dealing with a challenging cognitive task, a
person will be more likely to deeply engage with it depending on their previous experiences
(e.g., last time it was enjoyable to engage in such a task).
Cybernetic Big Five Theory (CBFT; DeYoung, 2015), another dynamic personality
theory, adopts principles of cybernetics, that is, the study of goal-directed, self-regulating
systems (Austin and Vancouver, 1996; Carver and Scheier, 1998; DeYoung, 2010). Like
CTA, CBFT recognizes that traits are contextualized in situations, meaning that they are
conditional on the presence of specific classes of stimuli. In line with the operation of
cybernetic systems, a cycle of five stages is proposed: (a) goal activation, (b) action selection,
(c) action, (d) outcome interpretation, and (e) goal comparison. Outcome evaluations and
feedback from the last stage feed directly into future actions. Further, processes of the five
stages are often carried out in parallel rather than serially (DeYoung, 2015). The stages of
CBFT can be transferred to Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory. Here, a
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 8
goal is activated, for example, by a situational cue (e.g., a cognitively demanding task
[situational cue] can prompt the goal to do well on this task). Next, behavior that is
appropriate for achieving this goal is activated (e.g., working hard to solve the task, leading
to high task performance). Individuals then interpret the outcome of the action (“Did I do
well and why [not]?”), which provides feedback for future actions. Outcome interpretations
can also be based on affect (e.g., “Did working on this task make me feel good about myself
and my capabilities?”). This affective route aligns with reinforcement learning that focuses
on how individuals seek to approach positive feelings and avoid negative feelings, which has
been described as a strong learning mechanism for a variety of domains, including complex
behaviors and personality (Caspi & Roberts, 2001; Wrzus & Roberts, 2017). Both cognitive
and affective interpretation routes seem likely to impact later investment personality states
(e.g., enjoying working on a cognitively challenging task contributes to becoming more
interested or curious).
Several issues relating to the central assumptions of Dynamic Intellectual Investment
Trait and State Theory derive from the discussion of dynamic personality theories and the
focus of Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory on dynamics between
investment personality states and cognitive performance states. It becomes clear that we need
to change our way of thinking about the environmental enrichment and success hypotheses if
we focus on states in situations, which contrasts with initial investment trait theory’s focus on
longer term links between cognitive abilities and investment traits. Specifically, if we
consider that we are now interested in state expressions of investment personality and
cognitive performance at shorter intervals (e.g., assessed every day), the assumption that a
person would, for example, select themselves into a more intellectually stimulating
environment following the assessment on Day 1, which has an effect on the assessment on
the next day might not necessarily hold. Instead, situation-specific processes come into play
and are needed to inform the respective hypotheses. Let us outline two examples to guide the
restatement of the environmental enrichment and success hypotheses to match Dynamic
Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory. The examples capture two different pathways
of influence, with each of them involving a cognitively challenging task, which, in
accordance with CTA and CBFT, serves as a “cue” for activating specific behaviors.
Path 1 (cognitive performance state à investment personality state): You perform
particularly well on a cognitively demanding task on a certain day (let us call this “Session
X”). Hence, you can exploit your cognitive potential in this session, which leads to positive
outcomes (strong performance in the situation) and evaluations, including the feeling that the
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 9
experience was rewarding. All of this likely makes you more interested or intellectually
curious the next time you encounter a cognitively demanding task (in Session X + 1). In
Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory, we call this the situation
exploitation hypothesis, which proposes that higher levels of state cognitive functioning
positively predict subsequent higher levels of investment personality states.
Path 2 (investment personality state à cognitive performance state): Imagine that
you show high interest and enjoy working on a cognitively demanding task on a specific day
(Session Y). This interest prompts you to explore several potential solutions, think more
deeply about the questions, and work harder. You probably also try a new reasoning strategy
(which might not immediately be more successful but may serve as a training bed for more
advanced reasoning). Overall, the “investment” of your interest in this session likely helps
you to perform better in Session Y + 1. In Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State
Theory, we call this the situation exploration hypothesis, which proposes that higher state
investment personality expressions positively predict subsequent higher levels of state
cognitive performance. It should also be noted that Paths 1 and 2 can co-occur, meaning that
situation exploitation and exploration processes can take place simultaneously.
To conclude, unlike the environmental enrichment and success hypotheses, the
situation exploitation and exploration hypotheses build on closely coupled sequences of
situations and strongly center on (shorter term) reinforcement and feedback loops.
Nevertheless, we note that this state of affairs does not have to be incompatible with longer
term development, which we will further elaborate on in the Discussion when presenting
future theoretical expansions of Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory.
Further, not only does Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory reflect
interindividual differences in people’s level of interests and cognitive abilities, but it also
acknowledges the existence of between-person differences in within-person dynamics. For
instance, whereas for some individuals, cognitive functioning states may be strongly related
to subsequent intellectual investment states, this effect may be less pronounced for other
individuals.
Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory Reconciles a Focus on Within-
Person Dynamics and Between-Person Differences in Developmental Trends
Intellectual Investment Trait Theory has primarily been framed in between-person
terms, and relatedly, environmental enrichment and success processes have been studied as
between-person phenomena. For example, Chamorro-Premuzic and Furnham (2004)
elaborated on effects of intellectual investment traits on cognitive abilities and wrote: “It is
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 10
now time to ask whether personality traits have any effect on the development of intellectual
skills (and vice versa). This refers to the question of why some people are more able than
others …” (p. 257; see also, e.g., Beauducel et al., 2007). More recently, however, Ziegler
(2014) stated: “It is time to shift research attention towards factors influencing intellectual
development which lie within persons ….” (p. 2). We agree with Ziegler’s statement, and the
situation exploitation and exploration hypotheses that were described in the previous section
are clearly framed in “within-person” terms. Dynamic intellectual investment trait and state
theory therefore pays specific attention to dynamic within-person reciprocal effects between
cognitive performance states and intellectual investment personality states.
Nonetheless, in addition to within-person dynamics, the theory accounts for between-
person developmental trends. Hence, Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory
posits that individuals differ in the trajectories of the growth of their cognitive abilities and
intellectual investment traits (see also, e.g., Núñez-Regueiro et al., 2022). Importantly,
Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory reconciles within-person dynamics
and between-person trends, as states are best operationalized as deviations from a person’s
trait-like developmental trends in the theory. This operationalization is also highly relevant
from a conceptual viewpoint. A justification for this stance is presented: Let us look at the
following examples. Consider that person i becomes more curious (than person j) over time,
and this curiosity is related to a greater increase in person i’s cognitive abilities. This is an
important insight, as it tells us about developmental trends in person i’s traits in terms of
curiosity and cognitive abilities and how they are linked. Consider another example: Person k
might not be known to be the most curious person; however, on a certain occasion, person k
is found to be more curious than what would be expected on the basis of the person’s trait
level of curiosity (e.g., because person k sees the value of a cognitive task for their everyday
life or because person k simply enjoys cognitively demanding work on this specific day);
hence, person k’s state curiosity shows a positive deviation relative to their trait curiosity. If
we incorporate insights into general developmental trends in person k’s curiosity, we can
even say that person k shows higher state curiosity than what would be expected on the basis
of their (not terribly steep) developmental trend in curiosity. In turn, this deviation in state
curiosity predicts a positive deviation from person k’s state cognitive performance, meaning
that person k can realize a stronger gain in cognitive performance than what would be
expected on the basis of their respective average development in cognitive performance. The
second example—if repeatedly experienced (i.e., repeated deviations from one’s
traits/developmental trends) and deemed successful—is critical for personality change (see
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 11
Wrzus & Roberts, 2017) and likely plays a role in cognitive abilities too. Hence, Dynamic
Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory’s operationalization of states as deviations
from developmental trends is well-aligned with modern personality science.
Note that the refinement of the state component can easily be integrated into the
situation exploitation and exploration hypotheses from the previous section. For example, we
began Scenario 1 by describing the situation exploitation hypotheses with the following
phrase: “You perform particularly well on a cognitively demanding task on a certain day ….”
This can be expanded to “You perform particularly well on a cognitively demanding task on
a certain day—much better than suggested by the average of your development trajectory for
cognitive performance ….” Similarly, for Scenario 2, which focused on the situation
exploration hypotheses, the statement “Imagine that you show high interest and enjoy
working on a cognitively demanding task on a specific day …” can now be refined to
“Imagine that you show high interest and enjoy working on a cognitively demanding task on
a specific day. Your levels of interest on this certain day really stand out, as you are more
interested than what would be expected on the basis of the average of your developmental
trajectory for interest ….”
Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory Makes It Explicit That “Time”
is Continuous
Research and theory on intellectual investment traits has been mute about conceptions
of “time,” a limitation that Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory seeks to
overcome. Theoretically, processes that occur only at discrete time points can be
distinguished from processes that exist continuously but are observed only at discrete time
points (e.g., Hecht et al., 2019; Hecht & Zitzmann, 2020; Hecht & Zitzmann, 2021a; Hecht &
Voelkle, 2021; Voelkle et al., 2012; Voelkle et al., 2018). Arguably, cognitive abilities and
intellectual investment traits are of the latter type, as they exist continuously within a person,
even though they are observed only at selected time points. Nonetheless, prior work has
failed to discuss these issues, and has, without questioning it, employed discrete-time models.
Consequently, we should make the continuous nature of these constructs and their interplay
part of our theories and choose methodological approaches that allow time to be treated as
continuous (i.e., continuous-time models, e.g., Hecht et al., 2023; Voelkle et al., 2018).
Methodologically, another benefit is that data from unequally spaced measurement points can
naturally be integrated in continuous-time models, as time is treated as continuously
evolving. Moreover, based on the estimated parameters from continuous-time models,
discrete-time parameters can be calculated for any interval length (e.g., Hecht et al., 2019).
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 12
As such, continuous-time modeling allows researchers to explore the unfolding and
dissipation of dynamic effects (Hecht & Zitzmann, 2021a).
To summarize, (a) Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory
distinguishes itself from Intellectual Investment Trait Theory due to the focus on dynamic
within-person reciprocal relationships between cognitive performance states and intellectual
investment personality states. Further, (b) these states represent deviations from trait-like
developmental trends in investment personality traits and cognitive abilities, meaning that
Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory integrates (but separates) within-
person dynamics and average developmental trajectories. In addition, (c) the theory adopts a
continuous-time framework. In the next section, we translate the centerpiece of the theory,
namely, the situation exploitation and exploration hypotheses, into theoretical estimands that
then guide the selection of the most appropriate model for our empirical illustration.
Defining the Appropriate Theoretical Estimand to Represent the Situation Exploitation
and Exploration Hypotheses
As described by Lundberg et al. (2021), the theoretical estimand defines the target
quantity outside of the statistical model and, thus, represents a precise statement of the
research goal. To guide the empirical illustration reported below and provide a blueprint for
future research on Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory, we outline
theoretical estimands for the situation exploitation and exploration hypotheses. Intellectual
investment personality states and cognitive performance states refer to deviations from mean
trends in interest and cognitive performance, respectively.
What changes in levels of state cognitive performance would people be expected to
realize after a certain time period if they were to increase their levels of investment
personality states, accounting for their initial levels of and average developmental trajectories
of cognitive abilities and investment personality traits (and vice versa)? Even more precisely,
what is the average predictive relationship between intellectual investment personality states
and later states of cognitive performance and vice versa (or, in other words, how strongly are
investment personality states and cognitive performance states related over time, depending
on the length of the time interval)?
The described theoretical estimands focus on dynamic within-person reciprocal
relationships between cognitive performance states and intellectual investment personality
states as a key element of Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory, even
though estimands could of course also be derived for other aspects of the theory.
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 13
The second building block of the theoretical estimand is the target population, defined
as the set of units over which the unit-specific quantity is aggregated (Lundberg et al., 2021).
We believe that Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory’s assumptions about
the interplay between cognitive performance and personality are a central part of human
architecture, and accordingly, the theory makes claims about situation exploration and
exploitation processes in humans. Potential restrictions regarding the extent to which the
sample from our empirical illustration is informative about the broader target population are
outlined in the Discussion.
Linking the Theoretical Estimand to an Empirical Estimand and Estimation Strategy
In the following, we describe how the theoretical estimand can be linked to an
empirical estimand, and how the latter can be estimated. In our Dynamic Intellectual
Investment Trait and State Theory, we are concerned with the temporal interplay of
intellectual investment personality and cognitive performance for a person; thus, there are
values of two variables that we stack into a column vector 𝐲. As we have multiple repeated
measurements of these two variables, we add the subscript 𝑝, with 𝑝 = 1, … , 𝑇 being a
running index denoting the time point (𝑇 is the number of time points), yielding 𝐲 . With
these multiple measurements of the two variables, we introduce the predictions (cross-lagged
effects) of one variable on the other and vice versa from one time point to the next (with the
∗ ∗
assumption of time-constant effects), 𝐲 = 𝐀 𝐲 , where 𝐀 is the autoregression matrix,
! !#$
which contains the autoregressive effects on the main diagonal and the cross-lagged effects,
∗ ∗
𝑎 and 𝑎 , on the off-diagonals. Because the predictions are usually not perfect,
$,& →& $,& →&
! " " !
we add normally distributed error (often called process error): 𝐲 = 𝐀 𝐲 + 𝛚 with
! !#$ !#$
∗ ∗
𝛚 ~ 𝓝 (𝟎, 𝐐 ), where 𝐐 is the process error covariance matrix.
!#$ 𝟐
So far, we have defined the targeted cross-lagged effects in discrete time for one
person. Due to the discrete-time assumption, they depend on the specific time interval
between the measurement occasions. However, as our Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait
and State Theory conceptualizes time as continuous, we now switch to modeling the velocity
𝑑𝐲(𝑡) at time 𝑡 with a stochastic differential equation: 𝑑𝐲(𝑡) = (𝐀𝐲(𝑡))𝑑𝑡 + 𝐆𝑑𝐖(𝑡), where
𝐀 is the drift matrix, 𝐆 is the Cholesky decomposition of the diffusion matrix, and 𝑑𝐖(𝑡) is
randomness from a Wiener process. The interested reader is referred to papers by Oud and
Delsing (2010), Voelkle et al. (2012), Ryan et al. (2018), Hecht et al. (2019), Hecht and
Voelkle (2021), Hecht and Zitzmann (2021a, 2021b), Lohmann et al. (2022), and Lohmann et
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 14
article by Hecht and Voelkle (2021) for an overview of discrete-time versus continuous-time
terminology. Most important for the current work is that the continuous-time drift matrix 𝐀
(with auto-effects on the main diagonal and cross-effects, 𝑎 and 𝑎 , on the off-
$,& →& $,& →&
! " " !
diagonals) is the pendant to the discrete-time autoregression matrix 𝐀 (with interval-specific
autoregressive effects on the main diagonal and interval-specific cross-lagged effects,
∗ ∗
𝑎 and 𝑎 on the off-diagonals) and that discrete-time autoregression matrices
$,),& →& $,),& →&
! " " !
for any time interval ∆ can be calculated from the continuous-time drift matrix 𝐀 (see, e.g.,
the equations in the Appendix of papers by Hecht & Voelkle, 2021, and Oud & Delsing,
2010). Besides a conceptual alignment of theoretical conceptualizations of time, the
continuous-time modeling technique equips us with advantages, such as an inherent handling
of individually varying designs and the possibility to explore the unfolding and dissipation of
cross-lagged effects (Hecht & Zitzmann, 2021a). In fact, one interesting way of reporting
results from continuous-time analysis is discrete-time plots of cross-lagged and
estimates (y axis) of the dynamic parameters are depicted depending on the time interval
length (x axis).
So far, we have defined the targeted cross-(lagged)-effects within a continuous-time
conceptualization. Besides dynamic effects, our Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and
State Theory includes long-term trends, that is, a changing trait level around which states
vary. To disentangle our empirical estimands of cross-(lagged)-effects from trends, we use
modeling strategies from Lohmann et al. (2022, 2023). In a nutshell, these authors
incorporated trend modeling into continuous-time modeling by using the “measurement
component” (see the original works for details), thereby creating a “best-of-two worlds”
combination of dynamic modeling and growth curve modeling, which makes it possible to
include polynomial and exponential terms to model linear, nonlinear, and exponential trends.
Now, our empirical estimand of cross-(lagged)-effects is controlled for trends but still
defined for just one person (𝑁 = 1 scenario). As we want to make assertions about how
people function in general (i.e., the average person) and not only about a specific person, we
develop our single-person estimand further into the average across individual cross-(lagged)-
effects (𝑁 > 1 scenario). Thus, our population changes from one specific person to the larger
population of all persons. To this end, technically, we need a subscript 𝑗 with 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑁
(with 𝑁 being the number of persons) on all mathematical symbols that denote individual
values or parameters as well as distributional assumptions for the parameters. Specifically,
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 15
we assume a multivariate normal distribution for the auto-effects, cross-effects
(𝑎 and 𝑎 ), diffusion (co)variances, and all polynomial or exponential growth
*,& →& *,& →&
! " " !
components. The mean vector of the normal distribution contains the average value of each
parameter, and the covariance matrix contains the between-person (co)variances of these
parameters. Particularly, the mean vector contains the means (over persons) of the cross-
effects, 𝑎 and 𝑎 , which can be used to calculate mean interval-specific cross-
& →& & →&
! " " !
∗ ∗
lagged effects, 𝑎 and 𝑎 , representing our final empirical estimands that match
),& →& ),& →&
! " " !
the theoretical estimands.
The estimands and the other model parameters can be estimated, for instance, in a
structural equation modeling framework using a maximum likelihood (ML) approach, where
the model parameters are estimated in such a way that the likelihood of the data given the
model parameters is maximal. Usually, numerical optimizers are used for this task.
Alternatively, a Bayesian framework could be used, where posterior distributions of
parameter are the central targets. Often, the posterior distributions are simulated using
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. Examples of suitable software for estimating
our model are OpenMx (Boker et al., 2017) and Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017). The R packages
ctsemOMX and ctsem (Driver & Voelkle, 2018; Driver & Voelkle, 2021) are user-friendly
wrappers for these software programs.
Learning from Data: An Empirical Illustration Using the COGITO Data
For our empirical illustration, we use data from the COGITO (“Cognition
Ergodicity”) study, which was conducted at the Max Planck Institute for Human
Development in Berlin, Germany (Schmiedek et al., 2010a, 2010b).
Measures
As an operationalization for intellectual investment personality, we used the item
“interested” from the PANAS (Watson et al., 1988). The item was translated into German
from the English version, which reads “How much do you feel interested at the moment?”
The response format was an 8-point Likert scale ranging from 0 (does not apply at all) to 7
(applies very well). Cognitive performance was operationalized as the percent correct score
from four blocks of a spatial n-back task (3-back spatial), a measure of working memory (see
Schmiedek et al., 2010a, for details). In this task, a sequence of 39 black dots appeared at
varying locations in a 4 x 4 grid, and participants were supposed to recognize whether each
dot was in the same position as the dot three steps earlier in the sequence or not. Both
measures were z-standardized before data analysis.
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 16
Sample and Design
The main data acquisition phase was 2006–2007. During this period, 101 younger
(20–31 years) and 103 older (65–80 years) adults repeatedly worked on cognitive tasks at
approximately 100 measurement occasions. The study design was an unequal-interval
individualized design because participants themselves could choose their times of
measurement within some boundaries. Thus, participants took 114 to 251 days to complete
Analysis and Model
The empirical estimands described above are part of Lohmann et al.’s (2022, 2023)
continuous-time modeling approach. The only ingredient that needs to be made concrete is
the expected shape of the trajectory curve. For our empirical illustration, cognitive
performance and interest were both modeled using exponential shapes that converged toward
an asymptote. The estimation was conducted with the R package ctsem version 3.7.6 (Driver
& Voelkle, 2021). Annotated R code for estimating the employed continuous-time model is
provided in the Online Supplementary Material.
Our attempt to fit the full model in which all dynamic and growth parameters vary
across individuals encountered substantial estimation and convergence issues. These
challenges might have arisen due to the limited sample size or due to parameters that were
close to the boundary of the parameter space (e.g., Zitzmann et al., 2022), potentially
resulting in what is known as “empirical underidentification” for such a complex model.
Hence, we restricted the variances of the dynamic parameters (and the covariances involving
these parameters) to zero. This remains a limitation, even though we believe that the
approach is still acceptable for the purpose of our illustration, which focuses on within-person
relationships between interest and cognitive performance states.
Transparency and Openness
This study was not pre-registered. We include our analysis code in the Online
Supplement. The data analyzed in this study is from the COGITO study and currently not
berlin.mpg.de/1291424/cogito).
Results
intervals for all model parameters. Our focus here lies on the empirical estimands of interest
and the model-implied trend curves, and thus, we will not interpret the other parameters in
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 17
in the left panels, and “SD plots” in the right panels, which showcase the between-person
variability in the trend curves. The cognitive performance (Panel A) shows mean exponential
growth, whereas interest (Panel B) shows mean exponential decline but in a smaller absolute
magnitude than cognitive performance. The presence of spread-out lines for ±1 and ±2
standard deviations in Panels C and D suggests that there is considerable between-person
variability in the shape of the growth curve for both cognitive performance and interest.
effects (upper panels) and cross-lagged effects (lower panels) with 95% confidence bands.
The autoregressive effects for both cognitive performance and interest gradually diminished
after approximately 2 days. Still, the autoregressive effect for interest dissipated slightly more
quickly than that of cognitive performance. The interval-dependent cross-lagged effects,
which are our empirical estimands of interest, were essential zero. This result implies that
cognitive performance and interest were not temporally coupled or predictive of each other.
Therefore, if interest is exceptionally high or low on one day, it will not have a predictive
effect on the subsequent level of cognitive performance. Similarly, good or poor cognitive
performance did not appear to be associated with a particular level of interest at a later time.
These findings suggest that, contrary to theoretical expectations, cognitive performance and
interest operated independently of each other and did not demonstrate a significant temporal
relationship, at least not in the current empirical illustration.
Discussion
Personality and cognitive abilities are principal classes of individual differences, and
both encompass important predictors of a range of life outcomes (e.g., in the domains of
health, educational and occupational success, and interpersonal relations; Stanek & Ones,
2023; Roberts et al., 2007). Hence, for over 100 years, researchers have been interested in the
connections between personality and cognitive abilities. A prominent perspective on how
cognitive abilities and specific personality traits (i.e., intellectual investment personality
traits) mutually reinforce each other has been provided by Intellectual Investment Trait
Theory (e.g., Ackerman, 1996; Chamorro-Premuzic & Furnham, 2004; von Stumm &
Ackermann, 2013; Ziegler et al., 2012; Ziegler et al., 2015). Nonetheless, despite its impact,
Intellectual Investment Trait Theory has several blind spots. For example, it relied chiefly on
the study of longer term between-person associations while neglecting the intricate and
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 18
conceptually relevant interplay between momentary expressions of cognitive performance
and personality.
The first aim of this article was therefore to advance research on the interface between
personality and cognitive abilities by introducing Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and
State Theory to the field. Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory is a logical
yet innovative extension of Investment Trait Theory, but the dynamic theory expands the
range of phenomena that can be explained. It focuses on dynamic within-person reciprocal
relationships between cognitive performance states and intellectual investment personality
states. Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory integrates (but separates)
within-person dynamics and developmental trajectories, as states are conceptualized as
deviations from trait-like developmental trends in investment personality traits and cognitive
abilities (Wrzus & Roberts, 2017). In Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait Theory,
reciprocities between cognitive performance states and intellectual investment personality
states are captured by the situation exploitation and success hypotheses, which also connect
Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory with broader dynamic personality
theories (e.g., CBFT, WTA, e.g., DeYoung, 2015; Revelle & Condon, 2015) and current
conceptions of personality development (e.g., Wrzus & Roberts, 2017). Further, Dynamic
Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory is embedded in a continuous-time framework,
representing another novel feature of the theory.
Guided by the premise that only the alignment between personality theories and
methodological approaches can build a better science of personality and individual
differences, the second aim of our work was to engage in rigorous theory-model matching,
and thus, to demonstrate how to precisely map core theoretical assumptions of Dynamic
Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory onto a statistical model. Accordingly, we
derived the appropriate theoretical and empirical estimands (Lundberg et al., 2021) for
investigating Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory’s situation exploitation
and exploration hypotheses. Based on the estimands, the most suitable model to test Dynamic
Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory, a continuous-time growth curve model
recently proposed by Lohmann et al. (2023), was selected for our empirical illustration. The
model disentangles trends and cross-lagged parameters, models states as deviations from
developmental trends, and describes trends and dynamics on a continuous-time scale
(Lohmann et al., 2023). Overall, one of the most vexing challenges in (personality)
psychology is to ensure the fit between our theories and the arsenal of advanced statistical
techniques. The most sophisticated methods provide little value (and even lead to misleading
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 19
conclusions) if they fail to reflect complex and nuanced theories. Hence, the adopted theory-
model mapping approach brings us one step forward in our quest of forging stronger
connections between theoretical and statistical models (see also, e.g., Curran et al., 2014).
Notwithstanding the contributions our work makes to theory development and theory-
model mapping, we did not find support for the situation exploitation and exploration
hypotheses in our empirical illustration. The reasons for this finding are difficult to establish
but may be linked to the setting and other characteristics of the study from which the data
stemmed. Specifically, the study was part of a large research project conducted in the lab. It
included many cognitive assessments, which may have decreased the intrinsic valence of “the
situation” and counteracted the unfolding of mechanisms underlying situation exploitation
and exploration processes. Future research revisiting Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait
and State Theory both in the lab and in everyday real-world contexts (e.g., children playing
with an educational app that includes cognitive assessments at home; Behnamnia et al., 2022)
can add clarity. Further, measurement issues may have blurred the effects in our empirical
illustration. For instance, interest was assessed with a single item. Future studies on Dynamic
Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory employing more comprehensive measures,
which also comes with the advantage of being able to conduct latent variable modeling, are
warranted. In addition, our empirical illustration relied on a sample of German adults from
two age groups (see, e.g., Schmiedek et al., 2010a; Schmiedek et al., 2010b), who were
recruited (e.g., through newspaper advertisements, flyers, word-of-mouth) to participate in
the study. The advertisements were aimed at people who were interested in practicing
cognitive tasks for 4–6 days a week for a period of about 6 months (Schmiedek et al., 2010b).
It has been argued that the sample was quite representative regarding general cognitive
functioning (Schmiedek et al., 2010a); nonetheless, we cannot rule out the possibility that
specific characteristics of the current sample may have systematically influenced the findings,
and there may still be some restrictions regarding the representativeness of the sample.
Lastly, we want to give an outlook on promising directions and further developments
within Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory. First, it is important to
reiterate that we were interested in finding out how people function in general (i.e., effects in
the average person). Although we did not obtain evidence for general temporal relationships
in our empirical illustration, there may still be participants for whom such a relationship in
the hypothesized direction held. This heterogeneity of temporal dynamics may be worth
investigating in future research because it can help us understand under which circumstances
participants show the hypothesized relationships and, ultimately, to investigate the boundary
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 20
conditions for Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory. Second, albeit
Dynamic Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory as presented in this article
emphasizes shorter term processes, the theory is compatible with longer term development as
well. For instance, we propose that a stronger “coupling” between intellectual investment
personality states and cognitive performance states (i.e., stronger dynamic reciprocal
relations) may give raise to longer term personality and cognitive ability (“trait”)
development. Further theory and method development is needed to achieve a better
theoretical and empirical grip on these pathways. Third, we encourage future studies to take a
closer look at the mechanisms that should play a role in the situation exploitation and
exploration hypotheses (e.g., feedback, evaluations, emotions) to gain a more thorough and
accurate understanding of the mechanisms underlying the reciprocities in Dynamic
Intellectual Investment Trait and State Theory. Fourth, for further extensions and refinements
of the theory, it may be fruitful to consider commonalities between Dynamic Intellectual
Investment Trait and State Theory and principles from existing theories and to engage in
intertheoretical integrations (e.g., mutualism, van der Maas et al., 2006, reward-learning
frameworks, Murayama, 2022, or “classical” motivational theories such as the four-phase
model of interest development, Hidi & Renninger, 2006, achievement goal theory, Bardach et
al., 2020, and situated expectancy-value theory, Eccles & Wigfield, 2020).
To conclude, we believe that it is an exciting time to conduct research on the interplay
between cognitive abilities and personality. We hope that Dynamic Intellectual Investment
Trait and State Theory and its future developments—matched with the appropriate modeling
approaches—can serve as an inspiration for research on cognitive abilities and personality
and for research on reciprocities between psychological constructs more generally.
DYNAMIC INTELLECTUAL INVESTMENT TRAIT AND STATE THEORY 21