Network Analysis of the Short Dark Triad: A Cross-Cultural Study in 10 Countries
Cristian Ramos-Vera1, Angel García O’Diana1, Dennis Calle1, Miguel Basauri-Delgado2,
Bruno Bonfá-Araujo3, Ariela Raissa Lima-Costa4, Mirko Duradoni5, Shagufta Nasir6,
Jacksaint Saintila7*
1Faculty of Health Sciences, Universidad César Vallejo, Lima, Peru
2Escuela de Posgrado, Universidad Femenina del Sagrado Corazón, Lima, Peru
3Faculty of Social Science, The University of Western Ontario, London, Canada
4Graduate Program of Psychology, Universidade São Francisco, Campinas, Brazil
5Department of Education, Literatures, Intercultural Studies, Languages and Psychology,
University of Florence, Florence, Italy
6Department of Psychiatry and Forensic Medicine, School of Medicine, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
7Faculty of Health Sciences, Universidad Señor de Sipán, Lima, Peru
*Correspondence:
Jacksaint Saintila, Faculty of Health Sciences, Universidad Señor de Sipán, Carretera a
Pimentel, Km 5, Chiclayo, Perú, E-mail: jacksaintsaintila@gmail.com
Abstract
Previous research has suggested that manipulation and callousness are central to dark
traits, but it has not identified which specific manifestations are expressed across various
countries. In the present study, we analyzed a general network structure and the most
relevant items (centrality indices) of interconnection of dark triad traits in 10 countries. For
this purpose, we used a scale widely used in different contexts such as the Short dark triad
(SD3). The total sample consisted of 8093 participants (59.7% women, M(age) = 32.68
years). Regarding the graphical representation with the spinglass algorithm in the general
network, we observed a structure distributed in clusters of Machiavellianism, psychopathy,
and subclinical narcissism traits. Firstly, the items related to short-term verbal manipulation
from the domain of psychopathy, along with clever manipulation and strategic revenge-
seeking items from the Machiavellianism cluster, and narcissistic motivations to establish
connections with important people, exhibited higher centrality indexes (expected and
bridge-expected influence). Secondly, the most predicted items were characterized by
planned revenge and using information against others from the Machiavellianism cluster,
short-term psychopathic verbal manipulation, and the narcissistic belief of being special
based on external validation. Finally, we utilized the clique-percolation algorithm to identify
shared central characteristics among multiple dark triad traits. Through this analysis, the
item of short-term verbal manipulation was found to simultaneously belong to the
psychopathy and narcissism clusters. Additionally, the clever manipulation item exhibited
an overlap with Machiavellianism and psychopathy traits. This cross-cultural study mainly
reveals the central role of manipulation and also a set of strategic and self-serving
approaches toward others within a system of dark traits of the SD3 scale. The importance
of exploring these traits in less considered contexts is emphasized in order to verify whether
these findings remain consistent.
Keywords: dark triad traits; network Analysis; Personality; Subclinical traits;cross-cultural
Introduction
Personality traits and contextual aspects influence how someone behaves, either
prosocially (i.e., behaving following social norms and caring about others’ rights) or
aversively (i.e., behaving contrary to social norms and disregarding others’ rights). There is
concern from many researchers about which traits are more likely to be associated with
aversive behaviors, affecting workplaces, marital, familial, and social settings negatively.
Researchers identified certain personality traits that appeared to be more prone to
influence people to behave aversively, the so-called dark triad (i.e., subclinical narcissism,
psychopathy, and Machiavellianism; Paulhus & Williams, 2002). Nonetheless, personality
alone does not influence the frequency and intensity of specific behaviors, environment
plays an important role in this process, thus is crucial to understand how people from
different cultures perceive such aversive behaviors.
The dark triad was proposed as a set of traits that consistently showed a shared core of
malevolent characteristics, such as aggressiveness, duplicity, callousness, manipulation, and
emotional coldness (Kowalski, 2001; Paulhus & Williams, 2002; Vize et al., 2020). Despite
having common characteristics, each trait has its own set of defining behaviors. Subclinical
narcissism refers to people who tend to self-promote and show an exacerbated sense of
grandiosity, believing they are the best in everything they do, requiring constant admiration
and care. Narcissistic individuals tend to exhibit more social and extraverted tendencies,
but they also have dominant and low empathy motivations, which can lead to aggression
when serving self-enhancement motives (Weiss & Miller, 2018). Machiavellianism, based
on the works of Machiavelli, characterizes people who behave in manipulative ways, lack
concern for morality and ethics, are able to delay gratification, and its key difference from
psychopathy is the high levels of constraining shown by Machiavellians (Collison et al., 2018;
Rauthmann & Will, 2011). Individuals with high levels of Machiavellianism are cold,
strategic, and prefer to have power over attention, unlike narcissists. The Machiavellian
trait is associated with antisocial behavior when a person perceives that rewards are greater
than risks, implying that Machiavellians pay attention to environmental clues about
punishment risks (Jones & Mueller, 2022). Finally, psychopathy is considered the most
aversive trait, being associated with more negative outcomes in life (Poythress & Hall,
2011). This term is used to describe individuals who disregard others’ feelings, are
untrustworthy, lack empathy, guilt, and remorse, are irresponsible, impulsive, and often
engage in criminal behavior (De Brito et al., 2021).
Certain environments may reinforce certain patterns of aversive manifestations. According
to the evolutionary perspective, traits of the dark triad may share a fast life history strategy
(fast life history strategy) that is based on a short-term approach to resource acquisition in
contexts with limited resources and high competition (Jonason et al., 2010). Assessment of
the dark triad in resource-deprived and high-developmental settings is important given that
these personality traits are not limited to a specific sociocultural context (Moshagen et al.,
2020; Paulhus & Williams, 2002). This may be supported by the fact that environments can
shape specific forms of expression of this ensemble of dark personality traits. This is
demonstrated by differential correlations between dark personality traits with occupational
outcomes, social positions, socioeconomic conditions, and even emotion recognition (Aluja
et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2021; Schmitt et al., 2020). Therefore, assessing the
dark triad in diverse settings is essential to identify which dark traits are most essential in a
multicultural sample, given that people belonging to diverse demographic groups interact
in diverse contexts and social dynamics that may be prone to take advantage of others,
possibly in different ways.
Besides the shared multicultural perspective of these behaviors, there is also a debate
about a shared central characteristic among the dark triad traits. According to some
findings, insensitivity towards others and interpersonal manipulation are the common and
most consistent behaviours among these social aversive traits, demonstrated through high
correlations between these traits and these behaviours in latent variable studies (Jones &
Paulhus, 2014) and network systems (Marcus et al., 2018; Truhan et al., 2021). However, it
is important to understand that there are distinct motivations for each trait, as theories of
each trait point out. For example, narcissists may manipulate others to gain admiration and
attention, while people with a high degree of psychopathy manipulate others for quick and
impulsive material gain. Moreover, Machiavellians use manipulation as a strategic tool to
achieve their goals and maintain power (Muris et al., 2017; Vize et al., 2018).
To assess these indicators, instruments must have been developed to differentially measure
patterns of behavior, motivation and beliefs in dark personality traits. One such instrument
is the Short dark triad (SD3) developed by Jones and Paulhus (2014). The SD3 aimed to
provide a brief assessment of these traits while ensuring item diversity and avoiding being
too long or too short like other measures such as the MACH-IV, Narcissism Personality
Inventory (NPI) or the Self Report Psychopathy (SRP). This instrument is one of the most
widely used globally and has a higher item conceptual breadth than other short dark triad
measures (Bonfá-Araujo et al., 2022; Furnham et al., 2013). This feature of the scale can be
used to analyze the content of the dark personality trait items in more detail to examine
the relationships between aversive behaviors from the dark triad model. However, there is
also evidence that this measure may not reflect the distinct characteristics of each trait, and
may not allow a clear evaluation to distinguish a clear structure or core features of each
dark triad trait as they were originally conceived (Dowgwillo & Pincus, 2017; Rogoza &
Cieciuch, 2020). Therefore, a detailed examination of the items on the SD3 scale can help
identify which items are most relevant for accurate assessment of the dark triad, which may
improve the accuracy of assessment in different cultural contexts.
Network analysis has gained popularity as an alternative for assessing psychological
constructs, including personality research. Unlike factor models, network analysis does not
address the fact that underlying latent variables are responsible for the interactions
between observable variables. In contrast, in the network model, psychological phenomena
are represented by a system where psychological characteristics emerge from the mutual
interconnections between observable indicators. In this way, it focuses on the patterns of
conditional relationships between items of similar content and which reinforce each other,
allowing the formation of groupings or clusters with the same common nature, analysing
the underlying structure and importance that each variable has in the network (Borsboom
et al., 2021). In the area of personality, this perspective can be especially useful as it allows
for a new representation of complex psychological measures where there are no latent
traits of common cause, but where observable traits together explain a system of specific
patterns (Costantini et al., 2019). In fact, this methodology has already been applied to
examine individual differences at both domain and item level (Dinic et al., 2021; Richetin et
al., 2017; Truhan et al., 2021). Thus, network analysis is presented as an appropriate
methodology for examining the complexity of relationships between personality variables,
even those more aversive traits that expand other more classical models (e.g. Big Five).
The first objective in the present study was to determine the aversive features with the
highest centrality of influence and interconnectedness (expected and bridge-expected
influence) in the overall network of the 10 countries. This was based on previous findings
that highlighted the existence of specific traits that promote and maintain connections
between the different domains of the dark triad. For example, research by Burtăverde et al.
(2022) reported a manipulative interconnected nature of various dark personality
expressions, specifically items such as verbal manipulation, aligning oneself with influential
people, using information against others and planned revenge seeking. These dark patterns
were found to show a higher number of connections, suggesting a central role in the overall
network. These findings offer evidence of the presence of stable associations among items
from different domains of dark personality traits. Collectively, these items are likely to
strengthen and stabilize a concise structural system, reflecting a central core of the dark
triad from a network perspective. Consequently, it is likely that a lower prevalence of these
core behaviours would lead to a deterioration of the network system as the number or
magnitude of network connections would be limited or reduced (Jones et al., 2021).
Although these findings have been observed in specific contexts (Burtăverde et al., 2022;
Marcus et al., 2018; Trahair et al., 2020), it is necessary to examine which aversive
characteristics may be more representative in diverse societies, both collectively and
independently in each environment.
As a second objective of the study, it was proposed to identify the items with the highest
predictability within the overall dark triad network. This was based on the known evidence
of positive correlations that have been reported in the diverse literature on the dark triad;
However, it is often not detailed which specific items are most strongly connected for each
domain (Muris et al., 2017). For this reason, we sought to identify the items with the highest
shared variance, i.e., those that are most strongly conditionally related to other items after
multivariate control of the network system components. For example, network research
conducted by Dodell-Feder et al. (2019) assessed a schizotypal personality trait (item)
system comprised of three communities, where the highest predictability metrics were
obtained for two schizotypal traits linked to social awkwardness and conversational
awkwardness, both measures with the highest degree of association and significantly higher
than the other network connections. In the case of the present study, this network metric
is relevant to understand the commonality where certain indicators or aversive behaviours
of each domain of the dark triad are reinforced. However, to date, most network studies
only include facets and dimensions of the dark triad in conjunction with other variables in
common contexts (Dinic et al., 2021; Truhan et al., 2021); while other network studies that
used only the SD3 measure did not report the predictability index (Burtăverde et al., 2022).
Finally, the third objective was to identify dark behaviours that overlap between the three
domains of the dark triad using the network percolation metric. To achieve this, we used
the clique-percolation method, which allows us to recognise those items belonging not only
to one grouping but to several groups or clusters at the same time. This objective builds on
the existing debate about the lack of clear distinction between subclinical traits such as
psychopathy and Machiavellianism, which hinders the accuracy of measurement of each
trait (Persson et al., 2019; Rogoza & Cieciuch, 2020). However, to detail these similarities
and/or distinctions, other authors suggest decomposing each trait into its elementary parts
to better understand its unique characteristics (Kay & Arrow, 2022). Based on the above,
the possibility can be raised that some items belong to more than one domain, which is
possible by means of this network metric, which allows to identify given the underlying
structure emerging from the interaction of the individual patterns of the dark triad, where
traits with common characteristics are recognised given the theoretical overlap shared by
these subclinical domains of socially aversive personality.
Materials and Method
Participants
First, we inquired about studies that used the SD3 during 2020-2022, and we invited the
respective authors to participate in the present investigation. Among them, we obtained a
response from researchers from India (Siddiqi et al., 2020) and Italy (Dionigi et al., 2022)
who offered direct availability to collaborate with their research data. Subsequently, we
collected accessible data (i.e., namely open databases), which used the SD3 instrument in
Regarding the data from participants from Peru and Brazil, these were collected
simultaneously during the second semester of 2020. In total, the final sample consisted of
8093 participants from 10 countries (59.7% female) after removing missing data (n=48)
from the original United States study (Vize et al., 2020; the original sample had 1255
participants, and the present study, 1207). All participant data is available at:
The data collection of each investigation was carried out following the respective approval
of the study, the use of language and ethical norms according to each cultural context, and
following the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki (World Medical Association, 2017)
regarding informed consent, confidentiality of the information and dignified treatment of
the participants.
Instruments
The Short dark triad scale (SD3; Jones & Paulhus, 2014) presents 27 items that are
distributed in 9 items for each dark triad trait, as in the case of Machiavellianism (e.g., “I
like to use clever manipulation to get my way”), subclinical narcissism (e.g., “I know that I
am special because everyone keeps telling me so”) and psychopathy (e.g., “People who
mess with me always regret it”). Although this instrument presents inverse scoring items to
minimize acquiescence in responses, this practice often leads to a potential risk of bias,
especially in cross-cultural studies (Church et al., 2011; Suárez-Álvarez et al., 2018), which
has also been referenced in works that examined the SD3 scale (Atari & Chegeni, 2016;
Čopková & Šafár,2021; Pechorro et al.,2019; Persson et al., 2019;Zhang et al., 2019). When
recoded, these reverse items formed separate groups in the general and individual
networks during initial network estimation. Also they correlated negatively with other
items, so we only considered those items with direct scoring that were interpretable
according to the dark triad model. In turn, item 1 was withdrawn, because it evidenced a
redundancy of collinearity with item 7, which was kept because it provides a better
Machiavellian orientation. Participants responded to each item in a range from 1 = Strongly
disagree to 5 = Strongly agree. Each measure was validated in the context and language of
the respective countries, where all the studies reported adequate values of internal
consistency for each trait of the dark triad. The general reliability of the instrument used in
this 21-item study refers to adequate reliability through the Omega coefficient (ω = .86).
Data Analysis
Packages
All processes were made in the R environment (R Core Team, 2022) with qgraph (Epskamp
et al., 2012; Epskamp et al., 2022), igraph (Csardi & Nepusz, 2006; Csardi & Nepusz, 2022),
bootnet (Epskamp, 2021), NetworkComparisonTest (van Borkulo et al., 2019), networktools
(Jones, 2022), NetworkToolbox (Christensen, 2019), and CliquePercolation (Lange, 2021)
packages.
General Network Estimation
The general network model was calculated with bootnet package, with the huge estimator
(Jiang et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2012), a nonparanormal transformation of the data (Liu et
al., 2009), and the Rotation Information Criterion (RIC) for model selection (Lysen, 2009);
all contained in the ‘estimateNetwork’ function. The clusters were identified with the
spinglass algorithm (Newman & Girvan, 2004; Reichardt & Bornholdt, 2006; Traag &
Bruggeman, 2009) this was calculated with ‘spinglass.community’ function in igraph
package, through the undirected adjacency matrix and 200 spins.
The overlapped communities in the graph were calculated with the Clique Percolation
Method (CPM) algorithm (Palla et al., 2005), where a community is a several fully connected
subgraphs that tend to share some of their nodes. Thus, the algorithm first finds all cliques
of size k in the estimated network graph, then create a graph where nodes are cliques of
size k, after adding edges if two nodes (cliques) share k-1 common nodes, and finally, each
community is represented by each connected component in the final clique graph. A k = 7
cliques were used to identify the percolated nodes.
For the network, visualization edges represent the weight of the correlations between the
individual nodes, whereas wider edges indicate stronger correlations between nodes.
Nodes represent scores of each predictability (i.e., how well a node can be predicted by all
others it is connected to). Each group node color is an identified cluster, and two or more
colors are percolated nodes; all were plotted with the ‘cpColoredGraph’ function of the
CliquePercolation package.
Stability and Centrality
The stability was calculated with the bootnet package in two forms: (a) using a person-
dropping bootstrap (CS-coefficient), values upper than > 0.5 indicate strong stability and
interpretability (Ramos-Vera et al., 2022); (b) A multiverse stability of bootstrap samples,
where every row indicates an edge and every column a bootstrap, the color intensity
indicates the strength of the edge in each bootstrap replication. If the network is stable, the
Then, the centrality indices, one and two step Expected Influence were estimated with the
‘expectedInf’ function on networktools package, the first provides information on the direct
relationships between each node and the rest by summing the weights of the edges,
considering the absolute values or the sign of the value, and the second sums the weights
of indirectly related edges (Robinaugh et al., 2016). Likewise, one and two step bridge
expected influence were estimated with the ‘bridge’ function in the same package, the first
indicates the total connectivity of each node with nodes of other communities with which
it is directly related, by summing the weights of the edges that connect the node with nodes
of other communities considering absolute values, while the second considers indirect
relationships with nodes in other communities (Jones et al., 2021). Furthermore, the
participation coefficient was estimated as a corrective for the centralities of nodes. This
allows us to observe the consistency of the connections that a node has in comparison to
different groups of nodes within the network (Letina et al., 2019). This was estimated with
the ‘participation’ function in the NetworkToolbox package.
Networks by Countries Estimation
The individual countries' networks were estimated with the Local/Global (LoGo) method,
which estimates a Graphical Gaussian Model (GGM) using a Triangulated Maximally Filtered
Graph (TMFG) network (Barfuss et al., 2016), the partial correlations were estimated
through a nonparanormal transformation of the data (Liu et al., 2009), and the Rotation
Information Criterion (RIC) for model selection (Lysen, 2009). To view the dynamism of the
communities, these were colored like the general network. And the centralities were
explored with the Expected Influence metric for each network. Afterward, the comparison
between networks of countries was conducted with the ‘NCT’ function of the
NetworkComparisonTest package, this was calculated with Bonferroni-Holm correction
(Hochberg & Tamhane, 1987; van Borkulo et al., 2022) and 100 permutations for each case.
Results
Frequency
Country (sample) M (Age) Gender ω (SD3)
(percent)
Male 207 (27.2%)
BRAZIL (n = 760) 34.53 0.89
Female 553 (72.8%)
Male 117 (26.7%)
CHINA (n = 439) 21.41 0.84
Female 322 (73.3%)
Male 94 (20.3%)
GERMANY (n = 463) 25.78 0.84
Female 369 (79.7%)
Male 490 (59.3%)
INDIA (n = 826) 19.8 0.77
Female 336 (40.7%)
Male 188 (26.3%)
ITALIA (n = 715) 42.4 0.83
Female 527 (73.7%)
Male 967 (49.7%)
JAPAN (n = 1947) 44.81 0.83
Female 980 (50.3%)
Male 121 (38.7%)
PERU (n = 313) 24.56 0.87
Female 192 (61.3%)
Male 300 (50.0%)
SLOVAKIA (n = 600) 43.12 0.84
Female 300 (50.0%)
Male 282 (34.3%)
SPAIN (n = 823) 31.31 0.82
Female 541 (65.7%)
Male 499 (41.3%)
USA (n = 1207) 39.1 0.90
Female 708 (58.7%)
Notes. M (age) = Mean age, ω (SD3) = omega reliability coefficient of the SD3 Scale
Regarding the descriptive data at a general level, the total number of participants was made
up of 8093 people: 3265 males (40.3%) and 4828 females (59.7%), while the mean age was
participants were those from Japan, Italy, and Slovakia, while the youngest were from India
and China. On the other hand, a more equitable sample of men and women is evident in
the countries of Slovakia and Japan; the opposite occurs in the sample of Germany, Italy,
and China. The reliability of the instrument in each study through the omega coefficient was
adequate. General and individual network correlation matrices can be found in the OSF
repository:
Notes.
Blue paths are positive relationships. Red cluster: Machiavellianism; Blue Cluster: Psychopathy; Green
Cluster: Narcissism. Node size is defined by its predictability index. Items: SDT2= I like to use clever
manipulation to get my way. SDT3= Whatever it takes, you must get the important people on your side.
STD4=Avoid direct conflict with others because they may be used in the future. STD5= It’s wise to keep track
of information that you can use against people later. STD6=You should wait for the right time to get back at
people. STD7= There are things you should hide from other people to preserve your reputation. STD8= Make
sure your plans benefit yourself, not others. STD9= Most people can be manipulated. STD10= People see me
as a natural leader. STD12= Many group activities tend to be dull without me. STD13= I know that I am special
because everyone keeps telling me so. STD14= I like to get acquainted with important people. STD16= I have
been compared to famous people. STD18= I insist on getting the respect I deserve. STD19= I like to get revenge
on authorities. STD21= Payback needs to be quick and nasty. STD22= People often say I’m out of control.
STD23= It’s true that I can be mean to others. STD24= People who mess with me always regret it. STD26= I
enjoy having sex with people I hardly know. STD27= I’ll say anything to get what I want.
highest relationships were between SDT5 (It’s wise to keep track of information that you
can use against people later) and SDT6 (You should wait for the right time to get back at
people) (r = 0.298) from the machiavellianism cluster. Then, SDT12 (Many group activities
tend to be dull without me) and SDT13 (I know that I am special because everyone keeps
telling me so) (r = 0.228) from the narcissism cluster. Furthermore, SDT3 (Whatever it takes,
you must get the important people on your side); and SDT4 (Avoid direct conflict with others
because they may be used in the future) (r = 0.176), also from the machiavellianism group.
Regarding predictabilities, SDT6(You should wait for the right time to get back at people'')
(r2 = 0.282) and SDT5 (It’s wise to keep track of information that you can use against people
later) (r2 = 0.264) were the highest values, while SDT26 (I enjoy having sex with people
Ihardly know)(r2 = 0.101) and SDT7 (I have been compared to famous people) (r2 = 0.083)
were the lowest.
Notes. Every row indicates an edge, and every column is a bootstrap. Blue lines = Positive
Edges; Red lines = Negative edges. The color intensity indicates the strength of the edge in
each bootstrap replication.
The clusters explored with the spinglass algorithm were in accordance with the original
theoretical framework. Then, they were percolated and plotted, the results suggest that
SDT2 (I like to use clever manipulation to get my way) item is influenced by
Machiavellianism and psychopathy dimensions, and SDT27 ( I’ll say anything to get what I
want) item is influenced by psychopathy and narcissism dimensions. The multiverse stability
bootstrap iteration executed; this can be visualized in the straight horizontal lines formed.
The highest value was between SDT5(It’s wise to keep track of information that you can use
against people later) and SDT6 (You should wait for the right time to get back at people)
edge weight (0.359) in the 366 iterations, while SDT3 (Whatever it takes, you must get the
important people on your side)- SDT23 (People who mess with me always regret it) edge
weight (-0.109) was the lowest in the 474 iterations.
Notes. Values greater than 1 refer to greater centrality in the network. Items: SDT2= I like to use clever
manipulation to get my way. SDT3= Whatever it takes, you must get the important people on your side.
STD4=Avoid direct conflict with others because they may be used in the future. STD5= It’s wise to keep track
of information that you can use against people later. STD6=You should wait for the right time to get back at
people. STD7= There are things you should hide from other people to preserve your reputation. STD8= Make
sure your plans benefit yourself, not others. STD9= Most people can be manipulated. STD10= People see me
as a natural leader. STD12= Many group activities tend to be dull without me. STD13= I know that I am special
because everyone keeps telling me so. STD14= I like to get acquainted with important people. STD16= I have
been compared to famous people. STD18= I insist on getting the respect I deserve. STD19= I like to get revenge
on authorities. STD21= Payback needs to be quick and nasty. STD22= People often say I’m out of control.
STD23= It’s true that I can be mean to others. STD24= People who mess with me always regret it. STD26= I
enjoy having sex with people I hardly know. STD27= I’ll say anything to get what I want.
Moreover, in the general network the highest expected influence and the bridge expected
BEI1 = 0.468). However, the lowest Expected Influence was between SDT7 (I have been
compared to famous people; EI1 = 0.503) and SDT26 (I enjoy having sex with people Ihardly
know; EI1 = 0.483) nodes; while the lowest Bridge Expected Influence was SDT10 (People
see me as a natural leader; BEI1 = 0.020).
Notes.
Blue paths represent positive relationships. Orange cluster: Machiavellianism; Blue Cluster:
Narcissism; Green Cluster: Psychopathy. BR=Brazil, CH=China, GR=Germany, IN=India, IT=Italy,
JA=Japan, PE=Peru, SL=Slovakia, SP=Spain, US=United States. Items: SDT2= I like to use clever
manipulation to get my way. SDT3= Whatever it takes, you must get the important people on your side.
STD4=Avoid direct conflict with others because they may be used in the future. STD5= It’s wise to keep track
of information that you can use against people later. STD6=You should wait for the right time to get back at
people. STD7= There are things you should hide from other people to preserve your reputation. STD8= Make
sure your plans benefit yourself, not others. STD9= Most people can be manipulated. STD10= People see me
as a natural leader. STD12= Many group activities tend to be dull without me. STD13= I know that I am special
because everyone keeps telling me so. STD14= I like to get acquainted with important people. STD16= I have
been compared to famous people. STD18= I insist on getting the respect I deserve. STD19= I like to get revenge
on authorities. STD21= Payback needs to be quick and nasty. STD22= People often say I’m out of control.
STD23= It’s true that I can be mean to others. STD24= People who mess with me always regret it. STD26= I
enjoy having sex with people I hardly know. STD27= I’ll say anything to get what I want.
countries: Spain, Brazil, Japan, Slovakia, India, Germany, Peru, China, Italy, and the United
States. It can be observed that in some cases, such as China, Japan, and Slovakia, the
network structures are more uniform for each trait of the dark triad compared to other
countries.
Notes. Values greater than 1 refer to greater centrality in the network. BR=Brazil, CH=China, GR=Germany,
IN=India, IT=Italy, JA=Japan, PE=Peru, SL=Slovakia, SP=Spain, US=United States. Items: SDT2= I like to use
clever manipulation to get my way. SDT3= Whatever it takes, you must get the important people on your
side. STD4=Avoid direct conflict with others because they may be used in the future. STD5= It’s wise to keep
track of information that you can use against people later. STD6=You should wait for the right time to get
back at people. STD7= There are things you should hide from other people to preserve your reputation.
STD8= Make sure your plans benefit yourself, not others. STD9= Most people can be manipulated. STD10=
People see me as a natural leader. STD12= Many group activities tend to be dull without me. STD13= I know
that I am special because everyone keeps telling me so. STD14= I like to get acquainted with important
people. STD16= I have been compared to famous people. STD18= I insist on getting the respect I deserve.
STD19= I like to get revenge on authorities. STD21= Payback needs to be quick and nasty. STD22= People
often say I’m out of control. STD23= It’s true that I can be mean to others. STD24= People who mess with me
always regret it. STD26= I enjoy having sex with people I hardly know. STD27= I’ll say anything to get what I
want.
keep track of information that you can use against people later) showed the highest values
(>1) of this index, particularly in countries such as Germany, India, Brazil, Spain, USA, Italy,
and Peru. Likewise, the item SDT6 (you should wait for the right time to get back at people)
displayed higher expected influence indices in Peru, Italy, Germany, and Slovakia.
differences in network structures were found in the United States and Spain. Additionally,
more significant centrality indexes were found in countries such as India and the United
States.
Country Network.p Centrality.p Country Network.p Centrality.p Country Network.p Centrality.p
BR–CH 0.38 0.90 CH–GR 0.09 0.20 PE–SL < .001 0.59
BR–IN 0.23 < .001 CH–IT 0.79 0.20 PE–SP 0.10 0.04
BR–JA < .001 0.25 IN–JA 0.11 < .001 PE–US 0.03 < .001
BR–PE 0.25 0.74 IN–PE 0.25 < .001 PE–GR 0.07 0.21
BR–SL 0.25 0.36 IN–SL 0.09 < .001 PE–IT 0.08 0.16
BR–SP 0.03 0.01 IN–SP 0.04 < .001 SL–SP 0.02 < .001
BR–US 0.06 < .001 IN–US 0.12 < .001 SL–US 0.53 0.01
BR–GR 0.20 0.27 IN–GR 0.64 0.01 SL–GR 0.22 0.03
BR–IT 0.26 0.12 IN–IT 0.95 < .001 SL–IT 0.07 0.01
CH–IN 0.95 < .001 JA–PE 0.01 0.76 SP–US 0.11 < .001
CH–JA 0.45 0.47 JA–SL 0.10 0.73 SP–GR 0.33 0.39
CH–PE 0.52 0.85 JA–SP 0.15 < .001 SP–IT < .001 0.43
CH–SL 0.33 0.36 JA–US < .001 < .001 US–GR 0.56 < .001
CH–SP 0.12 0.04 JA–GR 0.01 0.12 US–IT < .001 < .001
CH–US < .001 < .001 JA–IT 0.12 0.02 GR–IT 0.04 0.82
Notes. Network.p = network structures; centrality.p = network centrality by
country.BR=Brazil, CH=China, GR=Germany, IN=India, IT=Italy, JA=Japan, PE=Peru, SL=Slovakia,
SP=Spain, US=United States.
Other analysis figures are included on the OSF link
where the significant differences of any two edges can include a zero value (dark squares)
or not (gray squares). The diagonal displays the magnitude of the original edge, where blue
squares are positive values. Values at the top were significantly higher than all others.
significant differences in that index, and gray area non-significant differences. Bootstrap
correlations. The sample values are represented by the red line, while the bootstrapped
confidence intervals are indicated by the gray area. Each horizontal line corresponds to each
association in the network, in descending order from the highest to the lowest association.
(>.50 correlation between the original and bootstrapped sample).
Discussion
Personality models can be represented by an ecosystem where traits, behaviours, domains,
or facets that interact with each other are integrated, while other connections tend to be
reduced according to the degree of importance in the network, thus allowing the
structuring of a unique causal system emerging from the associations between these
personality measures (Borsboom et al., 2021; Costantini et al., 2019). Therefore, the
application of this systemic approach that considers associative patterns of individual
differences in subclinical personality traits is important, as it offers an integrative
perspective on aversive behavior in everyday life across different cultures. Specifically, the
present study is essential as it proposes to identify the most representative behaviors
according to the network centrality metrics of the universal dark triad given the inclusion of
a multicultural sample of 10 different geographical regions.
The Short dark triad (SD3) is a widely used measure that has advantages over other similar
short measures due to its diverse and specific conceptual breadth (Dinić & Jevremov, 2021;
Maples et al., 2014). However, while the original model was composed of three correlated
factors, it has been necessary to reformulate the model in some studies to obtain a
parsimonious structure (Atari & Chegeni, 2016; Boonroungrut et al., 2020), and replicated
in others (Arseneault & Catano, 2019; Gamache et al., 2018; Onyedire et al., 2019). To
examine the systemic representation of the dark triad traits across different continents,
new perspectives are needed. Multivariate relationship network models of darker traits
may better represent the dynamics of relationships between items with a nature of
common aversive behavior that reinforces each other, from which particular domains (e.g.,
Machiavellianism) can emerge (Costantini et al., 2019). Therefore, we believe that network
analysis can be a valuable methodology for assessing the structure of the SD3 scale in a
large transcultural sample, especially across multiple countries that have been
understudied.
The first objective was to identify the dark features of greater centrality (expected and
bridge expected influence) in the systemic model given a greater number of connections
and sum of weights of items and network communities. This reinforces the
interconnectedness of the system of dark traits and provides greater stability to the
network (Jones et al., 2021). The present study highlights pathways of interconnection
between the all three dark clusters through specific traits. Specifically, the short-term verbal
manipulation item (SDT27, psychopathy) had the highest centrality values in the general
network. Additionally, items of clever manipulation to get their way (SDT2,
machiavellianism), waiting for the right time to get back at people (SDT6, machiavellianism),
and getting acquainted with important people (SDT14, narcissism) were those more
consistently repeated in all centrality measures. These findings suggest that these particular
manipulative tendencies and social influence tactics are prevalent even in diverse cultural
contexts, highlighting the widespread exploitation of others for instrumental purposes and
their resources at the expense of harming other people and society as a whole (Jonason &
Webster, 2012; Jonason et al., 2020).
The prevalence of ‘saying anything to get what one wants’ can encompass broad patterns
of behavior (seduction, dominance, lying) that are commonly associated with the dark triad,
as referenced in a meta-analysis (Muris et al., 2017). At the sociocultural level, if the most
central item “saying anything to get what they want” (SDT27) found in this study is present
within resource-poor environments, individuals with these dark traits may resort to
deceptive behavior and exploitation as a means to enhance their social and economic
position. For example, they may use their skills to influence others through lying, emotional
blackmail or flattery to gain access to valuable resources such as take advantage of job
opportunities lacking the qualifications required, to obtain money and protection through
illegal activities (Kuyumcu & Dahling, 2014). On the other hand, in more developed
environments, people with these dark triad characteristics may use behaviours such as
manipulation, influence and deception to gain power, status and social recognition. For
example, they may persuade and convince others to obtain leadership positions at work or
in politics. These persuasive behaviours have also been used to manipulate and exploit
others in financial or work settings in order to gain competitive advantage and achieve their
personal goals of power and social status (Jonason et al., 2020). These findings of
interpersonal manipulation are in line with previous network analyzes studies that
examined various dark traits within individual countries, such as Germany and the United
States (Marcus et al., 2018; Wehner et al., 2021). Interestingly, these countries, including
Spain, Brazil, Italy, and Japan, emerged as having the highest centrality indexes in the
present study as well, although we specifically found it was the item of saying anything to
get a personal benefit.
Another item on the SD3 scale that consistently emerged as central in all samples was about
waiting for the right time to seek revenge on others (SDT6). This was reinforced by the item
of using information against others (SDT5), which in turn was also connected to the item of
motivation for quick and cruel revenge (SDT21). These associations suggest that these
behaviours may be common across cultures. Indeed, people who plan revenge against
others are probably more likely to realize these motivations through the use of information
to damage the reputation of others. However, these behaviours may also result in less
empathetic behaviours related to seeking quick and cruel revenge as a way of repairing the
perceived harm of unforgiveness and resentment caused in these individuals (Flores-
Camacho et al., 2022; Jackson et al., 2019).
The second objective of the study was to identify the items with the highest predictability
(r2) in the overall SD3 network. These elements stood out for being the most predicted by
other items due to their strong connections with them. Here, the planned revenge item
(SDT6) had the highest predictability index in the network, reinforced by using information
against others (SDT5), which followed closely in high predictability. Additionally, quick and
cruel revenge from the domain of psychopathy (SDT21) also showed a stronger association
with item 6 of Machiavellian revenge. While this poses a difference in the mode of revenge
for each trait, more calculated in Machiavellianism and more callous or impulsive in
psychopathy (Vize et al., 2018), these connections make sense as both forms of revenge
involve a desire for no one to interfere with their personal gain objectives, although each
trait differs in approaches and execution of their actions. However, it can also be
hypothesized that both forms of revenge may manifest in both traits, depending on other
individual characteristics, such as sensation seeking or emotional instability that need to be
addressed in future studies (Poythress & Hall, 2011).
Other item with high predictability index was the belief of being special based on external
validation (SDT13) in the narcissism cluster, which was mainly reinforced by the belief of
being indispensable in social groups (SDT12) and being perceived as a natural leader
(SDT10). These indicators exemplify the significance of grandiosity in these individuals.
Narcissistic individuals often assume leadership positions, showcase their talents or
accomplishments, and actively seek recognition from others. These behaviors are driven by
their desire to obtain social validation, which serves to reinforce their self-esteem and
perceived superiority, as some authors have highlighted (Morf & Rhodewalt, 2001; Weiss &
Miller, 2018). In addition, the belief that others need their presence in various activities may
also lead the individual to seek to take control given the need to be the center of attention
in any social dynamic, to reinforce a sense of personal importance and esteem (Krizan &
Herlache, 2017).
With regard to the third objective, consideration was given to recognizing traits that can be
simultaneously included in more than one domain of SD3. This builds on existing evidence
of an unclear measurement of subclinical dark traits (Persson et al., 2019; Rogoza &
Cieciuch, 2020) and aims to elucidate their similarities or distinctions. Among them, we
found that verbal manipulation to get anything (SDT27 item) belonged both to the
psychopathy and narcissism cluster. In psychopathy, verbal manipulation aligns with the
manipulative nature of this trait, which involves lying and disregarding the rights and
feelings of others in order to obtain immediate benefits (Shao & Lee, 2017). Similarly,
narcissistic individuals may use self-expression to manipulate others' perceptions and
achieve a desired image, sense of power, and control. This is in line with previous studies
that report that narcissistic individuals are driven by a desire to be seen as possessing
grandiose abilities, and they may even use social influence to fulfill their own desires (Dinić
et al., 2022). As a result, they often exhibit a lack of empathy and engage in exploitative
behaviors towards others (Morf & Rhodewalt, 2001; Glenn & Sellbom, 2015).
Another interesting finding was that the item of using clever manipulation (SDT2) was found
to be shared between the Machiavellianism and psychopathy clusters. This is possible due
to the shared nature of both traits of gaining benefits through deception and exploitation,
which makes it more likely that this measure using such traits in a general way shares a
common identification with both personality domains in the network (Sharpe et al., 2021).
However, theories of both traits point out that there are differences between the two traits
that can help differentiate them depending on the nature of the manipulation used.
Machiavellianism is often associated with a strategic and rational approach to
manipulation, where people may use calculated and well-planned tactics to achieve their
goals. In contrast, psychopathy is often associated with a more impulsive and emotional
approach to manipulation, where people may use deception and manipulation for
immediate gratification without considering the physical or psychological consequences
they may cause in others (Jones & Paulhus, 2014; Sharpe et al., 2021).
Limitations
Regarding the limitations, although some samples were composed of participants from the
general population, there was a greater number of university students, which is not
necessarily representative of the cultural context in a society. In addition, although there
are other measurements of broader dark traits (e.g. Dark Tetrad), such measures are not
yet validated in some environments such as South America. Another important limitation is
that reverse items of the SD3 Scale were not used, due to analysis revealed they did not
provide an accurate representation of the intended traits within the network estimation.
Future studies should address this issue further. Additionally, in future research, it may be
interesting to replicate the study by comparing attributes according to sex, age, or
socioeconomic indicators that make it possible to better differentiate one culture from
another and verify new findings. A strength of this study was a more informative approach
of associations such as the analysis of network structures. Beyond that, we verified that
certain manipulative social patterns may be prominent and reinforce each other across
different cultures.
Conclusion
In summary, by estimating a global network using items from the SD3 scale in 10 countries,
we found that certain items promoted connections between clusters and contributed to
the overall stability of the network. These items included short-term verbal manipulation
(psychopathy), waiting for the right moment for revenge, clever manipulation
(Machiavellianism), and motivations for establishing relationships with important
individuals (narcissism). On the other hand, the most predicted items in the overall network
of the SD3 were waiting for the right moment to seek revenge on others (SDT6), using
information against others (SDT5), verbal manipulation (SDT27) and the belief of being
special based on external validation (SDT13). Finally, using the percolation algorithm, we
identified that certain items belonged to more than one cluster of the SD3 dark triad,
including clever manipulation (Machiavellianism and psychopathy) and short-term verbal
manipulation (psychopathy and narcissism). In essence, our findings highlight the
importance of verbal manipulation and its intricate interplay within the network dynamics
as measured by the SD3 Scale. This shows the multifaceted nature of dark triad traits,
revealing the diverse patterns through which verbal and short-term manipulation can be
intertwined in a calculated, vengeful manner, while also projecting a high-status image.
However, this study also revealed some important issues regarding measuring the
complexity of some traits with the SD3 Scale. Therefore, future studies may benefit from
using alternative items or complementary scales to evaluate them with greater precision.
Overall, this study adds to the existing literature on the dark triad traits and highlights the
importance of taking a transcultural perspective in understanding these complex
personality traits.