I learn what I like: Children’s preferences but not maternal IDS influence word learning from
IDS and ADS
Sarah FV Eiteljoerge*a,b, Vivien Outters*a,b, Jana Schildknechta & Nivedita Mania,b
aUniversity of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany
bLeibniz ScienceCampus ‘Primate Cognition’, Goettingen, Germany
Corresponding author: sarah.eiteljoerge@psych.uni-goettingen.de
Acknowledgments: We thank the families and their children for participating in the study. We
also thank Sebastian Isbaner for his help with setting up the gaze-contingent paradigm.
Financial statement: This research was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG)
as part of the RTG 2070 Understanding Social Relationships, the German Research Foundation
(DFG) research unit “Crossing the borders: The interplay of language, cognition, and the brain
in early human development” (Project: FOR 2253, grant no. EL 253/7-1), and the Leibniz
ScienceCampus "Primate Cognition".
Competing interests: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 2
I learn what I like: Children’s preferences but not maternal IDS influence word learning from
IDS and ADS
The input a child receives as well as the child’s own preferences can influence their learning.
While parents typically use exaggerated infant-directed speech with their child (IDS), children’s
preference for IDS varies across development, and even older children learn better from IDS
relative to ADS (Ma et al., 2011). Here, we examine whether maternal input and children’s
preference for IDS relative to ADS influence their word learning from the two registers.
We tested 48 18- to 24-month-olds in a gaze-contingent preference task measuring
whether they prefer a woman talking IDS or a woman talking ADS. Subsequently, children
were presented with novel objects and their novel labels, with half of the labels in IDS and the
other in ADS. At test, two objects were presented side-by-side and one object was labelled
while children’s target looking was recorded. Additionally, we recorded mothers’ IDS and
ADS.
While mothers’ IDS differed from ADS, children did not show a systematic preference
for one of the registers. Children learned word-object associations from IDS and ADS, and they
showed higher target recognition in the register they preferred. These results reveal how the
preferences a child forms can influence a child's word learning behaviour early in life.
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 3
Introduction
Much of what children know is acquired through instruction and interaction with informed
adults and peers. This also holds true for language - children learn language from rich
interactions with caregivers and other adults in their environment. Pedagogical theories of
learning situate children’s early learning success in the quality of input available to them (Csibra
& Gergely, 2009, 2011). Natural pedagogy, for instance, highlights that parents instinctively
use a rich infant-directed register when interacting with children, thus providing children with
optimal input to learn from. Here, the use of the infant-directed register may serve as an
ostensive cue to the child that they are the intended recipients of a particular interaction and
may capture their attention further, thereby boosting learning (Senju & Csibra, 2008).
Indirect support for this suggestion is found in studies showing that infants prefer
listening to such infant-directed speech, hereafter IDS, relative to the register of speech that
adults use in communication with one another, called adult-directed speech, hereafter ADS
(Cooper & Aslin, 1990; Outters et al., 2020; Pegg et al., 1992; The ManyBabies Consortium,
2020). Such a preference is also in keeping with more infant-directed theories of learning (Kidd
& Hayden, 2015; Oudeyer & Smith, 2016) which suggest that children choose not just whom
to learn from, but also what they would like to learn and when they would like to be provided
with information about their environment (see Mani & Ackermann, 2018 for a review). Thus,
while these two accounts separately advocate the role of the learner and the learning
environment in learning, both accounts stress that children may exhibit a preference for certain
kinds of input, like IDS, and that such a preference may enhance learning. Against this
background, the current study uses a gaze-contingent paradigm to examine whether children’s
preference for IDS, relative to ADS, modulates their learning of novel word-object associations
in the two registers. In what follows, we first present a brief overview of the literature on the
use of IDS in interactions with children and children’s response to IDS, before outlining the
current study in further detail.
Infant-directed speech differs from the register of speech adults use in communication
with each other along prosodic, lexical and syntactic dimensions (see Cristia, 2013; Soderstrom,
2007, for reviews). Typically, IDS employs higher pitch (and sometimes, greater pitch range),
shorter sentences and longer pauses between words and phrases (Fernald et al., 1989; Fernald
& Simon, 1984), increased cues to phrase boundaries (Fernald et al., 1989) and spans larger
vowel spaces (Kuhl et al., 1997, but see Cristia & Seidl, 2014) relative to ADS. While the
prosodic characteristics of IDS are perhaps best researched, some work also suggests lexical
and syntactic differences between IDS and ADS such as the increased use of diminutives
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 4
(Gleason et al., 1994), isolated single words (Brent & Siskind, 2001; Josse & Robin, 1981), as
well as a low type/token ratio and syntactic simplicity of IDS (Henning et al., 2005; Phillips,
1973). Thus, there are several cues typically available to children to differentiate IDS from
ADS.
Infants also appear to be able to use these cues to differentiate the two registers and
show a preference for IDS relative to ADS early on: Even newborns display a preference for
IDS relative to ADS (Cooper & Aslin, 1990; Pegg et al., 1992), with this preference potentially
continuing into the second year of life (The ManyBabies Consortium, 2020, but see Hayashi
Akiko et al., 2001; Newman & Hussain, 2006). The robustness of this finding is underlined by
the results of a review finding that 32 out of 42 experiments report an IDS preference (Cristia,
2013), even when children are exposed to IDS in a foreign language and ADS in the child’s
native language (Ostroff, 1998). Infants also prefer to look at silent images of people who had
previously addressed them in IDS (Schachner & Hannon, 2011), suggesting that they are able
to associate this register with speakers who have used this register in the past. A recent cross-
linguistic, cross-laboratory initiative finds that the effect is still observable in older children (up
to 15 months of age, The ManyBabies Consortium, 2020), especially when the children are
tested in their native language using particular paradigms, i.e., the headturn preference
procedure.
Given that infants are able to discriminate IDS from ADS, show a preference for IDS
relative to ADS, and IDS may provide infants with simpler and potentially richer input quality
to learn from, it is unsurprising that infants also appear to attend to and learn better from IDS
relative to ADS. One of the earliest studies looking at infant language processing in IDS found
that infants’ sensitivity to clausal boundary cues was enhanced in IDS relative to ADS, thus
potentially helping infants to extract grammatical structure from fluent speech in this register
(Kemler Nelson et al., 1989). Following a relative dearth in research on this topic, some twenty
years later, two studies found that infants were also better able to extract lexical units from
fluent speech in IDS relative to ADS (Singh et al., 2009; Thiessen et al., 2005). This was also
found to be true with regards to infants’ learning of the meanings of words, with improved
learning of novel word-object associations when these were presented in IDS relative to ADS
(Graf Estes & Hurley, 2013; Ma et al., 2011).
This is not to suggest that children cannot learn from ADS. Studies find that children
can segment words from fluent speech in ADS (Mani & Pätzold, 2016; Schreiner et al., 2016)
and can learn novel word-object associations from ADS (Ma et al., 2011), albeit at a somewhat
later age than similar findings have been reported in IDS: Ma et al. (2011) find that only 21-
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 5
month-olds with larger vocabularies and 27-month-olds, in general, were able to learn the novel
word-object associations introduced in ADS, while 21-month-olds reliably learned the novel
word-object associations in IDS.
The propensity of IDS in the input to children has also been shown to influence long-
term development, with strong correlations between maternal IDS use and later language
development (Rowe, 2008; Vosoughi et al., 2010; Weisleder & Fernald, 2013). While such
studies emphasize the long-term benefits of the use of IDS in interactions with children, their
correlational nature leaves the causative link between IDS and language development unclear.
On the one hand, in keeping with pedagogical theories of learning, one interpretation of such
findings is that the mere fact of hearing more IDS may lead to improved language development,
due to the quality of this input. Thus, according to such accounts, IDS provides infants with
potentially richer albeit syntactically simpler, more intelligible, hyperarticulated input, making
IDS the optimal kind of input to learn from (Fernald, 2000; Kuhl et al., 1997; Martin et al.,
2015; Ratner, 1986). On the other hand, these findings could also be interpreted in keeping with
theories that place more emphasis on the child as one of the driving forces in learning (e.g.,
Oudeyer & Smith, 2016). Such an interpretation would suggest that children who have a greater
preference for IDS may not only attend more to such infant-directed input but also elicit more
IDS from their parents, potentially explaining improved learning from IDS relative to ADS
(McMurray, 2016; Schreiner et al., 2016; Stern et al., 1982). This echoes with dynamic systems
approaches to learning (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2000; Karmiloff-Smith, 1992; Thelen & Smith,
1996) which focus on the interaction between the child and her environment on learning. Here,
the child is an active participant in shaping her learning experience, choosing the kinds of input
that she attends to and wishes to learn from, and actively elicits more of this kind of input from
her environment. Against this background, we examine the dynamics of the interaction between
infants’ preference for linguistic input in IDS and ADS, the quality of the maternal IDS they
are typically exposed to and their learning from the two registers.
For instance, Outters et al. (2020) examined infants’ preference for IDS (based on their
performance in a central fixation preferential listening paradigm) and the quality of their
maternal IDS (based on the difference in mean, maximum, minimum pitch, pitch range and the
duration of maternal utterances in IDS and ADS) and found a relationship between the quality
of maternal IDS and infants’ preference for IDS at 6-months of age: infants whose mothers
produced more exaggerated IDS (relative to their ADS) showed a greater preference for IDS
relative to ADS (in the preferential listening task). This finding highlights the potential shared
underpinnings of infants’ response to IDS and maternal use of IDS. Here, we extend this to
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 6
examining the relationship between the quality of maternal IDS, children’s preference for IDS
and their learning from this register. This allows us to examine potential independent and shared
contributions of maternal IDS quality and infant IDS preference to infant learning from this
infant-directed register.
Current Study
The current study examines the influence of the interaction between maternal IDS
quality and IDS preference on children’s learning of novel word-object associations from IDS
and ADS. We examined maternal IDS quality using audio-recordings of caregivers interacting
with their child or an adult. Caregivers were given a book and a set of building blocks and left
alone to play and interact with their child allowing us to record the audio interaction between
the caregiver and her child. We also recorded caregivers' adult-directed speech by asking them
to describe a toy to an imagined adult or in conversation with the experimenter.
We examined children’s IDS preference using a novel gaze-contingent eye-tracking
paradigm. Gaze-contingent paradigms have become more popular in developmental research
in recent years. In such paradigms, the child’s active behaviour can be observed in a well-
controlled setting, which can be adapted to different age groups (Marraffa et al., 2012). Even
6- to 8-month-olds have been shown to reliably trigger the gaze-contingent design after about
three trials (Wang et al., 2012). The IDS preference has typically been measured using the
preferential listening paradigm in children below 13 months (Kemler Nelson et al., 1995). The
preferential listening paradigm may be tedious and difficult to implement with older children,
such as the 18- to 24-month-olds tested in the current study. Indeed, even the ManyBabies
consortium only tested infants up to 15-months of age using the headturn preference paradigm.
Therefore, in the present study, we adopted a gaze contingent design, which allowed a novel
measure of the child’s preference for a speech register.
Children were first exposed to a smiling video of two women. One of the women then
recited a short story in IDS, while the other woman recited a story in ADS. Then, in a gaze
contingent design, children could trigger a video of either of the women speaking using their
eye gaze. The proportion of times children chose the woman who spoke IDS relative to the
woman who spoke ADS was our measure of children’s IDS preference. We hypothesized that
children would trigger the video of the woman who had previously spoken in IDS more often
than the woman who had previously spoken in ADS, as an index of their preference for the
more infant-directed register.
We examined children’s learning from IDS and ADS by introducing them to four
novel word-object associations in IDS and ADS (two each) and then examining their
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 7
recognition of these newly learned word-object associations in a subsequent test phase. We
hypothesized that children would show improved learning of words from IDS relative to ADS
(Ma et al., 2011).
Furthermore, to examine whether children had correctly associated the register with the
speaker, we included a register violation phase at the end of the experiment in which the two
women used the other, “wrong” speech register as we measured children’s pupillary arousal in
response to the register violation (Jackson & Sirois, 2009). We hypothesized that children
would show increased pupillary arousal following the speaker speaking in the wrong register
relative to the trained register.
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 8
Methods
Participants
Forty-eight German monolingual, typically developing children aged 18 to 24 months (M =
20.96 months; range = 18;00 – 23;93 months, female = 18) participated in the study. Additional
participants were tested but excluded from the analysis during piloting (n = 3), due to
unwillingness to participate (n = 1) or to complete the experiment (n = 10), preterm birth (n =
1), technical error (n = 1), or insufficient data (n = 4, see Preprocessing). Children were recruited
from the babylab database of the Institute for Psychology. Following a complete briefing,
caregivers provided written informed consent for their child to take part in the study.
Participation was rewarded with a book at the end of the session. Ethics approval was granted
by the ethics committee of the institute (Project 201b).
Stimuli
For the preference phase, we recorded videos of two women standing in front of a blue
screen as they told short stories (about 15 s, 480x320 px). In total, we recorded each woman
telling eight stories, with each story recorded in both IDS and ADS.
For the word learning task, four kitchen tools were selected as novel objects. The objects
were assumed to be unfamiliar to children at the age tested (bottle opener, can opener, ice cream
scoop spoon and a tea strainer, see Fig. 1). Children were presented with photorealistic images
of these objects onscreen. Further, four pseudowords were chosen that adhere to German
phonotactic rules (Besa, Modi, Sibu, and Tona) as the novel labels for the four objects. All
Experimental Design
All children participated in a gaze-contingent preference phase, two training phases
interleaved with two yoked test phases, and a gaze-contingent register-side-violation phase.
Gaze-contingent preference phase. In the first trial, children were presented with a non-
contingent display of two women on-screen. Then, one of the women would disappear and the
other woman would start telling a story. This story would either be in IDS or ADS. Once the
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 9
first story was finished, the woman who had just narrated a story disappeared and the other
woman would reappear and tell a story in the other register. Thus, if the first story was in IDS,
the second story would be in ADS and vice versa. The two women appeared on different sides
of the screen and remained on these two sides of the screen whenever they appeared (except for
the gate contingent register-side-violation phase). This was to ensure that all children were
presented with a story in IDS and a story in ADS and were also familiarized with the side of
the screen that the stories in the different registers would appear. Thus, for each participant, if
the story in IDS was presented on the left side of the screen on the first trial, all stories in IDS
would be presented on this side in subsequent trials (except for the register-side-violation
phase), and respectively for ADS.
After this first non-contingent trial, in the next six trials, participants were presented
with the same two images of the women on the left and the right side of the screen. Then a third,
unfamiliar voice asked the child whom she wanted to hear a story from („Von wem möchtest
du eine Geschichte hören?“, Fig. 2). When the child then fixated the image of one of the women,
a frame in blue would appear around this picture. When the participant moved her gaze to the
other woman, the frame would follow her gaze. If the participant fixated one of the women for
1000 ms, the other woman disappeared and the "chosen" woman began to tell her story in the
register she had been associated with previously. Importantly, one side of the screen and one
woman was always associated with the same speech register for individual participants (e.g.,
woman A on the left side speaking IDS and woman B on the right speaking ADS). All that
changed across trials was the story that each woman told. Thus, by fixating one side for at least
1000 ms, the participant could trigger the presentation of a video with her "preferred" speech
register. Eye blinks or short shifts initiated an additional counter. If the duration of time
participants spent looking away from the image did not exceed 160 ms, counting towards the
current fixation was continued. If it exceeded this time window, the counter for a fixation was
reset to 0. If the participant did not fixate any of the women for longer than 1000 ms for 15 s,
the trial was aborted. Across participants, we counterbalanced the register that each woman was
associated with as well as the side of the screen that each woman was presented on. This ensured
that, across participants, the side of the screen on which the different registers were presented
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 10
was also counterbalanced. Following the gaze-contingent preference phase, participants were
presented with interleaved training and test phases in the order Training-Test-Training-Test.
Training phase. In each of the two training phases, children saw an image of an object
in the center of the screen while they heard the voice of the women from the first phase
introducing the label of the object six times in their respective register (“That is a xxx. Look, a
xxx. Do you see the xxx? That is a xxx. Look, a xxx. That was the xxx.”, in German: “Das ist
ein xxx. Schau mal, ein xxx. Siehst du das xxx? Da ist ein xxx. Guck mal, ein xxx. Das war das
xxx.“). The order of sentences varied across different objects. In each training phase, children
were presented with one object in IDS and one object in ADS. Thus, across training phases,
children were exposed to two novel word-object associations in IDS and two in ADS. Within
each training phase, each novel word-object trial was presented twice so that the child heard
the name of each object 12 times in total. The order of presentation was randomized within each
training phase. The labels assigned to the different objects as well as the register that each object
was labeled with was counterbalanced across participants.
Test phase. In each of the two test phases, children saw four trials in total in which both
objects from the training phase on-screen, one in the center of the left half of the display, and
one in the center of the right half (see Fig. 3). The third voice from the gaze-contingent
preference phase then asked the child where the target object was („Wo ist denn das xxx?“) in
the speech register that this object had been labeled with during the training phase. Each object
appeared on both sides of the screen across trials with each object on the left side in two trials
and on the right side in two trials. Each object was the target in two trials and the distractor in
the other half of the trials. Each test trial consisted of a prenaming phase, from the beginning
of the test trial until the onset of the auditory stimulus (varied depending on register used), the
register phase from the onset of the auditory stimulus until the onset of the target label, and the
postnaming phase from the onset of the target label until the end of the trial. Each test trial was
five seconds long and the target label always began at 2.5 seconds. The order of trials was
randomized. Training phase and test phase were repeated once so that every child was presented
with four novel word-object associations with two objects being labeled in each of the two
training phases. The speech register, the women assigned to the different registers, the side on
which the women appeared, the objects that the women labeled in the different registers, and
the order of the two training and test phases were counterbalanced across the different lists
presented to participants.
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 11
Gaze-contingent register-side-violation phase. In the last four trials, we examined
whether children had learned to associate a particular speech register with a particular side of
the screen during the preference phase. Such sensitivity would be key to any conclusions
regarding participants’ active manipulation of their learning experience, since such sensitivity
would necessarily underlie their “preference” for either of the registers presented. Thus, we
presented participants with two match trials, where the register that the women spoke with and
the side of the screen she was presented on was the same as in the preference phase. In two
subsequent mismatch trials, while the women appeared on the same side of the screen as before,
the register she spoke differed from the previous phases. Thus, had she spoken IDS during the
preference and training phases, she now spoke in ADS, and vice versa. We measured tonic
changes in participants’ pupillary dilation to a video of bubbles presented before and after each
trial (c.f. Hepach et al., 2012).
Procedure
Participants sat in a quiet and dimly lit experimental room in a booster seat or on their
caregiver’s lap. The monitor (92x50 cm) was placed about 65 cm distance from the participants.
A remote eye tracker (Tobii X 120) was set on a platform beneath the screen and recorded gaze
date at 60 Hz. Audio recordings were presented via two loudspeakers that were placed above
the screen. Two video cameras centered above the screen served to monitor the participant
during the experiment. Calibration was conducted in Tobii Studio using a 5-point calibration
procedure, in which a red point appeared in every corner and the center of the screen. In addition
to the eyetracker calibration check, calibration was checked using two pictures on the screen (a
snail and a frog). Any systematic divergences in looking at the two pictures led to recalibration.
The software E-Prime was used to present the stimuli.
Following the eyetracking study, caregivers and their children were audio-recorded
while playing together in the absence of the experimenter. Caregivers were instructed to interact
with their children as naturally as possible for a total of six minutes. For the first three minutes,
they were given a book. For the second three minutes, they were given building blocks and
asked to play with their child. Next, caregivers were asked to describe a picture of a toy to an
imaginary adult, or the experimenter interviewed the caregivers about the favorite toys or games
of the child. Lastly, using the Babylex app (Mayor & Mani, 2018), we estimated the vocabulary
size of the child, by presenting caregivers with 25 randomly chosen words (chosen by the app)
and asking them if the child could already produce those words.
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 12
Preprocessing
Audio recordings of the caregivers were transcribed and processed in PRAAT (Praat,
Version 6.0.36). The data were sorted according to whether the caregiver was speaking IDS or
ADS, and according to whether they were naturally interacting with the child or whether they
were reading to the child. All utterances with background noise, laughing or crying were
excluded from further analyses. Due to the limited amount of data that remained for parents
reading to their child, this was not included in further calculations. For the analyses of maternal
input, we only included those participants where we had data for both spoken IDS and ADS (n
= 48).
For the eyetracking study, the eyetracker provided an estimate of where participants
were looking approximately every 16 ms. All data were exported from E-Prime to be processed
in R. Areas of interest identical in size to one another were defined based on the size and
location of the videos and images on screen. First, we examined whether we obtained valid data
for one or both eyes. If only data from one eye was valid, we used this data as an index of
participants’ fixations, if data from both eyes were valid, we computed the mean point of
fixation by averaging data from both eyes. We then calculated the Proportion of Target Looking
(PTL, gaze time to target/(gaze time to target and distractor)) separately for the pre- and
postnaming phase of the trial. To ensure that only eye movements were analyzed that could be
interpreted as a response to the stimulus, we used gaze data beginning at 240 ms after the target
onset (Swingley et al., 1999). Single test trials were excluded from the analyses if a participant
was looking at the stimuli more or less than M ∓ 3SD of the time. Thus, a trial was excluded if
a child looked less than 26.6 % of the time during the trial to one of the two pictures. This led
to the exclusion of 19 trials (4.9 %) and led to two participants being excluded from analyses.
If a participant did not provide valid data for more than two trials per condition, the participant
was excluded (n = 2).
For the pupil dilation measure, only timestamps providing valid eyetracking data were
included in the analysis. We used a threshold filter for both pupils separately, that excluded data
points in which the difference between two adjacent data points fell into the top ten percent of
overall differences between adjacent time points. This procedure ensures that large deviations
between adjacent samples are excluded which are often artefacts in the data. Further, data were
interpolated with a sample size of four to account for gaps due to missing data (Hepach et al.,
2012). Finally, data from both eyes were averaged.
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 13
Results
Input
To evaluate differences in caregivers’ IDS and ADS, we analysed whether the maximum, the
minimum, the mean (each in Hz), and the range in pitch (in semitones), as well as the
utterance duration (in seconds per utterance) differed between the two registers (see Tab. 1).
Paired t-tests revealed significant differences (in maximum pitch, t(47) = 3.80, p < .001, d =
0.78, in minimum pitch, t(47) = 8.55, p < .001, d = 1.74, in mean pitch, t(47) = 8.31, p < .001,
d = 1.70, in utterance duration, t(47) = -5.26, p < .001, d = -1.07 and in pitch range, t(47) = -
3.14, p = .003, d = -0.64) across the two registers. This is in line with previous research that
showed that German mothers differ between their infant- and adult-directed speech (e.g.,
Fernald et al., 1989).
Preference
To evaluate children’s preferences for IDS and ADS at the group level, we analysed
children’s choices in the gaze-contingent preference phase (see Fig. 4). Seven trials (2.5%) had
to be excluded because children chose neither option on-screen which resulted in the trial
ending. This left us with 281 trials in total with each child providing at least four trials (IDS: n
= 150, mean = 3.13, SD = 1.36; ADS: n = 131, mean = 2.73, SD = 1.4; no choice: n = 7, mean
= 0.15, SD = 0.51). A paired t-test revealed that children’s choices did not differ significantly
across the two registers, t(47) = 1.01, p = .317, d = 0.21. Given the null result and the difficulty
interpreting the absence of an effect, we explored this result using a Bayes Factor t-test in R
with the package BayesFactor and r = 1 (Rouder et al., 2009). This allowed us to differentiate
between the data being inconclusive (Bayes Factor around 1) and the data being in favour of
the null hypothesis (Bayes Factor below 1/50; Mani et al., 2021). We found moderate support
for an absence of a difference (BF = 0.19). This result suggests that, indeed, there were no
differences in the number of IDS or ADS trials that children between 18 and 24 months
triggered in the current task. In other words, we found no evidence for a preference for IDS
over ADS in the current task at this age-group.
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 14
Word learning
To evaluate children’s word learning in both conditions, we ran generalised linear mixed
models (GLMM) using time within the test phase as an additional factor to model children’s
target looking behaviour over time in the test phase (also coined Growth Curve Analysis, see
Eiteljoerge et al., 2019; Mirman et al., 2008). Target looking is usually nonlinear, and including
time, as well as its linear, quadratic and cubic polynomials, allows us to model nonlinear
changes in the looking behaviour at test. For all models, we included age as a fixed effect, and
id, id by condition, speaker, and object label as random effects. We used the function drop1
where possible to evaluate the contribution of each individual factor to the model. This function
compares the model including one factor with a model without this factor, and thereby evaluates
its contribution to the model.
First, we ran a model including Condition (IDS vs. ADS) and the time factors (linear,
quadratic, and cubic) and compared it to a reduced model without Condition to evaluate
differences between conditions in the time course (see Fig. 5). Condition improved model fit
significantly (χ2 = 42.86, df = 4, p < .001), suggesting that target looking in the two conditions,
interaction of Condition*poly3 (χ2 = 35.53, df = 1, p < .001), suggesting differences mainly on
the cubic time term. No other factors were significant according to the predefined alpha level
of .05 (poly1: χ2 = 3.4, df = 1, p = .065).
We then split the data by condition to evaluate learning within the two registers. For
the split model including data only from the IDS condition, the model revealed a significant
effect of poly3 (χ2 = 16.17, df = 1, p < .001), suggesting that children learned the word-object
association when presented in IDS during training. For the split model including data only
from the ADS condition, the model revealed a significant effect of poly3 (χ2 = 19.74, df = 1,
p < .001), suggesting that children learned the word-object association when presented in
ADS during training (poly1: χ2 = 3.57, df = 1, p = .059). Note that given the absence of a
main effect of age, these results hold for all children included in the analysis independent of
their age.
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 15
Furthermore, in keeping with Ma et al. (2011) we examined a separate model including
vocabulary scores into the analysis and found a significant interaction of Condition*poly3 as
above (χ2 = 8.6, df = 1, p = .003), suggesting again differences mainly on the cubic time term
(see Fig. 6). In addition, vocabulary size influenced children’s word learning success (χ2 = 8.26,
df = 1, p = .004) with children who have a larger vocabulary size showing higher target
recognition at test in both conditions. Thus, we replicate Ma et al.’s finding in timecourse data.
Note that this model used data from only 35 children who provided vocabulary data (compared
to 48 children in the analysis above).
Word learning, children’s preference, and input
Next, we examined whether the quality of maternal IDS and individual children’s
preference for IDS as indexed by the percentage of IDS trials each child triggered modulated
children’s learning. Therefore, we ran a model with an interaction of condition, children’s
preference scores, and maternal input, as well as the time terms. To do so, we first transformed
the preference and input data. For the preference, we divided the number of chosen IDS trials
by the sum of IDS and ADS trials a child saw (IDS/(IDS+ADS). Note that timed-out trials were
thereby excluded.
With regard to maternal input, to reduce the dimensions and facilitate the interpretation
of this model, we entered the five prosodic characteristics of maternal input (maximum,
minimum, mean pitch, range in pitch, and utterance duration) into a Principal Component
Analysis. We used the function prcomp in R with center = T on the variance-covariance matrix
(i.e., scale = F). The first component explained 79.4 % of the variance (contribution: maximum
pitch = 92.5 %, mean pitch = 5.2 %, minimum pitch = 1.56 %, range = .47 %, duration = .34
%). The second component explained 17.7 % of the variance (contribution: maximum pitch <
.001 %, mean pitch = 26.33 %, minimum pitch = 72.15 %, range = .1.16 %, duration = .36 %).
Since almost 80 % of the variance explained suggested that this component captured much of
the variance in the individual prosodic features and entering only one component into the model
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 16
would facilitate the interpretation of potential interactions, we continued with only the first
component. To enter it into the model, we extracted the coordinate scores for the first
component of each participant and merged them with the learning and preference data.
Following all transformations, the model included an interaction term of Condition (IDS vs.
ADS)*the three polynomials, the first component of the PCA, and the child’s preference. Again,
we included age as a fixed effect, and id, id by condition, speaker, and object label as random
effects.
Learning, preference, and input. When using drop1, the model revealed that there was
no significant interaction between all factors (Condition*poly1*input*preference: χ2 = .7, df =
1, p = .41; Condition*poly2*input*preference: χ2 = 1.81, df = 1, p = .18;
Condition*poly3*input*preference: χ2 = .84, df = 1, p = .36). Since for drop1, all comparisons
below the main interaction are omitted, we will refer to the results provided by the summary,
and the getpvalues function from the psy811 package (Mirman et al., 2008). Here, the
interaction of Condition*input*preference was significant (p = .028), suggesting that preference
and input influenced target looking in the two conditions when disregarding time.
Learning and preference. Using getpvalues, the model revealed a significant interaction
of Condition*Preference (p = .011) and Condition*Preference*poly3 (p < .001). To explore
these results further, we split the data by condition. The models without time revealed no
significant influence of preference on target looking (IDS split model: χ2 = .3, df = 1, p = .58;
ADS split model: (χ2 = .18, df = 1, p = .68; see also Tab. 2). The models including the
interaction with time revealed a significant influence of preference on target looking (see Fig.
7): In a split model including only data from the IDS condition, the interaction between
poly3*preference was significant (χ2 = 27.34, df = 1, p < .001). In a split model including only
data from the ADS condition, again the interaction between poly3*preference was significant
(χ2 = 9.36, df = 1, p = .002). Thus, while overall, children showed robust recognition of words
trained in IDS and ADS, preference modulated target looking in both the IDS and the ADS
condition. In simpler terms, children who displayed an IDS preference (as indexed by more IDS
trials being triggered by this child in the gaze contingent preference phase) showed improved
learning of words trained in IDS, while children who displayed an ADS preference showed
improved learning of words trained in ADS register (see Fig. 7).
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 17
Learning and input. Using getpvalues, the model revealed no significant interactions
between condition and maternal input (all ps > .095). Also, when splitting the data by condition,
there was no influence of maternal input on target looking with or without the time terms in the
IDS or ADS condition (all ps > .054).
Preference and input. Using getpvalues, the model revealed no significant interaction
between individual preference and maternal input (p = .084).
Gaze-contingent register-side-violation phase
To evaluate whether children had formed an association between the register of speech
that a particular speaker used and the speaker themselves, we analysed their pupil dilation
during the presentation of a video of bubbles. This video of bubbles was presented at key points
during the study, in particular, prior to the first match trial, following the two match trials and
following the two mismatch trials. Pupil dilation in both match (match - baseline) and mismatch
trials (mismatch - baseline) was corrected for baseline pupil dilation to account for individual
differences in pupil sizes. We ran a generalised linear mixed model that evaluates the change
of pupil dilation in mismatch trials against chance level (chance = 0), while controlling for
participants’ pupil dilation in match trials. We controlled for pupil dilation in match trials to
incorporate any carry-over effects from the match trials due to the fixed order of match-
mismatch trials. With regard to the models, an effect on the intercept would suggest a difference
between the averaged minimum pupil dilation in mismatch trials and chance, while an effect of
match trials would indicate an additional influence of match trials on pupil dilation in mismatch
trials. Note that χ2 statistics are not available for intercept statistics, because χ2 is a measure
based on model comparison. A model without an intercept is impossible, and therefore, there
is no model comparison possible. Before the analysis, we ensured that each participant
contributed data in baseline, match, and mismatch trials (n = 47).
The model comparing pupil dilation in mismatch trials to chance while controlling for
pupil dilation in match trials revealed a significant intercept (p = .016) as well as a significant
effect of match trials (χ2 = 30.71, df = 1, p < .001). Pupil dilation was significantly above chance
in mismatch trials, and larger pupil size in match trials was related to larger pupil size in
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 18
mismatch trials. These results suggest that children were sensitive to the associations between
the speech register and the speaker in the gaze-contingent preference phase.
Discussion
In the current study, we investigated the relation between caregivers’ speech input, 18- to 24-
month-old children’s individual preferences for infant- and adult-directed speech, and
children’s word learning from these two speech registers. We audio-recorded mothers’ IDS
while they played with their children and their ADS as they described a toy or talked to the
experimenter. Children’s preference was measured using a novel gaze-contingent preference
paradigm in which children could choose to listen to a short story told in IDS or ADS.
Afterwards, they participated in a word learning task in which they were presented with novel
objects and their novel names in either IDS or ADS. In the following test phase, children’s
learning of these associations was tested in a preferential looking paradigm. The results suggest
that mothers’ IDS and ADS still differed when children are already 18- to 24-months, that 18-
to 24-month-olds did not show a preference for IDS or ADS at the group level, and that they
learned word-object associations in both IDS and ADS. Importantly, children’s word learning
was influenced by their preference and not by maternal input: children learned word-object
associations in both registers but target looking across time was modulated by their individual
preference with children showing higher target looking in the register they preferred (i.e., higher
proportional target looking in IDS when they triggered more IDS trials and higher proportional
target looking in ADS when they triggered more ADS trials in the gaze contingent phase). These
results indicate that, in the current setting, children’s preference for a particular speech register
modulated their learning of novel worlds at 18 to 24 months.
Our replication of differences between mothers’ IDS and ADS consolidates the findings
already present in the literature (Fernald et al., 1989; Fernald & Simon, 1984; Outters et al.,
2020), and additionally extends them to older children showing that mothers continue to adapt
their speech to be more suited to their child throughout the second year of their child’s life
(Kalashnikova & Burnham, 2018). Thus, even later in life, mothers tend to use a more
exaggerated infant-directed register when addressing their child.
In the gaze-contingent preference task, children between 18 and 24 months did not show
a preference for either IDS or ADS, i.e., children did not trigger more IDS trials than ADS trials
on the group level. This contrasts results with younger children, especially below 15 months
who usually show a preference for IDS (e.g., The ManyBabies Consortium, 2020). While this
might be due to the experimental setup, i.e., the gaze-contingent design compared to preferential
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 19
listening tasks (Kemler Nelson et al., 1995), it might also be the case that, with age, children’s
strong preference for IDS over ADS vanishes (as indicated by more mixed results in the
literature; Glenn & Cunningham, 1983; Hayashi et al., 2001; Newman & Hussain, 2006; Segal
& Newman, 2015). Furthermore, since we also found that some children showed a (numeric)
ADS preference, i.e., triggering more ADS trials than IDS trials, this might be taken to suggest
that the preference for a particular speech register at this age is more variable and may depend
on the demands of a child or the situation they find themselves in, with this preference
eventually vanishing across later development.
Before elaborating on the relationship between maternal IDS, children’s preferences and
their learning outcomes, we first discuss our measure of children’s preference in the current,
study, i.e., the use of a novel gaze-contingent paradigm in which children could elicit their
preferred content with their eye gaze. This design presents an interesting tool for studying
nonverbal and preverbal populations’ preferences, but there are still many open questions with
regards to this paradigm due to its relative novelty. For a start, interpretation of children’s
responses in this task are contingent on the assumption that children are sensitive to the
speaker/register-side association. We tested whether they had formed such an association by
examining their pupillary response to trials where the speaker/register-side violation was
maintained or violated and found that children successfully formed register-side associations.
Furthermore, children were instructed to actively engage in the gaze-contingent phase by a
female voice asking them from whom they want to hear a story. Other studies have also shown
that even 6- to 8-month-olds can discover their agency in a gaze-contingent task after three
trials (Wang et al., 2012). Given that the children in the present study were older, it is likely
that they were sensitive to their agency in the task. Indeed, the minimum number of trials
triggered was four out of six trials in the task (i.e., three children had two trials they did not
trigger), suggesting that children rarely failed to trigger a video. Thus, while there are many
questions that remain unanswered for now, this paradigm might be a promising new avenue for
curiosity- and preference-related research in non- and preverbal populations.
Regarding children’s word learning, we found that children learned novel word-object
associations across registers, i.e., both when they were previously trained on the word-object
association in IDS and ADS. This highlights the robust ability of 18- to 24-month-olds to learn
novel word-object associations from both registers. On the one hand, this extends previous
findings suggesting that 16-month-olds can segment words from both IDS and ADS (Mani &
Pätzold, 2016), and that speech segmentation performance in ADS correlating with children’s
attention to ADS (Schreiner et al., 2016). On the other hand, our results contrast with other
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 20
word learning studies: Graf Estes and Hurley (2013) found evidence for word learning from
IDS but not ADS at 17-months of age (in a switch task), while Ma et al. (2011) found robust
evidence for word learning from ADS at 27 months, while 21-month-olds learned words from
ADS only when having a large vocabulary. In the following, we discuss methodological aspects
that might explain this discrepancy.
The current study provides a more nuanced picture of the learning trajectory in ADS
during the second half of the second year: While children appear to still struggle learning words
from ADS relative to IDS (as indexed by the interaction between poly3*Condition as well as
the increased variance in the data), we find evidence for children learning words from ADS
especially when considering the temporal resolution of their target recognition at test. While
the methodology of Ma et al. (2011) was remarkably similar to the current setup, their analysis
did not consider the time course of children’s target looking across the trial, and instead
5, evidence for children’s target recognition in the ADS condition in our study is weak, with
differences across conditions being linked to the time course of children’s response: upon being
tested with words previously trained in IDS children showed an immediate increase in target
recognition which then dropped to near-chance levels towards the middle of the trial. In
contrast, when tested with words previously trained in ADS, children showed no response
initially, while looks to the target only increased towards the second half of the trial. Thus, when
aggregating this data across the entire trial, later fixations to the target in ADS trials may be
lost. The growth curve analysis reported here counteracts this due to its higher temporal
resolution (Eiteljoerge et al., 2019). This suggests, that around this age, learning from ADS
might still be challenging with children taking longer to respond to the label previously trained
in ADS while showing a rapid and robust response to labels previously trained in IDS. This
difference in learning from IDS and ADS diminishes when considering vocabulary size: similar
to Ma et al. (2011), we found that children with a larger vocabulary showed successful word-
object mapping in both IDS and ADS.
We found no evidence for an influence of the quality of maternal input on children’s
word-object association learning from either register. While the analyses revealed an interaction
between input, preference for IDS/ADS and learning, breaking down this interaction did not
reveal any influence of maternal input on learning. This suggests that the quality of maternal
IDS may not influence children’s preference for IDS at this later age (see also Outters et al.,
2020, for similar findings already at 13-months of age). Thus, as children grow older, the quality
of input might influence their preference for particular registers less, or indeed, there may be
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 21
less of a robust group-level preference for either register at this older age. This may also suggest
that we may be tapping into a period in development where such register-specific effects may
be waning and where the child may begin to focus on a greater variety of input than was
previously the case.
Importantly, across both conditions, children’s preference for a particular register
explained variance in their learning from this register. Thus, children who triggered more ADS
trials showed improved learning from ADS; while children who triggered more IDS trials
showed improved learning from IDS. These results are in keeping with theories that consider
the child an active participant in learning, choosing when, whom and what to learn from
(Montessori, 1914; Oudeyer & Smith, 2016; Smith & Thelen, 2003; Thelen & Smith, 1996).
These frameworks assume that the child and the environment interact with each other
multidirectionally and that this interaction shapes learning. While the environment provides the
child with novel information and changes in form and complexity, the learner shows active and
potentially systematic preferences for certain kinds of stimuli in their input, which explains
variance in their learning. Thus, while children’s learning can be influenced by the input they
receive (Hurtado et al., 2008; Rowe, 2012; Schreiner & Mani, 2017), this influence can vary
depending on the child’s experiences and knowledge base. Being able to build on the
knowledge they have already acquired, children’s individual preferences and interests can take
the lead in certain situations and guide the child to learn what he or she is interested in
(Ackermann et al., 2020, 2023; Kidd et al., 2012, 2014; Mani & Ackermann, 2018). In the
current study, we found that mothers still used IDS with their child. Thus, the fact that the social
partner was a child influenced the response of the environment, here, the mother. At the same
time, children’s learning success was not influenced by this aspect of the environment. Rather,
we found that children’s individual preferences explained variance in their word recognition
performance. Thus, the continuous and changing dynamics of social interactions between
children, their individual preferences, their caregivers and the environment appear to exist in a
feedback loop that characterizes further development (e.g., Smith & Thelen, 2003).
In conclusion, we investigated whether children’s preference for IDS or ADS or whether
the characteristics of maternal IDS and ADS influenced 18- to 24-month-olds’ word learning
in IDS and ADS. We found that mothers’ IDS and ADS still differed at this age, that children
showed no preference for either IDS or ADS at the group level, and learned word-object
associations in both IDS and ADS. Importantly, children’s individual preferences explained
variance in learning from IDS and ADS, whereas maternal input did not. Overall, these results
support a dynamic view on learning: While their environment still adapts to the child, it is the
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 22
child’s individual preferences for certain aspects of this environment that explains their learning
success.
PREFERENCES AND INPUT IN WORD LEARNING 23