NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 1
Nonfatal Inten+onal Self-Harm Gunshot Wound Cases in a Na+onally Representa+ve Sample of U.S.
Emergency Department Visits
Erik J. Reinbergs, PhD
Department of Psychology
Utah State University
Author Note
This is an unpublished pre-print (version 4), dated 2025-01-22
Correspondence should be addressed to Erik J. Reinbergs, 6405 Old Main Hill, Department of
Psychology, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84322. Email: erik.reinbergs@usu.edu.
No funding was received for this research. The author has no conflicts of interest to disclose.
PorVons of these findings were presented at the 2023 IASR/AFSP InternaVonal Summit on Suicide
Research. This research was deemed not human subjects research by the USU IRB.
A preprint of this manuscript is posted on the Open Science Framework preprint server:
h^ps://osf.io/preprints/osf/5a3c2. Stata analysis code and output are available at h^ps://osf.io/wb2yu/
for transparency and reproducibility. Data is publicly available from
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 2
Abstract
Background: Firearms are the leading means of suicide in the United States. Research on those
who survive injuries associated with intentional self-harm gunshot wounds (GSWs) is limited.
Aims: This study explores diOerences between patients and injury/event characteristics of cases
involving nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs compared to control cases that sustained nonfatal
GSWs that did not involve intentional self-harm. Method: Analyses used multivariable logistic
regression using the Firearm Injury Surveillance Study data (1993–2021). The complex survey
structure of the data was accounted for in analysis, producing nationally representative estimates.
Results: There were an estimated 113,012 (95% CI [53,807.58, 172,216]) nonfatal intentional self-
harm GSW injuries seen in U.S. emergency departments between 1993–2021, with diOerences in
adjusted odds ratios across sex and incident characteristics. Intentional self-harm shootings were
estimated to have an 84% (95% CI [76.5, 94.1]) case fatality rate. Each year, an estimated average of
3,897 patients survive intentional self-harm GSWs in the United States. Conclusion: Survival of
intentional self-harm GSWs is a rare, but non-zero outcome that merits further study.
Keywords: firearms, suicide, nonfatal injury, gunshot wounds.
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 3
Nonfatal Intentional Self-Harm Gunshot Wound Cases in a Nationally Representative Sample
of U.S. Emergency Department Visits
Firearms were used in 54.6% of all suicides in the United States in 2021 (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2024). Despite the high lethality of firearm suicide
attempts, 11.3% (95% CI [4.5–18]) of these attempts are not fatal (i.e., an estimated case fatality
rate of 89.7%; Cai et al., 2021). Firearm access is a well-established risk factor for suicide, with the
presence of a firearm in the home associated with triple the odds of suicide (Brent & Bridge, 2003;
Swanson et al., 2021). Firearm suicide rates vary significantly at the state level, related to the
permissiveness of gun laws across states and diOerences in rates of gun ownership (Anestis et al.,
2017, 2019). The firearm suicide rate in the United States is the second highest in the world, behind
Greenland (which had approximately 11 firearm suicides in 2016 compared to the approximately
23,800 in the United States), accounting for 35% of all firearm suicides worldwide in 2016—even
though the United States made up only 4.3% of the global population (The Global Burden of
Disease 2016 Injury Collaborators et al., 2018). Reducing the amount of firearms in the United
States to a rate comparable to Canada could reduce U.S. suicides by 25.9%—saving nearly 12,000
lives per year (Raifman et al., 2020). Adults simply locking their guns was simulated to reduce youth
suicide in the United States by up to 32% (Monuteaux et al., 2019).
Although firearms are used in most U.S. suicides, limited research exists on survivors of
firearm suicide attempts. Most people who attempt suicide with a firearm die on the first attempt
(Anestis, 2016). Only a handful of studies with limited samples compare survivors of intentional
self-harm firearm injuries with other firearm injury survivors. For example, those with self-inflicted
firearm traumatic brain injuries (TBIs) diOered from those with firearm TBIs from assaults: Those
with self-inflicted injuries were more likely to be older, more likely to have a lower Glasgow Coma
Scale score at admission, and more likely to be White (Bertisch et al., 2017). Research in a sample
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 4
of trauma admissions examining diOerences between survivors and decedents of firearm suicide
attempts found that older age and being uninsured were associated with greater odds of mortality,
but alcohol use disorder, substance use disorder, and being a smoker were associated with greater
odds of survival (Karnick et al., 2022). Patients with primary injuries to the neck, face, abdomen,
chest, or extremities were more likely to survive than those with injuries to the head (Karnick et al.,
2022). However, each of these studies have sampling limitations and do not allow for national
estimates.
Pronounced diOerences across (binary) sex regarding firearm-related suicides and suicide
attempts exist, in addition to sex diOerences in suicide-related behaviors more broadly. Men are at
least three times as likely to die by suicide than women, but women make more suicide attempts
than men (Fox et al., 2018). Men are more likely to use firearms in suicide attempts and suicides
than are women and tend to make more medically serious attempts (Fox et al., 2018). Women own
less firearms and are less likely to have firearms in the house than men (Fox et al., 2018). However,
during the COVID-19 pandemic there was a surge in firearm purchases and nearly half of all firearm
purchases by those who did not previously own firearms were made by women (Miller et al., 2022).
There is also some evidence that women are less likely to shoot their head/neck region during a
firearm suicide attempt than men. For example, a chart review study of 497 survivors of self-
inflicted firearm injury found that male survivors were more likely to have shot themselves in the
face/head/neck while women who survived were more likely to have shot themselves in the
abdomen (Williams et al., 2011). This finding also appears to hold in suicide decedents (Callanan &
Davis, 2011).
Although comparisons between survivors and decedents of self-inflicted GSWs are
informative, they are also greatly practically limited as decedents are not available for follow up
studies. Comparing those who survive self-inflicted firearm injuries with those that survive other
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 5
types of firearm injuries may shed light on unique aspects of this population that can be
prospectively examined in future research. Given the small number of studies, limited samples,
and limited findings in this area, additional studies with more representative samples of those who
have survived intentional self-harm gunshot wounds (GSWs) are needed.
The present study conducts an exploratory secondary analysis of publicly available,
nationally representative data from the Firearm Injury Surveillance Study (FISS; U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, CDC, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, 2023) to
describe the subpopulation of those who experienced a nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW and to
compare this subpopulation to those who sustained nonfatal GSWs that were not intentionally self-
inflicted. Given diOerences in suicidal behaviors and firearm use by sex (Callanan & Davis, 2012;
CDC, 2024; Fox et al., 2018), interactions between patient or injury/event characteristics and sex
were also examined. All analyses are exploratory and for the purpose of generating hypotheses that
could be further invested in future research. To produce a crude estimate of the case-fatality rate
for firearm suicide attempts, the estimated total of nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs that
presented to U.S. emergency departments (EDs) was compared against the number of firearm
suicides according to CDC mortality data.
Methods
Study Design
The current study uses pooled repeated cross-sectional data from a nationally
representative sample of U.S. EDs to compare the patient and injury/event characteristics of those
who present to the ED with nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs to those who present to the ED
with all other types of nonfatal GSWs. The author’s IRB determined that this study did not fall within
the definition of human subjects research.
Variables
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 6
Outcome: Nonfatal Intentional Self-Harm GSW Cases
A binary outcome variable (1 = Nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs; 0 = All other nonfatal
GSWs) was created by selecting cases that were both nonfatal GSWs (FA_GSW = 1) and had self-
harm intent (CLASS_C = 3). Cases only involve injuries incurred via GSWs, not from other firearm-
related injuries such as being struck by the firearm or having a non-shooting injury resulting from an
accident while handling the firearm. This also excludes cases that may have presented from to the
ED following a firearm suicide attempt where a GSW was not sustained (e.g., the gun did not fire or
the bullet did not hit the body).
Predictors
Variables were included as predictors in the analyses if they had less than 10% missing
data. Variables representing the following were retained for analyses: Sex, age group, body part
injured, whether the injury occurred on the job, method of transport to the ED, disposition from ED,
year, month, and day of the week of injury. Variables were recoded for analysis as follows. A binary
sex variable was created from SEX so that 0 = male and 1 = female. The variable representing the
body part injured (BDYPTG_C) was collapsed into four categories: Head/neck, trunk (i.e., upper and
lower trunk), extremity (i.e., arms and legs), and other. Three categories (EMS, Ambulance, and
Rescue/Fire) from the variable capturing the method of transport to the ED (TRANSP_C) were
collapsed into a single EMS category to create a new transport variable with the following
categories: EMS, Police, Air transport, or Other. Walk-ins and transport via private vehicle were also
collapsed into the Other transport category. Categories from the variable describing the disposition
of patients from the ED (DISP_C) were collapsed into the following categories: Treated/released or
Transferred released = Released; Transferred/hospital or hospitalized = Hospitalized; Held for
observation; or Left against medical advice / left without being seen. Patients coded dead on arrival
were removed from the study sample. A variable that indicates whether the injury occurred on the
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 7
job also included a response option for active duty miliary that was collapsed to represent an on-
the-job injury.
Data Source
The FISS data were collected by the CDC as a part of the National Electronic Injury
Surveillance System (NEISS), which catalogues nonfatal-injury-related ED visits. The data includes
inverse probability selection weights that are calculated monthly. The weights account for non-
response and have post-stratification adjustments for annual changes in the number of ED visits.
The complex survey data structure allows for analyses accounting for the survey design to produce
nationally representative estimates. Additional documentation on the survey structure and
sampling strategy employed in the data collection is available from the data repository:
recorded visits for nonfatal GSWs from 1993–2021 in the data. Of these, 3,350 were known to
represent nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs.
Data are drawn from EDs selected in a stratified probability sample of all U.S. hospitals with
at least six beds that provide 24-hour emergency services. There are five strata in the data: Four
hospital size strata (based on volume of ED visits; very large, large, medium, and small) and one
stratum for children’s hospitals. Data from years 1993–2021 were collected. The original dataset
contains cases of nonfatal firearm and BB/pellet gun injuries. The data is cross sectional, with no
ability to track individual patients over time or link multiple visits from one patient. The study
sample was formed by including only patients where (a) the intent of the firearm injury was known,
(b) the presenting injury was a GSW (i.e., not other firearm related injuries like being struck in the
head with the handle of a pistol; not injuries related to BB/pellet guns), and (c) the patient was not
classified as dead on arrival.
Analysis
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 8
Analyses using Stata 18.5’s svy: commands accounted for the complex sampling structure
of the data (StataCorp, 2024). The Stata analysis code and output file are available at
percentages for descriptive statistics were calculated.
Analyses across patient and injury/event characteristics and whether a nonfatal intentional
self-harm GSW was sustained were first conducted in a bivariate logistic regression framework.
Given the sex diOerences in suicide and suicidal behaviors, each model was also separately
analyzed with an interaction term to estimate sex eOects. Between group contrasts were conducted
using Bonferroni corrections to conservatively adjust for the type I error rate. Confidence intervals
(95%) are presented to increase interpretability.
To produce a crude estimate of the percentage of intentional self-harm GSWs that are
survived and present to U.S. EDs, national estimates of these nonfatal injuries were compared to
nationally representative estimates of firearm suicide fatalities in the US from the CDC WISQARS
(i.e., 1 - (nonfatal GSWs / (nonfatal GSWs + firearm suicides))).
The combination of the complex survey structure, interaction terms, categorical variables,
and rare outcome introduce significant uncertainty into the applicability, implementation, and
accuracy of modern missing data methods such as multiple imputation. Thus, missing data were
handled through case-wise deletion and predictor variables with more than 10% missingness were
excluded from the analysis. Several important predictors were unable to be included in the
analyses due to high levels of missingness, such as race (21.4%), location of shooting (46.7%), type
of firearm (69.4%), and whether drugs were involved (72.2%). Other studies with the FISS data have
also concluded that race was not able to be meaningfully examined in the data due to high levels of
missingness (Fowler et al., 2017). The outcome variable (whether the firearm injury was a nonfatal
intentional self-harm GSW) of the current study also had a high percentage (38%) of missing
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 9
responses (i.e., where the intent of the firearm injury was unknown). Thus, the results of this
analyses can only be suitably generalized to cases where the class of injury (i.e., nonfatal
intentional self-harm vs. all other nonfatal GSW categories) is known. Below the 10% threshold for
predictor variables, missingness in the study sample (i.e., cases for which the intent is known) is as
follows: Year, month, and day: 0%, sex, age group, body part injured, and disposition: < 1%, injured
on the job: 3.4%, and transport method: 7.4%. Within the study sample, 89.6% of cases had
complete data, 9% had missing responses on one variable, 1.2% had missing responses on two
variables, 0.2% had missing responses on three variables, and 0.01% had missing responses on 4
variables.
Results
Descriptive Results
characteristics by the occurrence of a nonfatal intentional self-inflicted GSW. All comparison tests
(survey-adjusted likelihood ratio tests) were significant at p < .001. There were an estimated
113,012 (95% CI [53,808, 172,216]) nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW cases in the United States
between 1993–2021, an estimated average of 3,897 per year (95% CI [1,855, 5,938]).
Primary Results and Interactions by Sex
Sex
Compared to men who presented to the ED with a firearm injury, women had greater odds
of presenting to the ED with a nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW (OR = 1.82, 95% CI: [1.62, 2.03]).
Men had a predicted probability of presenting to the emergency room with a nonfatal intentional
self-harm GSW of .043 while women had a predicted probability of .076—a diOerence of .033 (95%
CI: [.019, .047]). Among the population of those presenting to the ED with a firearm injury, women
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 10
had a greater probability of a nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW compared to men, although men
made up most patients with nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs (81%).
Age
Among those presenting to the ED with firearm injuries, the 0–14 youth age group had the
lowest predicted probability of experiencing a nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW at .03 (95% CI
[.01, .04]) and thus were selected as the reference group. Risk increased substantially with age,
with the highest risk group being those 65 years old or greater (OR = 14; 95% CI [9.2, 22]; predicted
probability: .27; 95% CI [.20, .34]). The interaction between age and sex showed a significantly
greater eOect for women in age groups 25–34, 35–44, 44–54, and 55–64 (ORs = 4.3–6.1; contrasts of
predicted probabilities = .03–.10) with the largest diOerence in the 45–54 age range (OR = 6.1, 95%
CI [1.8, 21.2]; contrast of predicted probabilities = .10, 95% CI [.03, .16]). Adjusted predicted
probabilities of nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs per age-group by sex are presented visually in
Body Part Injured
For ED patients with nonfatal GSW injuries, compared to patients with nonfatal intentional
self-harm GSWs to the extremities (the lowest predicted probability: .01, 95% CI [.01, .01]), GSWs
to the head/neck were the most likely (OR = 30.9, 95% CI [23.8, 40.0]; predicted probability: .20,
95% CI [.13, .26]). Head/neck injuries were significantly more likely to occur in comparison to all
other injury sites (ps < .001). There were significant interaction eOects for women, who were more
likely to sustain nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs to the trunk (OR = 2.6, 95% CI [1.8, 3.9];
predicted probability contrast: .07, 95% CI [.04, .11]) compared to men. Among those presenting to
the ED with nonfatal GSWs, women were also more likely to sustain nonfatal intentional self-harm
GSWs to the category of “other” body parts (OR = 5.9, 95% CI [1.9, 18.1]), however, the contrast
between the predicted probabilities for the other body part category between men and women was
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 11
no longer significant following a Bonferroni correction (p = .06). Adjusted predicted probabilities of
Injured on the Job
For patients presenting to the ED with a nonfatal GSW, nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs
were significantly less likely to occur on the job than not (OR = .1, 95% CI [.06, .08]; contrast of
predicted probabilities: -.04, 95% CI [-.06, -.03]). There was significant interaction eOect for sex in
which women were less likely to be injured on the job than men. However, inspection of the cross-
tabulation of these variables revealed that there were only three cases in the data of men sustaining
a nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW at work compared to four women.
Method of Transport
Patients who arrived in the ED with nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs had significantly
greater odds of beings transported to the hospital by air rescue compared to transport by (other)
emergency medical services (OR = 5.7, 95% CI [2.84, 11.59]). Patients were most likely to be
transported by air rescue (predicted probability = .24, 95% CI [.16, .33]) followed by other
emergency medical services (predicted probability = .05, 95% CI [.03, .07]), police transport
(predicted probability = .02, 95% CI [.00, .03]), and then by “other” methods (e.g., private vehicle,
walk-in; predicted probability: .01, 95% CI [.01, .01]. Interaction eOects for sex were not significant,
except that women had a predicted probability .03 points (95% CI [.02, .05]) greater than men of
being transported by EMS. Adjusted predicted probabilities of nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW
Disposition
Compared to being released from the emergency room, there were significantly greater
odds of being hospitalized (OR = 4.1, 95% CI [2.6, 6.3]) for patients with nonfatal intentional self-
harm GSWs among those who presented to the ED with nonfatal GSWs. Odds of being released
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 12
were not significantly diOerent than the odds of being observed nor of leaving against medical
advice / leaving without being seen. The predicted probability of being hospitalized was .08 (95% CI
[.05, .11]) and was significantly more likely compared to being released (contrast = .06, 95% CI [.02,
.09]). There was a significant interaction eOect for women being more likely to be hospitalized than
men (OR = 1.7, 95% CI [1.3, 2.3]; contrast = .07, 95% CI [.04, .09]) in the study population of
nonfatal GSWs in the ED, but not for any other outcome. No women who sustained a nonfatal
intentional self-harm GSW left against medical advice. Adjusted predicted probabilities of nonfatal
Year, Month, and Day
Lastly, there were no significant diOerences in the odds of sustaining a nonfatal intentional
self-harm GSW for year of injury nor for the interaction between year and sex for the population
presenting to EDs with firearm injuries. There was some variability in the odds of sustaining a
nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW by month for the population presenting to the ED with nonfatal
firearm injuries. Using January as the reference point, the nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs were
significantly less likely in May, June, August, and November (ORs = .7–.8) among patients who
present to the ED with other types of firearm injury. There were no significant interactions between
sex and month. Among firearm injury ED visits, nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs were had the
greatest probability of occurring on weekdays (predicted probabilities: .05–.06) compared to
weekends (predicted probabilities: .04), however, these diOerences are quite small. The overall
interaction eOect of day of the week by sex was not significant. There were no significant
interactions between sex and year. Adjusted predicted probabilities of nonfatal intentional self-
Estimated Case Fatality Rate
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 13
In the last 22 years of the data (2001–2021; the current range for available CDC WISQARS
mortality data), there were an estimated 79,347 (95% CI [27,583, 131,111]) nonfatal intentional
self-harm GSWs that presented to U.S. emergency rooms. Within the same timeframe, there were
426,241 firearm suicides in the United States (CDC, 2024). From these estimates (1 - (79347 /
(79347 + 426241)) * 100), a crude estimate of the case fatality rate can be calculated: 84.31% (95%
CI [76.48, 93.92]).
Discussion
The results of this study describe diOerences across patient and injury/event characteristics
among those who presented to EDs with nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs when compared to
patients who presented to the ED after sustaining all other types of nonfatal GSWs. Little
systematic prior research has been conducted on this survivor population. This study uses a
nationally representative dataset of nonfatal firearm injuries to describe the characteristics of this
group. Comparing this data to fatal injury data, it was estimated that self-harm GSWs have an 84%
(95% CI [76.48, 93.92]) case fatality rate. This is within the confidence interval of the estimate of a
previous meta-analysis (89.7%, 95% CI [82.0–95.5]; Cai et al., 2021). Although surviving an
intentional self-harm GSW is a rare event, this analysis estimates that an average of 3,897 cases
per year (95% CI [1,855, 5,938]) have occurred for nearly the last three decades. This represents a
sizable subpopulation of suicide attempt survivors that deserve further study.
As an exploratory study, no a priori hypotheses were specified. However, given the
established diOerences between men and women on a variety of self-injurious behaviors, some
significant sex diOerences and interactions by sex were expected. Among those who presented to
the ED with a nonfatal GSW, women had greater odds of a nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW than
men. More men sustain nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs (81% of this group in the current study
sample); however, the women have disproportionately greater odds of this outcome compared to
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 14
men. One possible explanation for this result is that women may be more likely to survive their
injuries and/or make less lethal attempts—and thus present to the ED at comparatively higher
rates. Odds increased with age, with those in the 65-and-older age group having the greatest
probability of sustaining a nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW. This also aligns with epidemiological
data showing that suicide rates generally increase with age (CDC, 2024). Compared to men, women
who presented to the ED for a nonfatal GSW in the 45–54 age range had significantly greater odds of
a nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW. It is unclear what would explain the sex diOerence for this
specific age range. Previous research, however, has found associations between the menopausal
transition (and particularly, related hormone therapy) and suicide attempts—in addition to social
role changes that may occur during this time (Gibson et al., 2021).
Nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs are often extremely medically serious, which this
study’s results support. These patients are more likely to be transported to the ED by air rescue
than other methods, more likely to be subsequently hospitalized, and more likely to have shot their
head or neck than other body parts. There were significant interaction eOects for women having
greater odds of sustaining a nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW to the trunk than men. This finding
partially aligns with that of Williams et al. (2011), which found that women were more likely to
sustain self-inflicted GSWs to the stomach. However, in contrast to previous research on suicide
decedents, results of the present study indicate that women with nonfatal intentional self-inflicted
GSWs had the same predicted probability of shooting themselves in the head/neck than men
(Callanan & Davis, 2011), despite having a higher probability of nonfatal intentional self-harm
GSWs to the trunk compared to men. GSWs to the trunk are likely less fatal than GSWs to the head
or neck, the sex diOerence in injury site may in part explain why women have greater odds of
nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs. Women are less likely to use firearms in suicides compared to
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 15
men, which aligns with men making up the majority of nonfatal intentional self-inflicted GSWs that
are seen in the ED.
Caution needs to be taken in hypothesizing about causes of sex diOerences in firearm injury
location. Callan & Davis (2011) note,
“The field is riddled with empirically unsupported explanations that characterize the
suicidal behavior of women as motivated by selfish or trivial concerns. To suggest that
women are less likely to shoot themselves in the face or head because they are more
concerned with their appearance than men is to minimize what Maris et al. (2000) called the
“final desperate act.” (p. 877)
Similarly, conflating method/means with seriousness of intent would be an error as these are
ultimately separate constructs. The results of this study do not (and cannot) suggest that women
who shot themselves in the chest had less intent to die than those who shot themselves in the head
or that male attempters overall have greater intent to die than women.
Nonfatal self-harm GSWs (that were seen in the ED) only very rarely occurred on the job
compared to other locations. Although there was a significant interaction eOect, this result should
be viewed with caution as there was only one additional woman who sustained a nonfatal
intentional self-harm GSW in the data compared to men (i.e., 4 vs. 3). With only seven instances in
nearly three decades of data, this is an extremely rare outcome.
Results regarding year, month, and day are more equivocal. The results suggest that, among
those presenting to the ED with nonfatal GSWs, there has been no significant increase over time in
the number of ED GSW patients whose wounds were intentionally self-inflicted compared to other
intents. This contrasts with rising suicides rates over a similar period (CDC, 2024). One potential
explanation for this is that although firearm suicides have increased, firearm injuries of all intents
may have also increased—thus leaving the proportion of intentionally self-inflicted injuries stable.
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 16
The results also indicate that nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs were less likely during some
spring months compared against January, which is opposite from the general seasonal pattern of
suicide deaths in the US (and many other countries; Yu et al., 2020). Both findings suggest that
nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW patients may be a qualitatively diOerent population than
patients who die from intentional self-harm GSWs.
Findings from this research may productively inform future qualitative and quantitative
studies on the population that survives firearm suicide attempts. Such research could further
explore sex diOerences, qualitatively explore reasons for the location on the body targeted for injury,
and how beliefs about firearm suicides changed or did not change following a firearm suicide
attempt. For clinicians, there are open questions as to whether future findings in this area could
inform lethal means eOorts tailored to specific client groups (e.g., men or women). Additionally,
future research in this area may provide insight for mental health clinicians working with clients
who have survived firearm suicide attempts.
Limitations
Nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs are a rare outcome (survival) of a rare outcome
(firearm suicide attempt), making results imprecise even with decades of data. The estimates of the
regression parameters are potentially not reliable when their coeOicient of variation exceeds 30%,
thus 95% confidence intervals are likely more informative than the point estimates. Many of the
models in the study, as reflected in the wide confidence intervals, have one or more regression
parameters with a coeOicient of variation that exceeds 30% (see analysis output in the online
materials for specifics). Several variables of potential interest had extensive missing data and thus
were not used in this analysis.
The complex sampling design mitigates selection bias by allowing for the calculation of
nationally representative estimates of ED visits. This, however, does not address that there may be
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 17
biases in who visits EDs. Given that this study sample is restricted to GSWs, this bias is not likely to
be substantial as it is highly likely that most GSWs present to the ED. However, this does raise the
possibility that patients with more minor GSWs (e.g., grazes) may be less likely to present to the ED
than those with severe GSWs—thus, the sample is representative of ED visits but may
underestimate all GSW injuries (i.e., those that present to the ED combined with those that do not).
Another source of bias within the is that there are many patients for whom the intent of the GSW is
unknown. This is a common challenge in self-injury studies as researchers are frequently limited in
the degree of certainty that can be ascribed to patient intent, particularly if the patient died, feared
negative consequences for disclosing self-harm intent, or sustained injuries that left them
incapacitated during treatment.
Importantly, this study’s findings are purely descriptive and exploratory. Results of this
study, for example, do not explain why women are disproportionally represented in this nonfatal
GSW outcome. This may be because women make less lethal attempts with firearms, or that they
had greater health at baseline and thus were more likely to survive serious injury, that women may
have had less acquired capability with firearm use, or any other number of potential explanations.
A nonfatal intentional self-harm GSW does not guarantee that the GSW was a suicide
attempt. These injuries are separated in the data, however, from unintentional injuries, accidents,
or injuries with undetermined intent. It seems highly likely that most intentional self-harm GSW
injuries had some degree of suicidal intent, especially given the high frequencies of injuries to the
head/neck and trunk. An informal evaluation of descriptive narratives of the intentional self-harm
GSW cases showed they were very often explicitly described as suicide attempts.
Data used in this study represent only nonfatal GSWs that presented to an ED where the
intent of the shooting was known. This leaves out those who attempted self-injury with a gun but
were not injured (e.g., gun failed to fire, empty shot in Russian roulette, fired but missed) and those
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 18
who attempted with a gun and sustained a minor injury that did not require emergency department
treatment. Thus, the results in this study are likely underestimates of the entire population of
nonfatal intentional self-harm firearm episodes. The data are cross sectional without any identifiers
through which to link patients across multiple visits or to ascertain death data on individual
patients. Such features would greatly increase the utility of potential analyses. Lastly, “nonfatal” in
the FISS dataset only describes mortality at the time of discharge from the emergency room. Follow
up data on these patients is not available. Some of them, for example, may have survived the ED
but later died in the intensive care unit.
Lastly, results of this study are specific to the United States and should not be generalized
to other countries or specific subpopulations within the United States (such as individual states).
Future research comparing nonfatal intentional self-harm GSWs in the United States to other
countries with diOerent gun ownership rates and diOerent trends in suicide lethal means use would
help better understand this population of survivors.
Additional research, both qualitative and quantitative, on the population that survives
intentionally self-inflicted GSWs is needed and may help understand diOerences across sex in this
group and diOerences between survivors and decedents of this method. All findings of this study
are considered purely exploratory and thus represent hypotheses to be investigated in future
research.
NONFATAL INTENTIONAL SELF-HARM GUNSHOT WOUND CASES IN THE US 19