Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 1
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life
Max A. Halvorson1*
Adam M. Kuczynski2*
1School of Social Work, University of Washington
2Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington
Author Note
*Max A. Halvorson and Adam M. Kuczynski contributed equally to this work and co-first-
authored this manuscript.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Max A. Halvorson and Adam M.
Kuczynski, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, Box
356560, Seattle, WA, 98195. Emails: maximum2@uw.edu (MAH) and adamkucz@uw.edu
(AMK).
Acknowledgments
Thank you to our participants for the effort, time, and thoughtfulness they put into their
participation in this study. Thank you also to Dr. Kevin Hallgren, whose feedback throughout this
project helped to shape our statistical analysis plan and discussion of our findings.
This represents the final version of this paper. This paper has been accepted in Translational
Issues in Psychological Science.
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 2
Abstract
Evidence of the public health significance of loneliness is accumulating. Lonely
individuals are at greater risk for diverse physical and mental health conditions, and the
prevalence of loneliness is rising. To address these concerns and align assessment with existing
theoretical frameworks, researchers aim to understand momentary feelings of loneliness in
everyday life. However, development of measures that reliably and validly assess momentary
loneliness has largely been overlooked. In this study we evaluated the psychometric performance
of a new multi-item measure of momentary loneliness derived from traditional self-report
measures – the Momentary Loneliness Scale – with respect to its factor structure, reliability, and
validity. We also compared this multi-item measure to the effectiveness of using a single-item
indicator of loneliness. A racially diverse sample of depressed adults (N = 102) provided data on
momentary loneliness and related measures 5x/day for 14 days (Nobs = 6,568). In a preregistered
multilevel confirmatory factor analysis, we observed evidence of an internally reliable,
unidimensional measure of momentary loneliness that demonstrated construct validity.
Momentary loneliness was associated with more depression and less satisfaction with social
interactions. Trait loneliness was associated with being more depressed, perceiving less social
support, and being less extraverted. Furthermore, exploratory analyses indicated that a single-
item indicator of loneliness (“I feel alone”) well-approximated the multi-item measure and can
be used in settings where brevity is prioritized. Altogether, our results indicate that momentary
and trait loneliness can be reliably and validly measured in everyday life using multi-item or
single-item instruments within ecological momentary assessments.
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 3
Keywords: Loneliness, measurement, ecological momentary assessment, experience sampling,
factor analysis
Public Significance Statement: To understand what causes people to feel lonely in
everyday life, valid and reliable methods of assessing momentary loneliness are needed. Results
from this study show that using multiple questions to assess loneliness outperforms using a
single question, but that using a single question is a valid approximation in settings where brevity
of assessment instruments is a priority (e.g., in clinical settings, naturalistic observational
studies). Results from this study also suggest that, while some people are more susceptible to
loneliness than others, most people experience momentary loneliness from time to time.
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 4
Loneliness is associated with a variety of physical and mental health morbidities (Park et
al., 2020), including depression (Kuczynski et al., 2023) and increased risk of mortality (Holt-
Lunstad et al., 2015; Rico-Uribe et al., 2018). As levels of loneliness increase (Buecker et al.,
2021), researchers (Blazer, 2020; Leigh-Hunt et al., 2017) and governments across the globe
(e.g., Office of the U.S. Surgeon General, 2023; UK Department for Culture, Media, and Sport,
2018) are calling for national strategies to reduce loneliness and social isolation. As a result, the
number of studies aiming to understand the causes, consequences, and correlates of loneliness
using ecologically valid, intensive observational longitudinal methods (e.g., ecological
momentary assessment) is growing.
Measuring Loneliness in the Moment
Using ecologically valid, intensive observational longitudinal methods is particularly
important for the study of loneliness due to it being influenced by momentary processes and
serving momentary functions. For example, feelings of loneliness might be adaptive at times and
motivate behaviors that promote social affiliation in moments when social connection is
insufficient (Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2018). Yet, momentary feelings of loneliness are often
perceived as distressing and are prospectively associated with depression (Kuczynski et al.,
2023), suicidality (McClelland et al., 2020), and stress (Doane & Adam, 2010). Existing
evidence-based psychosocial interventions seek to help individuals develop skills to prevent and
reduce feelings of loneliness as they emerge in the moment in daily life (Hickin et al., 2021).
Despite the momentary nature of loneliness, most research has measured and modeled
loneliness as a stable trait-like construct. Trait-like measures of loneliness typically require
respondents either to indicate, in retrospect, the average frequency with which they experience
conditions associated with loneliness or the degree to which they agree, in present time, with
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 5
certain statements about their perceived social network. Such approaches are problematic in that
they either ignore within-person variation (as in the first strategy) or conflate variation at the
between-person and within-person levels of analysis (as in the second strategy). Although trait-
level research has yielded important clinical insights, namely that people who report greater
loneliness tend to have poorer health than individuals who report lower loneliness (Park et al.,
2020), state-level research is needed to provide a strong understanding of how, when, and why
feelings of loneliness vary from moment-to-moment, within individuals, in their natural context.
Developing an understanding of when individuals experience loneliness and what they
can do to prevent and intervene upon these experiences requires measurement strategies that
reliably and validly characterize loneliness both between-persons (i.e., trait loneliness) and
within-persons (i.e., state loneliness). Several instruments have been developed to measure trait
loneliness; however, to our knowledge, no work has been done to evaluate the reliability and
validity of multi-item measures of momentary loneliness.
Adapting Trait Models of Loneliness to Momentary Measurement
Efforts to measure loneliness as a more stable trait have yielded varied findings with
respect to the nature of loneliness. Loneliness is most commonly treated as a unidimensional
construct and measured using the UCLA Loneliness Scale (Russell, 1996). Factor analyses of the
UCLA Loneliness Scale across samples and time have yielded three- (Hawkley et al., 2005) and
four-factor (Penning et al., 2014) solutions in addition to the widely conceptualized single-factor
solution. Other work not using the UCLA Loneliness Scale has identified two- and three-factor
structures of loneliness that attempt to differentiate between the relationship domains in which
loneliness is felt (e.g., in romantic versus non-romantic relationships; de Jong-Gierveld & Van
Tilburg, 2006; DiTommaso & Spinner, 1993). Although these findings indicate that loneliness
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 6
may be better conceptualized as comprising several facets, the possibility that the multi-factor
solutions identified in some studies reflect differences in item wording rather than distinct
psychological phenomena has not been sufficiently ruled out. For example, in Hawkley and
colleagues’ (2005) analysis, one factor comprises negatively-valenced self-referential items (e.g.,
“I lack companionship”), another comprises positively-valenced self-referential items (e.g., “I
feel part of a group of friends”), and the third comprises positively-valenced other-referential
items (“There are people I feel close to”). In de Jong Gierveld and Van Tilburg’s (2006) analysis,
one factor comprises negatively-valenced self-referential items (e.g., “I often feel rejected”) and
the other positively-valenced other-referential items (e.g., “There are enough people I feel close
to”). Across both these studies, it is not possible to differentiate whether these facets are due to
meaningful variation or statistical confound. As such, loneliness remains largely conceptualized
as a unidimensional construct (similar to other affective constructs, e.g., sadness).
Several existing trait measures of loneliness have been demonstrated to be valid and
reliable for use across various populations and settings. Although these measures have been
instrumental to between-subjects analyses of loneliness, their factor structure, validity, and
reliability does not necessarily generalize to momentary assessments that ask about loneliness
intensity (versus frequency) in the moment (versus retrospectively). We therefore chose to adapt
items from several existing trait measures rather than one particular existing measure for this
study.
The Current Study
To identify valid and reliable measurement strategies for differentiating trait-like and
state-like loneliness, we used data from an ecological momentary assessment study and
multilevel psychometric analytic methods to evaluate the performance of a multi-item measure
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 7
of loneliness – the Momentary Loneliness Scale – completed by people with depression under
ecologically valid conditions. Specifically, we evaluated the psychometric performance of the
Momentary Loneliness Scale with respect to (a) the degree of within- versus between-person
variation, (b) the factor structure at the between- and within-person levels of analysis, (c) and the
extent to which trait and state loneliness correlated with other psychological phenomena that are
hypothesized to be related to loneliness at the between- and within-person levels. We
hypothesized that (a) ≥ 20% of the variation in loneliness would be attributable to within-person
variability in state loneliness and ≥ 20% would be attributable to between-person variability in
trait loneliness, (b) we would observe evidence supporting a unidimensional factor structure of
both trait and state loneliness, and (c) the resulting measures of trait and state loneliness would
correlate ≥ |.3| with measures of negative emotionality and social processes (e.g., quantity of
social interactions) that are expected to vary with loneliness. Because very brief measures (e.g.,
single-item measures) may be required in some research and clinical contexts, we also compared
the magnitudes of these associations from the multi-item measure to the magnitudes of
associations obtained from a single-item measure of momentary loneliness.
Method
We pre-registered our hypotheses, data analytic plan, and statistical decision-making
Participants
Data for this study were collected as part of a larger study on the association between
momentary feelings of loneliness and depressed mood (Kuczynski et al., 2023). The sample
comprised 103 racially diverse adults (M = 31.94, range = 18-64) living in the United States
age
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 8
with Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) scores ≥ 10, suggesting a high likelihood of
depression. One participant did not complete any ecological momentary assessment surveys and
detailed sample characteristics.
Procedure
Prospective participants recruited through advertisements on social media were directed
from the study’s webpage to an online screening survey hosted through Qualtrics to determine
eligibility. Eligible participants were 18-64 years old, current residents of the United States,
owned a smartphone, reported average engagement in at least one social interaction per day, and
scored ≥ 10 on the PHQ–9 (including 1+ on items 1 [depressed mood] or 2 [anhedonia]; Kroenke
et al., 2001). To minimize the possibility of inadvertently including individuals who did not meet
our inclusion criteria, we excluded participants if they were unwilling to provide government-
issued photo identification, provided a VoIP (voice over internet protocol) phone number, or self-
reported a geographic location inconsistent with their location based on IP address.
Eligible participants met with a member of the study team using Zoom online video-
conferencing software. At this baseline visit, participants completed self-report measures hosted
through Qualtrics and were subsequently onboarded to the ecological momentary assessment
phase. During this onboarding, participants created an account and enrolled in our study using
member of the study team.
Ecological momentary assessment surveys were sent to participants 5 times per day for
14 days. Each survey was sent within a 150-minute block of time, with consecutive surveys
separated by at least 120 minutes. Participants had 90 minutes to complete each survey and were
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 9
sent up to 4 reminders if they did not complete it within 15-minutes of receiving the notification.
Surveys were sent to most participants within the following five blocks of time: 0900-1130,
1130-1400, 1400-1630, 1630-1900, 1900-2130. These intervals were shifted earlier/later for a
minority of participants to accommodate their wake/sleep schedules. All survey notifications
were sent by text message and/or email using Inclivio. Surveys were hosted on Qualtrics.
Measures
Documentation of the measures used in this study and their corresponding response
State Loneliness
items), was adapted from existing trait measures, including items from the UCLA Loneliness
Scale (version 3; e.g., “I feel ‘in tune’ with those around me”; Russell, 1996), items derived
based on theoretical conceptualizations of loneliness (loneliness as ‘perceived social isolation’;
e.g., “I feel isolated form others”), an item previously used to measure thwarted belongingness
(e.g., “I feel like I don’t belong”; Van Orden et al., 2012), and a face-valid single-item indicator
most often used in ecological momentary assessment studies of loneliness (i.e., “I feel lonely”).
We used an anchor-test planned missingness design, where a specific “anchor item” of loneliness
was presented at each assessment and 4 out of 11 remaining loneliness items were randomly
presented to reduce participant burden (Silvia et al., 2014). With this design, the remaining items
that are not presented at a given assessment can reasonably be assumed to be missing completely
at random, minimizing the risk of results being biased due to missing data. The item “I feel
lonely” was presented at each assessment together with 4 randomly selected items from the
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 10
remaining 11 items. Participants responded to each item using a visual analog scale ranging from
0 (Not at all) to 100 (Very much so). These items demonstrated strong reliability at the between-
person (ω = .95) and within-person (ω = .87) levels.
b w
State Depressed Mood.
State depressed mood was assessed using 11 items adapted from the PHQ-9 (Kroenke et
al., 2001) that capture depressed mood (8 items) and anhedonia (3 items). The items “I feel
depressed” and “I have little interest in doing things right now” were presented at each
assessment in addition to 4 randomly selected items assessing depressed mood and 1 randomly
selected item assessing anhedonia. These items demonstrated strong inter-item consistency
reliability at the between-person (ω = .96) and within-person (ω = .89) levels.
b w
State Social Interaction Characteristics.
State social interaction quantity was measured using the single item “How many social
interactions have you had since the last prompt?” Participants were instructed to include
interactions of 5+ minutes of duration with an individual age 7+ across all modalities (i.e., in-
person or virtual) and responded with a whole number ranging from 0 to 25+. State social
interaction satisfaction was measured using the single item “How satisfied did you feel with
these interactions?” with response options entered on a 0-100 visual analog scale. This item was
presented when participants reported engaging in 1+ social interactions since the previous
prompt; if participants did not respond to the social interaction quantity item, a score for social
interaction satisfaction was imputed. State solitude (i.e., aloneness) was measured using the
single item “Are you alone or with others right now?” Participants were instructed to select ‘with
others’ if they were with someone physically or virtually (e.g., on a phone call, video chat) and
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 11
‘alone’ if they were physically alone, which included being at their place of residence with others
but in a room alone.
Trait Loneliness
Trait loneliness was measured at baseline using the UCLA Loneliness Scale (version 3;
Russell, 1996). The UCLA Loneliness Scale measures loneliness as a unidimensional construct
and is the most widely adopted measure of loneliness in the literature. Reliability was strong in
the current sample (ω = .91).
Trait Depression
Trait depression was measured at baseline using the 9-item Patient Health Questionnaire
– 9 (PHQ-9; Kroenke et al., 2001) and the 30-item Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology
(IDS; Rush et al., 1996, 2000). The items of the PHQ-9 each correspond to the nine DSM-5-TR
symptoms of depression. The IDS assesses a broad array of depressive experiences in the
domains of depressed mood, anhedonia, psychomotor changes, concentration/memory, and sleep.
The IDS was included to capture a broader range of depressive symptoms and correlated highly
with the PHQ-9 (r = .70). Reliability was strong in our sample for both the PHQ-9 (ω = .80) and
the IDS (ω = .83).
Trait Fear-of-Intimacy
Fear-of-intimacy was measured at baseline using the 35-item Fear-of-Intimacy Scale
(Descutner & Thelen, 1991). The Fear-of-Intimacy Scale was designed to assess the extent to
which individuals experience anxiety in emotionally close relationships and was negatively
correlated with trait loneliness in the original validation sample. Reliability was strong in the
current sample (ω = .94).
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 12
Trait Extraversion and Negative Emotionality
Extraversion (i.e., sociability, assertiveness, energy level) and negative emotionality (i.e.,
anxiety, depression, emotional volatility) were measured at baseline using 24 items of the Big
Five Inventory (version 2; Soto & John, 2017). Reliability was strong in our sample for both the
extraversion (ω = .85) and the negative emotionality (ω = .82) subscales.
Trait Social Support and Social Stress
Social support and social stress were measured at baseline using the Duke Social Support
and Stress Scale (Parkerson Jr. et al., 1991). In each subscale, participants indicated whether they
received support from, or experienced stress with, certain individuals in their life (e.g., family
members, co-workers). We did not calculate internal consistency for this measure because it
represents a cumulative score across different domains rather than a single underlying construct.
Analysis Plan
information about our decision-making criteria and analyses (including code) is available in the
preregistration. We conducted data manipulation and descriptive analyses using R (version 4.3.0;
R Core Team, 2023). To examine whether loneliness could be reliably measured over time, we
examined rank-order stability as measured by R using an approach described by Shrout and
KR
Lane (2014) and internal consistency as measured by ω (Geldhof et al., 2014). R will take on
KR
a value closer to 1 when participants consistently rate their loneliness higher than other
participants and 0 when loneliness rankings fluctuate significantly. Values of ω closer to 1
indicate that if a participant scores one loneliness item high, they are also likely to score the
remaining loneliness items high whereas values closer to 0 indicate that the loneliness items are
not strongly correlated with one another.
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 13
We used the VCA software package in R (version 1.2.2; Schuetzenmeister & Dufey,
2022) to calculate R . Coefficient ω was calculated at the between-person and within-person
KR
levels. We calculated intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs; Hox et al., 2017; Raudenbush &
Bryk, 2001) for each loneliness item using an intercept-only multilevel model to capture the
extent to which variability in responses was attributable to between- versus within-person
variability. The ICC coefficient could range from 0 to 1, with the numeric value reflecting the
proportion of observed variability that is attributable to between-person differences (e.g., an ICC
of 0.7 indicates 70% of the variability in responses was due to differences between individuals
and 30% was due to differences within individuals).
Missing Data
Loneliness items were primarily missing completely at random due to our planned
missingness design (virtually no item-level missing data on completed EMA surveys), allowing
for the use of multiple imputation to estimate parameters without introducing systematic bias.
We used multiple imputation by chained equations as implemented in Blimp (version 3.0; Enders
et al., 2020) to create 20 imputed datasets. This imputation was performed prior to a separate,
this analysis. We used multilevel imputation to account for repeated measures nested within
participants in the imputation process and found acceptable potential scale reduction factors.
Multilevel Confirmatory Factor Analysis
We used multilevel confirmatory factor analyses (ML-CFA) in Mplus (version 8.10;
Muthen & Muthen, 2017) to examine the factor structure of momentary loneliness at the
between-person and within-person levels. First, we estimated a model with a single between-
person factor and a single within-person factor, with each factor loading on all loneliness items.
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 14
Model fit was assessed using chi-square as an indicator of exact fit and the Tucker-Lewis index
(TLI), standardized root mean square residual (SRMR), and root mean square error of
approximation (RMSEA) as measures of relative fit (Hu & Bentler, 1999; Marsh et al., 2004).
We followed several preregistered criteria to determine which items to select for the final
model. First, we excluded items with highly overlapping content (determined by agreement
between the co-first-authors) and any items with weak correlations (< .25) with all others.
Second, we fit the full two-level model separately in all 20 imputed data sets, evaluating
summary fit statistics in each. Third, we explored modification indices in five randomly selected
imputed data sets to identify potential post hoc sources of model misfit or misestimation (e.g.,
items with highly correlated residual variances). Terms that were outliers on modification indices
(at least an order of magnitude higher than the median of the first 20 modification indices) were
considered for exclusion or model modification. We decided a priori that if modification indices
indicated an additional factor (e.g., a pattern of item-level residual correlations between 3+
items), we would explore a two-factor model that models this factor.
Validity
We examined construct validity at the state (within-person) and trait (between-person)
levels. We hypothesized that trait loneliness would be positively correlated with trait depression,
negative emotionality, social stress, and fear-of-intimacy and negatively correlated with
extraversion and social support. We hypothesized that state loneliness would be positively
correlated with state depression and solitude and negatively correlated with the quantity and
satisfaction of one’s social interactions. Correlations were estimated using multiply imputed data
using Fisher's z-transformation. After estimating these models, we pooled results using Rubin’s
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 15
(1987) rules. Correlations of .3 or higher that were statistically significant at α = .05 were
specified a priori as indicating support for the validity of the Momentary Loneliness Scale.
Results
On average, participants completed 64.39 (SD = 11.63, Mdn = 68) of 70 possible
ecological momentary assessments (91.99% completion rate; 6,568 surveys in total). ICCs for
loneliness items ranged from .39 to .60 (M = 0.51, SD = 0.07), indicating a substantial
proportion of item variance due to between-person differences and a substantial proportion due
to momentary change. The 12-item loneliness scale had a mean of 42.13 and a standard deviation
of 25.58.
Multilevel Confirmatory Factor Analysis
Model Estimation and Fit
All models were estimated using robust maximum likelihood estimation and converged
without issues. We did not drop any items due to overlapping content or low correlations with all
fit statistics). Examination of modification indices from five randomly selected imputed datasets
indicated misfit due to residual correlations between the 5 items that were negatively worded
(i.e., wherein higher scores indicated lower loneliness). As such, we explored whether a CTC(M-
1) method effect model (all items load onto a general loneliness factor, negatively worded items
also load onto a second method factor; Eid et al., 2003) or a correlated factors model (wherein
the positively- and negatively-worded items load only onto separate factors) fit the data better.
The method-effect model was slightly favored by SRMR, AIC, and sample size adjusted BIC,
while the two-factor model was slightly favored by TLI and RMSEA. The CTC(M-1) model
allows for the separation of method variance from error and true score variance, and has the
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 16
advantage of identifiability under a range of data conditions. However, it requires the choice of a
"gold standard" method, in our case positively-worded items. This model is one of several
models inspired by the multitrait-multimethod (MTMM) approach (Campbell & Fiske, 1959; see
Castro-Schilo et al., 2014, 2016 for more on these models).
In light of equivocal evidence for a best-fitting model, we selected the method effect
model because of strong content overlap between items that loaded on the two factors. Rather
than representing a conceptually distinct second factor observed in other work on loneliness
(e.g., self- vs. other-referential, romantic vs. non-romantic; de Jong-Gierveld & Van Tilburg,
2006; DiTommaso & Spinner, 1993; Hawkley et al., 2005), negatively-worded items in the
second factor can be thought of as negatively-worded versions of items in the first factor.
Examination of modification indices from five randomly selected imputed datasets at this step
indicated that adding the item “I do not feel close to others” to the second (method) factor would
improve model fit. Fit did not meaningfully improve after adding this item, and doing so led to
low (< .3) loadings for other items. As such, we reverted to the CTC(M-1) method effect model
Factor Loadings
The method effect model included two factors (a loneliness factor and a method factor) at
each level (within-person, between-person). All loneliness items loaded highly (≥ .65 at within-
person level; ≥ .75 at between-person level) on their respective factors in the method effect
w b w b
.93), and “I feel isolated from others” (λ = .99, λ = .90) were the highest-loading items at both
w b
levels.
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 17
Reliability and Validity
Reliability
The twelve-item loneliness scale showed strong internal consistency reliability at the
within-person level ( = .87) and at the between-person level ( = .95), indicating that the
ω ω
w b
twelve loneliness items capture consistent variability in a common construct at each level. The
twelve items also showed consistent rank-ordering of individuals on the underlying loneliness
dimension (R = .99).
KR
State-level Construct Validity
directions with state measures of closely-related constructs. State loneliness positively correlated
with state depression (r = .59), such that when participants reported feeling more lonely than
usual, they also reported feeling more depressed than usual. State loneliness was associated with
less social interaction satisfaction (r = -.38). Although all within-person correlations were
statistically significant (p < .05), correlations between state loneliness and state solitude (r = .27)
and social interaction quantity (r = -.15) did not meet our preregistered minimum effect size of
interest.
Trait-level Construct Validity
Trait loneliness was calculated by taking the mean across all loneliness scores for each
participant. Trait loneliness was highly positively correlated with a baseline measure of
loneliness, the UCLA Loneliness Scale (r = .66). Trait loneliness also correlated in expected
directions with closely related measures: participants who reported higher average loneliness
also reported higher depression as measured by the PHQ-9 (r = .49) and the IDS (r = .41), and
less social interaction satisfaction (r = -.60), social support (r = -.43), extraversion (r = -.32).
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 18
Although all between-person correlations were statistically significant (p < .05), correlations
with fear-of-intimacy (r = .25), negative emotionality (r = .27), social interaction quantity (r = -
.13), and social stress (r = .05) did not meet our preregistered minimum effect size of interest.
Comparing a Single-item to a Multi-item Measure of Loneliness
Single-item measures are commonly used in intensive longitudinal studies on loneliness.
Although single-item measures are generally less reliable than multiple-item measures (see Allen
et al., 2022 for an overview), they have been demonstrated to have acceptable psychometric
functioning in several areas of research, including between-subjects analyses of loneliness
(Mund et al., 2022), and are often required or preferred for practical reasons. In a non-
preregistered analysis, we examined the reliability and validity of a single-item loneliness
measure using the highest-loading item on the Momentary Loneliness Scale: “I feel alone.”
We found evidence of validity correlations at both the within-person and between-person
levels that were in the same direction but slightly attenuated (difference of 0.18) compared to the
39% and within-person validity correlations were attenuated by 12-37%. These correlations were
generally less attenuated than one would expect from simply shortening the scale, as the
predicted reliability of the single-item measure based on the Spearman-Brown prophecy formula
applied to the 12-item measure was = .35 at the within-person level and = .61 at the
ω ω
w1 b1
between-person level. These reliabilities imply a 60% attenuation in within-person correlations
( = .40) and a 36% attenuation in between-person correlations ( = .64).
ω / ω ω / ω
w1 w b1 b
Discussion
The current study presents evidence that measuring loneliness using a brief, repeated,
smartphone-based survey captures meaningful variance that differentiates people from one
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 19
another (between-person variability) and differentiates moments of feeling more lonely from
moments of feeling less lonely (within-person variability). Similar to existing trait measures of
loneliness, we found evidence of a method factor in the context of a single overarching
loneliness factor. We also found evidence of criterion validity and convergent validity at both the
between-person and within-person levels. Feeling lonelier at a given moment was associated
with more depression and less satisfaction with social interactions at that moment. People who
reported feeling lonelier on average over the course of two weeks also reported more symptoms
of depression, lower extraversion, and less social support. We also examined the validity of a
single-item measure of loneliness, finding similar but slightly attenuated correlations with related
constructs. Overall, our findings support the reliability and validity of assessing loneliness in an
intensive longitudinal context using the Momentary Loneliness Scale.
The fact that loneliness varies at both the within- and between-person levels is of
theoretical and clinical significance. Theoretically, scholars suggest that loneliness serves a
within-person function, namely to motivate social affiliation in moments when individuals
perceive a lack of sufficient connection (Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2018). Although these findings
suggest that loneliness does indeed vary from moment-to-moment, they also show that some
people are more predisposed to experiencing loneliness than others. Theories of loneliness are
thus tasked at explaining variation in loneliness at both levels, for example by incorporating
person-level factors (e.g., heritability) or delineating developmental factors that lead to between-
person variation. Clinically, these results indicate a need for intervention at multiple levels, for
example by teaching individuals to challenge unhelpful social cognitions in moments when they
feel lonelier than usual (Cacioppo et al., 2015) and helping to resolve barriers to social
connection (e.g., social anxiety, social isolation) in the long term.
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 20
Our analyses are consistent with research in other settings and samples (e.g., Mund et al.,
2022) that indicate using a single, face-valid item to measure loneliness can provide somewhat
similar information as presenting multiple items from a scale. A single-item measure of
loneliness, using only the item "I feel alone," showed validity such that correlations with
expected constructs were only slightly attenuated relative to the full twelve-item measure. Mund
et al. (2022) argue that loneliness may be "highly schematized" in the sense that a single item
captures a set of common experiences, and our findings point toward this being the case at the
momentary level as well. Allen et al. (2022) lay out cogent arguments for and against using
single item scales under certain conditions, making the case that single-item measures are not
"automatically inferior" to multi-item measures. Although most validity correlations were
attenuated when using the single-item measure, some were effectively the same (e.g., only
past work making use of a single loneliness item at the momentary level may provide a
reasonable estimate of true relations with loneliness. Even so, using the full twelve-item measure
provides additional construct coverage and measurement reliability, and has advantages for more
basic research (e.g., may not be as susceptible to gender differences in loneliness ratings; Barreto
et al., 2021). Combined with a planned missingness design, longer measures can still be used to
enhance construct coverage. Given the emergent status of measurement work in an ecological
momentary assessment context, we hope our results provide some initial guidance on potential
trade-offs of longer and shorter measures of momentary assessment of loneliness in ecological
momentary assessment.
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 21
Strengths, Limitations, and Future Directions
There are many notable strengths of this study. Our anchor-test planned missingness
design allowed us to evaluate a multi-item measure of loneliness while also minimizing
participant burden, resulting in a high completion rate relative to other studies with a similar
design and sample (Colombo et al., 2019). Our preregistered data analysis plan and open data
and materials promotes confidence in the replicability and reproducibility of our findings
(Gelman & Loken, 2013; Munafò et al., 2017). Our racially and geographically diverse sample
increases generalizability of our findings to diverse populations (Roberts & Mortenson, 2022).
Our sample of adults with elevated depression scores reflects an important clinical population
affected by loneliness. Advantages of the CTC(M-1) model fit in the current manuscript include
avoiding the identification problems that can come with a full correlated trait-correlated method
model, while still allowing for the estimation of a method factor.
It is also important to consider limitations of this study. Although we had a sufficient
number of observations to evaluate the measurement of state loneliness, we were likely
underpowered for our analyses of trait loneliness. Jackson (2003) recommends at least 20
participants for each parameter estimate in a confirmatory factor analysis, which would require a
sample of ≥ 540 in the current analysis for the between-person submodel (11 loneliness loadings
+ 4 method factor loadings + 12 residual variances × 20). Future research with larger samples
will be better equipped for between-person psychometric analyses (e.g., testing measurement
invariance by gender). It should also be noted that measurement models that share similarities
with the one fit in this paper have been shown to have a high fitting propensity, such that they are
likely to fit data even with a very weak factor structure (Bonifay & Cai, 2017). It is unknown to
what degree fitting propensity may have influenced our results. Relative to other models of
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 22
MTMM data, the CTC(M-1) model requires the choice of a gold standard assessment method.
This can limit generalizability to other sources of method variance; however, it was appropriate
for the scope of this study. It is possible that variability in loneliness and other measures was
somewhat restricted due to the study inclusion criteria (e.g., PHQ-9 score ≥10, self-reporting on
average ≥1 social interaction per day). Similarly, because our sample comprised adults with
elevated scores on a depression screening measure, our findings may not generalize to other
populations. Loneliness is an inherently subjective experience and, as such, is related to how one
perceives their relationships. Because depressed individuals exhibit biases in social cognition
(Weightman et al., 2014), it is possible that their pattern of responses to the 12 items presented in
this study would differ from those without these biases in meaningful ways. Future research
should identify whether these findings generalize to non-depressed samples. It is also possible
that results were influenced by the fact that data used in this study were collected during the
heart of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic when opportunities for social interaction were limited
(Buecker et al., 2021). Some items from the multi-item Momentary Loneliness Scale may have
shared content overlap with other validity constructs measured in this study (e.g., “I feel left out”
having some conceptual overlap with social interaction satisfaction) and thus the validity
correlations may not be a result of true correlations between these constructs. More research on
the discriminant validity of the loneliness items is needed to address this concern.
Conclusion
Evidence suggests that levels of loneliness are increasing over time and are associated
with increased risk of morbidity and mortality. As researchers and governments across the globe
call for national-level strategies to reduce loneliness, ecological momentary assessment studies
that seek to understand how, when, and why feelings of loneliness fluctuate from moment-to-
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 23
moment in everyday life are growing. In the absence of reliable and valid measures of loneliness
at both the between-person (i.e., trait) and within-person (i.e., state) levels, researchers and
clinicians have turned to face-valid, single-item indicators of loneliness. In this study, we
evaluated the factor structure, reliability, and validity of a 12-item measure of momentary
loneliness and compared it to a single-item indicator. Results suggest that using a single-item
indicator is likely sufficient, but that multi-item measurement strategies are indicated when
increased reliability and validity are required. Findings from this study also suggest that
loneliness, when measured in everyday life, varies considerably from person-to-person and from
moment-to-moment. Scientific theories and clinical interventions must consider variation at both
levels if they are to effectively address the public health challenges of loneliness.
Measuring Loneliness in Everyday Life 24