MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 1
The Relationship Between Math Anxiety and Math Achievement: Novel and Robust
Evidence From A Meta-Analysis of Individual Participant Data From International
Large-Scale Assessments
Draft version (November 20, 2024). This paper has not been peer reviewed
1 2 3 4,5 1
Martin Brunner , Franzis Preckel , Thomas Götz , Oliver Lüdtke , and Lena Keller
Department of Educational Sciences, University of Potsdam, Germany
Department of Psychology, University of Trier, Germany
Faculty of Psychology, University of Vienna, Austria
Leibniz Institute for Science and Mathematics Education, Germany
Centre for International Student Assessment, Germany
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 2
Author Note
We thank James E. Pustejowsky and Wolfgang Viechtbauer for their support in using
the clubSandwich and metafor R packages to carry out the meta-analyses on the international
large-scale assessment data. However, our acknowledgment does not imply that these
colleagues endorse our views, and we remain solely responsible for the views expressed in the
present article. We would also like to acknowledge editorial support from Jane Zagorski. The
R code for reproducing all results as well as the data with effect sizes used in the present
paper can be accessed via the Open Science Framework (OSF) at [link]. We made a preprint
preregister the analyses presented in this paper.
We have no conflicts of interest to disclose. This work was supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG; German Research Foundation) under Grant 442358899.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Martin Brunner,
Department of Educational Sciences, Faculty of Human Sciences, University of Potsdam,
Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24-25, 14476, Potsdam, Germany. E-mail: martin.brunner@uni-
potsdam.de
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 3
Abstract
Math anxiety and math achievement are reciprocally related, which likely impacts
individuals’ agency; their educational and career trajectories in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields; and countries’ economic growth in these areas.
Previous meta-analyses on this relationship faced limitations from studies using small,
convenience samples and suffered from methodological issues, such as variance restriction,
low statistical power, and ecological bias. To address these challenges, the present research
synthesis is the first to use a comprehensive collection of representative individual participant
data (IPD) from International Large-Scale Assessments (ILSAs). This analysis incorporated
cumulative evidence from 1980 to 2022, including 452 probability samples from 90 countries,
and covered student and adult populations. The meta-analytic average correlation between
math anxiety and math achievement was r = .26. Moderator analyses revealed novel
evidence that this relationship is sensitive to construct characteristics as well as individual and
contextual factors. Specifically, the negative relationship was weaker for the worry facet of
math anxiety compared with its affective facet and its cognitive interference facet, and it was
weaker following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Additionally, the negative
relationship was stronger for individuals with average and high levels of math achievement
and in countries with higher Gross Domestic Product per capita. Gender differences in the
relationship were largely negligible after 2010, although female individuals exhibited a
stronger negative relationship in the 1980s and 1990s than male individuals. In summary,
synthesizing IPD from ILSAs provided novel, nuanced, and robust evidence for research,
practice, and policy.
Keywords: individual participant data meta-analysis, international large-scale
assessments, math anxiety, math achievement
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 4
Public Significance Statement
This meta-analysis provides novel and robust evidence that higher levels of math anxiety are
associated with lower math achievement in both student and adult populations worldwide.
The negative relationship between math anxiety and math achievement was stronger for
individuals with average and high levels of math achievement as well as in countries with
higher Gross Domestic Product per capita. Consequently, this relationship may have more
pronounced detrimental effects on individuals’ career trajectories in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields as well as on economic growth in STEM sectors
in socioeconomically thriving countries.
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 5
The Relationship Between Math Anxiety and Math Achievement: Novel and Robust
Evidence From A Meta-Analysis of Individual Participant Data From International
Large-Scale Assessments
2 1
“What is the area enclosed by the graphs of functions y = x and y = 5x – 4?” How do
you feel when you see this math problem? If you are experiencing math anxiety, which is
characterized by feelings of nervousness, dread, or confusion, and if you are worried that you
might fail to solve this problem (Ashcraft, 2002; Namkung et al., 2019), you are not alone.
Many people of all ages (Barroso et al., 2021; Caviola et al., 2022) and from around the world
(Foley et al., 2017) feel math anxiety. For example, projecting from recent International
and 540,000 students in Grade 8 in the US have been estimated to experience high levels of
math anxiety.
Importantly, math anxiety and math achievement are reciprocally related. Math
anxiety impairs math achievement (Barroso et al., 2021; Caviola et al., 2022; Chang &
Beilock, 2016; Namkung et al., 2019), and lower levels of math achievement result in higher
levels of math anxiety (Aldrup et al., 2020; Gunderson et al., 2018; Pekrun et al., 2017; Ma &
Xu, 2004). The motivational and cognitive profiles of math-anxious individuals predict that
they tend to avoid learning opportunities that have a strong mathematics focus in school,
college, university, and vocational training (Daker et al., 2021; Eccles & Wigfield, 2020; Lau
et al., 2024; Meece et al., 1990). Thus, an understanding of the relationship between math
anxiety and math achievement is key to (a) counteracting workforce shortages in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields and (b) fostering individuals’
mathematical literacy, which is essential for individuals’ agency (e.g., understanding interest
This math problem was taken from the year 2015 cycle of the Trends in International Mathematics and Science
Study in Grade 12 (see Exhibit M2.6.3 in Mullis et al., 2016). The area is 4.5.
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 6
rates on home loans or keeping track of family income and expenses) and their ability to
participate in a democratic society (e.g., understanding statistics in media reports).
The extensive research that has been conducted on the relationship between math
an overview) that drew on aggregated data (AD), which are the results reported in primary
studies (i.e., correlations). These meta-analyses, also referred to as AD meta-analyses (Cooper
& Patall, 2009; Pigott et al., 2012), have consistently shown that higher levels of math anxiety
are associated with lower levels of math achievement (average correlations have centered on a
value of r = .30). However, results from moderator analyses (e.g., involving grade levels or
the facets of math anxiety) for explaining the heterogeneity of correlations around the meta-
analytic average have been inconsistent across meta-analyses (Barroso et al., 2021; Caviola et
al., 2022; Namkung et al., 2019). Furthermore, previous meta-analyses have suffered from
major limitations, involving (a) the generalizability of findings because most primary studies
were based on small convenience samples of college students or samples from Western
countries and (b) the extent to which they could be used to study moderating effects of
individual characteristics (e.g., gender).
The primary goal of this evidence synthesis is to accumulate novel insights and
significantly advance the understanding of the relationship between math anxiety and math
achievement. To this end, we conducted a meta-analysis using a unique combination of
archival data: a systematic collection of individual participant data (IPD) from representative
International Large-Scale Assessments (ILSAs). This approach enabled us to compute a
substantial number of high-quality effect sizes across a wide range of countries, many of
which were not included in previous meta-analyses. Access to this extensive data set provided
greater statistical precision and power, enabling us to thoroughly examine potential
Individuals from countries or economic regions can participate in ILSAs. For ease of presentation, we refer to
both “countries” and “economic regions” as “countries” in this article.
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 7
moderators of the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement and address the
conflicting findings from previous meta-analyses that explored moderating effects.
Additionally, utilizing IPD from ILSAs allowed us to uncover the moderating effects of not
only individual factors (e.g., gender, individuals’ math achievement levels), which previous
meta-analyses could not conclusively address, but also contextual educational or
socioeconomic characteristics (e.g., country-level math achievement, national socioeconomic
prosperity), which were previously unexplored. In summary, the synthesis of IPD from ILSAs
enables the generation of reliable, generalizable, and novel findings on the relationship
between math anxiety and math achievement. These findings offer substantial contributions to
theory and research and highlight potential intervention targets for educational practice and
policy.
The Multidimensional Nature of Math Anxiety and Math Achievement
Math Anxiety
Math anxiety is an expression of academic anxiety that is specific to the domain of
mathematics (Ashcraft, 2002; Chang & Beilock, 2016). It can be conceptually and empirically
distinguished from related constructs, such as general test anxiety, academic anxiety in other
subject domains (e.g., German, physics), general anxiety, and general academic anxiety
(Chang & Beilock, 2016; Goetz et al., 2007; Gogol et al., 2017; Hembree, 1990). These
constructs are either more specific or general in nature or pertain to different domains and
thus differ in the extents to which they are similar to math anxiety.
Early work on math anxiety (Richardson & Suinn, 1972) treated it as a unitary
construct (Barroso et al., 2021; Namkung et al., 2019). However, research on test anxiety
(e.g., Liebert & Morris, 1967; Putwain et al., 2021) has shown that a more nuanced
understanding can be achieved by conceptualizing test anxiety as a multidimensional
construct that encompasses more specific, interrelated facets. Work by Liebert and Morris
(Liebert & Morris, 1967; Morris et al., 1981) has been particularly influential. They identified
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 8
worry as a major cognitive facet of test anxiety, comprising negative thoughts and self-
perceptions of failure (e.g., worrying about failing a math test). Additionally, they identified a
broad affective-physiological facet, termed emotionality, which encompasses both autonomic
arousal and negative emotions (e.g., nervousness or tension). Subsequent empirical analyses
(Pekrun et al., 2004; Putwain et al., 2021; Sarason, 1984), along with systematic reviews and
expert panels (Putwain et al., 2021), have corroborated and advanced the multidimensional
view of test anxiety. In particular, the work by Putwain et al. (2021) demonstrated that the
conceptual framework that Liebert and Morris proposed can be refined even further.
Specifically, they differentiated the affective-physiological facet into an affective facet and a
physiological facet. The affective facet encompasses individuals’ negative emotional
reactions (e.g., nervousness, dread, anxiety, tension), whereas the physiological facet is
related to specific physiological reactions (e.g., stomach discomfort, increased heart rate).
Additionally, Putwain et al. (2021) distinguished two cognitive facets: the worry facet (as
originally proposed by Liebert and Morris) and the cognitive interference facet, which refers
to test-irrelevant thoughts and distractions (e.g., confusion while taking math tests).
Furthermore, given the positive correlations among these four facets, Putwain et al. (2021)
proposed considering test anxiety as a broad general construct composed of these facets.
Conceptualizations of test anxiety have often been applied to research on math anxiety
(see Namkung et al., 2019). This meta-analysis is the first to adopt the current
conceptualization of test anxiety, providing two perspectives on math anxiety. First, math
anxiety can be understood as a broad construct comprising both cognitive and affective-
physiological facets. This perspective is particularly useful for investigating how individuals’
overall levels of math anxiety are related to math achievement. Additionally, math anxiety can
be understood as a multidimensional construct with four interrelated facets: the worry,
cognitive interference, affective, and physiological facets. This perspective provides nuanced
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 9
insights into the differential relationships between these facets of math anxiety and math
achievement.
Notably, general math anxiety and its specific facets may manifest in various math-
related contexts, such as in everyday situations (e.g., calculating the amount of a discount),
evaluative settings (e.g., tests), and learning environments, whether in class or independently
(e.g., Bieleke et al., 2023; Hopko et al., 2003; Richardson & Suinn, 1972). Thus, measures of
math anxiety can refer to specific contexts (e.g., “I feel nervous about taking math tests”) or
remain general in nature without specifying a particular context (e.g., “I feel nervous about
mathematics”).
Math Achievement
Math achievement can be defined as the math-related knowledge and skills that are
acquired through long-term, cumulative, and domain-specific learning processes (Baumert et
al., 2009). In academia and specifically in school, college, and university settings, math
achievement is often represented by performance outcomes that indicate the extent to which
an individual has achieved specific goals that have been the focus of activities in math
instructional environments (Steinmayr et al., 2014). Measures of math achievement comprise
very general indicators (e.g., tests of procedural and declarative knowledge) as well as more
curriculum-based indicators (e.g., performance on math achievement tests). From these
perspectives, the present meta-analysis conceptualizes math achievement as a broad,
multidimensional construct that encompasses various subdomains that differ in content,
difficulty, and complexity. This concept is well reflected in modern assessment frameworks
that guide the development of math achievement tests in ILSAs (e.g., Mullis et al., 2016,
2020; OECD, 2023a). Specifically, these tests include items that span a wide range of
difficulty, complexity, and curricular demands to assess general math achievement.
Additionally, ILSAs provide subtests to measure both the content-related subdomains (e.g.,
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 10
quantity and numbers, calculus, geometry, algebra) and the process-related subdomains (e.g.,
Why Are Math Anxiety and Math Achievement Interrelated?
The empirical relationship between math anxiety and math achievement has been
accounted for by several mechanisms, which we briefly summarize below (detailed
discussions can be found in Carey et al., 2016; Chang & Beilock, 2016; Suárez-Pellicioni et
al., 2016).
Cognitive Interference Theory
The cognitive-interference theory proposes that high levels of math anxiety lead to
poor math achievement because math anxiety may exert negative effects while individuals do
mathematics (Carey et al., 2016; Eysenck et al., 2007; Namkung et al., 2019). Several
mechanisms have been proposed to explain how math anxiety impairs the processing of math-
related information. These mechanisms primarily involve working memory, a central
cognitive system responsible for the simultaneous processing and storage of information
(Baddeley & Hitch, 1994; Oberauer, 2019), as well as the retrieval of mathematical
knowledge and methods from long-term memory (Carey et al., 2016; Unsworth & Engle,
2007). One widely discussed mechanism is math anxiety’s associations with worry and self-
deprecating thoughts, which tax some of the limited resources of an individual’s working
memory (Carey et al., 2016; Namkung et al., 2019; Suárez-Pellicioni et al., 2016). This taxing
of resources subsequently leads to reduced math performance. Moreover, math anxiety may
also impair individuals’ attention (i.e., a key function of working memory; Engle, 2002;
Oberauer, 2019). Because math-anxious individuals pay less attention to the current math
problem and more attention to threat-related stimuli (e.g., worrisome thoughts; Eysenck et al.,
2007), they experience cognitive interference (e.g., confusion) and disruptions in goal-
directed attention (e.g., difficulty concentrating), and in turn, their math performance is
impaired (Li et al., 2023; Putwain et al., 2021). Finally, another proposed mechanism involves
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 11
the impact of math anxiety on brain activity. When individuals experience negative emotions
(e.g., fear, dread) due to math anxiety, there is an increase in activity in the amygdala—a
brain region that is involved in processing emotions. At the same time, this increase is
associated with decreased activity in brain regions such as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
which is critical for working memory and successful math performance (Foley et al., 2017).
Deficit Theory
The deficit theory proposes that low levels of math performance (e.g., on a math
achievement test) and related memories lead to high levels of math anxiety (see Tobias, 1986,
for a first review). In particular, two lines of research have provided (some) support for this
idea (Barroso et al., 2021; Carey et al., 2016; Namkung et al., 2019). First, students with
(very) low levels of performance on math achievement tests have been found to report
disproportionally high levels of math anxiety relative to students with average performance
(Lai et al., 2015; Passolunghi, 2011; Wu et al., 2014). This finding suggests that students with
low math achievement may be particularly susceptible to the negative effects of math anxiety
(Barroso et al., 2021). Hence, low levels of math achievement could lead to math anxiety,
particularly when children demonstrate very poor math achievement in early development
(e.g., children with mathematical learning disabilities; see Carey et al., 2016). However,
research has yet to determine whether this developmental process can be generalized to
children in the average range of math achievement (Carey et al., 2016). Second, Ma and Xu
(2004) conducted a study that tracked students in the US from Grades 7 to 12 and found that
higher levels of prior math achievement predicted lower levels of math anxiety in subsequent
grades. Later math achievement could not be predicted by math anxiety in most cases, thus
suggesting that math achievement has an effect on math anxiety, but not vice versa (Ma &
Xu, 2004).
Reciprocal Theory
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 12
Reciprocal theory proposes that math anxiety and math achievement are mutually
related (Barroso et al., 2021; Carey et al., 2016; Namkung et al., 2019). At first glance,
cognitive-interference theory and deficit theory may appear to be in conflict. However,
findings supporting these theoretical models have been provided by different research
paradigms that use different time scales (Carey et al., 2016). The most support for cognitive-
interference theory has come from experimental studies that focused on the immediate effect
of math anxiety on math performance. For example, the study by Daker et al. (2023) showed
that higher levels of math anxiety (conceptualized as a temporally stable trait) were associated
with higher levels of in-the-moment (i.e., state-level) math anxiety that individuals
experienced while engaged in mathematical processing. Furthermore, higher state-level math
anxiety was associated with lower math performance. This pattern of results provides strong
support for the assumption that math anxiety interferes with (in-the-moment) math
performance. The strongest support for deficit theory comes from longitudinal studies that
focused on the effects of math achievement on math anxiety in the long term (e.g., across
months or years). Importantly, several of these studies have shown that math anxiety and
math achievement are indeed reciprocally related, with higher levels of math anxiety
predicting lower levels of math achievement, and vice versa (Aldrup et al., 2020; Gunderson
et al., 2018; Pekrun et al., 2017; and even the study by Ma & Xu, 2004 in Grades 7 to 9).
An important factor that may drive the reciprocal relationship between math anxiety
and math achievement is how individuals appraise math-related situations and activities
(Pekrun, 2006; Ramirez et al., 2018). Specifically, state-level math anxiety is likely to be
triggered and sustained in math-related situations when individuals: (a) negatively appraise
their ability to succeed (e.g., as reflected by a low math self-concept); (b) focus on the
possibility of failure (e.g., the likelihood of receiving a poor grade on a test); (c) perceive
limited control over the possibility of avoiding failure (e.g., having low math self-efficacy and
viewing the demands of current or upcoming math tasks as exceeding their capabilities); and
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 13
(d) perceive failure in mathematics as highly threatening and personally significant. These
appraisals are shaped by past math experiences and are continually updated by current
experiences (Eccles & Wigfield, 2020; Pekrun, 2006; Ramirez et al., 2018). Additionally,
these appraisal processes are also linked to individuals’ broader motivational profile in
mathematics (Pekrun, 2006). Math-anxious individuals tend to have lower motivation,
interest, enjoyment, and self-confidence in math-related activities (Gogol et al., 2017;
Hembree, 1990; Meece et al., 1990). Importantly, appraisal processes along with a broader
cognitive and motivational profile drive math-anxious individuals to avoid situations where
they might experience failure in math (Lau et al., 2024; Pekrun, 2006). As a result, math-
anxious individuals are less likely to seek out opportunities to learn math, such as choosing
math-intensive courses in school, college, or university (Daker et al., 2021; Eccles &
Wigfield, 2020; Lau et al., 2024; Meece et al., 1990).
To conclude, the dynamic interplay between math anxiety and math achievement, both
in the short term and over time, predicts that individuals with math anxiety are at a high risk
of entering a negative, self-reinforcing cycle—a vicious circle (Namkung et al., 2019). Their
anxiety often leads to decreased motivation in math, prompting them to avoid math-related
activities. This avoidance reduces their exposure to math learning opportunities, subsequently
impairing their math achievement even more and exacerbating their anxiety. Moreover, math
anxiety can negatively impact their immediate performance in learning and evaluation
situations, ultimately reducing math learning outcomes in the long term.
How Are Math Anxiety and Math Achievement Empirically Related?
Math anxiety and its relationship to math achievement have been examined in literally
hundreds of studies since Dreger and Aiken (1957) introduced the term number anxiety more
than 60 years ago (Ashcraft & Moore, 2009; Dowker et al., 2016). The results of these studies
have been synthesized in several meta-analyses, including the now classic meta-analyses by
Hembree (1990) and Ma (1999) as well as several more recent meta-analyses (Barroso et al.,
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 14
both the strengths of these meta-analyses and limitations that point to important gaps in
knowledge on the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement.
Average Relationship
Although the time range and inclusion criteria for primary studies have varied across
previous meta-analyses, the findings on the average correlation between math anxiety and
math achievement have been remarkably consistent, centering on a value of r = –.30.
Importantly, whereas previous meta-analyses have significantly advanced the understanding
of the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement, Barroso et al. (2021)—the
authors of the most comprehensive evidence synthesis available to date—self-critically
acknowledged that many effect sizes in their meta-analysis were derived from convenience
sampling procedures involving small samples, college students, or samples from Western
countries. This critique extends to all prior meta-analyses. Crucially, the limitations of the
primary studies entail a risk of (a) imprecise or (b) potentially distorted estimates of the
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement due to small sample sizes, variance
restriction, and sample selectivity. Furthermore, there is a risk of (c) biased results, limited
precision, and reduced representativeness and generalizability in meta-analytic integrations of
these relationships (Brunner, Keller, et al., 2023; Campos et al., 2023).
In addition, the standard search strategies that have been applied in previous meta-
analyses have typically missed reports on ILSAs and corresponding IPD that were based on
large, representative samples, most likely because these reports and data are often not indexed
in central databases (e.g., PsycInfo or Web of Science). Notably, existing meta-analyses have
included a few primary studies (e.g., J. Lee, 2009a, 2009b; Stoet et al., 2016) that used some
ILSA data in secondary analyses to examine the relationship between math anxiety and math
use complex survey procedures to compute correlations and their corresponding standard
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 15
errors. Thus, the effect sizes that have been included in previous meta-analyses to represent
the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement are at risk of being biased
(Brunner, Keller, et al., 2023; Campos et al., 2023). Furthermore, Stoet et al.’s (2016) results
were included in some previous meta-analyses (Caviola et al., 2022; Namkung et al., 2019).
However, this study reported country-average correlations, which do not provide information
on how math anxiety and math achievement are related at the individual level (ecological
bias; Thompson & Higgins, 2002). In summary, much of the arguably best empirical evidence
on the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement is missing from extant meta-
analyses or has been meta-analytically integrated by using error-prone procedures or drawing
on effect sizes that were not relevant.
Moderating Effects
Previous meta-analyses have found heterogeneity in effect sizes, suggesting
moderating effects. Thus, these meta-analyses examined several potential moderators of the
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement.
Analytic Strategies. Various strategies can be applied to study moderating effects in
meta-analyses (Konstantopoulos & Hedges, 2019; Tipton et al., 2019a). According to Tipton
et al.’s (2019b) best practice recommendations, all relevant moderator variables should be
included in a single meta-regression model to study a certain target moderator. In doing so, it
is possible to obtain an estimate of the effect of the target moderator by statistically adjusting
for the effects of the remaining moderator variables (which controls for their potential
math anxiety and math achievement, only Namkung et al. (2019) used a meta-regression
3 Lee (2009a, 2009b) did not use sampling weights to compute correlations. Thus, the correlations reported in
these papers do not provide unbiased estimates of the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement
for the target population. Furthermore, the AD meta-analyses that used the correlations from the papers by Lee
used standard formulas to compute the sampling variances (i.e., the squared standard errors) for the correlations.
However, in doing so, they neglected the clustered nature of ILSA data (e.g., students nested in schools). Thus,
they underestimated the corresponding sampling variances and thereby overemphasized the correlations obtained
from the ILSAs when calculating meta-analytic averages or performing moderator analyses on the basis of
inverse-variance weighting procedures.
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 16
model that included all target moderator variables. By contrast, the other meta-analyses
studied moderating effects either by subgrouping or entering each moderator variable
separately into meta-regression models. The results from these moderator analyses are
therefore more difficult to interpret because of the greater risk of potential confounding. To
conclude, the differences in the applied analytic strategies should be born in mind, as they
may partly explain some of the inconsistencies in moderating effects across previous meta-
analyses that we summarize below.
Between-Country Differences and Socioeconomic Prosperity. It is plausible that
socioeconomic and sociocultural differences as well as differences in educational systems
between countries moderate the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement (see
Eccles & Wigfield, 2020; Pekrun, 2024). Some support for this idea was provided by Barroso
et al.’s (2021) meta-analysis, which found substantial differences between countries, ranging
− −
from r = .54 (Turkey and India) to r = .12 (Indonesia). However, Barroso et al. (2021) and
Zhang et al. (2019) did not conduct moderator analyses to test for between-country
differences but instead examined mean-level differences between continents or geographical
regions within continents. Whereas Zhang et al. (2019) found significant differences in the
correlations between math anxiety and math achievement across continents, Barroso et al.
(2021) did not. Nevertheless, Barroso et al.’s additional analyses indicated significant
differences in the correlations across geographical regions within continents in Asia, Europe,
North America, Oceania, and South America.
Because previous meta-analyses did not explore differences in the relationship
between math anxiety and math achievement at the country level, little is known about the
factors that may moderate this relationship, even though between-country differences in
socioeconomic prosperity could serve as a moderating variable. Empirical support for this
idea was provided in two large-scale studies (Tucker-Drob et al., 2014; Zheng et al., 2019). In
particular, the authors proposed that students in wealthy countries have more opportunities to
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 17
engage in science-related learning than those in poorer countries do. To test this hypothesis,
they examined how the national Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita moderates the
relationship between students’ science interest and science achievement. Consistent with their
expectations, they found stronger positive correlations between science interest and science
achievement in countries with high levels of GDP relative to countries with low levels of
GDP.
When applied to the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement,
stronger negative relationships can be expected for countries with higher levels of GDP
compared with countries with lower levels of GDP. Specifically, wealthier countries provide
more math-related learning opportunities. Individuals with high levels of math anxiety and
low levels of math achievement make less use of such learning opportunities, as such people
tend to avoid these opportunities. Thus, individual differences in math anxiety unfold into
individual differences in math achievement (and vice versa), resulting in a negative
relationship between these constructs. On the other hand, in poorer countries, there are fewer
math-related learning opportunities, and thus, fewer opportunities for individual differences in
math anxiety and math achievement to unfold, resulting in weaker negative relationships
between math anxiety and math achievement. This meta-analysis is the first to test this
hypothesis.
Trends Over Time and Changes Following the COVID-19 Pandemic. Research on
the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement has a long tradition spanning
more than 60 years. Over this time period, research instruments for assessing math anxiety
and math achievement have been refined, new instruments have been developed, and the age
range of the samples has been expanded, particularly into younger ages (Barroso et al., 2021;
Namkung et al., 2019). Alongside these methodological innovations, many changes in
educational, sociocultural, and economic factors have occurred across many countries,
including an increase in the curricular emphasis on students’ socioemotional learning and
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 18
development (Durlak et al., 2022; OECD, 2024) as well as an increase in national GDPs,
which may reflect increases in math-related learning opportunities (Tucker-Drob et al., 2014;
Zheng et al., 2019).
These methodological and substantive developments may have jointly affected the
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement, which may account for differences
in the correlations between these constructs across historic time. The meta-analyses by Ma
(1999) and Zhang et al. (2019) tested this hypothesis and found that the correlation between
math anxiety and math achievement was not associated with the year of publication for
studies published between 1978 and 1992 or between 2000 and 2018. However, there is
limited knowledge about long-term trends in the relationship between math anxiety and math
achievement because recent meta-analyses have either covered limited time periods or failed
to perform moderator analyses to examine how this correlation has changed over time.
Importantly, previous meta-analyses did not cover any primary studies published after
2018. Thus, there is a dearth of meta-analytic knowledge about potential changes in the
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement following the onset of the COVID-
19 pandemic in 2020. It is now well-documented that the major learning disruptions (starting
in 2020 and ending in most countries in 2022; Hale et al., 2021; OECD, 2021; UNESCO,
2022) that resulted from lockdowns, complete school closures, and distance learning were
negatively related to students’ levels of math achievement (Betthäuser et al., 2023), well-
being, mental health (Viner et al., 2022), and motivation (Benner et al., 2024). It is also well-
documented that cognitive and socioemotional support from teachers and parents can mitigate
some of the negative effects of low levels of math achievement on math anxiety and high
levels of math anxiety on math achievement (Chang & Beilock, 2016). However, during the
pandemic, math teachers had difficulties adapting their teaching to online learning conditions,
and parents were less effective in supporting their children in mathematics than in other
subjects (see Di Pietro, 2023, for a summary). Consequently, students received less cognitive
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 19
and socioemotional support in mathematics during the COVID-19 pandemic, which
potentially contributed to strengthening the negative relationship between math anxiety and
math achievement.
By contrast, the negative relationship between these constructs could also have
weakened. Some empirical support for this hypothesis was provided by Sydänmaanlakka et
al. (2024), who showed that the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement
became weaker during distance learning compared with learning in regular classes. This
finding may be explained by two interrelated mechanisms. First, the learning disruptions due
to the COVID-19 pandemic substantively decreased the number and quality of learning
opportunities in which individual differences in math anxiety and math achievement could
unfold. Furthermore, the learning disruptions also had a strong social component, as the
achievement of other students was less salient, and opportunities for social comparison
processes were reduced (Sydänmaanlakka et al., 2024). Yet, social comparisons with other
students are considered to be a major driver of math anxiety. All else being equal, the
likelihood of perceiving oneself as failing in math in comparison with other students in the
classroom is much higher in a class with a high average level of math achievement, resulting
in less favorable self-perceptions of mathematical achievement, lower levels of math self-
confidence, and thus, higher levels of math anxiety (Pekrun et al., 2019). Conversely, the
negative relationship between math anxiety and math achievement may have become weaker
during the pandemic because opportunities for unfavorable social comparison processes were
reduced.
Developmental Trends Across Grade Levels and Age Groups. Drawing on deficit
theory, early work on the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement
hypothesized that a noticeable association between these constructs should not exist before
Grade 4. Because early math curricula are usually not too taxing, students have likely not had
many negative experiences while engaging with math problems before Grade 4 (Maloney &
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 20
Beilock, 2012; Namkung et al., 2019). However, recent meta-analyses (Barroso et al., 2021;
Caviola et al., 2022; Namkung et al., 2019; J. Zhang et al., 2019) have consistently shown that
math anxiety is negatively related to math achievement across all grade levels/age groups
under investigation, and even at the beginning of primary education in Grades 1 and 2.
Nevertheless, findings on whether this relationship is moderated by grade or age have been
inconsistent. Whereas some meta-analyses found no significant moderating effect of grade
(Namkung et al., 2019), others found larger negative correlations in children than in adults
(Caviola et al., 2022) or correlations that varied across age groups (Barroso et al., 2021). In
particular, Barroso et al. (2021) distinguished six grade levels/age groups and identified
nonlinear patterns of significant differences: Whereas students in Grades 1 and 2 displayed an
− − −
average correlation of r = .26, the relationship shifted to r = .20 for Grades 3 to 5, r = .30
for Grades 6 to 8, and r = .34 for Grades 9 to 12. Interestingly, the strength of the correlation
for students in Grades 9 to 12 was about the same as for the nonstudent adult population (r =
− −
.32), but it was weaker for postsecondary students (r = .24). It is important to note that
previous meta-analyses did not provide results on developmental trends in the adult
population (e.g., young vs. middle adulthood).
Math Anxiety and Its Facets. Math anxiety has been conceptualized as a
multidimensional construct (Barroso et al., 2021; Namkung et al., 2019). However, the
nuanced perspective that is now prevalent in research on test anxiety has not yet been fully
adopted in the measures used in primary studies or meta-analyses on math anxiety. For
example, some widely used math anxiety instruments (e.g., the Mathematics Anxiety Rating
Scale and its derivates; Plake & Parker, 1982; Richardson & Suinn, 1972; Suinn & Edwards,
1982) focus only on the affective facet, as it manifests itself in different contexts, such as in
evaluative and learning situations. Other instruments cover both the worry and affective facets
(e.g., the Math Anxiety Questionnaire; Wigfield & Meece, 1988). Finally, the instrument with
the greatest construct breadth is the Achievement Emotions Questionnaire-Mathematics
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 21
(Bieleke et al., 2023; Frenzel et al., 2007), which measures all facets (but with different
numbers of items) in three contexts (learning in class, learning by oneself, evaluative/testing).
However, the authors of this instrument have proposed that a score that represents
individuals’ general math anxiety should be generated, an idea that implies that the
psychometric properties of scores for assessing the specific facets of math anxiety have yet to
be evaluated.
Previous meta-analyses were constrained by the measures applied in the existing
primary studies, preventing these studies from taking full advantage of the nuanced
conceptualization of math anxiety that includes four distinct facets. Instead, the moderator
analyses by Namkung et al. (2019) distinguished between measures of the worry facet
(referred to as the cognitive dimension) and the affective facet (referred to as the affective
dimension) or both of these facets. Furthermore, Barroso et al. (2021) differentiated between
measures that capture the worry facet, those that capture the broad affective-physiological
facet (referred to as emotionality) as defined in work by Liebert and Morris (Liebert &
Morris, 1967; Morris et al., 1981), and those that capture both of these facets. In doing so,
these meta-analyses found significant moderating effects of different facets of math anxiety,
yet with somewhat inconsistent results. Specifically, no significant differences in the
correlations between math anxiety and math achievement were found between measures that
assessed the worry or affective facets of math anxiety. However, Namkung et al. (2019) found
a stronger negative relationship for measures that assessed both the worry and affective facets
in one measure compared with measures that assessed only the affective facet. By contrast,
Barroso et al. (2021) found no significant differences in the correlations when measures
assessed the worry facet, the broad affective-physiological facet, or both of these facets.
Importantly, the constraints imposed by the results available in primary studies imply that
there is a lack of meta-analytic knowledge about the cognitive interference facet and the
physiological facet.
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 22
Math Achievement and Its Subdomains. Given the multidimensional nature of math
achievement, measures of math achievement have assessed different mathematics subdomains
that vary in content, difficulty, and complexity. Importantly, the negative relationship between
math anxiety on math achievement has been predicted to become stronger as math problems
become more difficult and complex and consequently more demanding of working memory
resources (Ashcraft & Kirk, 2001; Namkung et al., 2019). However, previous meta-analyses
have provided mixed results on this prediction. Barroso et al. (2021) found no significant
differences in the correlations between math anxiety and math achievement across different
subdomains of math achievement. By contrast, Zhang et al. (2019), Caviola et al. (2022), and
Namkung et al. (2019) found significant moderating effects of math subdomains that
supported the prediction. For example, in the meta-analysis by Namkung et al. (2019), the
negative correlations were found to be stronger for math measures that tapped advanced skills
than for those measuring basic skills.
Importantly, modern assessment frameworks of math achievement distinguish
between several content- and process-related subdomains, providing a nuanced understanding
of the math-related knowledge, procedures, and thinking processes necessary for successfully
completing math tasks and problems in a wide range of contexts (e.g., Mullis et al., 2016,
2020; OECD, 2023a). However, because previous meta-analyses failed to consider much of
the evidence provided by ILSAs, little is known about whether the strength of the relationship
between math anxiety and math achievement varies across these content-related or process-
related subdomains. For example, the content-based subdomain of calculus covers advanced
mathematical methods and concepts. Hence, the negative relationship between this subdomain
and math anxiety might be stronger than the relationships obtained for subdomains that are
introduced earlier in the mathematics curriculum (e.g., geometry or quantity and numbers).
Moreover, the process-related subdomain of reasoning requires complex mathematical and
cognitive processes to identify patterns and regularities in novel, unfamiliar situations. Thus, a
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 23
stronger negative relationship might be expected for this subdomain compared with
subdomains that require mathematical processes to solve familiar problems (the subdomain of
applying) or the retrieval of mathematical knowledge and procedures (the subdomain of
knowledge).
Gender Differences. On the basis of his review of empirical studies, Aiken (1970)
predicted that the correlation between math anxiety and math achievement would be stronger
for females than for males. By contrast, on the basis of the widely cited control-value theory
of academic emotions by Pekrun (2006), the relationship between math anxiety and math
achievement would be expected to be universal, and, thus, not moderated by gender (Frenzel
et al., 2007). Previous meta-analyses (Barroso et al., 2021; Caviola et al., 2022; Ma, 1999)
found some gender differences in this relationship that were not statistically significant.
However, these findings should be interpreted with caution. For one, the numbers of
studies and effect sizes included in previous meta-analyses have been relatively small (see
rather low (Craig Aulisi et al., 2023; Hedges & Pigott, 2004; Pigott, 2012). Furthermore,
when correlations are compared between males and females, such comparisons can be
distorted by differences in variances (Smithson & Shou, 2017). Specifically, gender
differences in the correlations between math anxiety and math achievement may reflect not
only differences in the relationships between these constructs but also gender differences in
the variance of math achievement, as such gender differences are well-documented in the
literature (Brunner et al., 2013). Finally, Barroso et al. (2021) compared the average
correlations in all-female and all-male samples to examine the moderating effects of gender.
However, this approach cannot conclusively determine how gender at the individual level
affects the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement. This intuition is well-
documented in the multilevel and meta-analytic literature and has been referred to by various
terms, such as ecological fallacy or ecological bias (Thompson & Higgins, 2002; see Online
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 24
Supplementary Material [OSM] 1 for further details). More specifically, the magnitude and
direction of the moderating effects may vary between the individual and sample levels. For
example, the negative relationship between math anxiety and math achievement can be
stronger for male than for female participants within each sample when weaker relationships
are observed in samples with larger proportions of male students.
Levels of Math Achievement. There is strong interest in the question of the extent to
which individuals’ math achievement moderates the relationship between math anxiety and
math achievement. First, previous research on the deficit theory has shown disproportionally
high levels of math anxiety in students with lower math achievement (Lai et al., 2015;
Passolunghi, 2011; Wu et al., 2014), suggesting that this group of students may be more
vulnerable to the negative effects of math anxiety (Barroso et al., 2021). To study the
moderating effect of low math achievement, Barroso et al. (2021) compared the correlations
obtained for samples of individuals with low and average math achievement. Contrary to the
initial expectation, the average negative correlation obtained for individuals with low math
achievement was found to be weaker than the correlation obtained for individuals with
average math achievement. However, this result should be interpreted with caution for several
reasons. For one, when studying the moderating effects of math achievement, a key question
is how to define such groups of individuals with low or high math achievement. However,
there is no consensus on the answer. Barroso et al. (2021) did not have access to the IPD of
the primary studies and thereby relied on the criteria used in the original studies. For example,
in one of the included studies, the individuals with low math achievement were defined as 13
fourth graders who scored below the average test score on a general achievement test (Ribeiro
et al., 2017). By contrast, another primary study defined individuals with low math
achievement as 120 university students who failed the university entrance exam and who had
to take remedial math courses (Aoude, 2013). In other words: The criteria for low math
achievement were not standardized across primary studies, thereby limiting the interpretation
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 25
of the results reported by Barroso et al. (2021). Moreover, Barroso et al. (2021) compared the
correlations obtained for samples of individuals with low and average math achievement. As
discussed above, such comparisons are at risk of ecological bias. Finally, as noted by Barroso
et al., the correlations in the samples with low math achievement could have been distorted by
the restricted range of math achievement, an issue that constitutes another limitation of their
results.
Second, some studies found that students with high levels of working memory
capacity were more susceptible to the negative effects of math anxiety on math performance.
These students tend to apply strategies that place high demands on working memory and that
are likely to fail when math anxiety interferes with the resources available for working
memory (Beilock, 2008; Beilock & Carr, 2005; Ramirez et al., 2013). Because individuals
with high levels of math achievement are likely to have high levels of working memory
capacity, Foley et al. (2017) expected a stronger negative relationship between math anxiety
and math achievement for this group. This hypothesis has not yet been tested meta-
analytically.
Third, the susceptibility to the negative effects of math anxiety may also depend on the
average level of math achievement in a sample. In particular, if individuals with lower levels
of math achievement are more susceptible (as proposed by the deficit theory), we would
expect that the negative within-sample relationship between math anxiety and math
achievement would be stronger in samples with lower average levels of math achievement.
On the other hand, if individuals with higher levels of math achievement are more susceptible
(as described above), we would expect that the negative within-sample relationship between
math anxiety and math achievement would be stronger in samples with higher average levels
of math achievement. This set of hypotheses has not yet been tested because meta-analyses
have not had access to reliable data on the sample-average level of math achievement.
The Present Study
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 26
The overarching goal of the present evidence synthesis was to gather new insights and
significantly advance the understanding of the relationship between math anxiety and math
that have been published in the last 60+ years, previous meta-analyses have provided
important insights into the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement.
However, these meta-analyses have also been restricted in the extents to which they could
address several key research questions because they (a) suffered from various methodological
issues (e.g., reliance on small, convenience samples; risk of distorted results from variance
restriction; low statistical power; ecological bias) and (b) were missing a significant portion of
the robust scientific evidence that ILSAs can provide on this relationship (see Tables 1 and 3).
To address these major limitations, we capitalized on a systematic collection of representative
ILSAs to conduct an IPD meta-analysis (Brunner, Keller, et al., 2023; Campos et al., 2023).
Specifically, we (a) carried out a systematic search for archival data from representative
ILSAs, (b) took advantage of these IPD to apply a standardized protocol for computing effect
sizes, and (c) integrated these effect sizes using meta-analytic methods. Our research strategy
was based on the approach originally developed by Hedges and Nowell (1995), who
advocated for the meta-analyzing of results and data from representative probability samples
because the random sampling process underlying these samples (a) effectively responds to the
threat of sample selection bias, (b) depicts the full heterogeneity of target characteristics
without variance restriction, and (c) ensures that results can be generalized to well-defined
target populations (Findley et al., 2021; Shadish et al., 2002). Furthermore, the large sample
sizes in ILSA data sets enable precise estimates of the relationship between math anxiety and
math achievement. Moreover, access to IPD means that the errors in effect sizes reported in
previous meta-analyses can be corrected, thereby reducing biases and unwanted heterogeneity
and enhancing the overall reliability of the meta-analytic results. Finally, using IPD,
ecological fallacies can be avoided by meta-analytically integrating within-sample differences
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 27
in the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement across subgroups (e.g., male
or female participants) obtained for each sample (as recommended by Riley et al., 2020).
previous meta-analyses was their ability to identify and examine several substantive
moderator variables. However, due to inherent methodological constraints, these analyses
often provided inconclusive or limited insights into the factors that might moderate the
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement. By leveraging its methodological
strengths, the present meta-analysis was aimed at providing novel insights and robust
empirical results on the moderating effects of (a) long-term historical trends, (b) the COVID-
19 pandemic, (c) between-country differences in economic prosperity, (d) grade levels and
age in school-aged and adult populations, (e) construct characteristics of math anxiety, (f)
construct characteristics of math achievement, (g) gender differences, (h) individual levels of
math achievement, and (i) sample-average levels of math achievement.
Finally, by conducting an IPD meta-analysis with ILSAs, we were able to conduct the
first exploration of how sample characteristics and contextual factors might moderate within-
sample moderating effects. For example, we were able to investigate how the moderating
effects of gender or individuals’ math achievement levels may further depend on factors such
as grade level, age, average math achievement level, or differences in socioeconomic
prosperity between countries.
Method
Systematic Search Strategy
To identify relevant ILSAs for the present meta-analysis, we first defined ILSAs as
surveys that (a) assessed knowledge, skills, or behaviors in a particular domain and (b) had
the goal of describing a target population or populations of interest (Kirsch et al., 2013). We
then formulated the following criteria to assess the eligibility of ILSAs: (a) The data
documentation was available in English so that we could (i) reduce potential errors in
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 28
translation or interpretation and (ii) ensure reproducibility for other researchers; (b) the data
were fully documented (i.e., at least a conceptual/assessment framework and a technical
report were available); (c) the data were available as of June 28, 2024; (d) math achievement
was assessed with a math-related assessment (not self-reported beliefs about math
achievement); (e) math anxiety was assessed, with at least one measure evaluating cognitive
(e.g., worry, cognitive interference), affective (e.g., nervousness, tension, fear, dread), or
physiological facets, or a combination of these; and (f) math achievement and math anxiety
were measured and matched by participant.
We searched for ILSAs conducted between 1959, which was the year of the first ILSA
(Kirsch et al., 2013), and 2024. To this end, we examined four major repositories of ILSA
data from June 14 to June 28, 2023, with an updated search conducted on July 11, 2024.
comparative-analysis-of-educational-achievement-compeat). Our search yielded 98 records of
19 duplicate records, we used the inclusion criteria to assess the eligibility of the remaining 79
ILSAs in the first round of screening. Screening of the ILSAs was performed independently
by two authors (i.e., MB and LK). In following Polanin et al.’s (2019) recommendations, we
evaluated eligibility hierarchically, meaning that if one rater decided that an exclusion
criterion was met, the ILSA record was ineligible, and screening was stopped. Because raters
reconciled disagreements throughout the evaluation process (as recommended by Polanin et
al., 2019), traditional reliability statistics were not calculated, as they would have required
[link]
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 29
independent ratings throughout the eligibility evaluation process. We searched the conceptual
or assessment frameworks, technical reports, or assessment questionnaires to check the
eligibility of the identified ILSAs. If these could not be found (in English), we used the fact
sheets provided by the repositories or the homepages of the specific ILSAs (see our
documentation on the OSF for more details). After applying the above inclusion criteria, we
removed 67 of the 79 ILSAs and identified 12 ILSAs (i.e., the assessment cycle[s] of ALL,
Having access to the IPD from ILSAs, we applied several decision rules to build up the
final data base for the present meta-analytic integrations in a second round of screenings. To
this end, we applied Brunner, Keller, et al.’s (2023) decision rules to select ILSA samples: (a)
If only one or more economic regions (but never the entire country) participated in a specific
ILSA cycle, the economic regions were included and analyzed (separately). (b) If one or more
economic regions and the corresponding country participated at the same time, only the
country was included and analyzed. (c) If one or more economic regions and the country
participated, but at different times, both were included and analyzed. (d) If two or more ILSA
samples that fulfilled Criteria a to c were available for a specific country in a specific ILSA
cycle, we selected the samples that were included in the international reports because those
samples provided the most accurate estimates of effect sizes. In particular, we excluded
TIMSS samples that applied special forms of computer-based assessments of mathematics or
that were used to establish a common metric for computer-based and paper-pencil tests of
mathematics. In addition, (e) we excluded samples that did not meet the data quality standards
set for a specific ILSA, and (f) we excluded samples when our data quality checks revealed
ALL is an acronym for the Adult Literacy and Life Skills Survey that was carried out by the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). PISA is an acronym for the Programme for International
Student Assessment that is carried out by the OECD. SIMS is an acronym for the Second International
Mathematics Study that was carried out by International Association for the Evaluation of Educational
Achievement (IEA). TIMSS is an acronym for the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study that is
carried out by the IEA.
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 30
problems (see OSM 2). More specifically, the consortia responsible for conducting the ILSAs
that we used performed extensive data cleaning and adjudication procedures to detect
irregularities or inconsistencies. Furthermore, we checked the distribution of math anxiety
items for values outside of the theoretically possible range and checked the plausibility of the
correlations between math anxiety and math achievement. On the basis of these data quality
checks, the only data we excluded were from Japan (Grade 7) in SIMS 1980, Albania in PISA
2012, and Indonesia and the Philippines in PISA 2022.
ILSA Samples
Specifically, the present meta-analysis is based on 12 ILSAs conducted between 1980 and
2022, providing IPD for a total of 2,583,628 participants from 452 probability samples across
Moderator Variables
moderator subcategories) that we used in the present meta-analysis.
Countries and National Gross Domestic Product per Capita
We used the country codes provided in the IPD from ILSAs to define the country and
geographical regions from which a sample originated. Furthermore, in accordance with the
work by Tucker-Drob and colleagues (Tucker-Drob et al., 2014; Zheng et al., 2019), we used
the time series data for the national GDP per capita (given in current U.S. dollars) provided by
The World Bank (2024) as a measure of a country’s socioeconomic prosperity. In our
analyses, we matched effect sizes to the national GDP values by the year in which the ILSA
data were collected. Furthermore, in our analyses, we applied a log10 transformation to the
GDP measure (log GDP), and we used the international mean and standard deviation
(computed across all countries listed in the data set) for log GDP in the year 2022 (i.e., the
most recent ILSA data) to compute the z-standardized log GDP. Notably, the World Bank
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 31
does not provide data for Taiwan. To impute data for this country, we applied the same
statistical procedures to compute the GDP per capita index using the most recent version of
2023).
Trends Over Time and the COVID-19 Pandemic
To study overall changes in the relationship between math anxiety and math
achievement, we used the year in which the ILSA data were collected as an indicator of time
and included a linear trend for time in the meta-regression models that we applied to study
moderating effects. Moreover, the latest PISA cycle in the year 2022 was carried out shortly
after the major learning disruptions (e.g., school closures, distance learning) during the
COVID-19 pandemic came to an end in most of the participating countries (Hale et al., 2021;
OECD, 2023c; UNESCO, 2022). To examine the moderating effects of the COVID-19
pandemic, we included a dummy variable in the meta-regression models where all ILSAs that
were carried out before 2020 were coded as 0 (before onset of the COVID-19 pandemic), and
all others (i.e., PISA 2022) were coded as 1 (after the COVID-19 pandemic).
Grade Levels and Adult Age Groups
To examine the moderating effects of grade levels and age groups, we distinguished
between students in elementary education (Grade 4), students in lower secondary education
(Grades 7, 8, 9, and 10), and students in upper secondary education (Grade 12) using indicator
variables for each grade level. Furthermore, drawing on the standard categorization of ILSAs
with adult populations (OECD, 2011), we created several age groups (i.e., below 25 years, 25
to 34 years, 35 to 44 years, 45 to 54 years, 55 to 65 years).
Math Anxiety and Its Facets
We investigated how vital characteristics of the math anxiety construct moderate its
relationship with math achievement. To this end, we used IPD from ILSAs to obtain theory-
driven scores for assessing general math anxiety and the facets of math anxiety. First, we built
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 32
on our conceptual framework of math anxiety to carefully examine the content of all math-
related items in the context questionnaires used in the ILSAs and identified the ones that
assessed math anxiety. Each math anxiety item was assigned to a specific facet of math
anxiety or categorized as a measure of general anxiety when its wording addressed both
cognitive and affective-physiological facets. Notably, all items were assigned to these
moderator categories by consensus following thorough discussion between two of the authors
(MB and LK). Second, when only a single item was available per facet, we used the score for
that item as the measure of the facet. For facets with multiple items, we computed sum scores
based on participants’ responses to those items. This procedure yielded scores for the worry,
cognitive interference, and affective facets. Of note, scores for the physiological facet could
not be derived due to the unavailability of relevant IPD. Third, we created a score for general
math anxiety. To do so, we either created a composite scale score from items assessing the
worry and affective facets (PISA 2003/2012/2022) and the cognitive interference and
affective facets (TIMSS 2015/2019) or used the available single-item measure of general
math anxiety (TIMSS 2011). The remaining ILSAs did not provide data for assessing
anxiety that we used in the present IPD meta-analysis along with their reliabilities (see OSM 3
for details).
Math Achievement and Its Subdomains
Drawing on modern assessment frameworks of ILSAs, we investigated how the
characteristics of math achievement may moderate its relationship with math anxiety. To this
end, we assigned the available math achievement test scores to content- and process-related
Notably, the item “I feel helpless when doing a mathematics problem” was originally included in the PISA
math anxiety scale. We excluded this item from further analyses because feelings of helplessness are associated
with perceptions of a lack of internal control and a high expectation of failing. By contrast, math anxiety is
linked to a partial lack of control and high uncertainty about the outcome (Pekrun, 2006). Thus, helplessness has
considerably stronger conceptual ties to the emotion of hopelessness (a deactivating emotion that reduces
motivation) rather than being a clear indicator of anxiety (an activating emotion that increases motivation;
Pekrun et al., 2011).
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 33
subdomains of math achievement (see also OSM 4). Additionally, we created a moderator
category for general math achievement when test scores reflected individuals’ performance
across multiple content- and process-related subdomains. These moderator categories were
assigned by consensus after thorough discussion between two of the authors (MB and LK).
OSM 3 and 4 for details).
Gender
IPD from all ILSAs included variables indicating participants’ gender in a binary
format (i.e., female vs. male).
Individuals With Low, Average, and High Math Achievement
There is no consensus on how to define low (Fuchs et al., 2004; Wästerlid, 2022) or
high math achievement (Neuendorf et al., 2023). Thus, we defined two groups of low-
achieving individuals, namely, with respect to a certain ILSA sample: individuals who scored
th th th
(a) at or below the 5 percentile and (b) above the 5 percentile and at or below the 25
percentile. Likewise, we defined two groups of high-achieving individuals, namely, with
th
respect to a certain ILSA sample: individuals who scored (a) above the 75 percentile and at
th th
or below the 95 percentile and (b) above the 95 percentile. Individuals with average
th th
achievement were defined as those scoring above the 25 percentile and at or below the 75
percentile.
Sample-Average Level of Math Achievement
The sample-average level of general math achievement was calculated by averaging
the math scores of individuals within each country-specific sample. Consequently, these
averages represent the math achievement levels specific to each country. To allow for
meaningful comparisons across samples from different ILSAs, we z-standardized these
sample averages using samples from Sweden as the reference group. Specifically, we used the
mean and individual-level standard deviation as obtained for the total target population in
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 34
Sweden in a specific ILSA cycle when z-standardizing the sample averages. For example, a
value of 0 indicates that a certain country-specific sample had the same average level of math
achievement as participants in Sweden, whereas a value of 1/+1 indicates that the sample
average of math achievement lies 1 SD below/above the average achievement level observed
for participants in Sweden. We used data from Sweden because it was the only country that
participated in all but one (i.e., ALL) of the ILSAs from which we used IPD for the present
meta-analyses. For ALL, we used the mean and standard deviation as obtained for Sweden in
the 2011/2012 cycle of the Programme for the International Assessment of Adult
Competencies (PIAAC) that used a math test with a commensurable metric.
Data Analysis
Two-Stage Meta-Analytic Approach
The ILSAs identified in our systematic search varied in several key characteristics
(e.g., different measures of math anxiety and math achievement, different numbers of
plausible values for math achievement, and varying approaches for computing standard
errors). Furthermore, the sheer amount of IPD would likely prevent the use of advanced
statistical methods (e.g., multiple imputation to handle missing data; see below) due to the
insufficient random-access memory of regular computers, a well-documented issue in Big
Data analyses. To effectively address these challenges, we conducted a two-stage meta-
analysis. This approach yields the same results as a one-stage meta-analysis that pools all IPD
into a single analysis, except in cases of sparse data, which we did not encounter here
(Brunner, Keller, et al., 2023; Campos et al., 2023). Specifically, we used the IPD to estimate
the target effect sizes separately for each sample in Stage 1. These effect sizes were then
meta-analytically integrated in Stage 2. To this end, we used the R statistical software (R Core
Team, 2024) and the R packages BIFIEsurvey version 3.4-15 (BIFIE et al., 2022), survey
version 4.2 (Lumley, 2004), clubSandwich version 0.5.8 (Pustejovsky, 2021), and metafor
version 4.0-0 (Viechtbauer, 2010).
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 35
Stage 1: Computation of Effect Sizes
Selection of Effect Sizes. Having access to the IPD from ILSAs requires a thoughtful
selection of the variables for computing effect sizes. Previous meta-analyses included a
heterogeneous collection of correlations that were based on measures that assessed different
facets of math anxiety and different subdomains of math achievement. In line with this
inclusion strategy, we computed correlations between all possible combinations of the math
anxiety (and its facets) and math achievement (and its subdomains) measures that were
included in the public use files of the ILSAs. Furthermore, to study the moderating effects of
individual levels of math achievement and gender, we followed Lopez-Lopez et al.’s (2018)
recommendations and computed effect sizes for general math achievement and the most
general measure of math anxiety available. These measures were available for all samples and
provided the best content coverage and the most reliable assessment of the target constructs.
Handling of Missing Data. In the first step of our effect-size calculations, we applied
multiply nested imputations to impute the missing data in our target variables (Weirich et al.,
2014) while taking into account the nested structure of the data (Grund et al., 2023). The
details of the imputation process can be found in OSM 5.
Estimation of Correlations as Effect Sizes for Total Samples. For all analyses that
involved effect sizes for the total sample, we computed correlations between math anxiety
(and its facets) and math achievement (and its subdomains). Following Borenstein and
Hedges’ (2019) recommendation, we used the Fisher z-transformed correlations (r ) as effect
sizes in the meta-analytic integrations. We then back-transformed the meta-analytic results
into the correlation metric.
Estimation of Regression Coefficients as Effect Sizes for Subgroup Comparisons.
To allow meaningful comparisons of effect sizes within and across samples, we first drew on
the IPD from each sample and z-standardized the most general anxiety and math achievement
measures for each ILSA cycle by using the population estimates of means and standard
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 36
deviations as estimates in each sample. The applied measures (indicated by an asterisk in
reliable assessment of the target constructs. Using the data for these measures, we then ran
separate regression models for each subgroup (within each sample) with math anxiety as the
outcome variable and math achievement as the predictor variable. Notably, using our
approach to standardize the measures of math anxiety and math achievement ensured that the
regression coefficients that depicted the subgroup-specific relationships between math anxiety
and math achievement would be fairly robust against differences in variance between
subgroups or variance restriction within subgroups (Cohen et al., 2003). Furthermore, the
standardization ensured that the results would be comparable (a) to the correlations obtained
for the corresponding total population and (b) across samples within and across ILSAs.
Specifically, to compare the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement
between male and female participants, we first computed separate regression coefficients for
Female Male
regression coefficient of b = –0.30 is equivalent to a correlation of r = –0.30 as obtained
Female
for the corresponding total sample (composed of all male and female participants). Then, we
computed the difference in regression weights as b = b – b , with positive values
Gender Female Male
of b indicating that, if both weights were negative, the regression weight for female
Gender
participants was weaker than the weight for male participants.
To test the moderating effects of low math achievement, we ran separate regression
th
Low5
th th
participants scoring above the 5 percentile but at or below the 25 percentile (b ), and
Low25
th th
average achievers scoring above the 25 percentile but at or below the 75 percentile (b ).
Ave
∆ ∆
Differences in regression weights were calculated as b = b – b and b =
Low5 Low5 Ave Low25
b – b , with positive values indicating smaller negative regression weights for low
Low25 Ave
achievers compared with average-achieving participants.
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 37
Similarly, for high-achieving participants, separate regression models were run (see
th th
th
percentile (b ), participants scoring above the 95 percentile (b ), and those with
High75 High95
average achievement as defined above. We then computed two differences in regression
∆ ∆ ∆
weights for each sample as b = b – b and b = b – b , with
High75 High75 Ave High95 High95 Ave
positive values indicating smaller negative regression weights for high-achieving than for
average-achieving participants in math.
Sampling Weights and Estimation of Standard Errors. In Stage 1, we took the
complex sampling design of ILSAs into account (Brunner, Keller, et al., 2023) when
estimating the effect sizes (i.e., Fisher z-transformed correlations, regression coefficients, and
group differences in regression coefficients), their standard errors, and their sampling
covariances. To this end, we implemented standard survey procedures (e.g., sampling weights
and replication techniques; Rust, 2014).
Stage 2: Meta-Analytic Integration
one or multiple target effect sizes were derived from the same samples depending on the
analytic goal, with samples nested within both countries and ILSAs (i.e., SIMS, PISA,
TIMSS, ALL). To account for these dependencies in our meta-analytic integrations, we used
random-effects models as working models, with model parameters estimated using the
specification details for these models (abbreviated as M1a to M8).
Meta-Analytic Averages and Heterogeneity of Effect Sizes. We fit intercept-only
cross-classified random-effects models (CCREM) to estimate the meta-analytic average effect
size and assess effect size heterogeneity. The model specification was adjusted by the number
of target effect sizes per sample. Specifically, when multiple target effect sizes were available
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 38
hierarchical structure (effect sizes nested within samples and samples nested within countries)
with a crossed random effect for the ILSA factor. Given that multiple target effect sizes were
derived from the same sample, we extended the model into a correlated effects (CE) model,
using the empirical sampling covariances between the effect sizes estimated in Stage 1
(Pustejovsky & Tipton, 2021). We refer to this model as CE-CCREM. The random effects
specified for target effect sizes, samples, and countries accounted for systematic variation in
effect sizes at these levels (e.g., variance in the correlation between math anxiety and math
achievement within the same sample, across different samples within the same country, or
between countries). The random effect for ILSAs accounted for dependencies among
correlations that may result from using the same or highly similar standardized procedures,
instruments, and scaling methods across assessment cycles, grade levels, or age groups within
the same ILSA. This model specification was used to compute meta-analytic averages for
Fisher z-transformed correlations r (M1a) and differences in regression coefficients between
participants with low/high and average levels of math achievement (M5f: b and b ;
Low5 Low25
∆ ∆
M7f: b and b ). When only a single target effect was available per sample (see
High75 High95
countries and a crossed-random effect for ILSAs. This model specification was applied in the
sensitivity analyses (M1b: r ; M1c : r ; M1c : r ); in the analyses of relationships
z Corrected z Uncorrected z
for individuals with low, average, or high levels of math achievement (M5a: b ; M5b:
Low5
b ; M5c: b ; M7a: b , M7b: b ; M7c: b ); when examining a single difference
Low25 Ave High75 High95 Ave
∆ ∆ ∆ ∆
between these groups (M5d: b ; M5e: b ; M7d: b ; M7e: b ); and in the
Low5 Low25 High75 High95
analyses of gender differences (M3a: b ; M3b: b ; M3c: b ).
Female Male Gender
The intercept-only models provided multiple measures for assessing the heterogeneity
of effect sizes (Borenstein et al., 2017). The standard deviations obtained for the random
effects depict the average deviation of the (true) effect sizes within ( ) and between samples
ES
σ σ σ
( ) as well as across countries ( ) and ILSAs ( ). The statistical significance of
Sample Country ILSA
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 39
the variance (i.e., the squared standard deviations) of specific random effects was tested using
The Q test statistic compares the target meta-analytic model against a more restrictive model
that represents the total variance attributable to random effects as zero (Sera et al., 2019;
Viechtbauer, 2010). A statistically significant value of Q is typically taken to indicate effect
size heterogeneity (Borenstein et al., 2017). The I statistic depicts the proportion of observed
heterogeneity in effect sizes that is real and not due to random noise. The intervals 30% ≤ I ≤
2 2
60%, 50% ≤ I ≤ 90%, and 75% ≤ I ≤ 100% can be used as rough guidelines for interpreting
the I values that indicate moderate, substantial, and considerable heterogeneity, respectively
(Higgins et al., 2021). Finally, the 95% prediction interval (PI) provides a plausible range of
values in which the true effect sizes of about 95% of all relevant populations will fall.
Meta-Regression Models for Studying Moderating Effects. To explain
heterogeneity among effect sizes, we expanded the intercept-only models into mixed-effects
hierarchical meta-regression models (with correlated effects when necessary) by excluding
the intercept terms. These meta-regression models retained the same correlated effects and
hierarchical random effects (HRE) structure as the corresponding intercept-only models but
did not include random effects for ILSAs. Instead, we accounted for this potential source of
dependencies by incorporating fixed effects (FE) for ILSAs in the meta-regression model (Y.
R. Lee & Pustejovsky, 2023). We refer to these models as CE-HREM-FE (M2a: r ; M6:
∆ ∆ ∆ ∆
b and b ; M8: b and b ) or HREM-FE models (M2b: r M2c : r ;
Low5 Low25 High75 High95 z; Corrected z
∆ 7
M2c : r ; M4: b ). Following Tipton et al.’s (2019b) best practice
Uncorrected z Gender
The tables for models M2a, M2b, M2c , M2c , M4, M6, and M8 in the OSF provide detailed
Corrected Uncorrected
results on the moderator analyses, along with additional results on the statistical significance of pairwise
contrasts between categories of the target moderator variable. Specifically, we used robust t tests to test for
statistical significance between all possible pairwise contrasts between the categories of a given target moderator
(Pustejovsky, 2021), and we used the Benjamini-Hochberg correction to adjust the p values for multiple
comparisons (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995).
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 40
regression models, a practice that allowed us to estimate the means for each target level of a
given moderator while adjusting for the effects of the remaining moderator variables and
controlling for potential confounding. We used robust variance estimation (RVE) to adjust the
sampling variances and the 95% confidence intervals for the meta-regression coefficients in
the moderator analyses to guard against the misspecification of the random effect structure
(Pustejovsky & Tipton, 2021). Specifically, we evaluated the moderating effects with a robust
Wald F test (using the approximate Hotelling’s T squared; Tipton & Pustejovsky, 2015). This
omnibus test evaluated whether there were any mean differences between the categories of a
target moderator variable (e.g., grade level) while controlling for all other moderator
variables. Furthermore, we used robust t tests to assess the statistical significance of each
level of each moderator. To this end, we implemented Bediou et al.’s (2023) approach, which
estimated adjusted target effect sizes (e.g., r ) for each target category (e.g., Grade Level 4)
adj
of a certain moderator variable while accounting for the remaining moderator variables that
served as control moderators. The adjusted effect sizes were computed by focusing on a
certain target moderator category when (a) the remaining categories of the target moderator
variable were all set to zero, (b) all categorical control moderator variables took on their
respective average values, (c) the sample-average levels of math achievement and GDP were
set to their median values, and (d) the linear trend across time was estimated for the year 2022
(i.e., the year of the most recent ILSA cycle). Furthermore, to illustrate how the average level
of math achievement in a sample/GDP per capita might affect the magnitude of the effect
sizes, we adapted Johnson and Huedo-Medina’s (2011) moving-constant technique and
estimated effect sizes for different positions in the distribution of sample-average levels of
Of note, the indicator variables for ILSAs (except for SIMS) contained information that was redundant with the
other moderator variables. Thus, these indicator variables for ILSAs were dropped when they were used as
control moderator variables. Furthermore, we do not provide details on the moderating effects of ILSAs in our
results presentation, as this moderator variable was used only to control for potential dependencies among effect
sizes
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 41
th th th th th
math achievement and (z-standardized log) GDP (i.e., the 5 , 25 , 50 , 75 , and 95
percentiles). We also used this approach to estimate effect sizes across time from 1980 to
2022 where the estimates were based on the linear trend of time in combination with the
variable that indicated whether ILSA data were collected before (i.e., 1980 to 2019) or after
the COVID-19 pandemic (i.e., 2022). Finally, to study the moderating effects of between-
country differences in M2a (target effect size: r ), M2b (r ), M2c (r ), M2c (r )
z z Corrected z Uncorrected z ,
∆ ∆ ∆ ∆ ∆
M4 ( b ), M6 ( b and b ), and M8 ( b and b ), we estimated (a) the
Gender Low5 Low25 High75 High95
variances of the corresponding random effects and (b) the country-specific random effects and
their 95% PI using the ranef() function of the metafor package in R (Stijnen et al., 2021). A
statistically significant difference between a country-specific estimate and the meta-analytic
average (controlling for all included moderator variables) was identified when the 95% PI did
not include zero.
Sensitivity Analyses
We conducted several sensitivity analyses to test the robustness of results and probe
for alternative explanations.
Accounting for Differences in the Number of Effect Sizes per ILSA. There were
substantial differences in the number of correlations available per sample across ILSAs. PISA
and TIMSS provided multiple effect sizes per sample by combining different facets of math
anxiety with various subdomains of math achievement, whereas both ALL and SIMS offered
procedures, PISA and TIMSS received more weight in the meta-analytic integrations of r in
M1a and M2a, and this weighting may have influenced substantive conclusions about the
average correlations and potential moderator effects. To test the robustness of the results, we
used a single Fisher z-transformed correlation per sample, derived from the most general
These measures were available for all 452 samples, providing the best content coverage and
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 42
the most reliable assessment of the target constructs. In these sensitivity analyses, we
employed an intercept-only CCREM model with random effects for samples and countries
and a crossed-random effect for ILSAs (M1b), along with an HREM-FE meta-regression
model (M2b). This approach ensured that ALL and SIMS received more weight compared
with the meta-analytic integrations with M1a and M2a.
Accounting for Measurement Error. All effect sizes were based on observed
measures that assessed math anxiety and math achievement. Overall, the reliabilities for these
in comparison with typical standards (e.g., with values of .70 or greater representing desirable
levels; see Schmitt, 1996). Furthermore, the median reliabilities of the single-item measures
of math anxiety were comparable to those observed for single-item measures of personality
(with average reliabilities ranging from .45 to .70; Spörrle & Bekk, 2014). Nevertheless, the
reliabilities of the applied math anxiety measures may have slightly attenuated the
correlations between math anxiety and math achievement, assuming that the true
measurement model for both constructs is a common factor model (Rhemtulla et al., 2020).
To get an impression of how the effect of attenuation may have affected our substantive
conclusions, we followed Zhang’s (2024) recommendation and specified confirmatory factor
analytic (CFA) models that included latent variables representing general math anxiety and
general math achievement to estimate the correlations (and corresponding Fisher’s z values)
OSM 3). Notably, two or more indicators of each latent variable (i.e., math anxiety and math
achievement) per sample are required to identify latent variables in CFA. Thus, from the IPD
used in this evidence synthesis, we selected the subset that met this requirement (i.e., all PISA
cycles and the TIMSS 2015 and 2019 cycles in Grades 4 and 8). Drawing on this subset of
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 43
data from 328 samples , we tested the robustness of results by comparing the meta-analytic
results for Fisher z-transformed correlations that were corrected for measurement error versus
those that were not. To this end, for each set of correlations, we used the specification of
random effects as applied in M1b and M2b to specify intercept-only models
(M1c /M1c ) and meta-regression models (M2c /M2c ).
Corrected Uncorrected Corrected Uncorrected
Analysis for Possible Bias
We used Ahmed et al.’s (2012) procedure and evaluated several sources of potential
bias in the effect sizes that were computed using the IPD from ILSAs, including reviewer
selection bias, publication-related bias, and data availability bias. Furthermore, we assessed
the asymmetry in the distribution of effect sizes and their standard errors by (a) generating
funnel plots and (b) carrying out Egger and Egger sandwich tests (Rodgers & Pustejovsky,
2021; see Atit et al., 2022, for an application), where we added the standard errors of the
target effect sizes as moderator variables to the intercept-only models (i.e., M1a, M3c, M5f,
M7f) and mixed-effect models (i.e., M2a, M4, M6, and M8).
Research Transparency and Open Science
Because we used public use files from ILSAs, institutional review board approval was
not required. Ethical considerations related to ILSA data, such as parental consent and
authorization by ministries of education, were handled by the scientific consortia responsible
for collecting the data. Participants in all ILSAs were informed about the nature of the test and
the test date, and parental consent was obtained where necessary (Martin et al., 2016; OECD,
2005). We did not preregister our review or analyses. The effect sizes and the R code are
available through the OSF, and the ILSA raw data can be accessed from the websites run by
the OECD, IEA, COMPEAT, and Statistics Canada. For more information on the R
Notably, for the Grade 8 samples from South Korea in TIMSS 2015 and 2019, the CFA models yielded
improper solutions, as the reliability estimates for math anxiety exceeded 1. These samples were excluded from
the meta-analytic model estimations for M1c , M1c M2c and M2c
Corrected Uncorrected, Corrected Uncorrected.
compeat/studies-before-1995/second-international-mathematics-study-1980), PISA 2003
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 44
packages we used (e.g., to manage the data and create graphs), see OSM 6. We initially used
GPT-4o mini (OpenAI, 2024) for language editing while writing drafts. Subsequently, the
paper was reviewed and edited by an experienced native-speaking manuscript editor. Finally,
we conducted a thorough review and verification of the content in the final manuscript.
Results
Novel and Robust Evidence on the Relationship Between Math Anxiety and Math
Achievement
The present meta-analysis was based on up to 7,867 high-quality effect sizes from 452
the current evidence base with the effect size data from previous meta-analyses revealed little
and robust evidence that has not been previously meta-analyzed.
The Correlation Between Math Anxiety and Math Achievement
Meta-Analytic Average and Heterogeneity of Effect Sizes
Overall, the meta-analytic average correlation across k = 7,867 effect sizes (M1a) was
− − −
r = .26 with 95% CI [ .30, .23], demonstrating that higher levels of math anxiety were
The Q statistic and the percentage of true variance (I = 96) indicated heterogeneity in effect
sizes. Specifically, heterogeneity was present within samples ( = 0.04, p < .001), between
ES
repository/TIMSS/TIMSS2015/TIMSS2015_IDB_SPSS_G4.zip), TIMSS 2015 Grade 8
repository/TIMSSAdvanced/TA2015/TA2015_IDB_SPSS_Mathematics.zip), TIMSS 2019 Grade 4
repository/TIMSS/TIMSS2019/TIMSS2019_IDB_SPSS_G8.zip). Of note, the PISA 2003 and 2012 files are in
an ASCII format for which SAS or SPSS control files are available at the cycle-specific data repositories. The
public use file for ALL can be requested from Statistics Canada
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 45
σ σ
samples ( = 0.06, p < .001), between countries ( = 0.06, p < .001), and between
Sample Country
ILSAs ( = 0.04, p < .001). The 95% PI that accounted for these sources of heterogeneity
ILSA
ranged from r = –.44 to r = –.07.
The sensitivity analyses revealed that similar results were obtained when synthesizing
only the correlations between the most general measures of math anxiety and math
Corrected
M1c showed that the subset of negative correlations corrected for measurement error
Uncorrected
was, on average, somewhat stronger and more heterogeneous, as indicated by the 95% PI.
Moderating Effects
Between-Country Differences and GDP per Capita. Math anxiety was negatively
associated with math achievement across all countries. However, the strength of this
association varied, as indicated by the observed heterogeneity ( ) at the country level for
Country
M1c , and M1c demonstrated that this finding was robust to different ways of
Corrected Uncorrected
handling the data (considering all correlations vs. only those for the most general measures) as
well as to corrections for measurement error.
Some of the variation between countries could be explained by the national GDP per
capita. Specifically, a higher GDP per capita was significantly associated with stronger
7). For example, in countries with (z-standardized log) national GDP per capita at the 5th and
95th percentiles, the (adjusted) correlations were r = –.22 and r = –.28, respectively. The
corresponding meta-regression coefficient indicates that an increase of 1 SD in (z-
standardized log) GDP per capita was associated with a decrease of of r = –.03 in the (within-
sample) correlation. The sensitivity analyses using M2b yielded similar results. Furthermore,
comparing the results for M2c with M2c showed a similar descriptive pattern
Corrected Uncorrected
for the moderating effect of GDP per capita. Of note, the meta-regression coefficient was no
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 46
longer statistically significant (p = 0.19) when the correlations were corrected for
measurement error.
Finally, after controlling for the moderator variables in M2a, significant between-
Country
meta-analytic average, the adjusted average correlation between math anxiety and math
achievement was significantly stronger in New Zealand, Canada, Norway, Estonia, Denmark,
Poland, and the Czech Republic, whereas it was a weaker in Italy, Belgium, South Korea,
Japan, Indonesia, Israel, and Bahrain.
Trends Over Time and the COVID-19 Pandemic. We observed a robust negative
correlation between math anxiety and math achievement from 1980 to 2019, with the linear
time trend that was close to zero during this period (p = .15; M2a). However, as shown in
(adjusted) correlations were r = –.27 before the COVID-19 pandemic and r = –.20 after the
COVID-19 pandemic. The sensitivity analyses confirmed this pattern of results for M2b,
M2c and M2c .
Corrected Uncorrected
Grade Levels and Adult Age Groups. Across all grade levels and age groups, math
ages of 35 and 44 years (r = .32); the weakest relationship was found for Grade 7 students
adj
(r = .21). Notably, the robust Wald F test for M2a was not statistically significant,
adj
suggesting that the observed differences across grade levels and age groups might be due to
chance. Additionally, a similar pattern of results was observed in the sensitivity analyses for
M2b, M2c and M2c . In summary, these findings indicate that the correlations
Uncorrected Corrected
between math anxiety and math achievement were largely consistent across all grade levels
and adult age groups.
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 47
Sample-Average Level of Math Achievement. Descriptively, higher country-
specific sample-average levels of math achievement were associated with slightly stronger
negative relationships between math anxiety and math achievement within each sample
average level of math achievement was at the 5th and 95th percentiles, the adjusted
correlations were r = –.24 and r = –.27, respectively. However, the corresponding meta-
regression coefficient was not statistically significant (p = .06; model M2a), suggesting that
the observed differences across sample-average levels of math achievement may be due to
chance. A similar pattern emerged in the sensitivity analyses for model M2b. Comparing
results for models M2c with M2c showed that correcting for measurement
Corrected Uncorrected
error only marginally affected the size of the meta-regression coefficient. Overall, these
findings indicate that the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement was of
similar magnitude regardless of a country’s average level of math achievement.
Math Anxiety and Its Facets. General math anxiety and all its facets were negatively
for M2a indicated statistically significant differences across the facets of math anxiety. The
strongest negative (adjusted) relationship was observed for the cognitive interference facet
− −
(r = .29); the weakest relationship was found for the worry facet (r = .20).
adj adj
Math Achievement and Its Subdomains. The results for M2a showed that math
anxiety was negatively correlated with general math achievement and all its subdomains
differences in these correlations across subdomains. However, the differences were modest:
Adjusted average correlations ranged from r = .27 (e.g., general math achievement,
adj
knowing) to r = .23 (calculus).
adj
Gender Differences in the Relationship Between Math Anxiety and Math Achievement
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 48
Meta-Analytic Averages and Heterogeneity of Effect Sizes. The meta-analytic
average relationship between math anxiety and math achievement was negative, with similar
− −
magnitudes for female (b = 0.27; M3a) and male participants (b = 0.28; M3b;
Female Male
Gender
heterogeneity in effect sizes which was present within samples ( = 0.01, p = .04) and
Sample
σ σ
between countries ( = 0.02, p < .001), but not between ILSAs ( = 0.00, p = .29).
Country ILSA
The 95% PI that accounted for these sources of heterogeneity ranged from b = –0.04 to
Gender
b = 0.04.
Gender
Moderating Effects. Gender differences in the relationship between math anxiety and
math achievement were minimal (M4): (a) across all grade levels and age groups and (b)
robust Wald F tests indicated no significant effects of these moderator variables. Furthermore,
the size of the gender differences did not depend on the sample-average level of math
achievement or GDP per capita. However, we observed a statistically significant trend, with
b becoming a stronger positive value over time. For example, whereas the negative
Gender
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement was stronger for female than male
∆ ∆
participants in 1980 (adjusted b = –0.08), it was zero in 2010 (adjusted b = 0.00),
Gender Gender
and weaker for female than male participants in 2022 (adjusted b = 0.02). Finally, after
Gender
controlling for the moderator variables, we observed between-country differences in M4
( = 0.02, p < .001). The adjusted average relationship between math anxiety and math
Country
achievement was a significantly stronger negative relationship for female participants in
Canada, Iceland, and Turkey, whereas it was a significantly stronger negative relationship for
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 49
Differential Relationships Between Math Anxiety and Math Achievement for
Participants With Low Versus Average Math Achievement
Meta-Analytic Average and Heterogeneity of Effect Sizes. The meta-analytic
average within-sample relationship between math anxiety and math achievement was negative
− −
for groups of individuals with low math achievement (b = 0.14, M5a; b = 0.24;
Low5 Low25
Ave
with average achievement, the negative (within-sample) relationship was significantly weaker
for individuals with low math achievement ( b = 0.15 with 95% CI [0.07, 0.23], M5d;
Low5
∆ ∆
Low25 Low5
and b may vary widely. However, these differences could also be due to chance, given
Low25
the nonsignificant Q statistics.
Moderating Effects. Nonsignificant robust Wald F tests and robust t tests for meta-
regression coefficients in M6 indicated that b was not significantly moderated by (a)
Low
grade levels and age groups, (b) time, (c) whether the study took place before or after the
Low
significantly related to the criterion used to define low math achievement and the sample-
individuals with low and average math achievement in the relationship between math anxiety
and math achievement were less pronounced when comparing average-achieving individuals
th th
with individuals who scored above the 5 percentile but at or below the 25 percentile
(adjusted b = 0.10) than when comparing average individuals with individuals who
Low
th ∆
scored below the 5 percentile (adjusted b = 0.17). Furthermore, the difference in the
Low
relationship between individuals with low and average math achievement became larger as
the sample-average level of math achievement increased. For example, the average within-
sample difference in this relationship was adjusted Δb = 0.08 for samples with average
Low
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 50
levels of math achievement at the 5th percentile and adjusted Δb = 0.19 for samples at the
Low
95th percentile. Finally, we observed some between-country differences after controlling for
the moderator variables ( = 0.04, p = .01). Specifically, the difference in the
Country
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement between individuals with low and
To sum up, the present findings indicate that the negative relationship between math
anxiety and math achievement was stronger for individuals with average math achievement
compared with those with low levels of math achievement. The magnitude of the difference in
this relationship remained fairly consistent across grade levels, age groups, time, and GDP per
capita but increased with a more stringent selection criterion for defining low math
achievement and with rising sample-average levels of math achievement.
Differential Relationships Between Math Anxiety and Math Achievement for
Individuals With High Versus Average Math Achievement
Meta-Analytic Average and Heterogeneity of Effect Sizes. The meta-analytic
average within-sample relationship between math anxiety and math achievement was negative
− −
for groups with high math achievement (b = 0.33, M7a; b = 0.26; M7b) and
High75 High95
Ave
differences between individuals with average and high levels of math achievement in the
∆ −
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement were close to zero ( b = 0.03
High75
− ∆ −
High95
∆ ∆
The 95% PIs suggest that b and b may vary widely. However, the differences for
High75 High95
∆ ∆
b and b were likely due to chance, given the nonsignificant Q statistic.
High75 High95
Moderating Effects. The robust Wald F tests and robust t tests for meta-regression
coefficients in M8 indicated statistically significant moderating effects for b with regard
High
to (a) grade levels and age groups, (b) whether the study took place before or after the
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 51
achievement, and the GDP per capita were not statistically significant.
Specifically, the negative average (within-sample) relationship between math anxiety
and math achievement was weaker for individuals with high rather than average math
∆ ∆
achievement in Grades 4 (adjusted b = 0.14) and 12 (adjusted b = 0.12), as well as
High High
for those between 35 and 44 (adjusted b = 0.13) or 45 and 54 years of age (adjusted
High
b = 0.09). Conversely, it was stronger for individuals with high rather than average math
High
achievement in Grades 9–10 (adjusted b = –0.07). In other grade levels and age groups,
High
the relationship was not statistically significantly different between individuals with high and
average math achievement. Moreover, before the COVID-19 pandemic, the negative
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement was weaker for those with high
math achievement than those with average math achievement (adjusted b = 0.04),
High
whereas it was stronger afterward (adjusted b = –0.07). Furthermore, differences in the
High
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement depended on the selection criterion.
Differences between individuals with high and average math achievement were close to zero
th th
when comparing average-achieving individuals with those scoring between the 75 and 95
percentiles (adjusted b = 0.00). By contrast, the negative relationship was significantly
High
th
weaker for individuals scoring above the 95 percentile compared with those with average
math achievement (adjusted b = 0.05). Finally, after controlling for the moderator
High
variables, we observed between-country differences ( = 0.05, p < .001). The difference
Country
in the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement for individuals with high
versus average math achievement was significantly larger in Canada and smaller in Malaysia
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 52
In summary, math anxiety was negatively related to math achievement in individuals
with both high and average levels of math achievement. This pattern remained fairly
consistent across time, sample-average levels of math achievement, and GDP per capita
levels. However, a complex pattern of moderating effects emerged, indicating that the
differences in the math anxiety-achievement relationship between individuals with high and
average levels of math achievement were moderated by (a) grade levels and age groups, (b)
whether the study took place before or after the COVID-19 pandemic, and (c) the selection
criterion used to define individuals with high levels of math achievement.
Analysis for Possible Bias
In accordance with Ahmed et al. (2012), we assessed three potential sources of bias
that can affect the size and heterogeneity of effect sizes. First, the reviewer selection bias
reflects the bias that would be present if the pool of IPD did not reflect the entire evidence
base (Ahmed et al., 2012). This bias is especially likely to occur when IPD are not identified
by a systematic review and when the selection of the data takes place with knowledge of
results for specific countries (see Ahmed et al., 2012). However, this kind of bias was
minimized because our IPD meta-analysis was based on a systematic search in which we
identified the data sets comprising the highest quality IPD that met the inclusion criteria.
Second, when applied to our meta-analysis, publication-related bias would refer to bias that
could occur if data from countries with significantly larger or smaller relationships between
math anxiety and math achievement had not been published in the public use files (see Ahmed
et al., 2012). In all the ILSAs included in this meta-analysis, the countries that participated in
a certain ILSA cycle were registered, and their participation was fully documented in
corresponding reports (e.g., OECD, 2023b). If data for a certain country in a certain ILSA
cycle met predefined quality standards, these data were included in the corresponding public
use files that we used to estimate the effect sizes with IPD from ILSAs. Consequently,
publication-related biases were not likely to affect the present results. Third, when applied to
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 53
our meta-analysis, data availability bias would be present if IPD were unavailable for some
countries or participants within countries (Ahmed et al., 2012). ILSAs set high-quality
standards for collecting representative probability samples that are applied in all participating
countries. Furthermore, because we excluded IPD when these quality standards were not met,
the data sets included in the present meta-analysis were representative of the target population
in each country. Thus, any bias in sampling leading to distorted relationships between math
anxiety and math achievement was minimized. However, in the context of ILSAs, data
availability bias was reflected in the fact that not all countries around the world participated in
these assessments. To address this sort of data availability bias, we compared key
characteristics of countries that participated in the ILSAs that we selected for the present
meta-analyses and countries that provided data on these indicators but did not participate in
of the Human Development Index (d = 1.35) and a considerably higher average gross national
income per capita of about $25,000 USD. In addition, people in these countries had, on
average, a much higher life expectancy (about 10 more years) and a higher level of education
(they completed about 4 more years of schooling).
Asymmetry in the Joint Distribution of Effect Sizes and Their Standard Errors
Visual inspection of the funnel plots for the IPD meta-analyses with ILSAs did not
indicate a strong degree of asymmetry in the distribution of effect sizes and their standard
controlling for moderator variables, supporting the conclusion that “small-sample” bias was
not an issue in the present IPD meta-analyses, which drew on large, representative samples
Discussion
Synthesizing Novel and Robust Scientific Evidence on the Relationship Between Math
Anxiety and Math Achievement
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 54
Previous meta-analyses have significantly enhanced the understanding of the
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement. However, as Tables 1 and 3 show,
these analyses were limited in scope and reliability due to factors such as reliance on small,
convenience samples (e.g., college students or participants from Western countries), and
various methodological constraints, including the risk of distorted estimates due to variance
restriction, low statistical power, and ecological bias. To tackle these challenges, we
systematically used, for the first time, a comprehensive collection of IPD from representative
ILSAs to synthesize robust scientific evidence on the relationship between math anxiety and
math achievement from 1980 to 2022. In doing so, this IPD meta-analysis incorporated a
significantly larger number of effect sizes, samples, and countries, and the majority of these
Consequently, this evidence synthesis offers both novel insights and the most reliable,
generalizable findings to date on the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement
The Average Relationship Between Math Anxiety and Math Achievement
The present meta-analysis identified an average correlation of r = −.26, which
indicated that higher levels of math anxiety were associated with lower levels of math
achievement (and vice versa). This meta-analytic average remained largely consistent
regardless of which data treatment had been used, whether all correlations had been used or
only those from the most general measures of math anxiety and math achievement, and
whether measurement error had been corrected or not. By using representative samples from
ILSAs, this IPD meta-analysis supports the existing body of knowledge by corroborating the
averages obtained in previous meta-analyses on this topic.
The meta-analytic average correlation between math anxiety and math achievement
may seem to be only moderate by conventional standards in psychology (e.g., Cohen, 1992),
but, on the basis of established benchmarks in the field of educational research (Brunner,
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 55
Stallasch, et al., 2023; Hill et al., 2008), it is very meaningful. This becomes evident when
comparing the meta-analytic average correlation from the present study with correlations
between socioeconomic status and educational outcomes, which are highly relevant to policy.
Specifically, correlations between students’ socioeconomic status and their achievement
center on a value of r = .30 (Brunner, Stallasch, et al., 2023; Sirin, 2005)––a value that is
similar in strength to the meta-analytic average correlation found between math anxiety and
math achievement. Furthermore, individuals with low/high levels of math anxiety are often
defined as scoring /+ 1 standard deviation below/above the mean of the applied anxiety
measure (Ashcraft & Moore, 2009). In adopting a regression perspective, the meta-analytic
− −
average correlation translates into an (expected) average performance gap of 0.26 ( 0.26) =
0.52 standard deviations between low and high math-anxious individuals on standardized
measures of math achievement. To assess the magnitude of this difference, it can be compared
with average yearly learning gains in mathematics, which, for example, in K-12 education in
the United States (Hill et al., 2008), range from 0.01 standard deviations (Grades 11 to 12) to
1.14 standard deviations (Kindergarten to Grade 1). Thus, the performance gap between high
and low math-anxious students is quite substantive because it represents at least 46% (i.e.,
0.52 SD/1.14 SD) of such learning gains in mathematics.
Moderating Effects on the Relationship Between Math Anxiety and Math Achievement
Our meta-analytic analyses revealed heterogeneity in effect sizes. To clarify and better
understand the sources of this heterogeneity, we built on and extended previous meta-analyses
in order to conduct a series of moderator analyses. Importantly, the present pattern of
moderating effects reveals several similarities with, but also notable differences from, the
results of these previous studies. When interpreting these differences, it is essential to
The expected z-standardized value of math achievement can be computed as where β
represents the standardized regression coefficient that is equal to the correlation coefficient r, and is the z-
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀
𝑧𝑧̂ 𝑧𝑧̂ = 𝛽𝛽 ∙ 𝑧𝑧
standardized value of math anxiety. Hence, using the meta-analytic average r = −.26, the expected value for
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀
𝑧𝑧
individuals with low levels of math anxiety, where z = −1, is . The expected
MAX
value for individuals with high levels of math anxiety, where z = +1, is .
MAX
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀
𝑧𝑧̂ = −.26 ∙ (−1) = .26
𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀
𝑧𝑧̂ = −.26 ∙ (+1) = −.26
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 56
consider that variations in results are likely due to the combined effects of several substantive
and methodological factors, such as the application of somewhat different coding schemes for
moderator variables, the inclusion of different data sets in the meta-analytic integration, or
Countries and Their Socioeconomic Prosperity
The present meta-analysis found that math anxiety was negatively related to math
achievement across all countries, although the strength of this association varied by country,
consistent with the results reported in the meta-analysis by Barroso et al. (2021). It is
plausible that socioeconomic differences and variations in educational systems moderate the
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement (see Eccles & Wigfield, 2020;
Pekrun, 2024). Drawing on the work by Tucker-Drob and colleagues (Tucker-Drob et al.,
2014; Zheng et al., 2019) we expected and observed a stronger negative relationship between
math anxiety and math achievement in countries with higher levels of GDP per capita
compared with those with lower levels of GDP per capita. Specifically, we hypothesized that,
compared with poorer countries, wealthier countries provide more math-related learning
opportunities. Because individuals with high levels of math anxiety and low levels of math
achievement are more likely to avoid math-related learning opportunities, the availability of
more such opportunities allows individual differences in math anxiety to have a greater
impact on differences in math achievement (and vice versa). This situation consequently leads
to a stronger negative relationship between these constructs. However, given that GDP per
capita is only a distal measure of math-related learning opportunities, future research should
employ more direct measures to gather further support for this hypothesis.
Importantly, the moderating effect of GDP per capita suggests that the relationship
between math anxiety and math achievement may have a potentially stronger negative impact
in wealthier countries, affecting individuals’ educational and occupational career trajectories
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 57
(due to avoidance behavior) as well as economic growth in STEM fields (due to workforce
shortages).
Furthermore, even after adjusting for all moderator variables under investigation,
between-country differences remained, with stronger negative relationships in Canada, New
Zealand, and several Scandinavian and Eastern European countries. There were weaker
negative relationships in several countries in East, Southeast, and Western Asia. On the basis
of the available data, we can only speculate about potential explanations. For example,
cognitive interference and reciprocal theory predict that math anxiety impairs the learning of
mathematics in the classroom (Carey et al., 2016; Namkung et al., 2019). Thus, these effects
may be moderated by students’ experiences in the classroom (Pekrun, 2024; Ramirez et al.,
2018). For example, higher levels of confidence in mathematics teachers—such as their
ability to inspire students, demonstrate various problem-solving strategies, and support
struggling learners—have been linked to weaker negative relationships between math anxiety
and math achievement (Lau et al., 2022). Furthermore, instructional research by Helmke
(1988) suggested that the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement is weaker
when teachers focus on reviewing previously learned material, provide previews of upcoming
lessons, and avoid creating a “test-like” classroom environment with a strong emphasis on
success and failure (e.g., by minimizing evaluations by teachers or classmates). In summary,
future research could explore whether educational systems that prioritize these instructional
strategies help students manage both the cognitive and affective demands of math learning
more effectively, potentially leading to a weaker negative correlation between math anxiety
and math achievement. Additionally, integrating the archival data from this evidence
synthesis with key indicators of education systems (e.g., OECD, 2022) may provide further
insights into how institutional characteristics moderate the between-country variation in the
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement. For example, variations in
educational systems regarding how and when students are placed into different academic
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 58
tracks on the basis of their achievement may moderate social frames of reference and related
social comparison processes (Salchegger, 2016), which are expected to influence the
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement (Pekrun et al., 2019).
Trends Over Time and the COVID-19 Pandemic. The relationship between math
anxiety and math achievement has been studied for over 60 years. During this time, both
methodological innovations (e.g., refined assessments of math anxiety and math achievement)
and substantive developments (e.g., increasing curricular emphasis on socioemotional
learning and greater math-related learning opportunities associated with rising GDP per
capita) may have led to variations in the strength of the correlations between these constructs
(Barroso et al., 2021; Durlak et al., 2022; Namkung et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2019).
The present meta-analysis revealed a complex pattern in how this relationship has
evolved over time. Specifically, in line with previous meta-analyses (Ma, 1999; J. Zhang et
al., 2019), a consistent negative relationship between math anxiety and math achievement was
observed from 1980 to 2019, but this relationship was significantly weaker following the
COVID-19 outbreak in 2020. Thus, there was no support for the hypothesis that major
learning disruptions would lead to a stronger negative association between math anxiety and
math achievement when coupled with significantly reduced support from teachers and parents
(Di Pietro, 2023). Instead, this finding may be explained by at least two interrelated
mechanisms. First, the learning disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic significantly
reduced both the number and quality of learning opportunities (Di Pietro, 2023; OECD, 2021;
UNESCO, 2022). When these opportunities are diminished, individual differences in math
anxiety and math achievement are less likely to unfold, resulting in a weaker negative
relationship between them. Second, these disruptions also had a strong social component: The
achievement of other students became less visible, and opportunities for social comparison
were reduced (Sydänmaanlakka et al., 2024). Because social comparisons with other students
are a major driver of math anxiety (Pekrun et al., 2019), the decrease in the opportunities for
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 59
such comparisons during the pandemic may have contributed to reducing the magnitude of the
negative relationship between math anxiety and math achievement.
Notably, the results observed after the COVID-19 outbreak were based on data from
students in Grades 9–10 from PISA 2022. Therefore, future research should investigate the
replicability of the reduced negative relationship observed after the pandemic across other
grade levels and age groups. Additionally, it is important to examine whether the strength of
this association will remain at its current level or will return to pre-COVID levels. Analyzing
future ILSAs will be a valuable approach to addressing these questions. Moreover, although
the proposed mechanisms are plausible, they remain tentative. To further explore these
mechanisms and other potential factors that may explain changes in the association due to the
COVID-19 pandemic, significant progress can be made by employing statistical models
(Gangl, 2010; Imbens, 2024) and the quasi-experimental toolbox for causal reasoning
(Shadish et al., 2002; West, 2009). It will be crucial to use data that include variations in the
onset, duration, and extent of learning disruptions. These data can be longitudinal, with
multiple measurement points for each participant (e.g., before, during, and after the
pandemic), or cross-sectional, provided that the timing of measurement (reflecting different
durations of learning disruptions) is not related to participant characteristics.
Developmental Trends Across Grade Levels and Age Groups
Taking a developmental perspective, the present meta-analysis found that math
anxiety was significantly, negatively associated with math achievement across primary, lower,
and upper secondary education, as well as in adult age groups up to 65 years. Furthermore,
although some variations in this relationship were found across grade levels and age groups,
the moderating effect was not statistically significant. Thus, these differences were likely due
to chance. This pattern of results is in line with the meta-analysis by Namkung et al. (2019)
for school-aged populations but is not consistent with other meta-analyses that demonstrated
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 60
moderating effects within the student population (Barroso et al., 2021) or between school-
aged students and adults (Barroso et al., 2021; Caviola et al., 2022).
Using representative ILSAs, this meta-analysis is limited to the populations covered in
these assessments and therefore does not apply to populations of preschool children, students
below Grade 4 in primary education, or adults over the age of 65. However, previous research
has shown that math anxiety and math achievement are negatively related in children before
Grade 4. Specifically, Barroso et al.’s (2021) meta-analysis indicated a significant negative
correlation for students in Grades 1 and 2. This correlation was similar in size to the
correlation observed for students in Grade 4 in the present meta-analysis. Furthermore, recent
primary studies have extended this knowledge, revealing negative relationships for children in
U.S. kindergarten (Lu et al., 2021) and UK preschool (Petronzi et al., 2019).
In summary, the present results highlight the importance of considering the
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement as a lifespan phenomenon.
However, significant knowledge gaps remain. First, more empirical evidence is needed to
corroborate the predictions and replicate initial findings on how individual and contextual
factors, as well as their interplay, make children vulnerable to developing math anxiety. For
example, it is well-documented that preschool children demonstrate considerable individual
differences in early math abilities (OECD, 2020) that are predictive of their later math
achievement in school (La Paro & Pianta, 2000). Thus, according to deficit and reciprocal
theory, children with low levels of early math abilities are at great risk of developing math
anxiety. Moreover, some key socioemotional and cognitive child characteristics, such as high
levels of general trait anxiety (Svraka et al., 2024) or low working memory capacity (Moran,
2016), are predicted to represent general risk factors for developing math anxiety. Finally,
parents and teachers play an important role, as they can offer math-related learning
experiences to foster and respond to children’s math-related interests and behaviors (e.g.,
counting, playing with geometric shapes or quantities). In this respect, parents’ and preschool
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 61
teachers’ math-related beliefs and their own math anxiety may lead to differential learning
experiences, which are predicted to initiate, maintain, and increase children’s math anxiety
(Becker et al., 2022; Boehme et al., 2017; Carkoglu et al., 2023; Chang & Beilock, 2016;
Galeano et al., 2024). Second, despite the demographic trend in Western societies with an
increasing number of people over the age of 65, research on the relationship between math
anxiety and math achievement in older adults is lacking. An important task for future research
is to study this relationship in the older population, specifically how it interacts with cognitive
aging (Tucker-Drob, 2019) and the associated limitations in working memory (Bopp &
Verhaeghen, 2005, 2020) and math knowledge (Kavé et al., 2022).
Math Anxiety and Its Facets
Building on recent work in the field of text anxiety (Putwain et al., 2021), the present
meta-analysis approached math anxiety from two perspectives. First, it was conceived as a
broad, general construct that encompasses both cognitive and affective-physiological facets.
Second, it was considered a multidimensional construct that includes worry, cognitive
interference, affective, and physiological facets. General math anxiety, along with the worry,
cognitive interference, and affective facets, was significantly and negatively associated with
math achievement. Additionally, we found that the weakest relationship was with the worry
facet, whereas stronger, similar negative relationships were observed for the cognitive
interference and affective facets as well as general measures of math anxiety. An important
direction for future research is to explore the physiological facet of math anxiety, which could
not be examined in this meta-analysis due to limitations in the available IPD.
Our results have several important implications. First, further research is needed to
improve the understanding of the mechanisms through which math anxiety impairs math
performance. The differential relationships observed between the worry facet (with weaker
negative correlations) and the cognitive interference and affective facets (both with stronger
negative correlations) suggest that the widely discussed mechanism wherein worry and self-
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 62
deprecating thoughts deplete the limited resources in working memory (Carey et al., 2016;
Eysenck et al., 2007; Namkung et al., 2019; Suárez-Pellicioni et al., 2016) cannot fully
explain the debilitating effect of math anxiety on math performance. Instead, the present
results suggest that stronger or additional debilitating effects are likely associated with
mechanisms related to the cognitive interference facet, the affective facet, or both.
Specifically, the robust negative relationship observed for the cognitive interference facet
highlights how math anxiety disrupts a key function of working memory (Chang & Beilock,
2016; Eysenck et al., 2007), namely, individuals’ goal-directed attention (Engle, 2002;
Oberauer, 2019), as evidenced by difficulties concentrating or confusion (Li et al., 2023;
Putwain et al., 2021). Furthermore, the robust negative relationship observed for the affective
facet suggests that negative emotional reactions have detrimental effects on brain activity
(e.g., in the amygdala), which in turn impairs functioning in brain regions (e.g., the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex) involved in efficient working memory and cognitive processing
(Foley et al., 2017; Ramirez et al., 2018).
Second, this pattern of moderating effects is novel and has not been observed in
previous meta-analyses on the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement,
likely due to the unavailability of relevant data in primary studies. Furthermore, the present
meta-analytic results diverge from meta-analytic findings in the realm of general test anxiety,
as these previous findings revealed stronger negative relationships with test performance for
the worry facet than for the broad affective-physiological facet of test anxiety (Von Der
Embse et al., 2018). In summary, these empirical inconsistencies highlight the need to
consider math anxiety and general test anxiety as distinct constructs. They also point to the
need for further research to identify the factors that may explain these differences.
In summary, the present findings underscore the importance of considering math
anxiety as a multidimensional construct and highlight the necessity for measures of math
anxiety to include all its facets. This approach is crucial for fully capturing its conceptual
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 63
breadth and understanding how each facet is differentially related to math achievement.
Consequently, future research should focus on developing, refining, and utilizing measures
that reliably assess these specific facets of math anxiety. Ideally, these measures should assess
the facets of math anxiety not only in relation to mathematics in general (e.g., “I feel nervous
about mathematics”) but also across various contexts (Bieleke et al., 2023; Hopko et al.,
2003) that differ in their evaluative nature (Helmke, 1988) and their potential to stimulate
social comparisons with others (Pekrun et al., 2019). These contexts include evaluative tests
(e.g., “I feel nervous about taking math tests”), classroom learning (“I feel nervous in my
math class”), and self-directed study (“I feel nervous when learning math on my own”) for
student populations. For adult populations, the contexts extend to work-related and public
settings (e.g., “I feel nervous when using math at work”; “I feel nervous when using math in
front of others”) as well as to private settings (e.g., “I feel nervous when facing math
problems on my own at home”).
To build cumulative knowledge, authors of primary studies should ideally share their
 
raw data in public repositories or report for each context correlations with math
achievement for each facet, in addition to general math anxiety. Specifically, including the
physiological facet in primary studies and subsequent meta-analyses could address a
limitation of both the current meta-analysis and all previous meta-analyses, as none of them
examined the relationship between the physiological facet of math anxiety and math
achievement. Notably, incorporating the physiological facet offers promising research
opportunities by enabling multimethod approaches that combine self-reports with objective
measures (Daker et al., 2023; Roos et al., 2021). For example, metrics such as heart rate, heart
rate variability, and blood pressure measured with smartwatches (Masoumian Hosseini et al.,
2023) offer a noninvasive and continuous way to assess individuals’ arousal in relation to
math anxiety in real-life situations (e.g., in the classroom, during tests, or at work).
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 64
Finally, future research should carefully consider how the interrelations between the
facets of math anxiety, both within and across contexts, can be represented in measurement
models that capture the target construct(s) and account for measurement error. Measurement
models that capture general math anxiety (e.g., single-factor or composite models) may be
particularly useful for deriving test scores that represent individuals’ overall level of math
anxiety in counseling and intervention contexts. Furthermore, a key substantive point is that
the measurement model should reflect the distinctive nature of the facets and their
interrelations (Rhemtulla et al., 2020). Measurement models that capture the distinctiveness of
the facets include multidimensional factor models and bifactor/nested-factor models (Brunner
et al., 2012; Gogol et al., 2017), as well as composite models and psychometric network
models (Borsboom et al., 2021; Rhemtulla et al., 2020). Employing these models, particularly
in experimental and longitudinal research, will provide deeper insights into the interplay
among the facets of math anxiety and their relationships to math achievement.
Math Achievement and Its Subdomains
Drawing on contemporary assessment frameworks of math achievement (e.g., Mullis
et al., 2016, 2020; OECD, 2023a), we examined various conceptualizations of math
achievement, including general math achievement as well as content- and process-related
subdomains. Our meta-analytic integration revealed that math anxiety was negatively related
to all subdomains of math achievement as well as to general math achievement, with similar
strength. Interestingly, there were only minor differences across the content- and process-
related subdomains, despite expectations that stronger negative relationships might be
observed in more complex and demanding content-related subdomains introduced later in the
curriculum (e.g., calculus) or in process-related subdomains requiring more cognitively
demanding math-related processes in novel situations (e.g., reasoning). Overall, the present
pattern of findings highlights that math anxiety impairs not only problem-solving in novel
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 65
situations but also the acquisition, retrieval, and application of mathematical facts and
procedures in familiar contexts and curricular domains introduced early in math education.
Each measure of math achievement used in ILSAs covered a broad spectrum of
difficulties and complexity. However, these measures were associated with two limitations
that restricted the ability of the present meta-analysis to address the inconsistencies found
across previous studies. First, math achievement was assessed with standardized tests in a
low-stakes research setting, where individuals’ test results held no significant personal
consequences. One might expect the correlation between math anxiety and math achievement
to be stronger in the kinds of assessment situations that tend to induce high levels of anxiety
(Barroso et al., 2021; Namkung et al., 2019). For example, it would be logical to expect
higher levels of anxiety when failure on a math assessment has far-reaching personal
consequences, such as course or final exam grades in math or for high-stakes math
assessments (e.g., when test scores on the math portion of the SAT or ACT are used for
college admission) than for low-stakes math assessments (e.g., homework assignments or test
scores in research settings). However, previous meta-analyses have provided only partial
support for this prediction. Namkung et al. (2019) found that the average correlation between
math anxiety and math achievement was significantly stronger when the math measure was
used for grading than when it was not used for grading. However, Barroso et al. (2021) found
no significant differences in the magnitude of the correlation between high-stakes tests and
standardized tests that were used for research purposes. In addition, and contrary to
expectations, they found that the negative correlation was significantly stronger when the
math measure was a standardized test that had no direct consequences compared with exam
grades that carried a lot of weight. To address these inconsistencies, future meta-analyses
would likely benefit from combining IPD from ILSAs and AD from primary studies, while
utilizing the present analytic strategy to investigate moderating effects (see also the
“Strengths, Limitations, and Future Directions for Advancing Theory and Research” section).
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 66
By doing so, these meta-analyses can compare the relationships between math anxiety and
math achievement when achievement is measured by grades versus when it is measured by
low- and high-stakes standardized tests.
Second, the measures of math achievement applied in ILSAs did not provide test
scores for foundational mathematical subdomains (e.g., number sense or single-digit
computations below 10). Some meta-analyses have suggested that the negative association
between math anxiety and math achievement becomes less pronounced as the difficulty,
complexity, and working memory demands of math problems decrease (Caviola et al., 2022;
Namkung et al., 2019; J. Zhang et al., 2019). By contrast, other studies have found no
significant moderating effects (Barroso et al., 2021). In this regard, an important task for
future research is to better understand the task characteristics that may exacerbate or mitigate
the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement. To this end, future studies
could draw inspiration from research examining how the working memory demands of
intelligence tasks influence the relationship between item performance and working memory,
for example, by leveraging methods such as cognitive demand analysis, verbal protocols, eye-
fixation patterns, error analysis, and neuroimaging (Carpenter et al., 1990; Conway et al.,
2003), as well as psychometric findings (Frischkorn & Oberauer, 2021). Additionally, teacher
complexity ratings (Pettersen & Braeken, 2019) could be used to investigate how various
characteristics of math problems (e.g., demands for mathematical modeling or reasoning)
influence the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement. Gaining such
knowledge could be particularly valuable for educators and could help them anticipate and
address challenges in learning and evaluation situations for students with high levels of math
anxiety.
Gender Differences
On the basis of the results of a series of studies, Aiken (1970) expected a stronger
negative relationship between math anxiety and math achievement for women and girls than
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 67
for men and boys. By contrast, Pekrun’s (2006) control-value theory of academic emotions
predicted that the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement would be
universal and would therefore not be moderated by gender. Overall, the present meta-analysis
found that math anxiety was negatively associated with math achievement to similar degrees
for males and females. This finding is consistent with previous meta-analytic results and
remained stable across different grade levels and age groups, variations in the average math
achievement levels of samples, and differences in national GDP per capita. However, gender
differences in the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement have evolved over
time. Prior to 2000, there was a stronger negative relationship for females than for males.
After 2010, the trend reversed, showing a somewhat stronger negative relationship for males
than for females. By 2022, the gender difference in this relationship appeared to have
approached zero. Interestingly, the present findings reveal that scientific results and
hypotheses are embedded in their respective historical contexts, which need to be considered
when evaluating their contributions. Specifically, the observed trend suggests that there was a
stronger negative relationship between math anxiety and math achievement for girls and
women than for boys and men around 1970 when Aiken formulated his expectation. By the
time Pekrun made his prediction, however, gender differences in this relationship had
diminished to nearly zero.
We can only speculate about potential factors that might explain this observed trend as
well as the between-country variation in gender differences in this relationship that remained
after the moderator variables had been accounted for. One possible explanation could be the
significant increase in the numbers of female students participating in advanced math courses
(e.g., calculus) in high school as well as in mathematics programs at the university level,
compared with 1970 (National Center for Education Statistics, 2022). Today, young women
represent over 40% of the total number of students enrolled in mathematics and statistics
programs in tertiary education in many countries (Eurostat, 2024; U.S. Department of
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 68
Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 2022b). This development has likely been
associated with changes in the cultural milieu, including changes in gender roles and
stereotypes in mathematics, as well as shifts in the beliefs of socializers, such as parents and
teachers, about gender differences in mathematics. These changes may have differentially
influenced the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement for females and
males (see Eccles & Wigfield, 2020; Ramirez et al., 2018). Moreover, despite an overall trend
of decreases in gender differences in enrollment rates, substantial differences remain across
countries. Further research is needed to examine the proposed mechanisms, such as by using
archival data on gender-related stereotypes in science and mathematics (Nosek et al., 2009) or
national indicators of gender equity (Else-Quest & Grabe, 2012). These approaches could
help in the investigation of how temporal trends in stereotypes or differences in gender equity
between countries are linked to the observed patterns in gender differences in the relationship
between math anxiety and math achievement.
Levels of Math Achievement at the Individual and Sample Levels
There has been increasing interest in understanding how math achievement levels
moderate the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement. In this paper, we
tested three hypotheses in this context and explored how moderating effects at the individual
level are associated with sample characteristics and contextual factors.
Individuals With Low Levels of Math Achievement. Previous research on deficit
theory has demonstrated disproportionately high levels of math anxiety in students with lower
math achievement (Lai et al., 2015; Passolunghi, 2011; Wu et al., 2014), suggesting that this
group may be more vulnerable to the negative effects of math anxiety (Barroso et al., 2021).
Contrary to this prediction, but consistent with Barroso et al.’s (2021) results, the present
meta-analysis revealed that there was a stronger negative relationship between math anxiety
and math achievement for individuals with average math achievement than for those with low
math achievement. Interestingly, this pattern parallels findings on the relationship between
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 69
math self-concept and math achievement, as these findings for math self-concept indicate that
its relationship with math achievement was weaker for students with low levels of math
achievement (Keller et al., 2021). This weaker relationship was explained by low-achieving
math students applying self-protective strategies to maintain a favorable math self-concept
(Alicke & Sedikides, 2009; Keller et al., 2021). As individuals draw on their math self-
concepts to evaluate math-related situations and activities (Pekrun, 2006; Ramirez et al.,
2018), the favorable math self-concepts of individuals with low math achievement may
mitigate the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement. This mitigation may
lead to a reduction in the strength of the negative relationship for this group of individuals
relative to individuals with average math achievement.
Individuals With High Math Achievement. Foley et al. (2017) expected that
individuals with high math achievement may be more susceptible to the negative effects of
math anxiety because they often rely on strategies that place high demands on working
memory, as such strategies are likely to fail when math anxiety interferes with the resources
available for working memory. Consequently, a stronger negative relationship between math
anxiety and math achievement was anticipated for this group. However, the results of this
meta-analysis provided little empirical support for this hypothesis in high achievers. By
contrast, the observed patterns for individuals with low and average levels of math
achievement supported the prediction that the negative relationship between math anxiety and
math achievement becomes stronger as math achievement levels increase. Notably, this
increase was not linear across the full range of math achievement; the average strength of the
relationship for high achievers was largely comparable to that of individuals with average
math achievement. These findings suggest that the detrimental effect of math anxiety may
initially intensify as math achievement increases but tends to plateau in individuals with
average and high math achievement.
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 70
A potential explanation for this pattern may lie in the influence of social comparison
processes, math self-concept, and appraisal mechanisms on math anxiety. Individuals with
very high levels of math achievement who compare their performances with those of lower
achieving peers may develop lower levels of math anxiety and higher math self-concepts.
Hence, social comparison processes and associated appraisal mechanisms may mitigate the
negative relationship between math anxiety and math achievement in this group. These
mechanisms could explain why (a) the relationship between math anxiety and math
achievement plateaus in high achievers and (b) individuals scoring above the 95th percentile
demonstrated even a somewhat weaker negative relationship compared with those scoring
above the 75th percentile but at or below the 95th.
Sample-Average Level of Math Achievement. If susceptibility to the negative
effects of math anxiety varies with math achievement levels, the sample-average level of math
achievement could moderate the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement
within each sample. However, our moderator analysis indicated that this relationship was
generally consistent across varying sample-average levels. Although we observed a slightly
stronger negative relationship with increasing sample-average levels, inferential testing
suggested this moderating effect may be due to chance. Notably, our analyses provide no
evidence that higher sample-average levels of math achievement are associated with weaker
negative relationships between math anxiety and math achievement.
One possible explanation for this pattern of results is that several mechanisms might
exert opposing effects on the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement. In
particular, academically thriving countries with higher average math achievement tend to
offer more opportunities to learn advanced mathematics, supported by curricula and
instruction that emphasize complex problem-solving (OECD, 2014). Consequently, a larger
proportion of individuals in these countries may adopt math problem-solving strategies that
place greater demands on working memory. Such strategies may become less effective when
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 71
math anxiety impairs working memory, potentially leading to stronger negative relationships
between math anxiety and math achievement in these countries. However, this effect may be
counterbalanced if educational systems in these countries emphasize instructional strategies
(e.g., supporting struggling learners; Helmke, 1988; Lau et al., 2022) that mitigate the
relationship between these constructs. Together, these opposing effects could result in similar
relationships between math anxiety and math achievement across varying sample-average
levels of math achievement. However, additional research is necessary to further elucidate
these mechanisms.
Exploratory Moderator Analyses. Exploratory moderator analyses indicated that the
moderating effects of individuals’ math achievement levels may be contingent on sample
characteristics and contextual factors. Given the novel nature of these findings, we present
conjectures and preliminary explanations with the aim of facilitating a deeper understanding
of these potential influences.
Sample-Average Level of Math Achievement. Our results indicated that, in countries
with higher sample-average math achievement levels, the relationship between math anxiety
and math achievement was more pronounced for individuals with average versus low math
achievement. One explanation is that academically thriving countries (with higher average
levels of math achievement), opportunities for math-related learning expand (OECD, 2014).
Consequently, there are more situations in which math achievement becomes relevant, leading
to experiences of success and failure, along with associated social comparison and appraisal
processes. This, in turn, may strengthen the negative relationship between math anxiety and
math achievement in individuals with average math achievement, while students with low
math achievement may employ self-protective strategies to preserve a positive math self-
concept (Alicke & Sedikides, 2009; Keller et al., 2021). Taken together, these mechanisms
could explain the increased disparity in the relationship between math anxiety and math
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 72
achievement between low and average achievers in countries with higher average math
achievement levels.
Grade Level. The moderating effects of grade levels identified for the comparison of
individuals with high and average math achievement may be attributable to the differences in
the demands that math problems place on working memory resources, as such demands have
been found to affect the impact of math anxiety on math performance (Ashcraft & Kirk, 2001;
Namkung et al., 2019). For example, math assessments in earlier grade levels are less
complex than math assessments in higher grade levels. Thus, earlier math assessments might
be less demanding of working memory resources. Likewise, the working memory demands of
math problems in the TIMSS assessments (administered in Grades 4, 8, and 12) might be
lower than those in the PISA assessments (administered in Grades 9 and 10). This difference
arises because the PISA math tests are generally considered more challenging than the
curriculum-based TIMSS tests (Else-Quest et al., 2010).
COVID-19 Outbreak. After the COVID-19 outbreak, the negative relationship
between math anxiety and achievement increased in strength for high achievers. This shift
likely occurred as lockdowns and learning disruptions reduced opportunities for social
comparisons, which may have otherwise mitigated anxiety for individuals with high levels of
math achievement.
Directions For Future Research. Overall, this meta-analysis provides strong
evidence that individual levels of math achievement may moderate the within-sample
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement. However, the observed patterns
underscore the need for further research to better explain the underlying mechanisms and the
moderating effects that have been identified as well as to empirically substantiate our
proposed conjectures and preliminary explanations of these effects. To this end, future studies
could benefit from: (a) examining diverse samples that include a broad range of math
achievement levels; (b) incorporating math problems of varying difficulty and complexity,
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 73
such as those used in the PISA assessments; and (c) collecting data on moment-to-moment
math anxiety alongside measures of social comparison and appraisal processes, emotion
regulation, and applied math problem-solving strategies. Such research designs could offer
deeper insights into how math anxiety differentially affects math performance across
individuals with varying levels of math achievement.
Strengths, Limitations, and Future Directions for Advancing Theory and Research
The present evidence synthesis embodies several key strengths. It provides novel,
reliable, and generalizable findings on the average relationship between math anxiety and
math achievement and key moderating factors. In discussing these moderating effects, we
have highlighted how the robust empirical findings from this meta-analysis not only establish
important insights but also identify constraints and boundary conditions. These insights serve
as a valuable foundation for guiding future theoretical developments aimed at better
understanding the dynamics between these constructs (see Eronen & Bringmann, 2021).
Nevertheless, as is the case for any study, this meta-analysis has several limitations.
Some limitations specific to the moderating effects have already been discussed. This section
addresses more general issues that provide nuances for interpreting the current results and
propose broader directions for future research.
Using IPD From Future ILSAs to Enhance the Generalizability of Results
Compared with previous meta-analyses, the results of the present meta-analysis offer a
considerably wider reach due to the much larger number of countries we included. However,
the sample of countries was still skewed toward those with higher educational and
socioeconomic resources, thus limiting the generalizability of the results. Additionally, except
for ALL, the IPD were predominantly obtained from student populations in elementary, lower
secondary, and upper secondary education. As a result, the available data restricted the scope
have been conducted regularly to assess adult populations, such as the Programme for the
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 74
International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC), and student populations in
specific regions, such as the Latin American Laboratory for Assessment of the Quality of
Education (LLECE) in Latin America and the Southern and Eastern Africa Consortium for
Monitoring Educational Quality (SACMEQ) in Africa. If these ILSAs were to expand their
background questionnaires to include measures of math anxiety, future IPD meta-analyses of
the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement would greatly benefit from
synthesizing these additional data.
Synthesizing Results From More Complex Models to Capture Nonlinear Relationships
To study how gender or individuals’ math achievement levels may moderate the
relationship between math anxiety and math achievement, we compared regression
coefficients (i.e., slope parameters) as obtained from separate linear regression models that we
specified for each gender as well as for individuals with low, average, and high levels of math
achievement. Given its parsimony, we used the linear regression model as a starting point
from which to explore the potential moderating effects of these individual characteristics.
However, the application of more complex regression models (e.g., restricted cubic spline
functions; Harrell, 2015) that allow for potential nonlinear relationships between these
constructs may offer an even better way to approximate their empirical relationships. Thus,
future research may be able to provide a more nuanced understanding of the moderating
effects of individual characteristics on the relationship between math anxiety and math
achievement by using such models to compute the target effect size(s) for each sample in
Stage 1 of a two-stage meta-analysis. In Stage 2, within-sample differences in slope
parameters as obtained between multiple target points (e.g., the difference in slope parameters
th th
obtained at the 5 and 50 percentiles of math achievement) can be synthesized by using
pointwise meta-analytic integrations. Alternatively, multivariate meta-analytic models that
synthesize the model-implied regression relationships across the full range of math
achievement can be used (Marlin et al., 2023).
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 75
Synthesizing IPD from ILSAs With AD From Primary Studies and Previous Meta-Analyses
This meta-analysis of IPD from representative ILSAs yielded novel and robust
evidence on the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement. This evidence
highlighted the sensitivity of this relationship to construct characteristics, as well as to
individual and contextual factors. Additional insights into this relationship may be gained by
combining meta-analytic AD with IPD from ILSAs. For example, AD meta-analyses often
incorporate effect sizes from postsecondary populations (e.g., college students). Furthermore,
statistical models for integrating AD and IPD within a single meta-analysis are well-
established (Campos et al., 2023; Pigott et al., 2012). However, an effective implementation
of these models requires a robust foundation of information and considerable additional effort.
First, authors of primary studies should provide easy access to the relevant raw data, ideally
by storing it in public repositories. Doing so facilitates the validation of results presented in
these studies, allows potential errors to be corrected, and enables the computation of effect
sizes that are often not reported (e.g., facets of math anxiety, subdomains of math
achievement, demographic subgroups). Additionally, authors should report information on the
sample’s country of origin, the time of data collection, the quality of the samples (e.g.,
selection mechanisms, range restrictions), and the reliability of the applied measures. Second,
for meta-analyses that rely on AD, it is essential to incorporate this information from primary
studies, to consistently define sample or study features that could introduce dependencies in
effect sizes (e.g., countries), and to develop comprehensive archives that compile effect sizes
and moderator variables across meta-analyses while identifying any duplicate data (Burgard et
al., 2022). Third, these archives should also facilitate access to the full texts of primary studies
and relevant codebooks, which are crucial for coding new moderator variables, verifying
previous codings, and harmonizing moderator variables across meta-analyses. Currently,
these conditions are rarely fully met (e.g., Green et al., 2011; Polanin, 2018; Wicherts et al.,
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 76
2006). Thus, we strongly encourage researchers to provide access to their data and
supplementary information.
Implications for Policy and Practice
Mathematical literacy is essential for everyone; however, the relationship between
math anxiety and math achievement can impair individuals’ full participation in a democratic
society, hinder their educational and career development, and limit their agency in daily life.
High levels of math anxiety are found across the entire distribution of math achievement at all
ages. Thus, even top-performing math students who experience anxiety may avoid future
learning opportunities that focus on math, consequently avoiding STEM fields that are
considered highly relevant to individual well-being (e.g., as they provide better earning
opportunities) and societal well-being (e.g., as people working in STEM develop science and
technology to solve pressing societal problems). Furthermore, employers should recognize
that math anxiety is not confined to school-aged students but is also prevalent in the adult
workforce. This anxiety can negatively impact a company’s success by impairing employees’
performance on math-related tasks or causing them to avoid training and promotional
opportunities that involve mathematics, thereby limiting their contributions and growth in the
organization.
Policies and practices are needed to help individuals manage their math anxiety
throughout their lives. For instance, to reduce students’ math anxiety and enable them to reach
their full potential in mathematics, educators need reliable and valid assessment tools to
evaluate both math anxiety and math achievement (Urhahne & Wijnia, 2021). To assist
individuals suffering from math anxiety, effective intervention approaches should be
implemented—both at school and beyond—customized for each person, and ideally
introduced at a very young age to disrupt the cycle of math anxiety and poor math
performance. These interventions can be individualized (e.g., by supporting individuals’
emotions and cognition; Sammallahti et al., 2023) and curriculum-based (e.g., by supporting
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 77
students’ socioemotional learning at school; Durlak et al., 2022). They can even be
implemented at low cost and with a light touch (e.g., expressive writing about one’s math
anxiety before a test; Park et al., 2014; Rozek et al., 2019).
Finally, educational policymakers should recognize the global prevalence of math
anxiety across all age groups, the strong negative association between math anxiety and math
achievement, and the evidence that this association becomes more pronounced in
economically thriving countries. Consequently, large-scale assessments (e.g., TIMSS, PISA,
LLECE, SACMEQ, PIAAC) should routinely collect data on both math achievement and
math anxiety. Such reliable information is essential for policymakers to develop and refine
evidence-based policies and programs aimed at reducing math anxiety, improving
mathematical literacy, and addressing workforce shortages in STEM fields.
Conclusion
One of the founding fathers of the meta-analytic enterprise, Gene Glass, envisioned
that “[m]eta-analysis needs to be replaced by archives of raw data that allow the construction
of complex data landscapes that depict the relationships among independent, dependent, and
mediating variables” (Glass, 2015, p. 230). This paper responds directly to Glass’s vision by
leveraging and synthesizing a systematic collection of representative IPD from ILSAs to
examine the relationship between math anxiety and math achievement. By combining the
strong evidence provided by ILSAs with advanced evidence synthesis methods, we have
begun to construct such a “landscape” to better understand how these constructs are
interrelated. Our analysis revealed negative relationships between math anxiety and math
achievement, observed to varying degrees across countries, grade levels, age groups, and
genders; among individuals with low, average, and high math achievement; and across facets
of math anxiety and math subdomains. By sharing our effect size data and our R code, we
would like to support other researchers in using IPD (e.g., from ILSAs) to extend our
“landscape” or to create new ones that illuminate other important psychological phenomena.
MATH ANXIETY AND MATH ACHIEVEMENT 78