The adoption of technologies in The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s Sovereign
Wealth Fund in propelling its attainment of Vision 2030 goals
Loulwa Fadel Alqublan
December 10, 2021
Abstract
This research investigates the role of artificial intelligence (AI) and digital technologies (DTs)
in the Public Investment Fund's (PIF) Vision Realisation Programme (VRP) and their impact
on the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia's progress toward achieving its Vision 2030 strategy. The
study employs sentiment, empirical, and semi-empirical analyses to examine the adoption of
AI and DTs in the PIF's portfolio companies before and after the inception of Vision 2030.
Sentiment analysis is utilised to textually analyse the profiles of PIF's portfolio companies in
both periods. Empirical analysis reveals a statistically significant difference in the adoption of
AI and DT terminologies. Where empirical evidence was implausible to obtain due to data
limitations, semi-empirical analysis is employed, yielding results consistent with the study's
hypothesis.
This paper extends its focus to the macroeconomic level, demonstrating a positive impact of
AI and DTs on the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s macroeconomic indicators. Notably, the study
challenges existing literature by revealing that AI adoption does not negatively affect
employment, providing a novel insight on the relationship between AI and the labour force.
This departure from previous literature emphasises the need for further exploration of AI's
implications on employment.
This study’s key findings align with existing literature on sovereign wealth funds (SWFs),
affirming that integrating AI and DTs enhances investment outcomes. While existing literature
employs qualitative assessments, this research fills a substantial gap by offering a country-
specific empirical analysis of the impact of the PIF on the country’s macroeconomy. The study
provides structured analyses, contributing in-depth knowledge on various aspects of broader
debates on AI and DT adoption. The inclusive conceptual framework presented in this research
suggests avenues for future research and diverse applications across countries.
Keywords: Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA), Artificial Intelligence (AI), Digital
Technology (DT), Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF), Public Investment Fund (PIF), Vision
‡ This working paper was compiled in partial fulfilment of the MSc in Accounting, Accountability and Financial
Management.
§ King’s Business School, King’s College London. Email: loulwa.alqublan@kcl.ac.uk; l.alqublan@hotmail.com
Introduction
1.1 Setting the Scene
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is distinguished for being one of the world’s largest producers
and exporters of oil and petrochemicals (OPEC, 2020). However, with the rapid technological
advancements taking place, the ways in which goods are created and consumed are shifting,
thus resulting in changes in the demand levels of petrochemicals. Additionally, oil prices can
fluctuate due to external factors such as economic or political events, making them volatile and
therefore unsustainable when treated as the sole source of income, especially on the
macroeconomic level. Previously, the Kingdom’s1 heavy reliance on oil as the main income
stream might have been ideal. Subsequently, although the country may have sufficient amounts
of oil for the next sixty to seventy years at current extraction levels, the oil-based dynamic in
its economy must be altered with serious adjustments and reforms in order to better suit the
modern world. Thus, although petrochemicals remain an essential pillar of the Kingdom’s
economy, the strategic diversification and expansion of the economy are crucial to mitigate
detrimental risks.
The oil price plunge in 2014 has driven the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) member states to
exploit this phenomenon and introduce economic reforms to redeem their status in the global
economy (Al-Marri, 2017). A pivotal element of these efforts was the formation of Sovereign
Wealth Funds (SWFs). Although the Kingdom’s SWF, the Public Investment Fund (PIF), was
founded in 1971 and has significantly contributed to the Kingdom’s economy at the time, its
rebirth in 2015 allowed it to reach a substantial milestone in its evolution. Its oversight was
shifted from the Ministry of Finance to the Council of Economic and Development Affairs
(CEDA), its board of directors reconstituted, and the number of employees significantly
increased to enable the achievement of Vision 2030. This reform expanded the PIF’s mandate
and broadened its scope in playing a strategic national role. Since then, Gulf SWFs have made
remarkable progress not only in terms of size but also in their portfolio configuration. Their
behaviour has aggressively shifted to become more risk-tolerant, from holding more
considerable equity percentages to predominantly investing in emerging markets and
technologies (Bostan and Ergen, 2017). Most GCC SWFs, such as the PIF, act as government-
owned development and stabilisation funds rather than sovereign savings funds, where they
aim to maximise long-term intergenerational savings. As part of the reform, the PIF’s decree
to be directed by CEDA to develop and diversify the economy has grown significantly. It
resulted in the formation of venture capital funds through partnerships, investing with external
asset managers and in high profile companies to hold direct equity stakes in disruptive,
innovative and high-tech firms. In addition, GCC SWFs are well-known for their strategic
investment decisions, buying stakes in industries that they wish to promote nationally in their
economic diversification schemes (Diwan, 2009).
1 Throughout this paper, the term ‘Kingdom’ refers specifically to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia unless
otherwise specified.
1.2 The Kingdom’s Vision 2030
The Kingdom’s Vision 2030 is a unique and ambitious transformational programme in line
with the United Nations’ (UN) 2030 Agenda, which is a strategic plan supporting governments
in developing national strategies to achieve the outlined Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) for a sustainable future. Inaugurated in 2016, the Kingdom’s Vision 2030 incorporates
social, economic and environmental reform strategies, consisting of a strategic framework to
reduce the country’s dependence on oil. As such, the country is determined to reinforce and
diversify the capabilities of its economy, turning its key strengths into enabling tools for a fully
diversified and sustainable future. Thus, at the core of the Vision, lay three unwavering pillars
an investment powerhouse and is the heart of both the Islamic and Arab worlds, being home to
the two holy mosques, one of which is the direction to which Muslims all around the world
turn at prayer, and a hub connecting three continents – Asia, Africa and Europe. These are core
competencies upon which the three pillars of the Vision were developed. The vibrant society
pillar aims to strengthen Islamic and national identity and offer a fulfilling and healthy life.
Furthermore, the thriving economy pillar aims to grow and diversify the economy and increase
employment. Meanwhile, the ambitious nation pillar aims to enhance government
effectiveness and transparency and enable social responsibility.
The Vision was cascaded into 96 strategic objectives with transparent methodologies to enable
its effective implementation. Subsequently, these objectives were turned into twelve diverse
Vision Realisation Programmes2 (VRPs) established by CEDA. The VRPs were developed in
three steps as follows:
1. Studied and grouped strategic objectives based on similarity
2. Strategic objectives’ groups prioritised to form twelve VRPs
3. VRP cards were developed, and gaps identified
The VRPs strategically translate Vision 2030 into actionable executive programs. The PIF
aligns its activities through established delivery plans, driven by key performance indicators
(KPIs) and targets tied to five-year milestones. This approach aims to improve implementation
and measure progress towards its goals. With the progressive deployment of the VRPs, there
are three target categories in place – macroeconomic targets, programme targets and strategic
objectives’ targets. These categories are utilised to track the progress of VRPs, and are
reviewed, measured, and reassessed quarterly with critical actions being taken. This
realignment step is crucial to supplement new projects and deploy adjusted and better-suited
strategies to best achieve Vision 2030.
1.3 The Public Investment Fund
Prior to the launch of Vision 2030, the PIF acted as an angel investor providing funding
opportunities to support local start-ups to catalyse their growth. These investments consisted
of local firms in traditional sectors such as banking, food and agriculture, ceramics and
petrochemicals, which were convenient and sufficient at the time to maximise the wealth of an
oil-based economy. However, the goals of the PIF were redefined under Vision 2030’s
mandate, shifting from small conventional investments with the aim of supporting local
companies to internationally investing in and locally establishing firms in the disruptive
industries of AI and DT, with the aim of leading the global digital economy. This notion
conforms with Diwan’s (2009) observation that SWFs strategically invest in sectors they wish
to promote locally. The PIF’s transformation into a VRP in 2017 revolved around redeveloping
its vision and mission, modernising its strategy, reassessing its assets and restructuring its
governance and organisation. The PIF primarily has six investment pools that aim to facilitate
the achievement of Vision 2030, with the focus on investing in industries of the future, ranging
from Saudi equity holdings, Saudi sector development, Saudi real estate and infrastructure
development, international strategic investments, Saudi Giga-projects and international
diversified pools, most of which adopt AI and DTs. Therefore, the PIF is no longer classified
as a sovereign savings fund as it is working towards sustainably developing the Kingdom’s
2 Eleven of the twelve VRPs have been launched, and these are: Public Investment Fund Programme, Housing
Programme, Doyof Al Rahman Programme, Fiscal Sustainability Programme, Human Capability Development
Programme, Quality of Life Programme, National Transformation Programme, Privitisation Programme, Health
Sector Transformation Programme, Financial Sector Development Programme and National Industrial
Development and Logistics Programme.
economy. The attainment of sustainability in the PIF would increase the country’s resilience,
safeguard its economy against volatilities in commodity prices and mitigate risks caused by
external global factors (Arab News, 2021b), thus resulting in a robust economy with a
competitive advantage.
Currently, the PIF stands among the world's largest SWFs. However, its introduction as a VRP
is strategically geared toward fostering robust economic partnerships. This initiative is
designed to expedite and amplify the Kingdom's influence on both national and international
stages, positioning it as the largest SWF globally.
The role of the PIF VRP is mainly classified under the ‘thriving economy’ pillar, where its four
direct objectives are growing its assets, unlocking new strategic sectors, building strategic
economic partnerships and localising cutting-edge technologies in the Kingdom through
increased investments in advanced technologies. These objectives guide the formulation and
design of investments aligned with the investment pillars. These pillars encompass the
introduction of promising local sectors, the development of local real estate, the establishment
and support of large-scale projects, and the expansion and diversification of the fund's global
assets. This strategic approach positions the fund to pioneer the digital economy by bridging
global gaps in digital technologies (Arab News, 2021a).
The PIF stands as a pioneering catalyst and a vital contributor to the 'thriving economy' pillar.
It serves as the main active engine behind the diversification of the Kingdom's economy,
actively fostering the development of strategic sectors. The fund achieves this by cultivating
and maximising the impact of its investments. As such, the PIF is the most prominent source
of income for the Kingdom and has been incorporated as one of the most significant VRPs due
to its large-scale influence and contributions in enabling the country to achieve its 2030 Vision.
In the recent Financial Stability Conference, His Excellency (H.E.) Mohammed Al-Jadaan, the
Kingdom’s Minister of Finance, announced that budget surpluses, if attained, will be dedicated
to reinforcing government reserves, paying off public debts and supporting the PIF, rather than
dedicating it to expenditures that do not serve the long-term benefit of the Kingdom and its
nationals (AlMadina, 2021). Therefore, it is evident that, unlike the other VRPs, the Kingdom
has placed more emphasis on the PIF to attain economic diversification, sustainability and
ultimate success.
As previously mentioned, all active VRPs launch their delivery plans in five-year periods, but
due to its launch in 2017, the first delivery plan encapsulates a three-year milestone. Following
the success of its first delivery plan, the PIF has launched the sequel, where the strategy ensures
the PIF continues to expand as a global investment powerhouse and be a partner of choice for
innovative and transformative industries globally. Thus, the delivery plans for the PIF are as
follows:
2018-2020 Delivery Plan – launched in 2018, referred to as Phase 0.
2021-2025 Delivery Plan – launched in 2021, referred to as Phase 1.
2026-2030 Delivery Plan – expected to launch in 2026, referred to as Phase 2.
The Phase 1 delivery plan builds on the achievements attained in Phase 0, representing another
breakthrough in the reform journey towards achieving the 2030 Vision. Since its launch, the
PIF VRP has reached a significant milestone and marked several achievements, including
maximising the fund’s assets, expanding the establishment of local companies in numerous
sectors, increasing total shareholders’ return and launching several major national projects. As
a result, this has created hundreds of thousands of job opportunities and increased the
Kingdom’s non-oil GDP. Moreover, the PIF aims to maximise sustainable returns by investing
in the long-term. Thus, it has categorised its initiatives to transform the dynamic of the
Kingdom’s economy in alignment with Vision 2030, and this research will focus on these
initiatives from a technological perspective.
1.4 Rationale and Aim
Recently, there have been disruptive and exponential developments in fields such as AI,
robotics, Internet of Things (IoT), big data, the Cloud, virtual reality (VR) and augmented
reality (AR). The Kingdom has been heavily involved in these fields, making AI a cornerstone
of its 2030 Vision (Helou, 2021). In December 2020, the Kingdom was ranked 1st in the Arab
world and 22nd globally in the Global Artificial Intelligence Index, compared to 29th in 2019.
This significant improvement resulted from the integrated efforts of government agencies in
the participation and implementation of the National Transformation Programme initiatives.
Another contributor to this achievement was the establishment of the Saudi Authority for Data
and Artificial Intelligence (SDAIA) in 2019. SDAIA attained many achievements in a short
timeframe despite the COVID-19 challenges and was rapidly responsive in creating an
operations centre for backing the health and security sectors in tackling the pandemic. The
centre has aided decision-makers in formulating effective mechanisms based on data and
supported the country’s precautionary procedures to combat the spread of the virus.
Additionally, the Kingdom’s capital, Riyadh, was ranked as the third smartest capital of the
G20 member states in 2021 on the IMD Smart City Index, leaping 23 ranks from the previous
year, thus outperforming cities such as Hong Kong, Paris, Madrid and Los Angeles. Moreover,
being at the crossroads of three continents with its position between the East and the West,
placing AI at the heart of the Kingdom’s transformation makes the country an ideal location
for the world to collaborate in moving AI towards the right direction for the benefit of
humanity.
The immense efforts and progress attained by the Kingdom is fascinating, and thus worth
exploring. These phenomena were motives to further study this emerging field in the context
of the Kingdom. Hence, the objective of this paper is to investigate the extent to which the
integration of AI and DTs within the PIF contributes to the realisation of the VRP's objectives
within the broader Vision 2030 initiative.
This study seeks to highlight the difference between the PIF’s investment decisions in Phase 0
and Phase 1 delivery plans, placing more emphasis on Phase 1 as it essentially adopts the new
strategies of achieving Vision 2030 goals. In this sense, statistical tools will be utilised to
compare the extent of AI and DT investments in Phase 0 and Phase 1, and a statistical
significance test will be deployed to assess whether the difference in investments is significant.
As such, a full sample of investments disclosed in Phase 0 and Phase 1 will be analysed.
Moreover, there is no existing literature to date that covers the areas in this research; thus, this
paper aims to introduce a new field of research by integrating areas covered in the existing
limited literature around SWFs, country’s Visions and AI and DT-based investments. Although
very specific to the Kingdom and its 2030 Vision, this paper aims to offer literary contributions
on both the national and international spectra as the same conceptual framework can be applied
across diverse settings.
2.0 Literature Review and Research Question Development
This research lays at the intersection of various topics, including AI and DT investments,
SWFs, Vision 2030, and the impact of these variables on the macroeconomy. The heart of this
paper studies these areas on a national level, specifically in the context of the PIF. Due to the
specificity of this research and the lack of literature around it, the literature review section aims
to delve into these diverse areas by using the bottom-up approach for knowledge ordering
purposes to further synthesise the concept and formulate a sensible research question. In this
sense, the first area to be tackled is investments in AI and DTs on a broader spectrum. Then,
the development of global digital trends will be delved into to develop a deeper understanding
of such technologies. Next, the research area will be narrowed down to the utilisation of AI in
relation to achieving the UN SDGs, followed by the Kingdom’s progress towards achieving
these SDGs under its 2030 Vision mandate. Additionally, SWFs and their recent shift to
technology-based investments will be explored. Finally, being an SWF, this study would be
incomplete without assessing the PIF’s contributions to the Kingdom’s macroeconomy.
Therefore, their shift towards AI and DT investments strikes the importance of studying the
impact of AI on a macroeconomic level, which will be reviewed in the final section of this
section.
2.1 Investments in Technology and Artificial Intelligence
There is myriad literature around AI; however, literature on the intersection of AI with
investments from a business perspective is limited to almost none. For the purpose of this
research, it is imperative to provide clarity on the dynamics within the investment realm of the
AI industry. In chapter four of his textbook, Corea (2017) researched the investment backdrop
in AI-based companies. The author statistically analysed approximately 14,000 companies in
the fields of AI, machine learning, big data and robotics, and further identified the key elements
that are attractive to investors. Corea stated that the development of AI had been hindered due
to lack of funding from investors. Moreover, it was observed that there was a higher risk in
investing in AI due to its technical complexity as it is not merely for commercial purposes like
many other traditional investments. Consequently, it is challenging for AI companies to
provide proof of their concepts due to the obstacles they encounter in the concept creation and
implementation processes. Thus, investing in AI requires a different type of investors who
comprehend the nature of the investment, the functions of AI, and have a deep capital base and
higher risk tolerance. Furthermore, investing in AI is considered a long-term investment, where
actual returns might be recognised a decade subsequent to the investment, if any. Therefore,
many investors view such opportunities as black boxes, making it more challenging for
companies to attract funding. Corea stated that for AI companies to develop and succeed,
government intervention is crucial. Building on his statement, it is evident that SWFs would
be better-suited investors in the AI and DT industries.
Consecutively, further examination of the AI environment demonstrated that the AI industry is
not yet mature, which was observed by looking at the companies’ age classification, where
most of the companies were founded in 2014. Corea also studied the geographical setup of
these companies and identified that the United States (U.S.) and the United Kingdom (UK) are
the major hubs for AI start-ups, who most prominently play a vital role in the AI industry. This
determinant is justified by the fact that the U.S. and the UK are home to the world’s top
universities and research centres, which cultivates strong interrelationships between businesses
and academic institutions and encourages the business culture between students, academics
and employers. Over the past few years, this led to the introduction of incubators and
accelerators in the AI sector, which are critical drivers for generating ideas and developing
businesses. The author’s geographical observation is in accord with the PIF’s international
portfolio companies adopting AI and DTs as they are most prominently located in the U.S. and
the UK.
2.2 The Development of Digital Technologies
Kostin (2018) analysed and evaluated global trends through two variables – DTs and relevant
marketing resources. Namely, the DTs investigated were AI, blockchain and big data, while
the marketing resources were the IoT, social media, VR and AR, with the latter being the most
propitious marketing resource for the tourism industry. While this research classifies its two
domains as AI and DT, Kostin interestingly classified AI technologies under the DT variable.
This case further amplifies the concept that AI and DTs act as complements to one another,
and the deployment of these two technologies is amalgamated in most settings.
The theoretical foundation of Kostin’s research firstly explicated the terminologies ‘foresight’
and ‘global trends’. Briefly, foresight is an organised social procedure that formulates litigable
knowledge regarding the future. Kostin’s methodology to quantify foresight involved the
utilisation of ‘horizon scanning’ – a systematic forecast for potential future developments,
which was contextualised by using AR as the main marketing resource in the tourism industry.
In this research, horizon scanning would require insiders’ knowledge from the PIF. Thus, due
to accessibility and data limitations, foresight will be carried out using other mechanisms that
measure the PIF’s performance.
Kostin aimed to study the modern developments of the global digital trends and examine
potential DTs necessary for international companies. The author stated that a long-term vision
is essential to structure future strategies, not only for companies but also for governments.
Moreover, the author continuously highlighted the importance of utilising DTs to catalyse
business’ success. Additionally, although some technologies might be seen as well-established,
they nonetheless have the potential to further develop and cater to the rapidly changing social
and economic environment. In this sense, it is evident that the use of DTs is pivotal for
businesses to remain successful and competitive. These factors, alongside numerous others,
justify the involvement of the PIF in technology-based investments, and Kostin’s finding that
a long-term vision is crucial for strategic structuring is validated by the mandate of Vision
2030.
2.3 The Use of Artificial Intelligence in Achieving Sustainable Development Goals
2.3.1 Sustainable Development Goals and The Kingdom’s Vision 2030
The population in urban cities is exponentially increasing due to rising job opportunities,
enhanced service delivery and improved quality of life. As a result, environmental issues are
becoming more concerning due to the faster consumption of natural resources. Hence, it is
currently pivotal for nations to take immediate action in mitigating risks that could arise from
this phenomenon.
The UN General Assembly established seventeen diverse yet interlinked goals for sustainable
better and more sustainable future for all” (United Nations, 2020), and are set to be achieved
by the year 2030. They address the global challenges encountered, such as inequality,
environmental degradation and climate change. These SDGs were set as strategic plans to help
governments develop national strategies to achieve the 2030 Agenda for a sustainable future.
As a result, 2015 was a transformational year where many nations and organisations realised
that rapid transformation was essential for a sustainable future. This global initiative was a
motive for countries such as Qatar, Egypt, the United Arab Emirates, Kenya and more recently
France to launch their Vision 2030 programmes in line with these SDGs, with the Kingdom
being one of the first to inaugurate its Vision 2030 programme. Each of these visions are
tailored to the specific needs of the countries but is aimed towards achieving the same goal –
sustainability across all sectors for the future.
Within the framework of the Kingdom, Vision 2030 serves as the fulfilment of various
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in conjunction with other country-specific objectives.
Alharthi et al. (2019) conducted a comprehensive study mapping the seventeen SDGs to the
Kingdom's Vision. Their analysis elucidates the intricate interplay between each SDG and the
strategic objectives of Vision 2030. Additionally, the Kingdom's Unified National Platform
systematically categorises the seventeen SDGs, revealing the initiatives and actions undertaken
to realise them.
Alharthi et al. underscored the integration of information and communication technology (ICT)
alongside IoT solutions and AI in the infrastructure and project implementation of urban cities
in the Kingdom. These technologies effectively manage data and resources in critical areas like
traffic, pollution, and energy conservation. This context emphasises the symbiotic relationship
between AI and DTs. Moreover, the urbanised cities align with cutting-edge technological
advancements and societal needs, ensuring sustainability without compromising the
requirements of future generations, implying that these implementations are indeed
sustainable.
Although Alharthi et al.’s research studied the incorporation of AI and DTs in Vision 2030
from an operational perspective, this research aims to study these two domains from an
investment point of view through the eyes of the PIF VRP. Nevertheless, their study is highly
relevant to this research as it is an invaluable addition in providing a more holistic overview of
the Kingdom’s Vision.
2.3.2 The Role of Artificial Intelligence in Achieving Sustainable Development Goals
To further examine the Kingdom’s role in fulfilling the UN SDGs, it is essential to
subsequently study the utilisation of AI and DTs in achieving these SDGs. Vinuesa et al. (2020)
believe that the substantial impact of AI on many sectors concerning SDGs needs to be
assessed. Their study distributed the SDGs into three pillars: society, economy and
environment, which are the same pillars upon which Vision 2030 was founded. The authors
found that AI facilitates the achievement of 80% of the SDGs’ targets while hindering the
attainment of 35%. AI acts as an enabler for targets by supporting the provision of basic
necessities, supplementing low-carbon systems, incorporating renewable energy and analysing
large databases to develop actions concerning environmental preservation. The common theme
for AI being an inhibitor across all three pillars was that its implementation requires advanced
resources that may not be available in some less economically developed countries. Therefore,
AI could be applied and developed in specific technologically advanced settings; thus,
potentially exacerbating issues of inequality between nations.
Nonetheless, the importance of AI is amplified as it facilitates the majority of SDG targets and
does not surcease the others, but only hinders their attainment. Thus, contingency plans and
alternative methods should be in place to overcome these obstacles. Furthermore, even though
AI is primarily beneficial in enabling the accomplishment of SDGs, uncovering detrimental AI
features may need longer-term studies.
Many researchers, including Vinuesa et al. stated that the rapid progression in AI needs to be
regulated by professional bodies to ensure that these technologies support sustainable
development. Otherwise, the lack of regulatory insight and oversight could result in breaches
in transparency, ethical and safety standards.
2.4 Sovereign Wealth Funds and Technology Investments
To further streamline this research, the area of SWFs in relation to technology will be
examined. Literature on SWFs is even more limited than that of AI, however, a couple of
relevant papers were reviewed.
Engel, Hamirani and Saklatvala (2016) aimed to observe the shift in SWF asset allocations as
an attempt to fill a gap in this field of research, which is becoming increasingly opaque and
hardly accessible. They studied SWFs’ pursuit after innovation and technology investments,
where they highlighted that SWFs have been engaging in high-profile investments in healthcare
and technology-based companies. They mentioned that the PIF had made the top of the list in
2016 when it bought a 3.5 billion U.S. Dollars (USD) stake in Uber and a USD 100 billion
collaboration with SoftBank’s tech-focused venture capital fund.
In part one, the authors interviewed thirteen SWF officials enquiring about the reason behind
the transformation in investments. It was found that 85% of SWFs increased their investments
in technology over the preceding five years either via direct investments or through external
asset managers. Although strategies differ across SWFs, common priorities were higher growth
potential, diversification from conventional investments towards idiosyncratic growth
incentives and technological developments’ positive effect on their investment portfolios. This
finding aligns with Vision 2030’s aim to diversify the Kingdom’s oil-based economy and
unlock numerous sectors. Another finding that arose from interviewees was that the return on
investment and opportunities from conventional investments have become limited, and more
opportunities became available in high-tech businesses. Thus, the shift towards early
investments in advanced technologies provided higher returns. Additionally, despite the
importance of conventional sectors, the technology sector is changing the world, and it is
recommended that SWFs invest in this sector to benefit from the accompanied growth.
In part two, the authors highlighted the decline in GDP of GCC countries in 2014, which was
driven by the oil price plunge. Therefore, it was pivotal for the Kingdom and its fellow GCC
peers to take immediate action in deviating from their conventional strategies and introducing
reforms on several levels. An SWF official stated that this phenomenon has made the
technology industry more compelling for GCC SWFs. In line with this paradigm, the authors
introduced an argument that SWFs could add a learning curve to their strategies as a mechanism
of mitigating risks that come along with investments in disruptive industries.
In line with Engel, Hamirani and Saklatvala’s (2016) research, Megginson and Gao (2019)
reiterated the notion that SWFs have recently been more involved in innovative technologies.
They argued that this transformation was driven by the recent shift in global economic and
environmental initiatives that have encouraged SWFs to adopt reforms. Moreover, the authors
stated that SWFs have wider economic and environmental implications that have a significant
impact on macroeconomies, where an SWF is expected to be capable of financially supporting
its country and citizens when undergoing economic strains. As such, the high importance of
exploring the macroeconomic implications of SWFs is evident. While there is limited literature
on SWFs’ macroeconomic implications, this research aims to fill a substantial gap by further
delving into this area and assessing the impact of PIF’s technology-driven investment strategy
on the country’s employment metrics, foreign direct investments (FDIs) and GDP growth.
2.5 Implications of Artificial Intelligence on the Macroeconomic Level
Somjai, Jermsittiparsert and Chankoson (2020) established that the ongoing phenomenon of
deploying AI technologies across all industries in the economy is multifaceted. The first facet
constituted of positive attitudes towards AI, such as the effective usage of AI-generated data,
the provision of clear strategies, the assessment of individuals’ skills and the successful
mapping of AI, which had a positive and statistically significant impact on economic indicators
of the Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). These factors resulted in higher capital investment,
economic output, return on capital and wages.
However, a notable drawback of AI adoption was its adverse effect on employment, resulting
in elevated unemployment rates. The authors recommended that businesses in the ASEAN
region enhance their understanding of the intricate relationship between AI adoption and the
economy to mitigate potential risks. It is crucial to note that this study had limitations, with
data derived from 240 observations through an online questionnaire within a six-week
timeframe, involving experts in AI within the ASEAN region. Given the unique dynamics of
this region, the authors emphasised the need to bridge the gap between academic qualifications
and job requirements to alleviate unemployment rates. Despite this challenge, AI remains a
significant positive contributor to the macroeconomy.
In line with these findings, Huang, Hu and Dong (2019) found that AI lowered capital prices
and increased wages of employed persons. Additionally, when AI and the labour force were
complementary, AI capital positively affected labour share. Overall, as AI technologies
improve, the economy is sustained and will experience further growth. Moreover, Furman and
Seamans (2019) have reviewed the evidence of the impact of AI on the economy, where they
stated there might be mixed effects on labour. However, the longer-term implications of AI on
labour could be positive if the knowledge and awareness of the labour gap are bridged, as AI
has a significant potential of increasing productivity growth. Furthermore, He (2018) took the
UK as an example in exploring the determinants of AI in the context of the country’s
macroeconomics. His findings showed that the real GDP, real income, FDI and government
the development of AI.
The common theme across literature discussed in this subsection was that the successful
implementation of AI has a positive effect in every dimension, with adverse or mixed effects
on labour. These effects are driven by the disruptions AI introduces into the workforce, thus
further exacerbating issues within labour. The disruptions are most prominently led by the
replacement of human labour with AI technologies due to the latter being more efficient,
timely, effective, accurate and significantly surpassing human performance levels. However,
further to the authors’ notions, bridging the gap between AI adoption and the labour force is
pivotal to harnessing positive impacts on the labour force. To acquire more expansive
knowledge on this phenomenon in the context of the Kingdom, a subsection of the results and
discussion chapter will be dedicated to studying the effects of the PIF’s technology-driven
investments on the GDP growth rates, FDIs and employment measures as key macroeconomic
indicators.
2.6 Research Question Development
The deployment of the bottom-up approach in this chapter entailed the introduction of the
various research fields on an individual basis, which were then gradually amalgamated into
areas more fixated on this research. This method has aided in building the knowledge and
foundation necessary to comprehend the rationale behind this research. Due to limited literature
availability, the vast majority of papers in relation to these areas have been reviewed. As such,
this research is an exploratory piece of literature that taps into the areas of AI, DTs, SDGs and
SWFs, and assesses how technology contributes to catalysing the achievement of the strategic
goals of the Kingdom’s PIF. Ensuing this discussion, the following research question has
emerged:
To what extent does the adoption of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Technologies
within the Public Investment Fund’s Vision Realisation Programme propel The
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s success in relation to accomplishing its 2030 Vision?
The research question outlined attempts to determine whether AI and DT-based investments
support the Kingdom in attaining a sustainable future for the country by extensively examining
this paradigm through the eyes of the PIF. The uniqueness of this research lays under the fact
that AI and DTs are studied from an investment perspective rather than an operational one,
where the inclusion of petrochemical (Petchem) investments was incorporated as a benchmark
in assessing the strategic transformation in investments. This phenomenon will be examined
with the deployment of sentiment, empirical and semi-empirical analyses and extending the
discussion to further include macroeconomic implications to formulate a well-rounded
discussion. Therefore, the contribution of this research also involves synthesising different
areas of research into one, where existing literature is extremely limited to none, difficult to
access and often not robust. Accordingly, this study seeks to contribute to the existing literature
that lacks the incorporation of these diverse aspects and analyses mechanisms by fixating the
topic on a single country, thus enabling the customisation of the research to obtain more robust,
in-depth results and knowledge. However, although very specific, the same conceptual
framework and methodology applied in this research could be implemented globally across a
wide range of settings. Finally, alongside contributions to academia, this paper further aspires
to add value to the Saudi government, the strategic implementation of Vision 2030 goals and
the PIF.
3.0 Methodology
Ensuing the systematic literature review and research question emergence, the PIF’s Vision
2030 delivery plans for Phase 0 and Phase 1 were obtained in two separate reports – one for
each phase. Both reports highlighted most of the PIF’s investments prior to the relevant
reporting period. This insinuates that the Phase 0 (2018-2020) report is based on the PIF’s
investments in the pre-Vision 2030 era [i.e., prior to the inauguration of Vision 2030 in 2016].
Similarly, the Phase 1 (2021-2025) report included the PIF’s investments from 2016-2020.
Since the Phase 1 report has already been launched, any new initiatives after 2020 will be in
the Phase 2 report for the period 2026-2030, which is expected to launch at the start of 2026.
This lag is due to the reports being ‘delivery plans’ for the forthcoming years. Therefore, the
section that highlights the PIF’s investments are that of the previous period.
3.1 Inclusion Criteria
The investments identified in the two reports were screened, and the ones included in this
research were only the direct investment contributions in PIF portfolio companies. These
include:
Direct investments in international companies, including companies that have formed
partnerships with the PIF to establish projects or venture capital funds
Direct investments in national companies:
Either private limited or publicly listed
Either PIF-owned or the PIF is a shareholder
A full sample of the companies in the inclusion criteria were studied to avoid bias in the
selection process and obtain the output as accurately as possible with the inclusion of the entire
population available for study.
3.2 Exclusion Criteria
The exclusion criteria included two of the PIF’s reported indirect investments, present in the
Phase 1 report. These were the French Private Equity Investment and the Investment
Programme in Brazil. The first programme involved investing USD 2 billion with different
French asset managers, with the PIF committing to eight private equity funds to date, while the
latter entailed the PIF investing USD 10 billion in Brazil, where it has committed to two private
equity funds to date. Although these two investments were quite substantial, they could not be
included in this research as it is challenging to track and analyse indirect investments with
The total number of investments included in this study is 80, with 47 investments being in
Phase 0 and 33 investments in Phase 1, respectively. All investments are disclosed in
Appendix 1.
3.3 Data Collection Process
3.3.1 Company Profile Compilation Process
To perform the analysis, profiles of the 80 companies had to be obtained. Company profiles
are documents that include a professional summary of the company and its operations, and they
aim to provide users with a holistic overview of the company. Due to the lack of availability
of downloadable profiles, the company profiles were obtained by using four different methods:
1. Downloaded company profiles as PDFs where available on the companies’ websites.
2. A Python code named ‘scraper’ was constructed for companies that had a functioning
website but no downloadable profile. This code involved importing ‘BeautifulSoup’ – a
Python library for extracting data from the markup languages embedded in websites. The
relevant data were extracted, and a function was called to turn all text into a valid XML
format that is both human- and machine-readable. Next, a blank array was created to store
the relevant text extracted into a Word document. This code thus generated a separate Word
document for every portfolio company with a functioning website, which was then
exported into a PDF and used as a company profile.
3. Where the ‘scraper’ adopted in method two crashed due to the different structures of
websites, the profiles were then compiled by manually copying the relevant text on
companies’ websites and their sub-links, pasting them into a Word document. These were
exported as PDFs and used as company profiles.
4. For companies that did not have a functioning website, the Bloomberg Professional
Services Public Information Book (PIB) command was utilised to generate PDF company
profiles. [The PIB collects publicly accessible documents, data, and Bloomberg reports on
a specific company and downloads it as a single PDF document.]
The first method would have been ideal if the profiles were available for all 80 companies to
avoid data collection inconsistency. However, the other compilation methods had to be applied
due to the lack of data availability. Therefore, company profiles from the first method were
screened and the main contents covered in the profiles were identified. These contents
included:
Introduction and overview about the company
Company’s history and timeline
Company’s business sector and units
Company’s community and partnerships
News and highlights
Achievements
Company’s products and services
Vision and mission statements
Company values
Departments
Innovations
Projects
Business models
With the aim of making the data collection process as consistent as possible, the exact contents
above were added to company profiles generated in methods two and three. In addition, any
information published by other sources such as news websites were avoided in the company
profile compilation process to refrain from exhibiting untruthful information and outsider bias.
3.3.2 Textual Analysis
Following the obtention of all 80 company profiles as PDF files, a Python code was written
and run for each company to examine the adoption of AI and DTs compared to investing in
petrochemicals using textual analysis. The Petchem domain is not as crucial as the AI and DT
domains and was just used as a benchmark to provide additional insight into the direction of
the PIF’s investments. This text analysis process was assumed to capture the essence of the
PIF’s investments, where it was assumed that:
Companies that mentioned AI, DT and Petchem-related words more frequently were
heavily involved in these domains.
Companies that mentioned AI, DT and Petchem-related words less frequently had limited
involvement in these domains.
Companies that have not mentioned any terminologies classified under these categories
were not involved in these domains.
The Python code deployed two methods of textual analysis – the detection of the top 20 most
repeated words and the bag-of-words model. These mechanisms of textual analysis entailed
importing ‘Pandas’ – a Python software library for data analysis and machine learning tasks.
The company profiles were then imported in their PDF formats, and ‘pdfplumber’ was
imported next to allow the extraction of the desired text in a subsequent stage. Then, a library
of punctuation, stop and connection words were downloaded to introduce the characters that
will be filtered out of the word detection process. Consecutively, the function ‘readPdf’ was
created to read the PDF file, followed by a function to exclude the previously downloaded
punctuation, stop and connection words. Next, a function was created to detect the top 20 most
repeated words, followed by a function to rank these words from most to least frequently
mentioned. Successively, a dictionary array was created, which consisted of a bag of words
including AI, DT and Petchem terminologies. Finally, a ‘For Loop’ was run to go through
every PDF file and generate a separate document for each portfolio company, disclosing the
number of hits detected for every word in the dictionary array.
The first method was not used in this research because all the detected top 20 most repeated
words were irrelevant and random in relation to this research, as presented in Appendix 2.
Such ‘random’ terms were used in very high frequencies in the company profiles, with some
being mentioned over 200 times. As a result, the detection of AI, DT and Petchem-related
terminologies was disregarded. Therefore, the first method was negated, and the second
approach was adopted as it was more appropriately tailored to this research.
Although the second method may have been slightly subjective, the textual analysis approach
had to be tweaked to tailor the results to this research. Therefore, the second method was more
efficient in generating the desired output. As the bag of words deployed in the Python code for
the second method included a word dictionary array with AI, DT and Petchem terminologies,
the search terms Artificial Intelligence, Digital Technology and Petrochemicals for the domains
were not exhaustive. For instance, under the AI domain, some other terms that branch out from
AI were included. Similarly, terms that did not directly fall under the AI domain but were still
technology-related were included in the DT domain.
The words included had been determined via AI, DT and Petchem online word libraries.
Terminologies surrounding Petchems were very limited, thus Petchem online libraries were
sufficient to identify these terms. Whereas the AI and DT domains are more extensive, thus
containing a wider array of terminologies. Therefore, a sample of the most significant AI and
DT-based company profiles were manually screened to search for words that the online
libraries might have excluded. However, it was crucial to first define what these variables
meant to justify the classification of words under each domain.
3.3.2.1 Text Classification
There is a great deal of controversy around the definition of intelligence, let alone artificial
intelligence. Moreover, the definition of AI has been altering over the years with the rapid
technological developments in place. However, to contextualise the definition of AI in relation
to this research, it is necessary to first explore the definition of intelligence to obtain a clearer
understanding of this field. According to Palomares et al. (2021), intelligence is the ability to
achieve sophisticated goals based on information in the given environment. Tegmark (2017)
defined the term artificial intelligence as non-biological intelligence, which aims to achieve
sophisticated goals based on the data input as a source of information in the environment.
Although there is not a single universal definition of AI, for this research, AI can be explicitly
defined as “software or hardware systems designed by humans that, given a complex goal act
in the physical or digital dimension by perceiving their environment through data acquisition,
interpreting the collected structured or unstructured data, reasoning on the knowledge, or
processing the information derived from data to ultimately decide the best course of action to
achieve a given goal” (European Commission, 2018). Building on this definition, AI has
various branches stemming from it. These will be identified next to justify the classification of
terminologies as either AI or DT-related.
The branches that fall under the AI umbrella, as classified by many researchers, including
Galbusera, Casaroli and Bassani (2019) and Munawar (2011), include but are not limited to:
Chatbots
Expert systems
Algorithms
Machine Learning
Deep learning
Robotics
Big data
Cognitive computing
Natural language processing
Neural networks
Again, this list is not exhaustive as there are several other branches of AI. However, these were
the main areas in which the PIF’s portfolio companies operated.
Furthermore, any relevant exogenous and digital technologies that are not directly related to
AI and its branches were placed in the DT domain. Even though AI systems are capable of
learning to accomplish tasks, they often require the support of DTs for obtaining, storing,
calculating and disseminating data. Thus, related technological terms were included in the DT
domain because they are essential and are symbiotically combined with AI technologies to
enhance and optimise the performance of organisations. These include but are not limited to:
Virtual reality (VR)
Augmented reality (AR)
Simulations
Blockchain
Cloud computing
Internet of Things (IoT)
Moreover, the governor of the PIF, H.E. Yasir Al-Rumayyan, stated in his interview with
David Rubenstein that his discussions with HRH Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman
revolved around strategising the PIF’s investment approach, and they reached a consensus that
they ‘aim to invest in the future’. He further elaborated on this point by saying that the PIF
aims to invest in diverse fields including “AI, robotics, blockchain, the Internet of Things and
so on” (2020). Thus, such DTs are essential to consider as they complement AI technologies
(Ribeiro, 2021) which are of interest to the PIF in achieving Vision 2030 goals, hence their
high relevance to this research.
Additionally, terminologies related to petrochemicals included:
Petrochemical
Petroleum
Oil
Gas
Hydrocarbon
4 further summarises the text analysis methodology.
Following the calculation of the number of hits in each domain for each phase, the percentage
changes per domain will be calculated between Phase 0 and Phase 1, which is further clarified
below.
3.3.3. Formulae for the Percentage and Fold Changes
The aim was to examine, through this text analysis, the difference between the direction of the
PIF’s investments in Phase 0 and Phase 1. It is predicted that the PIF has been more heavily
involved in AI and DT investments and less in the petrochemicals industry in Phase 1 than in
Phase 0. To validate this hypothesis, the sum of the number of AI, DT and Petchem-related
terminologies will be calculated for each phase and domain separately, creating a 2x3
phases, the following equation will be used for each domain separately to calculate the
percentage difference between the two phases:
𝛼 − 𝛼
! "
𝜗 = × 100
Where:
𝜗: percentage change in AI/DT/Petchem-related words
𝛼 : sum of each of AI/DT/Petchem-related words in Phase 1
𝛼 : sum of each of AI/DT/Petchem-related words in Phase 0
From visually observing the number of hits in both phases, the difference was tremendous, thus
will be well over 100% for the AI and DT domains. Therefore, fold changes will be calculated
next. Fold change is widely used in genetics and bioinformatics. However, it will be deployed
in this paper to further clarify the percentage difference between the phases. Fold change is
utilised as an alternative way of expressing comparisons, where it describes the change as a
ratio between the two values being compared and is calculated using the following formula:
𝐹 =
Where:
𝐹 = fold change
𝛼 : sum of each of AI/DT/Petchem-related words in Phase 1
𝛼 : sum of each of AI/DT/Petchem-related words in Phase 0
3.3.4. Formula for the Statistical Significance Test
In addition to the above calculations, it is necessary to use statistical tools to see if the result is
truly significant. Fisher’s exact test for statistical significance will be used for the output of the
(𝑎 + 𝑏)! (𝑐 + 𝑑)! (𝑎 + 𝑐)! (𝑏 + 𝑑)!
𝑝 =
𝑎! 𝑏! 𝑐! 𝑑! 𝑛!
Where:
𝑝 = p-value
𝑛 = total frequency
The hypotheses for this test are as follows:
𝑯 : there is no statistically significant difference in the number of AI and DT-related words in
the PIF between Phase 0 and Phase 1.
𝑯 : there is a statistically significant difference in the number of AI and DT-related words in
the PIF between Phase 0 and Phase 1.
A significance level of α = 5% will be applied for the statistical significance test. This
significance level is most widely used by statisticians and researchers by convention
(Riffenburgh, 2006). The aim is to make the significance level area as small as possible to
increase the confidence level. Thus, if alpha is set at 10%, it could increase the probability of
making a Type I3 error. Contrarily, although a smaller significance level is encouraged, using
1% alpha could cause a Type II4 error. Therefore, the more Type I errors are avoided, the higher
the chance of Type II errors arising. Thus, an alpha of 5% is a good balance, providing a
confidence level of 95%, which is considerably high.
3 Type I error: rejecting the null hypothesis when it should be accepted due to the area being relatively large.
4 Type II error: accepting the null hypothesis when it should be rejected due to the area being relatively small.
The computations will be carried out in the next section, and to further support these empirical
findings, a mixture of other empirical and semi-empirical analyses will be carried out. First,
the transformation in the PIF’s investment strategy will be discussed. Second, the PIF’s direct
objectives will be identified and analysed. Case studies of PIF portfolio companies will back
the observations made in the discussion as examples to validate the argument and are intended
to further justify and contextualise the statistical outputs computed in relation to the PIF’s
actual activities. However, due to the nature of the topic, it is implausible to be exhaustive.
Thus, although only a few case studies will be presented, the ones that most prominently relate
to the direct objective being discussed will be presented. In light of this connotation, it is not
intended to disregard the rest of the PIF’s portfolio companies, and all PIF investments
available for study (presented in Appendix 1) are strategic and thus aim to fulfil all the
objectives from multiple angles. Additionally, the impact of the PIF on the Kingdom’s
macroeconomy will be assessed by observing and analysing trends in the GDP growth rates,
FDI inflows, employment measures and oil prices in relation to PIF activities and performance.
Finally, the correlation coefficient was deployed using the ‘CORREL’ function on Microsoft
Excel to determine the relationship between oil prices and GDP growth rates. The data of these
indicators were obtained from Trading Economics.
4.0 Results and Discussion
This section begins by presenting the statistical outputs of the data collected in the previous
section through sentiment analysis, followed by the computation of percentage and fold
changes as well as Fisher’s exact test to determine the statistical significance between the
outputs of Phases 0 and 1. Additionally, the implications of the results will be discussed,
followed by an analysis of the PIF’s objectives, KPIs and targets based on its achievements
within its investment portfolio as well as its implications on the Kingdom’s macroeconomy.
4.1 Percentage and Fold Change Outputs
The percentage change and fold change were computed using the formulae stated in Section
3.3.3 to determine the change both in terms of percentages and ratios, respectively. There were
three levels in the ‘Domains’ group: Artificial Intelligence (AI), Digital Technology (DT) and
Petrochemical (Petchem) terminologies. There were two levels in the ‘Phases’ category: Phase
0 and Phase 1.
Phases
Phase 0 Phase 1
Domains Percentage Change (%) Fold Change
Hits, n Hits, n
Artificial Intelligence (AI) 16 638 3887.50 39.88
Digital Technology (DT) 699 3937 463.23 5.63
Petrochemical (Petchem) 549 1023 86.34 1.86
each phase. The number of hits scored for every company in each phase is disclosed in
Appendix 3. AI terminologies were used 16 times across all 47 company profiles that are part
of the PIF’s investment portfolio during Phase 0 and 638 times across 33 companies in Phase
1, respectively. A substantial difference was evident, with approximately a 3888% increase.
As mentioned in the methodology, the fold change was calculated to better visualise this large
percentage increase, and the result showed an increase by 40 folds between Phase 0 and 1.
Moreover, DT-related terminologies were utilised 699 times in Phase 0 and 3937 times in
Phase 1, respectively, scoring a 463% difference, with a 5.6-fold increase. As for Petchems,
related terminologies were mentioned 549 times in Phase 0 and 1023 times in Phase 1, with an
86% and 1.86-fold increase, much less than the AI and DT domains. Unlike AI and DT,
Petchem terminologies were not as elemental to this research but were computed for both
phases to provide a more comprehensive representation of the shift in PIF investments, where
they better depicted the change towards a more diversified, non-oil-based economy. Thus, the
results for the AI and DT domains in comparison to the Petchem domain further amplified the
PIF’s actions in diversifying the Kingdom’s economy by investing less in petrochemicals and
more in the AI and DT sectors for the future sustainability and success of the Saudi economy.
The outputs stated expand on Engel, Hamirani and Saklatvala’s (2016) findings that GCC
SWFs are pursuing investments in technology to diversify their portfolios from conventional
investments towards idiosyncratic growth incentives, where the effect of technological
development on the PIF’s investment portfolio was evident.
4.2 Fisher’s Exact Test Output
While applicable to all sample sizes, Fisher's exact test was employed as it better suits the
relatively small data sample available for this research. It was conducted to examine whether
the ‘Domains’ and ‘Phases’ were independent. Moreover, other tests of statistical significance
such as the G-test and the chi-square test provide approximations that may be inadequate,
whereas Fisher’s provides exact results as the name implies. Consequently, it assesses the null
hypothesis of independence by using hypergeometric distributions of the values in the cells as
the outputs of Fisher’s exact test.
The hypotheses for this test are as follows:
𝑯 : there is no statistically significant difference in the number of AI and DT-related words in
the PIF between Phase 0 and Phase 1.
𝑯 : there is a statistically significant difference in the number of AI and DT-related words in
th e PIF between Phase 0 and Phase 1.
Phases
Phase 0 Phase 1
Domains Total
Hits, n Hits, n
Artificial Intelligence (AI) 16 638 654
Digital Technology (DT) 699 3937 4636
Total 715 4574 5290
The Fisher Exact Test was computed by inputting the totals above into the formula disclosed
%&
in Section 3.3.4. The results showed that the p-value is less than 1 × 10 , making the result
significant based on an alpha value of 0.05, where the basis of selecting this alpha was also
disclosed in Section 3.3.4. The output implied a strong correlation between the phases and the
domains; thus, the result is of considerable statistical significance. This backdrop entails that
the null hypothesis is rejected, and therefore the alternative hypothesis that there is a
statistically significant difference in the incorporation of AI and DT-related words in the PIF
between Phase 0 and Phase 1 is accepted, which aligns with the PIF’s and Vision 2030’s goals
and objectives. Although consistent with the literature reviewed surrounding SWFs and
technology investments in Section 2.4, the outputs in this section were contextualised to the
case of the Kingdom and provided statistically significant numerical evidence to the authors’
qualitative observations and conclusions that SWFs are pursuing AI and DT investments.
4.3 Strategic Transformation in the PIF
The substantial transformation in investments was evidently shown in just the number of hits
scored in each phase; however, the percentage change was deployed to easily quantify and
refer to the difference between the phases in this analysis. Nonetheless, as the percentages were
also very high, the results were further compared using fold changes to determine the difference
in terms of ratios rather than percentages. The results presented are interpreted as follows – the
number of AI-related terms were mentioned 40 times more in Phase 1 than in Phase 0, thus the
40-fold increase. Similarly, DT-related words were mentioned 5.6 times more in Phase 1 than
in Phase 0, thus the 5.6-fold increase. As mentioned previously, these outputs are assumed to
capture the essence of the PIF’s investments in the sense that the higher the frequency of AI
and DT-related words, the higher the PIF’s involvement in these types of investments.
Therefore, with that in mind, it is evident that the PIF has been more heavily involved in AI
and DT investments, which is in concordance with Megginson and Gao’s (2019) and Engel,
Hamirani and Saklatvala’s (2016) research. Although the changes between the phases for DT-
related words were not as considerable as AI-related words, the difference is still considered
to be substantial. This instance could be due to DT-related words being more broadly utilised
in a general sense than pure AI words that are very specific and not as widely used due to their
limited relevance to some sectors. In addition, the results further implied that the PIF was barely
involved in AI investments in Phase 0, which represented their investments before the
inauguration of Vision 2030 and has shown an aggressive exponential increase in AI
investments in Phase 1. Similarly, although the increase in DT investments was not as
aggressive as that of AI investments, the increase is still considered highly exponential. In
Phase 0, prior to investing in AI and DTs, it could be argued that the PIF was initially building
a solid foundation to become more resilient and capable of entering the risky immature market
of AI and DTs, which was attained by empowering the Saudi private sector.
Although the Kingdom aims to diversify its oil-based economy, this does not imply that the
PIF will cease its investments in the petrochemicals industry. Instead, it implies that the PIF
will diversify its portfolio by unlocking new strategic sectors through its investments, and
further grow and expand its portfolio to become the largest SWF in the world. In a general
sense, this could be one justification as to why there was an 86% increase in the number of hits
for the Petchems domain between Phases 0 and 1. However, given the significant drawback of
sentiment analysis of disregarding the context of terminologies detected, further analysis
around the context in which Petchem terminologies were mentioned was carried out, where it
was evident that companies present in Phase 0 have used these terminologies to describe their
investments and operations in the petrochemicals industry. On the other hand, in Phase 1,
Petchem terminologies were used mainly by the local portfolio companies and were mentioned
in the context of grammatical negation, such as “increase non-oil GDP,” “manufacture non-
petroleum products” as well as “mechanisms of conserving oil,” “oil recycling,” “reduce oil
dependency,” and other phrases that either implied the sustainable extraction and distribution
of petrochemicals aided by advanced technologies or the diversification of investments beyond
the petrochemicals industry in order to achieve PIF and Vision 2030 goals. This precedent was
most prominently observed in the case of ACWA Power. Thus, the computation for this domain
was an inaccurate representation due to the limitations of AI in regard to textual analysis.
Therefore, a statistical significance test was not carried out for the Petchem domain alongside
the two technology-based domains to not obstruct the accuracy of results.
4.3.1 The Case of ACWA Power
ACWA Power is a developer and operator of power generation and desalinated water. The
purpose of selecting this company as a case study was due to the utilisation of Petchem
terminologies in high frequencies and to further analyse the context surrounding these
terminologies. In Phase 1, the total number of hits of Petchem terms was 1023, and 891 of these
were mentioned in ACWA Power’s company profile alone (see Appendix 3), thus significantly
increasing the number of total hits, making them higher in Phase 1 than in Phase 0.
ACWA Power is known for its corporate social responsibility, where 77% of its gross capacity
of power-generation projects utilises either renewable or low carbon sources. In 2020, the PIF
increased its stake in ACWA Power from 33.36% to 50%, given their socially responsible
actions and high growth potential supporting the country’s Vision. Moreover, in the same year,
the company’s board reached a consensus of not undertaking any new coal- or oil-fired
projects, intending to reduce the company’s greenhouse gas emissions and ultimately achieve
net zero-emissions by 2050, which is in high concordance with the PIF, Vision 2030, Green
Saudi Arabia and Green Middle East initiatives launched by HRH Crown Prince Mohammed
bin Salman, and the UN SDGs as well as numerous other climate change initiatives globally.
ACWA Power aims to become one of the largest sustainable power generation, water
desalination and green hydrogen players in its countries of operation. It aims to generate its
electricity from renewable energy sources without compromising its commitment to deliver
power and desalinated water reliably and responsibly at a low cost. Additionally, in 2019, the
GCC Electrical Testing Laboratory, a PIF-owned company, announced the implementation of
twelve renewable energy projects worth USD 7 billion. This case is in accord with the new
trend of developing the renewable energies sector in the Kingdom by localising technologies.
Thus, it is seen that the PIF’s contribution has further encouraged the company to become more
sustainable and responsible towards the environment.
Additionally, the company has disclosed that the PIF’s involvement was crucial to their
transformation towards reducing climate change effects. All these sustainable projects that the
company pursues are backed by the utilisation of AI and DTs to facilitate their operations and
make their sustainable goals achievable. This heavy reliance on AI and DTs was evident in the
number of hits scored in both domains (52 and 1,117, respectively). This case further iterates
on the statement made by Corea (2017) that larger-scale investors and government intervention
such as that of the PIF with ACWA Power are crucial to enable companies to successfully
adopt AI and DTs due to their considerable influence in the industry and the economy.
Furthermore, this case aligns with Vinuesa et al.’s (2020) assertion that the utilisation of AI
and DTs supports low-carbon systems by reducing carbon emissions and incorporating
renewable energy.
4.4 Analysis of the PIF’s Objectives
The transformation of the PIF as one of the VRPs aims to crystalise the PIF’s role as the main
active engine and beating heart behind the economic diversity of the Kingdom by developing
and forming new strategic sectors, which have shown the extensive adoption of AI and DTs as
presented in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 of the results. The VRP also seeks to grow the PIF
into the largest SWF in the world and build solid economic partnerships to heighten the
Kingdom’s impact and role on both the regional and global spectra. Thus, the PIF VRP has
been established on the basis of aiming to equalise innovativeness and opportunities for the
current and the upcoming generations with robust and transparent governance strategies and
risk management agendas for every single pillar, project and objective.
Regression analysis would have been sensible to predict the adoption of AI and DTs in the
PIF’s portfolio companies beyond Phase 1. However, this will not be plausible to deploy as
there only exists two observations – Phase 0 and Phase 1. Thus, given the data limitation, the
regression analysis will not capture a trend in the investment behaviour of the PIF to support
the argument and the hypothesis of this research. Nonetheless, the percentage and fold changes
and the statistical significance test, alongside the performance of the PIF reflected in its
investment portfolio are sufficient and robust evidence to prove their progress towards
achieving the goals of Vision 2030. The outputs of these computations illustrated an
exponential increase in the incorporation of AI and DTs in the PIF portfolio companies, with a
statistically significant result that proved the validity of the hypothesis.
Having established the exponential increase in the PIF’s AI and DT investments, the remainder
of this section will focus on whether these technology-based investments propel the PIF in
achieving its goals by the year 2030. This will be assessed according to the objectives, KPIs
and targets of the PIF. The achievement of these targets will be measured using direct
announcements that the PIF has made or indirect factors that may not have been
straightforwardly realised, such as its activities and the achievements of its portfolio
constituents. Additionally, due to the importance of these results and the immense impact they
have on the PIF and Vision 2030, it is undoubtedly just as important to explore the broader
implications of AI and DTs on the macroeconomic level.
Vision 2030 established 96 strategic objectives across its three pillars. Four of these objectives
regarding the second pillar, ‘a thriving economy’, have been directly assigned to the PIF VRP.
Thus far, it is evident that the PIF is putting a great deal of effort into achieving its goals.
However, it is difficult to determine if some of these goals have been reached due to the PIF
being in its early stages of implementing the strategy, which is meant to show long-term results
as highlighted by Corea (2017) and Vinuesa et al. (2020). However, to examine the efficiency
and effectiveness of the PIF’s performance against the four objectives it has set, numerous
to proceeding with the analysis, it is essential to mention that the PIF portfolio constitutes
completely different companies in each phase, except three companies being in common (see
Appendix 1). The absence of companies in Phase 1 from the previous phase does not imply
that the PIF has been divesting. Instead, it implies that the PIF is further expanding and
diversifying its portfolio by adding new portfolio constituents in line with the reforms and
Vision 2030 goals and becoming the world’s largest SWF, and selectively disclosing
investments in the delivery plans.
Furthermore, the PIF did not announce its percentage or amount contribution in most of its
portfolio companies. Therefore, the industry contribution percentage could not be computed
for Phase 1. However, the transformation is already evident in the statistical analysis of this
study and will be further discussed next.
Objective KPI Target by 2020
1. Grow the assets of the PIF assets under SAR5 1.5 trillion
• •
PIF management
Total shareholder return 4% - 5%
• •
(annualised)
2. Unlock new sectors Share of assets in new 20%
• •
through the PIF sectors
(as % of total PIF AUM)
New sector assets’ direct
• SAR 30 billion
contribution to GDP
3. Build strategic Share of assets in 25%
• •
economic partnerships international investments
through the PIF (as % of total PIF AUM)
Cumulative 3-year
SAR 20 billion
contribution of PIF
Programme to FDIs
4. Localise cutting-edge Number of new direct high- 11,000 direct jobs
• •
technology and skilled jobs created
knowledge through
the PIF Investments in cutting-edge SAR 210 billion
• •
technology and in R&D
Local and international, includes
direct and indirect investments
through portfolio companies
The objectives stated above are for the long-term. However, the PIF has launched the relevant
KPIs and targets to be attained by the next phase as a mechanism of measuring progression,
with the aim of increasing these targets in the forthcoming phase leading up to the greater goals
of 2030.
4.4.1 The First Objective – Grow the Assets of the PIF
5 The Saudi Arabian Riyal (SAR) is pegged to the U.S. Dollar (USD) at a fixed exchange rate of 1 USD = 3.75
SAR
As presented by Engel, Hamirani and Saklatvala (2016), a common priority across GCC SWFs
is higher growth potential. In alignment with this observation, the first long-term objective the
PIF had set at the investment portfolio level was to grow its assets. For this objective to be
measurable, the PIF established two KPIs alongside targets to be achieved by 2020 as an initial
steppingstone. The first KPI for this objective was to increase the assets under management
(AUM). The PIF has witnessed an exponential increase in its AUM during Phase 0, which
increased by SAR 270 billion in just two years from the inauguration of the Vision.
the increase in the PIF’s AUM throughout the period 2015-2020, where it achieved the SAR
1.5 trillion target. The initial increase in the figures between the years 2015 to 2017 reflected
the PIF’s new strategy to maximise the value of the under-utilised government assets (PIF,
2018). Another factor that caused this surge in the AUM is the increased value of investments.
However, the PIF’s investments in assets are not solely for reaching the 2030 milestone, but
are intended to generate returns over the medium and the longer-term. The PIF has evidently
reaped triumphant achievements since the introduction of the reform in line with Vision 2030,
where it overcame numerous obstacles and attained indisputable impacts both nationally and
internationally through its considerable investments in AI and DTs, making it one of the largest,
fastest-growing, developing and acquiring SWFs globally (Taha, 2021). Additionally, the PIF
aims to have total assets of USD 2 trillion in 2030, which H.E. Al-Rumayyan (2020) confirmed
is very achievable due to the outstanding performance of the PIF, the assets and cash injections
given by the government, and the recycling of the profits.
The second KPI was to increase annualised shareholder return from 3% in 2014-2016 to 4%-
5% by 2020. In 2020, the PIF reported that total shareholder return upsurged to 8%, as shown
shares. Its computation constitutes of two elements – share price appreciation and dividends
paid. Therefore, its increase signifies the overall financial benefits generated for shareholders
and is seen as a good metric to determine the value of long-term investments. Thus, the increase
DTs, add value to the overall portfolio and facilitate the achievement of Vision 2030 goals.
This increase in total shareholder return in Phase 1 compared to Phase 0, which exceeded the
estimated target, is seen to be in concordance with Engel, Hamirani and Saklatvala’s (2016)
statement that return on investment and opportunities from conventional investments have
become limited and more opportunities have become available in businesses adopting high-
tech in their operations, such as that in Phase 1.
4.4.2 The Second Objective – Unlock New Sectors Through the PIF
The second objective is to unlock new sectors through the PIF. It has already been established
that the PIF VRP will significantly catalyse the Kingdom’s economic transformation, launch
and develop new diverse sectors. To achieve this objective, the PIF VRP has and continues to
establish new companies as wholly-owned subsidiaries, make local and international
investments, and develop large-scale infrastructure and real estate projects, with Giga-projects
being an elemental component of the real estate strategic sector as they revolve around unique
projects supported by AI and DTs. The two KPIs and targets within this objective were: share
of assets in new sectors to reach 20% of the PIF’s AUM by 2020 and new sector asset’s to
directly contribute to the SAR 30 billion to the country’s GDP.
At the international level, the PIF strategised its investments by introducing two international
investment pools, consisting of investments outside the Kingdom as well as the Middle East
and North Africa (MENA) region. This strategy helped the PIF unlock new sectors and build
deep connections with top-tier international investors and partners, which supports the bigger
goal of becoming the largest SWF globally. Additionally, these international investments are
seen as catalysts for unlocking new sectors locally due to the knowledge transfer and synergies
present between the PIF portfolio companies. Thus, the target to increase asset shares from 5%
in 2017 to 20% in 2020 was exceeded as the PIF announced a 30% increase in asset shares of
new sectors. This upsurge has been achieved by investing in diverse geographic locations, asset
classes and industries, focusing on AI and DT industries that have exponentially propelled the
PIF’s performance.
Although it was not announced whether the target of contributing SAR 30 billion to the GDP
was attained by 2020, this does not necessarily imply that the target has not been met. Rather,
it could be due to non-disclosure between the vision realisation department and the reporting
department creating the publicly available delivery plans. Another possibility could be the
challenges posed on the global economy by the COVID-19 pandemic, thus impeding the PIF’s
progress. Therefore, instead of looking at the actual results for this target, the transformation
in PIF investments will be explored between Phases 0 and 1 to examine whether the objective
has been met regardless of the data boundaries.
significant contribution of the PIF’s investments was in the petrochemicals industry and was
also distributed among other industries such as cement, steel, mining and financial services.
The industry clustering was not available for Phase 1, and the PIF did not disclose its
investment contributions in its portfolio companies. Thus, it will not be plausible to compute
its contribution per industry due to data unavailability. However, the change in the composition
of the companies it invested in during Phase 1 is already evident in the statistical results that
have been computed and analysed in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2, which have proved that
investments in AI and DT have increased exponentially, proving that the PIF has been
undoubtedly investing in new strategic sectors in comparison to its Phase 0 investments.
Moreover, this diversification was evident through the portfolio company profiles in Phase 1,
which included new sectors such as technology, investment management, healthcare,
entertainment, real estate, information technology and tourism. These are considered new
Furthermore, the PIF announced its investment in 30 new companies across ten strategic
sectors locally and internationally in Phase 1, thus emphasising unlocking new sectors via its
investments. Another factor that is important to consider is that although some companies in
Phase 1 do not purely operate in the AI and DT sectors, they still heavily adopt these
technologies to facilitate their operations and make them more efficient and effective. This
circumstance was prominently evident in the case of ACWA Power, where even though the
company is involved with petrochemicals, it heavily adopts AI and DTs to make its operations
more efficient and sustainable. Thus, it is seen that even if the industry clustering was available
for Phase 1, the classification would have been too vague and would have not truly and fairly
represented the utilisation of AI and DTs within the different sectors. This situation was also
observed in the majority of the PIF portfolio companies in Phase 1, such as Elm Information
Security Company on the local level and Babylon Health on the international level, which will
be discussed below.
4.4.2.1 The Case of Elm Information Security Company
Elm was established as a technology researcher. Nonetheless, the support provided by the PIF
has enabled the company to expand its operations further, transforming it into a pioneering and
innovative Saudi company in big data and integrated digital solutions, which operates across
13 diverse sectors, both public and private. As is the case with ACWA Power, this is in line
with Corea (2017) that larger-scale government interventions further facilitate companies’
expansions and aid the adoption of AI and DTs.
Elm consists of three key departments – innovation, research and venture capital. The
innovation department is the bedrock of which the other two departments operate as it catalyses
the establishment of innovative products. The research department seeks to acquire advanced
knowledge in emerging technologies and deliver unmatched customer experiences via data-
driven and user-centric solutions as the company examines and forecasts social interactions
towards new technologies. Therefore, this contributes to unlocking new strategic sectors, and
examines how businesses and individuals react to disruptive technological changes, hence
identifying obstacles that may be encountered earlier on to introduce mitigation measures.
Elm’s top three deployed technologies are AI, blockchain and IoT. In addition, the company
helps SMEs in the technology sector achieve their ambitions by providing funding and AI and
DT-based mechanisms to accelerate their development and facilitate their operations.
4.4.2.2 The Case of Babylon Health
Babylon is a digital-based telemedicine company providing virtual consultations with medical
practitioners, and a wide array of virtual services such as checking symptoms and managing
chronic conditions. The company provides both proactive, preventative healthcare and reactive
sick care, resulting in improved health and reduced costs and making healthcare accessible on
a global level. To achieve this value-based goal, Babylon has combined cutting-edge AI-
backed technologies with human medical practitioners to create this all-inclusive service for
the wellbeing of individuals, making it timely and highly effective. This case further confirms
Engel, Hamirani and Saklatvala’s (2016) observation that GCC SWFs have been noticeably
investing in the healthcare sector as a priority. Therefore, not only does the PIF’s investments
allow the development of new strategic sectors that adopt AI and DTs, but also achieves the
wider goals of Vision 2030 in line with the UN SDGs, which is in conformity with Alharthi et
al.’s (2019) research on the attainment of UN SDGs via Vision 2030.
4.4.3 The Third Objective – Build Strategic Economic Partnerships Through the PIF
The third objective is to build strategic economic partnerships through the PIF. While
implementing the reform strategy, the PIF aims to develop and intensify its presence in the
international market. Therefore, the first objective of the PIF growing its AUM is interlinked
with this objective, where many of the AUM is in international strategic and diversified pools,
compared to being only local and regional prior to Phase 1. Therefore, the PIF will benefit from
its scale to become the most favoured and impactful investment partner worldwide. As part of
the VRP, the PIF’s international assets were expected to comprise 25% of its AUM in 2020;
however, this target was exceeded to comprise 30% of the PIF’s AUM.
No direct announcement was made regarding the second target of contributing SAR 20 billion
to FDIs over the three-year period. However, in Phase 0, 100% of the portfolio companies were
local or regional within MENA. Whereas, in Phase 1, the PIF portfolio comprised ten
international companies, including Blackstone, Lucid Motors, Magic Leap and Uber based in
the U.S. and Babylon Health and SoftBank headquartered in the UK. Moreover, it is likely that
many other investments were not disclosed publicly to date. However, news agencies have
announced some of the PIF’s technology-based investments that were not disclosed in its
delivery plans, such as:
Pfizer
IBM
Automatic Data Processing Inc.
The Boeing Company
Meta Technology Company (formerly known as Facebook)
Citigroup Inc.
The Walt Disney Company
Bank of America
Tesla Inc.
Six Flags Entertainment Corporation
General Electric Company
Virgin Galactic
These disclosures further promote Corea’s (2017) remark that most companies adopting high-
tech are located in the U.S. and the UK due to their close proximity to the world’s top
universities and research centres that further support and facilitate the adoption of these
technologies.
Furthermore, the Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority6 (SAMA) announced that the PIF signed
a memorandum of understanding with the National Energy Administration in China during
2019 to collaborate in the renewable energy sector. This opportunity aimed to deepen the
collaboration and economic ties between both entities and utilise the Kingdom’s strategic
location as a hub for the advancement of renewable energy projects. This revelation was a
significant contributor to the objective of ‘building strategic economic partnerships’ and
encouraging the local private sector to invest in renewable energies, which is heavily backed
by advanced technologies required to construct wind turbines, solar panels, electrification, and
energy storage mechanisms as well as Power-to-X, which involves the transformation of
electricity into heat. As a result, numerous high-skilled job opportunities were created, and
localisation of cutting-edge technologies and knowledge was facilitated. These initiatives
illustrated that there is a significant increase in FDIs.
Moreover, the PIF has committed to an additional SAR 361 billion in FDIs over the five years
in Phase 1. This backdrop demonstrated the PIF’s intention to intensify its FDI contribution in
its investment portfolio. Given the statistical outputs computed earlier in this section, it was
evident that the vast majority of these FDIs were dedicated to investments in AI and DTs, with
6 The Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority (SAMA) is the Central Bank of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
SoftBank Vision Fund being a prominent example. Additionally, the PIF focuses not only on
investing in FDIs but also on channelling FDIs into the Kingdom to further facilitate knowledge
and technology transfer. Despite the recent common global challenges, the country’s Minister
of Investment announced that an increased number of investors are starting businesses in the
Kingdom, making FDI inflow into the country at its peak level due to Vision 2030 (Al-Falih,
2021). FDI inflow is also attained through other mechanisms, such as the establishment of
multiple Giga-projects, with the most distinct project being NEOM.
4.4.3.1 The Case of SoftBank Vision Fund
SoftBank Group Corp. is a conglomerate company operating in the investment management
sector, with a mere focus on advanced technology-based investments. The PIF’s investment in
SoftBank is the most considerable technology investment fund globally, which is expected to
reach USD 100 billion. The PIF’s governor, H.E. Al-Rumayyan (2020), stated that the
alignment of thinking was what brought and drove this mega partnership with SoftBank.
The venture capital vision fund between the PIF and SoftBank is a committed active
partnership that aims to target long-term investments in developing SMEs run by disruptive
innovators in technology that aim to become central platforms of the informatics revolution.
The fundamental premise of all portfolio companies in this partnership is to disrupt regular
traditional businesses that are run inefficiently, where the inefficiency could be due to legacy
systems, cost management and many mediators. Thus, the utilisation of AI and DTs would
disrupt those industries. Therefore, SoftBank acts as an incubator for these high-tech SMEs,
and the PIF is a supporter to make these goals attainable and successful with the funding
opportunities it offers, further reinforcing Corea’s (2017) observation.
The vision fund invests across all sectors and geographic locations regarding technology, such
as IoT, AI, robotics, software, FinTech, health sciences, computational biology as well as
computing and cloud technologies. Intending to be one of the top investors in the global
technology sector, the PIF will contribute to 45% of the vision fund’s total investments. As a
result, the vision fund will also provide the PIF with a platform to access emerging technology
opportunities. Moreover, synergies between PIF portfolio companies were evident when the
Saudi Electricity Company announced its partnership with SoftBank vision fund to create the
New Solar Energy Plan for 2030. Building such partnerships also facilitates and enables the
localisation of cutting-edge technologies. This case exemplifies the PIF’s goal to create
strategic and operational value by building interconnected networks of its portfolio companies
across diverse geographies and sectors.
4.4.3.2 The Case of NEOM
NEOM is a USD 500 billion futuristic mega-city whose strategy was developed in 2017 and
established in 2019, involving the development of sixteen diverse sectors such as mobility,
biotech, digital technology and health and wellbeing. Currently, the mega-city has an airport.
In January 2021, HRH Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman announced the launch of ‘The
Line’ project within NEOM, a city that is unmatched by any of the other smart cities around
the globe. Enhanced liveability in ‘The Line’ is heavily supported through the invisible AI-
enabled infrastructure. Moreover, its linear setup will preserve 95% of its natural landscape,
where it will be free of cars and roads, and its clean energy will be 100%. This project will
generate 380,000 new jobs and boost the Kingdom’s GDP by USD 48 billion by 2030.
Additionally, in November 2021, HRH disclosed plans on building ‘Oxagon’, the world’s
largest floating automated modular manufacturing facility, an efficient ecological phenomenon
to revolutionise reliance on renewable energy, which is expected to be a catalyst for the
economic growth and diversity of the Kingdom. This environmentally friendly hydrogen
production facility aims to support sustainable solutions in the transport sector and addresses
climate change issues by implementing sustainable solutions to minimise carbon emissions, in
alignment with the UN Agenda 2030. Alongside its peer Giga-projects, NEOM is a substantial
contributor to attracting FDI inflows into the Kingdom due to its unique AI-based
that with the launch of the aforementioned projects in 2021, FDI inflows have peaked and
reached a historical all-time high of USD 13.8 billion in the second quarter of 2021, being the
fifth consecutive increase. Despite the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the
global economy, foreign investors have high confidence in the Kingdom’s transformation
journey under the direction of Vision 2030. Consequently, FDIs in the Kingdom are expected
to increase to at least USD 14 billion in the last two quarters of 2021 (Trading Economics,
2021).
4.4.4 The Fourth Objective – Localise Cutting-edge Technology and Knowledge
The fourth objective is to localise cutting-edge technology and knowledge through the PIF.
This objective is to be achieved by creating more high-skilled direct job opportunities,
establishing cutting-edge technology companies, investing in and developing international
partnerships with technology companies to gain further experience and expertise. The first
target is to increase the number of new direct high-skilled jobs to 11,000 by 2020. When the
PIF first started to implement its reform strategy in 2015, its first step was to reformulate its
whole board to hire new highly skilled employees with the required qualifications to enable
the attainment of Vision 2030 goals. The PIF initially consisted of 40 employees, and in March
2020, there were over 700 employees with the aim of becoming 1000 by the end of 2020. In
December 2020, there were over 1,300 employees in the PIF alone despite the COVID-19
pandemic (Azhar, 2021), excluding the number of highly skilled employees in its 30
subsidiaries that are heavily reliant on AI and DTs. This instance alone is a considerable
contributor to creating more high-skilled job opportunities.
from 2015-2019. The significant surge in 2019, with the rise of technology-based companies,
proves substantial progress in increasing employment rates. Although the literature reviewed
in Section 2.5 presented a common theme across all the studies that AI has adverse or mixed
effects on employment rates, it is evident that this was not the case for the Kingdom. Although
automation backed by AI technologies can displace labour, it in turn, unlocks new high-skilled
job opportunities. As such, the Kingdom is bridging the gap between the labour force and
technologies, thus deterring the adverse effects of AI on employment rates.
Furthermore, the PIF launched its Graduate Development Programme in 2017 to foster young
persons’ talents and provide them with the environment and resources to sustain a future career
in high-skilled jobs to shape the future of the Kingdom’s economy. The programme offers
academic courses taught to the country’s brightest young minds by academics from world-class
universities, which involve theoretical and practical learning in high-skilled jobs such as data
analytics, financial analysis and project management. Additionally, the programme allows
trainees to apply knowledge gained in the classroom via on-the-job training at the PIF and its
subsidiaries. This epitomises another significant contribution for increasing the number of
employees in high-skilled jobs. Thus, it is evident that the substantial increase in the number
fulfil their job requirements that entail the utilisation of AI or DTs. Consequently proving that
the Kingdom’s 2030 Vision is in concordance with the UN SDGs as illustrated by Alharthi et
provision of quality education.
The second target for this objective was for the PIF to invest SAR 210 billion in its local and
international portfolio companies in the AI and DT sectors. Therefore, not only is it investing
in companies that already operate in the technology sector, but it also encourages more
conventional companies to incorporate such technologies. This phenomenon was demonstrated
in many of PIF portfolio companies such as ACWA Power, Elm Information Security and
SoftBank Vision Fund. With the PIF being keen on localising cutting-edge technologies, the
awareness and implementation of AI and DTs have also increased among local companies to
be in harmony with Vision 2030. In addition, international investments in AI and DTs are not
intended to be merely for portfolio diversification purposes but to also encourage knowledge
transfer, the formation of allies, and the creation of synergies between local and international
PIF portfolio companies, which further assists the Kingdom in localising the technology sector
and strengthening its position on the national and global level. In alignment with the two KPIs
of this objective, the Saudi Ministry of Communication and Information Technology has
launched a five-year strategy on the sectoral level that aims to increase the aggregate GDP of
the sector by SAR 50 billion, as well as create 25,000 direct high-skilled jobs in the information
and communications technology (ICT) industry.
Moreover, in 2019, SAMA announced that the PIF signed a memorandum of understanding
with OYO Hotels and Homes, a leading international company in the hospitality sector that is
extensively involved in technology. The deployment of these technologies in the Kingdom
exemplifies that they are being localised in concordance with the fourth objective, in addition
to cultivating the hospitality and tourism industry in the Kingdom, creating new job
opportunities locally and launching new strategic sectors. Furthermore, localising cutting-edge
technologies was further emphasised in the establishment of TAQNIA, a Saudi technology
development and investment company that aims to develop and bring global technologies into
the Kingdom, and was also exhibited in many of the PIF subsidiaries, such as in the case of
NEOM, Elm Information Security, Saudi Information Technology Company, ACWA Power,
Saudi Arabian Military Industries and the vast majority of the local PIF portfolio companies.
4.4.4.1 The Case of Saudi Arabian Military Industries
One of the Vision 2030 goals is to localise the Saudi military industry to maximise the
utilisation of the Kingdom’s assets compared to importing military products. As a result, the
PIF has founded the Saudi Military Industries Company (SAMI) as a wholly-owned subsidiary,
which works under the directives outlined in Vision 2030. To become among the top twenty-
five military companies globally, SAMI aims to deploy the latest advanced technologies to
develop military products such as defence electronics, emerging technology products,
protection and surveillance systems backed by AI as per global standards. To achieve this goal,
SAMI’s mission is to localise and develop cutting-edge technologies in alignment with the
fourth objective of the PIF, manufacture world-class products and provide top-quality services
by the best national talents to strengthen and accelerate the progress of the military, industrial
equipment and ICT sectors. In this sense, the case of SAMI incorporates both targets of this
objective to increase the number of new high-skilled jobs and investments in cutting-edge
technologies under Vision 2030’s mandate.
4.5 The Wider Implications of the PIF’s Strategic Transformation
Having discussed the increase in FDIs and the number of employed persons, it is essential to
further explore this transformation from a more expansive angle using the Kingdom’s GDP
As far as 2017, the Kingdom could only be classified as an oil-based economy. This claim
implies that its economy is not multi-faceted and does not have a complex disposition. Hence,
due to their minor impact, any fluctuations in non-oil sectors would not be reflected on the
macroeconomic level, and indicators such as the country’s GDP would not be affected.
Moreover, it has already been established that the PIF is the beating heart and active engine
behind the success and growth of the Kingdom’s economy. Therefore, alongside oil prices, the
recent rebirth of the PIF has the most significant impact on the country’s GDP. Thus, the
analysis of the Kingdom’s GDP will be carried out with this assumption in mind. The average
annual Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) crude oil prices from 2014-
GDP growth rates and oil prices was computed in 2-year intervals from 2014-2021 (illustrated
(in USD per Barrel)
Year Quarter GDP Growth (%) Oil Price (USD/Barrel) Correlation Coefficient (2-year)
Q1 2.7 98.61
Q2 -0.5 102.99
Q3 0.6 97.25
Q4 -0.2 73.2
-0.05285063
Q1 2.7 48.57
Q2 2 57.95
Q3 0.5 46.5
Q4 -0.4 42.16
Q1 1.1 33.57
Q2 0 45.64
Q3 -0.1 45
Q4 0.9 49.33
-0.679547444
Q1 -1.4 52.03
Q2 0.4 48.28
Q3 0 48.11
Q4 -0.7 55.41
Q1 1.4 62.91
Q2 1 67.81
Q3 1 70
Q4 0.5 60
0.798019124
Q1 -0.9 54.98
Q2 0.1 59.9
Q3 -0.2 56.46
Q4 0.3 56.95
Q1 -2.2 46.68
Q2 -4.7 28
Q3 2.5 40.92
Q4 0.3 42.74 0.695638482
Q1 -1 58.04
2021 Q2 1.1 66.1
Q3 5.8 70.48
Although the correlation between the GDP growth rate and oil price decreases from 2018-2019
to 2020-2021, the previous values depict a negative correlation between these two variables.
Numerous factors prove that this is not the case for the Kingdom, most evidently the country’s
aversion from investments in petrochemicals in more recent years compared to previously
being solely oil-based. Therefore, it could be stated that this computation was incapable of
validly capturing a cause-and-effect association between the two variables – GDP growth and
oil price. Thus, this calculation represents the principle that correlation does not imply
causation, meaning that the relationship between the two variables does not necessarily imply
that one causes the other and there could be numerous other factors affecting both variables.
Hence, it would not be reasonable to analyse the Kingdom’s GDP with the sole reliance on oil
price, as this indicator has been affected by other factors driven by its 2030 Vision in more
recent years. As such, given the Kingdom’s reduced oil sector contributions and increased
investments in non-oil sectors strikes the importance of analysing this indicator from a well-
rounded perspective in opposition to the mere focus on the oil price. The other factors affecting
the Kingdom’s GDP will be discussed below, most of which entail the implementations of the
Vision 2030 mandate to diversify the economy of the Kingdom.
first quarter of 2014 of the Kingdom’s GDP growth. Subsequently, the oil prices have
witnessed a plunge in 2015 and 2016, most prominently reflected in the fourth quarter of 2016’s
GDP, where the growth rate dropped to -1.4%. The GDP started recovering in 2018 with the
increase in oil prices and the introduction of the PIF VRP.
The year 2019 was challenging for the Kingdom, where the GDP declined again, especially in
the first quarter, which resulted from the bombing of some Saudi Aramco petroleum refineries
by the Yemeni Houthis. As the GDP was recovering in the second quarter of 2019, it declined
again with the rise of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has inevitably affected all businesses
and economies globally. Yet, despite the decline in oil prices in 2019, the fourth quarter of the
year represented a 0.3% growth rate after a -0.2% decline in the previous quarter. SAMA
justified that this growth was attributed to the support of the non-oil sector, with the PIF having
attained substantial growth in adopting AI and DTs in its investment portfolio.
Moreover, SAMA reported that the non-oil private sector constituted 39% of the Kingdom’s
GDP in 2018, and 41% in 2019. Furthermore, the non-oil public sector comprised 16.8% of
the GDP in 2018, and 17.2% in 2019. Meanwhile, the oil sector’s contribution decreased to
41.5% in 2019 from 43.4% in 2018. This transformation was driven by the PIF’s decision of
selling 70% of its stake for approximately SAR 260 billion in Saudi Basic Industries
Corporation (SABIC), a subsidiary of Saudi Aramco, both of which operate in the
petrochemicals sector. This transaction was the most considerable in the history of the
Kingdom and has enabled the PIF to redirect its investments towards new strategic sectors both
on the national and global spectra, thus facilitating the PIF’s goals and accelerating the
execution of Vision 2030 objectives.
of this study that the PIF is effortlessly working towards diversifying the Kingdom’s economy
by averting from oil-based investments towards other diverse strategic sectors that incorporate
AI and DTs. For instance, one of the most conspicuous achievements of the local technology
sector in 2019 was the telecommunications and information technology contribution, which
has led to the Kingdom leaping 16 ranks on the ICT pillar of the Global Competitiveness Index
for expansively adopting ICT in the country.
2018 2019
Non-Oil Private Sector 39% 41%
Non-Oil Public Sector 16.8% 17.2%
Oil Sector 43.4% 41.5%
As the pandemic was in domination in 2020, the GDP was extensively triggered and thus fell
to its lowest levels in the first two quarters of the year, and was volatile until the first quarter
of 2021. Such economic contraction suggested the necessary health measures taken by the
Kingdom to contain the virus and protect its citizens and nationals both in the country and
abroad. Moreover, the pandemic led to economic supply and demand disruptions and tightened
financial conditions. However, in the second quarter of 2021, the GDP recovered even though
oil prices were not at their highest. As highlighted, the highest oil price was USD 93 per barrel
in 2014, with a GDP growth rate of 2.7% in the first quarter of the year. The second highest oil
price was USD 65 per barrel in 2018 and 2021, where the GDP growth in 2018 ranged between
0.5%-1.4% across the four quarters. In 2021, however, the country’s GDP witnessed a
substantial surge, reaching a growth rate of 5.8% – an all-time high since 2010. These
indications dictate that, although in its very early stages, the impact of working towards Vision
2030’s and the PIF’s goals of achieving sustainability through AI and DTs are starting to be
extensively represented as part of the Kingdom’s GDP, signifying its grave importance to the
country. This case is in line with the literature reviewed in Section 2.5 surrounding the
implications of AI on the macroeconomic level that the adoption of AI, with the exemption of
its impact on the labour force, has a significant economic impact on the macroeconomic
indicators such as GDP measures (Somjai, Jermsittiparsert and Chankoson, 2020; Huang, Hu
and Dong, 2019; Furman and Seamans, 2019; He, 2018).
4.6 Concluding Remarks
The four direct objectives assigned to the PIF have been examined based on their relevant KPIs
and targets intended to be achieved by the end of 2020. Although the actual targets may not
have been fully announced, the actions taken by the PIF have been discussed through a sample
of case studies, implying the high probability of reaching the disclosed targets. Additionally,
the broader implications of the PIF’s extensive involvement in AI and DTs have been assessed
on the macroeconomic level by using employment measures, FDI inflows and GDP growth
rates as macroeconomic indicators of the Kingdom.
It is crucial to declare that not only does the PIF benefit from investing in companies adopting
AI and DTs, but these companies also benefit from such large-scale investors as they are well-
equipped to inject the businesses with significant capital investments, which smaller-scale
investors are incapable of providing. Additionally, the considerable local influence of SWFs
opens doors for these businesses. Moreover, SWFs can also locate potential synergies that may
be present between their portfolio companies and allow them access to foreign markets. This
bilateral relationship depicts a marriage of interest, providing substantial advantages and
knowledge transfers. However, collaborating with SWFs imposes more responsibility and
accountability upon the portfolio companies to fulfil their requirements for receiving large
funding.
In line with this, the PIF not only invests in companies to expand its portfolio, but also focuses
on value creation and supports its portfolio companies in achieving high growth rates by
helping them develop their governance systems. As such, the PIF has established a robust
governance committee that is based on six pillars to overlook its portfolio companies’
governance systems externally and ensure that they keep up with the best practices. Moreover,
the PIF has a robust internal governance structure, where potential investments undergo many
layers of investment diligence and risk assessments (Al-Rumayyan, 2020). The tracking of
these governance standards ensures compliance with PIF and global principles, which is a
crucial step to ensure that AI and DTs are being implemented ethically. This notion was
illustrated in Vinuesa et al.’s (2020) study that the utilisation of AI and DTs need to be
regulated using robust governance systems to mitigate detrimental risks such as hacking,
malfunctioning or any other unethical violations that arise due to lack of oversight.
Furthermore, the PIF indirectly contributes to 28 other objectives beyond those with which it
is tasked due to its significant role in the Kingdom’s economy and the way in which it supports
various other sectors and VRPs. For instance, the PIF VRP seeks to offer s fulfilling and healthy
life by facilitating access to healthcare services, which was evident in the case of Babylon
Health. Furthermore, the PIF contributes to the growth and the development of the country’s
economy by attracting FDIs, developing the digital economy, improving connectivity,
developing bilateral economic ties both locally and internationally and transforming promising
local companies into local and global leaders. It also contributes to increasing employment,
enhancing government effectiveness, enabling social responsibility and strengthening national
identity, all of which have been proven through the PIF’s activities.
Moreover, the PIF is a catalyst and a complement to the Kingdom’s private sector by investing
in and forming new sectors to help achieve several goals of Vision 2030. The PIF also acts as
a global player and participates in a large network to select strategic partners that will aid and
facilitate the transfer of technology to the Saudi private sector, providing it with a competitive
edge as well as increasing FDIs as part of the Vision 2030 programme.
5.0 Limitations of the Research
Obstacles were encountered and limitations were inevitably present throughout the different
stages of this research, most prominently in the literature review and the data collection stages.
Therefore, this section aims to present the potential limitations in regard to the literature
availability, data collection process and other case-specific impediments. Moreover, the
limitations of AI mechanisms deployed in this research will also be explored. Finally, ways in
which these limitations were - or can be - conquered or mitigated will be suggested.
5.1 Literature Availability
This paper’s specific research area and methodology have not been previously explored.
Therefore, it was necessary to deploy the bottom-up approach by disintegrating this research
into broader fields to review the available literature, which was then amalgamated and
synthesised to support this paper and formulate a sensible research question. Although the lack
of literature may have been extensively challenging, exploring the diverse fields it incorporates
using the bottom-up method has provided a better, well-rounded approach towards the topic
and has strategically ordered the knowledge to make it more comprehensible. Nonetheless,
even with the implementation of the disintegration procedure, the research areas that arose
were still relatively new, thus not yet mature, further limiting the available literature and their
robustness. While all the research areas relevant to this paper were covered, the literature
reviewed included some limitations, most of which were in regard to insufficient samples and
observations, as was the case with this paper. Therefore, although these papers may provide
significant contributions and fill substantial gaps in the literature, Vision 2030 and AI,
especially from an investment perspective, have longer-term implications, where it is
implausible to derive actual results even with the utilisation of robust statistical tools as
suggested by Vinuesa et al. (2020). However, an attempt to mitigate this shortcoming involved
the deployment of semi-empirical analysis consisting of numerous case studies to assess
whether the accomplishment of Vision 2030 goals is attainable, given the latest performance
review of the PIF.
5.2 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Although the inclusion criteria contain far more substantial investments than in the exclusion
criteria, tracking the PIF’s actual progress in relation to the French Private Equity Investment
and the Investment Programme in Brazil would have been beneficial. Both initiatives include
significant contributions to the relevant countries, and the inability to generate profiles for these
investments hindered the ability to further analyse these investments in relation to the extent
of AI and DT adoption and the PIF’s objectives; most prominently the third objective of
building strategic economic partnerships, as both Brazil and France were not founding
countries of any of the investments in the inclusion criteria. However, the direct investment in
the inclusion criteria were substantial and sufficient to produce statistically significant results
in line with the hypothesis of this research.
5.3 Company Profile Compilation Process
Only a handful of companies had downloadable profiles available. Therefore, to ensure the
inclusion of the full sample, profiles of most companies had to be compiled using other
methods. Although this involves a significant risk of inconsistency, an attempt to mitigate this
was by screening the available company profiles, identifying their main contents and compiling
the same type of data for the constructed company profiles. AI mechanisms were utilised to
scrape these contents from the company websites; however, due to the variation in website
formatting, the code occasionally crashed as it was unable to detect some texts embedded in
images or non-text formats. This further iterates that although AI may be an efficient tool to
extract large sums of data, the code must be specifically tailored to carry out the task on an
individualistic basis; otherwise, its crashing would impede the workflow. However, to ensure
that the full sample was included, profiles of these companies were manually compiled.
Additionally, a few companies who operate in traditional sectors, mainly in Phase 0, did not
have functioning websites. For these, the Bloomberg Professional Services PIB command was
utilised to generate the company profiles as PDFs. However, the PIB command collects
publicly accessible data; thus, some documents were blank due to the unavailability of
information. Nonetheless, this does not pose a risk to this study, as the principal analysis lies
in Phase 1 portfolio companies, and it is already a given that Phase 0 companies barely adopt
AI and DTs, as shown in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 of the results.
5.4 Textual Analysis
This section further iterates on the limitations of AI, where the textual analysis was intended
to be carried out by detecting the 20 most repeated words across all company profiles to avoid
subjectivity. However, this was not plausible as although punctuation, stop and connections
words were excluded, the top 20 words detected by the code were random jargon that are not
related to the domains of this research (see Appendix 2). This limitation was conquered by
constructing a bag of words within the code, including AI, DT and Petchem-related
terminologies, which were then detected in the company profiles being studied.
Given the sentiment analysis approach deployed in this study, it further shed light on the
limitations of AI, where it literally detects the terms identified in the bag of words but
completely disregards the context in which they were mentioned. This incident was most
prominently acknowledged when the percentage and fold changes of the Petchem domain
increased in Phase 1 driven by the case of ACWA Power, which is in opposition to the PIF’s
strategy of averting from traditional investments.
Therefore, communication and impression management implications needed to be carefully
considered to contextualise the terminologies and not obstruct the accuracy of results.
Consequently, following the exploration of Petchem terminologies’ contexts, the terms were
found to be in the form of grammatical negation, as explained in Section 4.3. Hence, the count
of Petchem terminologies was excluded from the statistical significance test to avoid obtaining
an invalid output.
5.5 Discussion of Results
An outside-in analysis of the portfolio companies’ impact on the PIF was carried out. However,
due to non-disclosure, many of the PIF’s investment amounts or contributions were
unidentified, thus deterring the ability to deploy an inside-out analysis of the PIF’s impact on
its portfolio companies. However, this has been overcome by carrying out extensive research
on the PIF’s impact on its portfolio companies, as represented in the case of ACWA Power,
Elm Information Security, NEOM and SoftBank, where it was evident that the PIF’s
involvement has enabled the companies to be more sustainable and show progression in the
utilisation of technologies in line with Corea (2017).
Due to the limited availability of performance metrics within each portfolio company, the PIF’s
contribution per industry was also implausible to compute for Phase 1. Moreover, even with
the identification of industries in which each company operates, this method did not provide
an accurate representation of the adoption of AI and DTs as the industry classification was
vague. Subsequently, it has been observed in Phase 1 that even though some companies still
operated in traditional sectors, becoming a PIF portfolio constituent entailed modernising their
approach by utilising AI and DTs. This matter was exemplified in ACWA Power (in the
petrochemicals industry), Babylon Health (in the healthcare industry) and OYO Hotels and
Homes (in the hospitality industry). Despite their operation in traditional sectors, the main
essence of their operations is heavily dependent on AI-based technologies. Therefore, the
reliance on the numerical results presented in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 was sufficient in this
sense. This was further surmounted by looking at other metrics such as employment measures,
FDI inflows and GDP growth rates. This mechanism resulted in obtaining a more robust
analysis by exploring the wider implications on the Kingdom rather than merely focusing on
the PIF’s direct fulfilment of its targets. Given that the industry contribution was disclosed in
the Phase 0 delivery plan, this caused inconsistency in the analysis. Nonetheless, this was also
surpassed by identifying the Vision 2030 objectives of diversifying the Saudi economy and
providing proof that the PIF has averted from investments in petrochemicals and paved its way
towards economic diversification through the obtention of its four direct objectives.
The PIF has evidently been transparent with its goals and objectives. However, data limitations
are present, where only the most considerable investments were highlighted rather than
disclosing all portfolio companies in Phase 1. This approach is sensible because SWFs tend to
have extensive portfolios, and with the PIF being one of the top ten SWFs globally, it would
be implausible to disclose every single investment. Thus, investments that have more
significant impacts on the portfolio have been included, making the sample size reasonable,
which has provided significant results that portray the substantial transformation between
Phase 0 and Phase 1.
5.6 Case-specific Impediments
In addition to Vision 2030 being somewhat new, the AI landscape is also not yet mature (Corea,
2017). Therefore, it is difficult to reach solid and definite conclusions. However, this paper
aimed to bridge the gap, enabling future researchers to build on this piece of literature.
Moreover, SWFs need to be aware of the extent of their investments in technology, as the
increased demand may result in overinvesting, which will lead to unsustainability (Barbary,
2015), making the rationale behind Vision 2030 counterintuitive. Therefore, SWFs must have
a long-term strategy regarding their investments rather than jumping on the bandwagon of
investing in trending sectors, as this will be undoubtedly crucial for eventual success. H.E. Al-
Rumayyan (2020) stated in his interview with David Rubenstein that the PIF has a robust
governance structure, where every potential investment undergoes the many layers of
investment diligence and risk assessments. This is a substantial contributor to the strategic
investments made by the PIF, hence reducing the high risks involved with technology-based
investments. This robust governance structure that aims to mitigate risks was exemplified in
Phase 0. Prior to investing in the high-risk sectors of AI and DT, the PIF built a solid foundation
to acquire more resilience and perseverance by empowering the Saudi private sector through
investments in traditional local industries, thus the lower number of hits in the AI and DT
domains of Phase 0.
Additionally, it is crucial to be aware that not all investments may succeed. Thus, as Engel,
Hamirani and Saklatvala (2016) suggested, introducing the learning curve into an SWF would
be an invaluable addition. Although other valuations could present the financial returns, the
learning curve does that, in addition to visualising the progress rate in gaining experience, new
skills and strategic benefits. Success is not only present in the context of financials, as gaining
knowledge and experience from mistakes could be more valuable than financial gains, given
that they ensure long-term success and sustainability. As such, once the learning phase is over,
the next phase of the investment strategy will be far more robust and perceptive as the selection
process of managers, board members and investments will be done with a better understanding
of the prospects and the ability to succeed. Therefore, in the case where an SWF commits to a
bad investment decision, the learning curve would show the knowledge and experience gained
despite the financial losses. This is a key metric to ensure sustainable long-term success and is
aligned with HRH Mohammed Bin Salman’s statement in presenting Vision 2030: “we ponder
what lies over the horizon rather than worrying about what could be lost”.
6.0 Conclusion
This study employed sentiment, empirical and semi-empirical analyses upon a sample of 80
PIF portfolio companies to assess the extent to which the adoption of AI and DT in the PIF
VRP propel the Kingdom’s success in relation to accomplishing its 2030 Vision. The
hypothesis that the PIF is heavily adopting AI and DTs as part of its Vision 2030 programme,
compared to its pre-Vision 2030 era, is statistically validated given the large percentage and
fold increases and the attainment of a statistically significant result at a 95% confidence level.
Domains Percentage Change (%) Fold Change Statistical Significance
𝑝 < 1 × 10
%&
Artificial Intelligence (AI) 3887.50 39.88
∴ Statistically
Digital Technology (DT) 463.23 5.63
significant
Furthermore, to gain a deeper insight into the PIF’s activities and goals, its objectives, KPIs
and targets were analysed and discussed, which were evidently in conformity with the
hypothesis. The PIF is not constructed to be solely a savings fund, but also a stabilisation and
development fund. Thus, its capital is intended to cushion the country’s budget against price
fluctuations in the commodities market and neutralise the impacts of such external shocks.
Therefore, the macroeconomic implications of the PIF’s activities were explored using the
number of employed persons, FDI inflows, and GDP growth rates as indicators of the
Kingdom’s macroeconomy.
Throughout the analysis, the PIF presented consistent progress and developmental leaps
towards achieving its goals under the Vision 2030 mandate. This progress was even more
evident in its attainment of higher ranks on the Global AI, ICT and Smart City Indices. Thus,
given these robust results, it is evident that the PIF is well-equipped to remain resilient and
determined to surpass obstacles to best deliver its goals by 2030 and beyond.
As previously established, the literature surrounding areas covered in this paper was minimal
both in terms of value and quantity, and no previous research had covered this field. Therefore,
with the statistically significant results and the in-depth analyses presented, this paper has
aimed to provide substantial literary contributions. Moreover, all the findings in this paper were
in conformity with the literature reviewed, such as Kostin’s (2018) observation that employing
DTs is an inevitable leap for organisations to remain successful and competitive, where a long-
term vision is essential to structure future strategies. The alignment with literature reviewed
was also exemplified in Alharthi et al.’s (2019) research that Saudi Vision 2030 supports the
UN SDGs. This notion has driven the exploration Vinuesa et al.’s (2020) study on the
attainment of UN SDGs through the utilisation of AI technologies, where it was proven that
overall, AI facilitates the achievement of these sustainable goals. Furthermore, Engel,
Hamirani and Saklatvala’s (2016) research findings entailed that SWFs are prioritising higher
growth potentials and diversification from investments in traditional sectors towards
idiosyncratic growth incentives, where they are aggressively pursuing technology and
engaging in high-profile investments, with the PIF making the ‘top of the list’.
Nonetheless, regarding the exploration of AI and DT on macroeconomies, there existed one
solitary deviation from the literature available on the effects of AI and DTs on the labour force.
This notion entailed that all the existing literature illustrated that AI and DTs have adverse or
mixed effects on labour (Somjai, Jermsittiparsert and Chankoson, 2020; Huang, Hu and Dong,
2019; Furman and Seamans, 2019; He, 2018). However, this paper ascertained that the PIF’s
new strategy of adopting AI and DTs in its portfolio has, in fact, substantially positive effects
on labour, which was most prominently encapsulated in its fourth objective of ‘localising
cutting-edge technology and knowledge’ through creating new direct high-skilled job
opportunities and investing in cutting-edge technology.
This finding has provided an eccentric understanding that advocates future research to explore
this area in its diverse dynamics. Future research on the subject could utilise this paper as an
addition to existing literature providing a more comprehensive insight on the topic. Other
potential studies may either expand on this research and assess the accuracy of the semi-
empirical findings once data becomes available and more well-annotated or deploy the same
approach in a different setting. The sole fixation on the Kingdom has allowed the formation of
a more robust, well-rounded and in-depth analysis of the topic; thus, attempting to meet the
goal of bridging a substantial research gap both concerning the research topic and the
methodology deployed to formulate a comprehensive framework. Despite this backdrop, the
inclusive conceptual framework employed could be similarly valuable across a wide range of
applications. Conclusively, alongside contributions to academia, this paper further aspires to
add value to the PIF, the Saudi government, and the strategic implementation of Vision 2030
goals.