NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 1
Novel Approaches towards Studying Change:
Implications for Understanding and Treating Psychopathology
Saida Heshmati1, Marlon Westhoff2, Stefan G. Hofmann2,
1Claremont Graduate University, Department of Psychology, 150 E. 10th Street, Claremont, CA
91711, United States of America
2Philipps-University of Marburg, Department of Psychology, Translational Clinical Psychology
Group, Schulstraße 12, D-35032 Marburg, Germany
Author Notes
Correspondence regarding this article should be addressed to: Saida Heshmati, Department of
Psychology, Claremont Graduate University, 150 E 10th Street, Claremont, CA, 91711, United
States, email: saida.heshmati@cgu.edu
Disclosure Statement: Authors of this manuscript have no conflict of interest to disclose.
Dr. Hofmann receives financial support by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (as part of
the Alexander von Humboldt Professur) and the Hessische Ministerium für Wissenschaft und
Kunst (as part of the LOEWE Spitzenprofessur). He also receives compensation for his work as
editor from SpringerNature and royalties and payments for his work from various publishers.
Key Points: (3-5 bulleted sentences)
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 2
● Traditional models of psychopathology, based on symptom-based classifications, are
limited in addressing the dynamic and individualized nature of mental health.
● This paper emphasizes the need for idiographic and process-oriented approaches, moving
away from static models to dynamic and personalized systems of psychopathology and
health.
● The paper explores alternative methodologies, such as Process-Based Therapy, dynamic
network modeling, and control theory, which offer deeper insights into the interplay of
symptoms and underlying mechanisms in mental health disorders.
Synopsis: (100 words or less)
In this paper, we critically evaluate contemporary models of psychopathology and therapies,
underscoring the limitations of traditional symptom-based classification approaches in mental
health. We introduce a paradigm shift in the field, towards a process-oriented and dynamic
systems approach to psychotherapy that offers deeper insights into the complex interplay of
symptoms and individual experiences in psychopathology. These approaches offer a more
personalized and effective understanding and treatment of mental health issues, moving beyond
static and one-dimensional views. We discuss the implications for clinical practice, emphasizing
improved assessment, diagnosis, and tailored treatment strategies.
Keywords: psychopathology; psychotherapy; evidence-based therapy; processes of change,
idiography; Ecological Momentary Assessment, Dynamic Network Analysis
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 3
Novel Approaches towards Studying Change:
Implications for Understanding and Treating Psychopathology
Easing human suffering is a formidable endeavor, necessitating robust conceptual
frameworks to distill complexity into manageable issues. The way mental health problems are
conceptualized and classified fundamentally influences the clinician’s views and therapeutic
approach to these problems. Nosology, the taxonomy of mental diseases, relies on
methodological tools enabling the extraction of universal insights from diverse individual
experiences. The primary objective of clarifying a person’s psychopathology is to facilitate the
provision of the most effective treatment tailored to their unique needs. However, contemporary
approaches to understanding and treating psychopathology and mental health have encountered
significant challenges and limitations. In this paper, we critically examine the current paradigms
in psychopathology and mental health treatment, and propose an alternative approach that seeks
to address these shortcomings. Our goal is to pave the way for a more effective, empathetic, and
nuanced approach to mental health care, ultimately enhancing our ability to alleviate human
suffering.
Contemporary Models of Psychopathology and Therapies
The Latent Disease Model of Psychiatry
Psychiatry and behavioral sciences both share the aim of alleviating human suffering but
differ in the initial foundational paradigms and associated methodologies. Psychiatry has been
classifying psychopathology under the assumption that an individual’s problems are symptoms
of one or more latent disease entities. Psychopathology in psychiatric classification systems is
described as "a syndrome marked by clinically significant disruption in an individual's cognition,
emotion regulation, or behavior, indicating a dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 4
developmental processes that underlie mental functioning".1 (p20) With this definition, the DSM
adopted a disease model to equate mental diseases as "dysfunctions." It further assumes the
existence of “processes that underlie mental functioning,” pointing to latent disease etiologies.
The dysfunctional latent processes are manifested in the form of symptoms that are then grouped
into syndromes to define the specific psychopathology.
The initial editions of the DSM were heavily influenced by psychoanalytic theory,
positing that psychopathology stemmed from profound inner conflicts. Subsequent editions,
reflecting a shift in perspective, were shaped by biologically-oriented psychiatrists. These
professionals explored the role of genetics, neuropeptides, brain circuitries, and other biological
markers in determining the root causes of mental diseases.
Despite extensive research over many years, investigations into the biological
underpinnings of psychopathology have not yielded significant results, largely due to a range of
clinical and theoretical challenges. For instance, one key issue is the necessity to adhere to the
axiom of local independence for validating the hypothesis that a latent variable is responsible for
the co-occurrence of symptoms. This principle dictates The observed covariance among
symptoms should only be attributable to the underlying disorder, and not to direct causal
relationships between the symptoms themselves. In other words, when the presence of the
disorder is accounted for, the correlations among symptoms should no longer be significant.
This condition is clearly demonstrated in certain physical health conditions. For example,
in lung cancer, symptoms such as coughing, chest pain, breathlessness, and chest discomfort are
interconnected; however, this correlation is primarily due to the presence of a tumor. When the
tumor is considered, these symptoms no longer show a direct correlation with each other.
Similarly, in Down syndrome, symptoms like intellectual deficiency, a crease across the palm,
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 5
short stature, and a protruding tongue co-occur because they share a common cause, namely
three copies of chromosome 21. In this case, there are no direct causal relations between
individual symptoms, such as between short stature and a protruding tongue.
This clarity of causal relationships in physical conditions contrasts with the complexities
and ambiguities often found in mental health disorders, where such straightforward causal links
between symptoms and underlying biological factors are less evident. For example, in
depression, a person who engages in excessive rumination may frequently suffer from insomnia.
This lack of sleep, in turn, can lead to fatigue, which negatively impacts concentration and
further lowers mood the next day. These interconnected symptoms demonstrate a chain of cause
and effect within the syndrome of depression, complicating the application of both latent
categorical and latent dimensional models of psychopathology. Such models typically rely on the
assumption that symptom covariance is primarily due to a common underlying factor, an
assumption that does not hold up well in the face of these evident causal relationships among
symptoms in psychiatric conditions. This complexity highlights the challenges in understanding
and modeling mental health disorders, where symptoms are often interdependent in a way that
defies simple categorization or dimensional analysis.
Understanding Therapeutic Change
The exploration of therapeutic change in clinical science has long been a subject of
intense study and debate. Central to this exploration is the understanding of how and why
therapy works, which involves dissecting the intricate processes and mechanisms at play. This
quest for understanding has led to the development of various models and theories, among which
the concepts of mediators and moderators have become particularly influential.
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 6
Baron and Kenny's paper, published in 1986,2 introduced these terms to the field of
psychology. Using simple and elegant methods with linear regressions to study mediation of
change gained immense popularity. Their straightforward “causal steps” approach to study
mediation and moderation was summarized in their 1986 article published in the Journal of
Social and Personality Psychology, which became one of the top 100 most cited articles of all
time in the entire field of science,3 surpassing numerous Nobel-prize winning papers in
chemistry and biology in terms of total citations. Their approach has brought several advantages
to the field of research.
However, despite its widespread acceptance and influence, the Baron and Kenny model
has its limitations, especially in clarifying the mechanisms and processes of psychotherapy. As
noted elsewhere,4 we believe that the linear mediation approach, with its assumptions of linearity
and uni-directionality, falls short in capturing the intricate nature of treatment processes. It is
further assumed that there are only variables responsible for change processes. The model’s
reliance on pauci-variate approaches (containing only a few variables) is seen as inadequate for a
comprehensive examination of treatment processes. In contrast, methods that can examine the
connection between multiple variables, including two-way relationships that change in a non-
linear and dynamic manner due to treatment, are required. This shift in perspective calls for a
more nuanced and multifaceted approach to understanding therapeutic change.
The Role of the Individual
To effectively comprehend and treat psychopathology, it is crucial to focus on the
individual, as each person’s experience with a disorder is unique. Traditional research methods
often rely on group-level data from cross-sectional studies, applying these findings to
individuals. However, these approaches are fraught with challenges; people with the same
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 7
disorders can exhibit vastly different symptoms and responses.5,6 Consequently, there is
considerable variability in how individuals within the same diagnostic category present
symptoms, with each person potentially exhibiting a unique set of symptoms. Moreover, even
among individuals with similar clinical presentations, the underlying network structures of these
symptoms can differ significantly.7,8 This highlights the complexity and individuality of
symptom manifestation in psychiatric diagnoses.
If research does not account for individual trajectories and characteristic differences,
these unique aspects may be obscured in group-level analyses. This issue arises particularly
when studies focus predominantly on mean values, such as in randomized control trials, leading
to the oversight of variability between participants. This variability is often mistakenly treated as
mere statistical noise, causing the loss of valuable insights into individual behavioral patterns.
For instance, while a higher level of avoidance might decrease negative affect in some
individuals, it could conversely increase it in others.9 Therefore, it is crucial to consider
individual data to fully understand the diverse trajectories and identify specific differences that
hold clinical significance.10 This individual-focused approach is key to uncovering nuanced
understandings of psychological phenomena.
Moreover, the application of collective findings to individual trajectories is contingent
upon highly restrictive and often unrealistic assumptions. These include the notion that the
process being studied is stationary, meaning that its mean value and variance remain constant
over time, and homogeneous, implying that all individuals conform to the same dynamic model.
Such assumptions do not align well with the nature of living systems, which are inherently
dynamic and diverse.11,12 In practice, these assumptions are frequently violated in the realms of
psychological testing and treatment research.13 Despite this, a significant portion of clinical
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 8
psychology still depends on probabilistic, group-level analyses to investigate mechanisms and
understand psychopathology, often at the expense of capturing the complex, individualized
nature of these phenomena.
Therefore, given the significant heterogeneity both between and within individuals, and
the challenges in applying group-level findings to individual cases, there is a pressing need for
dynamic, individual-level analyses that embrace this variability.14,15 Such analyses involve
closely examining the symptoms of each individual at multiple time points, followed by tailored,
person-specific evaluations. This approach to studying psychopathology acknowledges and
dissects the unique mechanisms driving and sustaining each individual's symptomatology. By
conducting analyses at this granular level, we can then extrapolate broader, nomothetic
generalizations that are more representative and insightful for the collective. This method is
crucial for a comprehensive and nuanced understanding of the mechanisms underlying change in
mental health.
A New Approach to Studying Change
The emergence of the so-called "third wave" approaches of CBT in the 2000s aimed to
explore the underlying processes of change in CBT. This sparked debates within the field and
expanded the range of intervention strategies. There has been a renewed focus on understanding
the central processes of change and studying mediators and moderators, leading to a refocusing
of CBT toward processes of changes and away from syndromal disorders. This includes
recognizing the importance of philosophical assumptions in intervention methods and
emphasizing the need for training in the philosophy of science.
As an answer to these challenges, Process-Based Therapy (PBT) has emerged as a new
direction in CBT.16 It shifts the focus from syndromes to evidence-based processes linked with
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 9
procedures, encompassing core competencies shared across various CBT approaches. PBT
integrates a broader spectrum of concepts and methods, paving the way for a more inclusive,
evidence-based approach to behavior change. As attention pivots towards change processes,
mental health care transcends disorder-focused models, embracing a holistic approach to
psychological well-being. Personalized and precision medicine principles are increasingly
applied, paving the way for a future where evidence-based therapy is synonymous with process-
based therapy. This marks a significant transformation in the field, promising a more tailored,
effective, and person-centered approach to intervention science.
The field has matured sufficiently to revisit Gordon Paul's vision.17 We propose that the
time is ripe for modern psychotherapy and intervention science to concentrate on a new
fundamental query: "What core biopsychosocial processes should be addressed in this context,
with this client, for this goal, and how can they be most efficiently and effectively altered?" This
forms the essence of PBT – a context-specific use of evidence-based processes tied to evidence-
based procedures, tailored to individuals for problem-solving and well-being enhancement.
Unlike treatments centered on syndromes, PBT hones in on theoretically-driven, empirically-
supported processes underpinning positive change, signifying a pivotal shift for the future of
evidence-based care.
It is crucial to distinguish between therapeutic processes (fundamental change
mechanisms leading to desired treatment outcomes) and therapeutic procedures (methods applied
by therapists to achieve agreed-upon goals). Therapy often targets multiple goals, ranked by
priority, immediacy, or complexity. At the psychological level, we can understand processes as
sequences of biopsychosocial events in domains such as affect, cognition, attention, self,
motivation, overt behavior, biophysiology, or sociocultural characteristics that lead to desired
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 10
changes.16 Therapeutic processes need to be theory-grounded, dynamic, progressive, and
multilevel changes occurring in predictable, empirically established sequences, oriented towards
desired outcomes. They are theory-based with falsifiable predictions, dynamic due to potential
feedback loops, progressive for long-term success, and multilevel as some processes take
precedence over others. Importantly, they address both immediate and long-term objectives.
While a therapeutic process is sometimes used broadly to denote the patient-therapist
relationship, we employ it in a more specific sense, requiring a clearly defined, testable theory
meeting empirical standards.
A Complex Network Approach to Psychopathology
The complex network approach to conceptualizing psychopathology is an alternative to
the traditional ways of understanding mental disorders.18 Instead of viewing symptoms as
manifestations of an underlying disease, this approach sees symptoms as constitutive of the
disorder itself. In other words, psychopathology is not caused by symptoms that reflect a latent
disorder, but rather it is the interaction and self-reinforcing system of problems that constitute the
psychopathology.18–20 According to this perspective, a stressful event, for example, does not
activate a latent condition like depression, which then leads to the emergence of symptoms.
Instead, the event triggers certain problems, which in turn activate other problems. When a
sufficient number of problems occur and are connected in a way that maintains the
psychopathology, a diagnosable episode of the disorder may be identified. To avoid implying
that symptoms indicate the presence of an underlying disease, we prefer the term “problem”
instead of "symptom". Psychopathology is seen as functionally interconnected problems that
form a complex network.
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 11
Network theory is a subset of graph theory, which is a branch of mathematics that deals
with visually representing a group of objects and the connections between them. Networks
consist of nodes (i.e., symptoms, aspects of suffering), and edges, which are the lines connecting
two nodes and represent the type of association between them. In an unweighted network, the
presence or absence of a line between two nodes indicates whether they are connected. On the
other hand, a weighted network not only shows the connection but also represents the strength of
association, such as using a Pearson r correlation coefficient to indicate the magnitude of
association between insomnia and fatigue calculated across multiple individuals. The network
structure provides information about what a problem consists of and what sustains it. Network
dynamics also provide information on how processes develop and can be changed over time.
Centrality metrics in network theory allow us to determine the relative importance of a
node within a network.21 A highly central node is one that, when activated, has the potential to
spread activation throughout the network via its connections to other nodes. For instance, a node
with high degree centrality is one that is connected to many other nodes, similar to a highly
popular person in a social network. On the other hand, a node with high strength centrality in a
weighted network is characterized by having connections with large magnitudes of associations,
such as edges with a high Pearson's r value. Lastly, a node with high betweenness centrality
often lies on the shortest path between two other nodes, acting as a mediator or connector within
the network.
Complex networks are characterized by nodes that are interconnected in a non-random
and non-uniform manner.22 This means that some nodes form clusters or subgroups, while others
have fewer or weaker connections. Such complex networks are commonly observed in fields like
sociology, neuroscience, and psychopathology. By repeatedly assessing the nodes and
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 12
connections in a network, we can observe how the network evolves over time, which is often
referred to as network dynamics. This can be seen in the trajectory, or recovery, from
psychopathology.
The diagnostic implications of the network perspective are focused on understanding
psychopathology in a new way rather than providing a new method of diagnosis. Instead of
replacing the DSM or ICD, the network perspective offers a fresh perspective on the ontology of
psychopathology. It shifts the focus towards identifying the defining features of the pathology
(nodes) and their functional connections (edges), rather than searching for a common underlying
cause expressed as a sum score of severity. In this approach, the emphasis is on investigating the
mechanisms or biomarkers that cause specific elements of the disorder, such as anhedonia, rather
than diagnosing the overall disorder itself, such as major depression.
The network perspective on diagnoses recognizes that there are different patterns of
symptoms within a diagnostic category, which is different from how the DSM has traditionally
viewed heterogeneity. Instead of considering heterogeneity as separate underlying factors within
a diagnosis, each with its own cause, the network perspective sees heterogeneity as common
patterns that indicate causal connections between different features of a disorder. For example,
the network perspective may consider the relationship between diurnal variation of mood and
early morning awakening in the context of the melancholic network.
The network perspective provides a unique approach to differential diagnosis. Instead of
simply determining whether a fear of driving is caused by specific phobia or posttraumatic stress
disorder, the focus should be on understanding the active symptoms and how they relate to each
other. This approach is similar to the functional analysis used by behavior therapists, which
examines the links between environmental stimuli and symptoms. However, the network
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 13
perspective considers the functional relations between a large number of different nodes, not just
between two variables. The complex network approach also offers the possibility of integrating
the multidimensional facets of psychopathology,18,19 which should prove advantageous given the
biopsychosocial nature of psychopathology.23,24 For example, psychopathological, psychological,
and biological processes that influence psychopathology and their interrelationships can be
conceptualized together.
It should be noted that a network approach resolves the comorbidity problem in
psychiatry. Traditional diagnostic efforts have focused on eliminating nonspecific symptoms that
are present in multiple disorders, in order to distinguish between comorbid disorders. The
network analytic framework recognizes the importance of these nonspecific elements and views
them as crucial connections. When activated, these connections transmit activation to features of
several related disorders.25
Critical Role of Causality
Dynamic networks offer a promising approach for studying such treatment processes, as
they can provide insight into the causal relationships between variables.26 Prevention and therapy
can only be implemented efficiently if it is clear which variables are causally linked to each
other. The inference of causal relationships can be understood as the ability to modify the
probability distribution of one problem caused by the presence or alteration, whether
experimental or natural, of another problem.19 However, in order to understand causalities in
psychological phenomena, it is not only relevant to describe whether one variable influences
another, but also to explain how this change comes about,27 which ultimately leads to the study
of mechanisms. The investigation of mechanisms requires more than the mere description of
cause-and-effect relationships. The context – other involving variables and the environment –
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 14
plays a crucial role. For example, a variable such as a spark may be causal for an effect such as
an explosion in a silo, but only under specific conditions, such as in the presence of dust and
oxygen. In the psychological domain, mechanisms are also links between problems, but they
depend on other problems involved and the context, as these factors are also largely responsible
for changes.
To identify causal mechanisms of change, temporal knowledge regarding the relationship
between problems is essential. There is much debate about whether causal inference is also
possible using cross-sectional data.28,29 However, structural modeling strategies applied to cross-
sectional data usually still require temporal knowledge regarding temporal precedence and causal
ordering, which by nature can only arise from temporal data. Temporal precedence is a necessary
condition for causal inference, making dynamic analyses essential at any point in the inference
process, as only these can estimate the directionality of edges.30,31 Inferences based on cross-
sectional data are not the same as those based on longitudinal data and do not reveal how
problems influence each other over time.32 Furthermore, psychopathology is not stable over time,
33,34 which makes multiple measurements over time necessary to reflect this discontinuity.
By determining the direction of the relationships through multiple measurements over
time, it is possible to identify and distinguish between primary causal symptoms and
epiphenomena. Epiphenomena are secondary phenomena that are not causally related to the
primary causal symptom, but may appear to be correlated. It can therefore be an effect of the
primary symptom or other underlying factors, but not itself have an effect on the primary
symptom or others. The detection of epiphenomena is relevant in that they may represent a
distinct condition, but do not themselves play a role in maintaining mechanisms.
Studying Processes of Change
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 15
The ability to identify signals that predict transitions from non-pathological states to
pathological states and vice versa is particularly valuable to clinical scientists. For this,
Experience Sampling Methods (ESM),35 also known as Ecological Momentary Assessment
(EMA),36 will be critically important. The use of EMA in studying psychopathology represents a
significant shift towards understanding mental disorders in real-time and real-world contexts.37
Just as people's well-being fluctuates in response to their environment and daily experiences, so
too does their psychological state in the context of psychopathology.38 These moment-to-moment
experiences are crucial in understanding the dynamic nature of psychopathology. Traditional
methods, which often rely on retrospective or global assessments, can miss the nuanced changes
and patterns that occur in the daily lives of individuals with psychopathology.39 EMA allows
researchers to move beyond these limitations, adopting a dynamic modeling approach to capture
how symptoms and their interactions change across different contexts and over time.
The proliferation of mobile health (mHealth) tools has significantly impacted the study of
psychopathology, particularly in the collection of EMA data. The use of mHealth tools in EMA
data collection is pivotal in enhancing the design and implementation of psychopathology
interventions38 making these programs more accessible and sustainable for a wider range of
individuals. Furthermore, mHealth tools facilitate the gathering of intensive longitudinal data
(ILD), involving numerous measurements over time from a significant number of individuals.
This approach allows for the observation of time-structured patterns in symptomatology,
providing a deeper understanding of how these momentary changes contribute to the overall
trajectory of a mental disorder. Studies in this area, such as those by Kuppens et al.40 have
identified three specific components of dynamical change that are sufficient for describing
individual differences in time-varying patterns: (1) changes in baseline, reflecting long-term
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 16
shifts in a person's average psychological experience and indicating whether these changes are
trending positively, negatively, or remaining stable; (2) Intra-Individual Variability (IIV), which
captures the extent and nature of fluctuation in a person's psychological experiences on a
momentary level; and (3) regulation, focusing on the rate at which individuals return to their
baseline levels of experience, thereby measuring the speed and efficiency of psychological
regulation following deviations. Together, these components provide a comprehensive
understanding of how momentary changes contribute to the overall trajectory of a mental
disorder, offering valuable insights into individual differences in time-varying patterns of
psychopathology.40
These dynamic characteristics of psychological patterns can be effectively mapped onto
various statistical process model parameters. This includes time series and differential equation
model parameters, as explored in the work of Hamaker et al..33 By applying these models,
researchers can quantitatively analyze and interpret the complex dynamics of psychological
experiences over time. This approach allows for a more nuanced analysis of psychopathology,
moving beyond static assessments to capture the fluid and evolving nature of psychological
experiences. Moreover, this methodology can aid in the development of personalized treatment
strategies. By identifying specific patterns of emotional change and regulation in individuals,
clinicians can tailor interventions to address the unique dynamics of each person's
psychopathology. This personalized approach is crucial for effective treatment, as it considers
the individual variability and complexity inherent in mental health disorders.
Novel Methodology and Statistical Analysis
Dynamic Network Analysis
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 17
Dynamic network analysis is a methodological approach that delves into the intricacies of
complex systems. Such an analysis is particularly valuable in transcending the limitations of
traditional research methods when it comes to dissecting the mechanisms at play. Dynamic
Network Models are among the most recent additions to the repertoire of tools used in
psychological sciences. Importantly, this framework provides a systematic and mathematical
principled way to model how change in one variable (i.e. node) affects other variables in the
network, and further, how change in the whole or part of the network is related to the strength of
the connections and the overall geometry of the network.
Networks are used in the study of clinical disorders and comorbidity,18,20,41 cognition and
intelligence,42 personality,43 and many others.44 Within the framework of psychological well-
being for instance, network modeling has been used to examine elements of psychological well-
being as an interconnected network in early adulthood45 and further to examine distinctions
among measures of well-being.46
The true power of dynamic network analysis lies in its ability to reveal how changes in
one part of the network (a single node or a group of nodes) can influence the entire network. For
instance, an increase in a specific symptom might lead to changes in other symptoms, reflecting
the interconnected nature of psychological states. The analysis also considers the overall
structure and geometry of the network, which can provide insights into how robust or vulnerable
the network is to changes in specific nodes. For example, a network with many strong
interconnections might be more resilient to change in any single node, compared to a network
with fewer or weaker connections.
Furthermore, dynamic network analysis can identify central nodes that have a significant
impact on the network. These central nodes might be key symptoms or factors that, when
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 18
addressed in treatment, could lead to broader improvements across the network. By
understanding these dynamics, clinicians and researchers can develop more targeted and
effective interventions for psychopathology, tailored to the specific network dynamics of an
individual or a group. This approach marks a significant shift from traditional methods, offering
a more nuanced and comprehensive understanding of the complex interplay of factors in mental
health and illness.
Control Theory
Importantly, from a mathematical standpoint, Dynamic Network Models are closely
related to network control theory,47 the engineering study of network systems under intervention.
Control theory models the dynamics of complex systems and analyzes functional relationships,
resilience and control of the system.47–49 It enables the quantitative assessment and prediction
about the reaction of the entire network and its nodes to both endogenous and exogenous input
signals, dynamics over time, and identifies nodes that control the organization of the system.50,51
The controllability of a network refers to the ability to manipulate network components in order
to control the system along a desired trajectory, i.e. to bring it to a desired target state. Therefore,
it allows for the investigation and evaluation of the effects of psychological interventions on the
overall condition of an individual.51 The ability of a network node to control the rest of the
system can be described by the metrics average controllability,52 modal controllability,53 and
boundary controllability.50
Control theory combined with longitudinal data not only provides a comprehensive
understanding of the changes in networked systems but also identifies the mechanisms of change
driving psychological interventions and their relation to system changes.54,55 Hypotheses about
mechanisms of change can be tested experimentally using network control theory. As an
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 19
example, this methodology has been used to study the effect of an attitude modification
intervention through a dynamic network and control approach.51 Using Dynamic Network
Modeling the relationship between topological network features and alterations in the network
were examined over time. This approach allowed the researchers to test the effect of the
intervention in terms of its sensitivity and specificity and their relationship to the response
trajectories that control theory predicts. This study demonstrated that intervention effects can be
tested using Dynamic Network Models with unparalleled accuracy.51
Group Iterative Multiple Model Estimation (GIMME)
The analysis of mechanisms at the individual level is essential, as the mechanisms
responsible for changes differ from one individual to another. However, for a comprehensive
scientific understanding, it's equally important to derive general principles that acknowledge
these individual differences. Such generalizations are key in identifying broader patterns and
connections that transcend individual cases. This approach lays the groundwork for creating
more inclusive models and intervention strategies, ensuring they are both broadly applicable and
sensitive to individual variations.
A statistical method to gain a deeper understanding of mechanisms is the Group Iterative
Multiple Model Estimation (GIMME).56 GIMME uses unified structural equation modeling
(uSEM)57 to initially identify unique associations between symptoms for each individual.
Assuming that individuals have similar representations of causal structures, it then iteratively
integrates pathways that are applicable at the group levels if they improve individual fit.58 This
approach diverges from traditional methods that view individual variability as an error in
estimating group-level central tendencies. Instead, GIMME estimates individual models based on
intraindividual variability, subsequently generalizing these findings nomothetically. By
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 20
integrating causal structures from both individual and group levels, GIMME facilitates more
effective and precise generalizations about common mechanisms within the target population.59
GIMME considers temporal dependencies between variables and thus provides insights
into the temporal precedence and directionality of the associations between variables at
individual, subgroups, and group level.60 The temporal dimension improves the understanding of
how symptoms unfold and potentially have a causal effect on the overall disorder (e.g. captured
by network analyses). This contributes to a deeper understanding of complex systems and their
underlying mechanisms.
Conclusion
The latent disease model of psychiatry, while foundational, has shown limitations in
addressing the complex, interconnected nature of psychopathology. The examination of
therapeutic change has evolved, moving beyond linear models to embrace more nuanced
methods that provide idiographic considerations as well as the dynamic interplay of symptoms
over time. The role of the individual in understanding and treating psychopathology has become
a focus of research, underscoring the need for personalized approaches that account for the
unique symptom networks of each person.
Subsequently, the emergence of PBT marks a significant shift in CBT, focusing on
processes rather than syndromal disorders. PBT is built upon the complex network approach to
psychopathology which provides a fresh perspective on mental disorders, viewing them as
systems of interconnected problems rather than manifestations of an underlying disease. Therapy
as a dynamic system, highlights the importance of understanding the resilience and control of
psychological networks as well as the causal pathways present. This perspective, in turn, is
crucial for developing interventions that effectively target pathways through which networks can
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 21
be shifted towards healthier states. This paper underscores the importance of moving beyond
traditional models and embracing more dynamic, individual-focused approaches to better
understand and treat psychopathology and promote mental health.
NOVEL APPROACHES TO STUDY CHANGE 22