Social evaluation of co-action partners: Children’s partner recruitment in
cooperation and competition tasks
[Preprint – not yet peer-reviewed]
1, 2, 3
Rowan Titchener ORCID 0000-0001-5603-5614
Jonas Hermes
1, 3, 4
Julia Fischer ORCID 0000-0002-58070074
2,4
Hannes Rakoczy
1, 3, 4
Stefanie Keupp ORCID 0000-0002-5451-4256
Cognitive Ethology Laboratory, Deutsches Primatenzentrum GmbH, Kellnerweg 4, 37073 Göttingen,
Germany
Institute of Psychology, University of Göttingen, Waldweg 26, 37073 Göttingen, Germany
Department of Primate Cognition, University of Göttingen, Germany
Leibniz ScienceCampus Primate Cognition, Göttingen, Germany
Corresponding author:
Stefanie Keupp
Cognitive Ethology Laboratory, Deutsches Primatenzentrum GmbH, Kellnerweg 4, 37073 Göttingen,
Germany
Email: skeupp@dpz.eu
Statements and Declarations
The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.
Data, code and materials
Supporting material (the Electronic Supplementary Material, datasets and R code) have been made
available on OSF at the following link:
Funding
This work was carried out with funding from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (project number
254142454/GRK 2070) and a grant from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft to S.K. (project
number 425330201).
Authors’ contributions
Contributions according to CRediT: R. T.: conceptualization, formal analysis, investigation,
methodology, resources, visualization, writing original draft, and writing - review and editing; J. H.:
resources; J. F.: conceptualization, funding acquisition, methodology, investigation, supervision and
writing – review and editing; H. R.: conceptualization, funding acquisition, methodology, investigation,
supervision and writing – review and editing; S. K.: conceptualization, investigation, methodology,
supervision and writing – review and editing.
Acknowledgements
We thank Imke Koch, Christiane Decker, Lia Künnemann, Josephine Quirbach and Mellory Kripzak for
help with data collection and Eva-Maria Wellmer for help with reliability coding. Our thanks to Marlen
Kaufmann for help with participant recruitment and Roger Mundry, for statistical guidance. Thank you
to the children, parents and students who volunteered to take part in these experiments.
Abstract
Social evaluations are a pervasive feature of human thinking. Studies on selective trust, selective social
learning, and helping – that is, in cooperative contexts – have shown that children become competent
social decision-makers in their preschool years. Choosing partners based on relevant attributes is
equally important for success in competitive situations, however. To test predictions from a dual-
process account of children’s development of reasoning abilities, we devised two online experiments
for 4- to 7-year-old children. In Experiment 1, children were introduced to a weak and to a strong
model and had the opportunity to apply this information strategically in competitive and cooperative
domain-relevant games (requiring strength) and in a domain-irrelevant game (requiring object
labelling knowledge). Children recruited the optimal partner in both contexts from around 5 years of
age and generalized partner expertise to novel domains. Experiment 2 was designed to shed light on
the reasoning process underlying partner recruitment choices. Children were introduced to a weak
but smart and a strong but ignorant model and had the opportunity to apply this information in games
of different domain-context combinations. Contrary to our expectations, even the oldest children
performed poorly. Our findings are at odds with previous research showing that 4-year-olds rationally
recruited optimal partners for cooperative tasks. Children may have struggled with the unfamiliar first-
person perspective, and the difficulty of the task when they had to consider multiple agent
characteristics at once.
KEY WORDS
Social evaluation – Partner choice – Strategy – Cooperation – Competition
Children gain valuable knowledge from observing and communicating with the people in their
surroundings (Csibra & Gergely, 2009; Harris, 2012; Harris et al., 2018). From around three to four
years of age, children begin to be selective about whom they attend to, imitate, and trust when making
use of socially-disseminated knowledge (for reviews on selective trust, see Mills, 2013). Selective trust
has often been studied by means of the “two-informant” paradigm, developed by Koenig et al. (2004).
From these studies, we know that preschoolers tune into epistemic cues (e.g., Birch et al., 2008; Jaswal
& Neely, 2006; Koenig et al., 2004; Koenig & Harris, 2005; Pasquini et al., 2007) as well as social cues
(Bascandziev & Harris, 2014; Bernard et al., 2016; Corriveau & Harris, 2009; Elashi & Mills, 2014; Jaswal
& Kondrad, 2016; MacDonald et al., 2013). Recently, the focus has shifted from identifying cues that
mediate selectivity, to theorizing about the inferential processes likely to underlie selectivity (Fusaro
et al., 2011; Hermes et al., 2015; Sobel & Kushnir, 2013). Three candidate processes have been put
forward (outlined in Fusaro et al., 2011): (1) behaviour-matching, (2) global impression formation and
(3) trait-reasoning.
In behaviour-matching, a child assumes that a model shows behavioural consistency over
time. Thus, someone who has demonstrated accuracy in object-labelling in the past will provide
accurate labels in the future. An inference based on behaviour-matching is relatively narrow. In global
impression formation, in contrast, a child conceives a model as positive/negative in undifferentiated
ways (also referred to as “halo/pitchfork” effects), leading to wider competence predictions than
warranted. For example, a child might infer that someone who is strong is also an accurate object-
labeller. Trait-reasoning, finally, requires a more complex inference process than behaviour-matching
and global impression formation. A child who engages in trait reasoning succeeds in a two-component
process (Liu et al., 2007). The first component involves mapping observed behaviour to a trait. The
second component involves mapping the assigned trait to future behaviour. There is evidence to
support the idea that children engage in global impression formation in certain situations and trait-
reasoning in others (Bascandziev & Harris, 2014; Fusaro et al., 2011). For example, Bascandziev and
Harris (2014) found that preschoolers preferentially learned from people who rate highly in terms of
attractiveness, although attractiveness has no obvious relation as to whether or not a person is
knowledgeable. There is also, however, evidence that young children understand that people differ in
their abilities in different domains of expertise (e.g., Lane & Harris, 2015; Lutz & Keil, 2002; Sobel &
Kushnir, 2013). For example, given the choice between adults and peers, children consult peers for
toy-related information and adults on the topic of food (VanderBorght & Jaswal, 2009).
Hermes and colleagues recently suggested a dual-process account (Hermes et al., 2018) to
reconcile findings showing that children’s social selectivity sometimes relies on simple and sometimes
on more complex inferences. They theorize that early in development, children’s trust decisions are
based on simple decision heuristics (‘Type-I’ processes, Kahneman, 2003), such as a general trust
heuristic and a trust-the-better heuristic. As children grow older, they acquire a sounder concept of
knowledge, a better understanding of how different domains relate to one another, and more general
cognitive resources, including better executive functions and Theory of Mind abilities. In cases where
a conclusive answer is possible, such as in in degree of competence contrasts, halo-effects are
observed. In cases where such generalizations are insufficient, such as in domain of competence
contrasts, more sophisticated reasoning processes are required (Type-II processes). A number of
findings are compatible with the dual process account (for a review, see Hermes et al., 2018). For
example, Hermes et al. (2016) found that the same children who chose the more competent of two
models for domain-unrelated tasks showed context-specific partner choice when confronted with two
models who had different domain expertise. Furthermore, older children and children with better
executive function abilities have been shown to be able to resist a general trust bias and disregard
advice from formerly unreliable models (Heyman et al., 2013; Jaswal et al., 2014; Vanderbilt et al.,
2011).
One way to test predictions from the dual-process account is to examine whether the Type I
and Type II strategies used in the cooperative context are also applied in other contexts that require
similar problem-solving strategies. Choosing partners based on relevant attributes is equally
important for success in competitive situations. If children operate with rational conceptual capacities,
they should be able to apply these capacities in flexible, domain-general ways, allowing them to
choose a given partner in one context but reject the same partner in another. We designed two
experiments to investigate how 4- to 7-year-old children recruit co-action partners in competitive and
cooperative contexts when they are provided with different sets of information about potential
partners. Competitive tasks pose more complex perspective-taking demands compared to
cooperative tasks (Perner et al., 2005; Priewasser et al., 2013) because, in a cooperative context, the
perspective of the child and the recruited team member align, whereas in a competitive context the
child has to keep in mind that their goal and the goal of the recruited character are in conflict.
In Experiment 1, children met two models who differed in terms of physical strength. We
predicted that that younger children would make fewer correct choices in the competitive context,
while older children should be equally successful in both contexts. We also predicted that younger
children would be more likely to generalize about competence and would be more likely to do so in
the cooperative as compared to the competitive context. In Experiment 2, children met two models
who each had a strength and a weakness: one character was strong but ignorant, the other was weak
but knowledgeable. We monitored the partner recruitment choices of each participant in a series of
competitive and cooperative strength and knowledge games. In this design, only those participants
who engage in rational trait reasoning (Type-II process) should be successful: they should choose the
strong/ignorant partner for cooperative strength and competitive knowledge games and the
weak/knowledgeable partner for competitive strength and cooperative knowledge games. We
predicted that younger children should do less well than older ones, and struggle particularly in the
competitive context, while older children should be equally successful in both contexts.
Experiment 1
Material and methods
Participants
For both experiments, we carried out power analyses to establish the power we have to detect an
effect of an interaction between context and age as a function of sample size (n = 80, 100, 120, 140,
160, 180, 200). Due to a lack of sufficiently comparable study designs in the literature, we simulated
different effect sizes based on studies using cooperative tasks, on theoretical considerations, and on
small pilot studies. For Experiment 1, we estimated the following: for the 4-year-olds, the probability
to succeed in the cooperative condition was set to 0.8 and in the competitive condition to 0.5. For
the 7-year-olds, the probability to succeed was set to 0.9 for both contexts (for more details and
Experiment 2, we estimated the following three sets of success probabilities: for the 4-year-olds, the
probabilities to succeed in the cooperative condition were set to 0.9, 0.9, and 0.8 respectively, and
the corresponding probabilities to succeed in the competitive condition were set to 0.2, 0.5, and 0.5.
For the 7-year-olds, the probabilities to succeed were always set to 0.9 in both contexts (see
For Experiment 1, the power of detecting the main effects of context and age was high.
Already, with 80 participants, it was above 0.8. The power to detect an effect of the interaction
between these two variables, however, was low to medium, ranging from 0.3 with 80 participants to
0.7 with 200 participants. Acknowledging practical constraints of data collection and considering that
these results are based on estimated probabilities, which are associated with quite some uncertainty,
we settled on a sample size of n = 100 children. Ultimately, we tested a total of 123 children and
analysed the data from 107 children (mean age = 72.64 months, 51 girls, see Electronic Supplementary
Material [ESM] for more details on exclusion criteria). We also ran a validation study with 41 adult
participants (mean age = 25.46 years, 21 women). All participants took part voluntarily; children
received a personalized certificate of participation; undergraduate students could receive
compensation in the form of university credits.
Design and materials
In Experiment 1, children were given information about two models who differed from one another
in terms of physical strength: Mr. Blue was physically strong and Mr. Green was weak. Children then
played a series of competitive and cooperative strength games in which their avatar had to play with
or against one of the models. The optimal strategy was to choose the weak model as an opponent and
the strong model as a teammate. In addition to these strength games, each child played a knowledge
game. In this novel domain, they lacked information about the partners’ expertise. If the children
engage in global impression formation, they should, for instance, recruit the physically strong model
details regarding experimental stages and familiarization are described in subsection 1.1. of the ESM.
All video stimuli were created using the Vyond animation software. An overview of the stimuli
can be found in the ESM (subsection 1.2). The experiments were run in Labvanced (Finger et al., 2017).
The child met with an experimenter via virtual conferencing software – usually BigBlueButton (BBB)
and occasionally Zoom, when BBB failed. Three female experimenters collected the data. We used a
repeated-measure within-subject design for the strength games (the “degree-of-competence” test
trials) and counterbalanced the order in which we presented the context (cooperation vs
competition). The knowledge game (“generalization” test trial) was implemented as a between-
subject factor. Children who had received a competition strength game first, experienced a
competition knowledge game and vice versa. The stimuli for adults were identical to those used in the
child study, although bridging text was added so that the participants could navigate the experiment
alone.
Coding
The keyboard keys the experimenter used to navigate the experiment automatically logged data. One
person (the first author) transcribed the answers children gave to the two identification questions
regarding the avatar (a manipulation check) and the two justification questions (see Tables S1 and S2
for details). A person blind to the hypothesis of the study coded 20 % of the child videos. Overall inter-
coder agreement was excellent (Cohen’s Kappa coefficient (𝜅) ranging between 0.934 and 1), except
for the degree-of-competence justification answers of the adults, which indicated moderate
agreement (𝜅 = 0.429) and the generalization justification answers (𝜅 = 0.797), reflecting substantial
agreement.
Analyses
All statistical analyses were carried out in R (R Core Team, 2021, version 4.1.1). We fitted a total of six
models. Three Generalized Linear Mixed Models (GLMM, Baayen, 2008) were used to analyse the
degree-of-competence test trials. Two Generalized Linear Models (GLM, Baayen, 2008) and one
GLMM were used to analyse the generalization test trials. Four of these analyses (Models 1 through
preregistered analyses (Models 1B and 3B) were run to check for a potential effect of experimenter
ID (given that three experimenters collected the child data). In the subsections that follow, we
concisely describe the structure of each model but for detailed information concerning model
structure, sample size, variable standardization, model diagnostics (stability, collinearity), and to view
the output tables, see subsection 1.3 of the ESM. In the ESM, we also elaborate on comprehension
checks, participants’ answers to follow-up questions, and exploratory analyses with these qualitative
data.
We constructed a GLMM, Model 1, to test whether context, age, or their interaction had an
effect on children’s partner recruitment choices in the degree-of-competence test trials. The binary
response variable was optimality of partner recruitment choice. Model 1 additionally comprised the
fixed effects of gender, condition presentation order and trial number. Participant ID was included as
a random effect and the random slopes of context and trial number were included in the model. In
addition, we fitted Model 1B to assess and control for a potential effect of experimenter ID, which
was fitted as a random effect. Models 1 and 1B thus differed only in terms of their random effects
components (and therefore also with regard to their random slope structures, see ESM). To establish
whether context had an effect on adult partner recruitment choices, we fitted Model 2. The binary
response variable of this GLMM was optimality of partner choice. Model 2 comprised a main effect of
context in addition to the fixed effects of gender, order and trial number. Participant ID was included
as a random effect and the random slopes of context and trial number were included in the model.
We constructed a GLM, Model 3, to test whether either an interaction between context and
age, or a main effect of context or age, had an effect on children’s partner choice in the generalization
test trial. The binary response variable was whether recruitment choice constituted a generalization;
to generalize in the competition knowledge game was to choose the physically weak partner and to
generalize in the cooperation knowledge game was to choose the strong partner. Model 3 comprised
a two-way interaction between context and age, in addition to their main effects and the fixed effects
of gender and the intercept-BLUPs (Best Linear Unbiased Predictors) generated in Model 1. These
BLUPs were a proxy measure for how successfully each child had performed in the degree-of-
competence test trials. To control for a potential effect of experimenter ID, we constructed another
GLMM, Model 3B. Models 3 and 3B differed in terms of their random effects components (and
therefore also with regard to their random slope structures, see ESM) and the BLUPs were taken from
Model 1B rather than Model 1. We fitted a GLM, Model 4, to test whether context had an effect on
adult generalization behaviour. Model 4 comprised the main effect of context, in addition to the fixed
effects of gender and the BLUPs generated in Model 2.
Results and Discussion
The majority of the participants “identified” with the virtual character that represented them
compared to the older participants. They recruited poorly irrespective of context, while the oldest
children performed well in both contexts (see Figures 2 and S4).
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Age group
Note. Dark grey bars represent the proportion of test trials in which participants chose the relevant
partner (i.e., the competent partner in the cooperation task [coo] and the incompetent partner for
the competition task [com]). Light grey proportions represent the opposite choices.
Model 1 indicated a significant effect of the predictor variables (likelihood ratio test: 𝜒 =
37.125, p = <0.001). However, we found no evidence for the predicted interaction between context ×
age (p = 0.376) and therefore fitted a reduced model. Children were significantly more likely to recruit
the optimal partner in the cooperative than in the competitive context (p = 0.035). Moreover, older
children were more likely to recruit optimally than younger children (p < 0.001), and boys recruited
more selectively than girls (p = 0.019). Model 1B differed from Model 1 in that we controlled for the
fact that multiple experimenters had collected the data. The Model 1B output no longer indicated a
significant effect of context, raising questions to which degree the identity of the experimenter played
a role in children’s response behaviour (see General Discussion). For the adult participants, context
had no effect on recruitment behaviour: adults recruited rationally at high levels in both contexts
(likelihood ratio test:𝜒 = 0.562, p = 0.454).
We found that the 4 and 5-year-olds generalized only in the cooperative knowledge game,
where they were more likely to choose the strong partner over the weak one. In the competitive
knowledge game, their generalisation tendencies were less strong (see Figures 4 and S5). Contrary to
our predictions, the 6- and 7-year-old children generalized at high levels in both contexts. Adults chose
at chance level, indicating that they were not generalizing competency between domains. .
eciohc
rentrap
tnaveler
fo
noitroporP
com coo com coo com coo com coo com coo
4YO 5YO 6YO 7YO Adults
age bin
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Age group
Note. Dark grey bars show the proportion of test trials where the participant selected the strong
partner for the knowledge task (cooperation: coo; competition: com). Light grey bars represent the
opposite choice.
In Model 3, we tested whether context, age, or their interaction, affected children’s tendency
to generalize about competence. We found evidence for a weak effect of the predictor variables
(likelihood ratio test: 𝜒 = −6.923, p = 0.074) but neither the interaction of context × age (p = 0.138)
nor the main effects of context (p = 0.109) and age (p = 0.153) significantly affected children’s partner
choice. Interestingly, the more successful a child had recruited during the strength games, the more
likely that child was to generalize when recruiting for the knowledge game (effect of intercept-BLUPs,
p = 0.011). Model 3B differed from Model 3 in that we controlled for the fact that multiple
experimenters had collected the data. This model showed no evidence for an effect of the predictor
variables (likelihood ratio test: 𝜒 = 4.415, p = 0.22). Analysis of the adult data (Model 4) revealed no
significant effect of the predictor variables (likelihood ratio test: 𝜒 = −1.127, p = 0.289). At the
conclusion of the experiment, we asked each participant whether they could explain their recruitment
choices. An exploratory analysis revealed that children who provided a “rational” justification (i.e.,
referred to strength) were more successful in the degree-of-competence test trials (for more details,
In Experiment 1, we investigated whether children recruited co-action partners in selective
context-specific ways both in competitive and cooperative games. From approximately five years of
noitazilareneG
fo
noitroporP
com coo com coo com coo com coo com coo
4YO 5YO 6YO 7YO Adults
age, children systematically selected the physically weak model for the role of opponent and the
strong model for the role of teammate. Numerous studies have demonstrated that four-year-old
children are selective when it comes to choosing a partner or informant in cooperative settings (e.g.,
Hermes et al., 2016; Koenig & Harris, 2005). In comparison, the four-year-olds in our study performed
surprisingly poorly in the cooperation strength games. One possible explanation may be the different
presentation format. In our online experiment, the experimenter assigned the child an onscreen
character and the child navigated the experiment in the virtual first-person. This aspect of the study
design adds a layer of complexity and detachment because the child’s experience becomes passive –
the consequences of the child’s recruitment choices are only indirectly experienced. Rather than the
children themselves feeling true emotion after winning or losing a game, they watch their character
display the appropriate response. Interestingly, a recent study (Grueneisen et al., 2023) obtained
similar results, with 6-7-year-olds but not 4-5-year-olds choosing co-action partners in adaptive
context-specific ways, in an online experiment.
Experiment 2
The degree-of-competence paradigm we used in Experiment 1 allows to identify patterns of partner
selectivity, but it does not allow to discern the underlying inference strategy. The pattern is compatible
with both trait reasoning (a Type-II process) as well as a generalization heuristic (a Type-I process). In
Experiment 2, we aimed to differentiate between these possibilities by presenting “Domain-of-
competence” contrasts. Participants were given information about the partners’ competence in two
different domains with each partner having a strength and a weakness: one character was strong but
Experiment 2 and the answers predicted by Type-I and Type-II reasoning. Detailed information on
experimental phases and familiarization is provided in subsection 2.1 of the ESM.
Material and methods
Participants
For Experiment 2, the power simulations revealed the following: the power to detect an effect of the
interaction between context and age was high for power analysis 1 (power ca. 0.9 for an n of 80),
medium for power analysis 2 (power ca. 0.65 for a n of 80) and low for power analysis 3 (power ca.
0.3 for an n of 80). Acknowledging practical considerations and the uncertainty those results come
with, we settled on a sample size of n = 100 children. Participants from Experiment 1 were not eligible
to participate in Experiment 2. Due to recruitment logistics, we tested 123 children, the data of 98
children were analysed (mean age = 5.5 months, 48 girls; see ESM for details on reasons for
exclusions). We also ran a validation study with 48 adult participants (mean age = 23.83 years, 24
females).
Design and Procedure
All participants were tested in all four domain-context combinations. We counterbalanced the trial
type that appeared first. At the close of the experiment, we asked children several questions to probe
the rationale behind their partner recruitment choices.
Coding and Analysis
The keys the experimenter used to navigate the experiment automatically logged data. The first
author transcribed the answers children gave to the two advice questions and categorized them
study coded 20 of the child videos. Inter-coder agreement was excellent. Coder 1 and 2 matched in
their categorization of the answers given to the competition and the cooperation advice questions (𝜅
= 0.933 and 1 respectively). The same person coded data from 20 adults. Inter-coder agreement was
perfect (𝜅 = 1 for each advice question).
We analysed the domain-of-competence data via three GLMMs. Two of these GLMMs
Model 5B was run to check for a potential effect of experimenter ID. In the subsections that follow,
we concisely describe the structure of each model. For more details, see subsection 2.3 in the ESM.
The binary response variable in Model 5 was rationality of partner recruitment choice. The
model comprised context, age, and their interaction, as well as gender, order (which trial type was
presented first) and trial number as fixed effect predictors. Participant ID was included as a random
effect and the random slopes of context and trial number within participant ID were included in the
model. Model 5B additionally controlled for a potential effect of experimenter ID. We constructed a
GLMM, Model 6, to test whether context had an effect on adults’ rational partner recruitment. Model
6 comprised the main effect of context, in addition to the fixed effects of gender, order and trial
number.
Results and Discussion
Overall, the children performed at chance level in the domain-of-competence test trials (see Figures
7 and S12); the children recruited rationally in just 57 % of the test trials. Interestingly, the adults ’
recruitment choices were less rational in the competitive as compared to the cooperative context.
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Age group
Note. Proportion of rational partner choices are depicted in dark grey. Children performed at
chance in the domain-of-competence test trials. A context difference is apparent in the four-year-
old children and in the adults; these participants recruited more poorly in the competitive [com] as
opposed to the cooperative [coo] games.
Model 5 indicated a significant effect of the predictor variables (likelihood ratio test:𝜒 =
7.974, p = 0.047). Contrary to our predictions, the interaction of context × age was not significant (p
= 0.261) and we therefore fitted a reduced model. Context had no effect on the rationality of partner
recruitment (p = 0.289) but older children recruited more rationally than younger children (p = 0.019).
Model 5B controlled for a potential effect of experimenter ID. In this case, the predictor variables had
no effect on selective partner recruitment (likelihood ratio test: 𝜒 = 5.474, p = 0.14). Model 6
indicated that the predictor variables had an effect on adult partner recruitment choices (likelihood
eciohc
lanoitar
fo
noitroporP
com coo com coo com coo com coo com coo
4YO 5YO 6YO 7YO Adults
ratio test: 𝜒 = 16.071, p = <0.001). Adult participants recruited more rationally in the cooperative
context (p = <0.001). At the conclusion of the experiment, we asked each participant to provide advice
to a peer about to encounter a competition and a cooperation strength game. With increasing age,
revealed, though, that participants who gave “rational” advice (i.e., correctly referred to the domain
of expertise) didn’t perform differently in the domain-of-competence test trials from participants who
didn’t give such advice (for more details, see ESM section 2.4.B).
Experiment 2 was designed to determine if participants use sophisticated trait reasoning
(Type-II process) or a simpler heuristic such as global impression formation (Type-I process) to choose
between co-action partners in competitive and cooperative games. Children performed at chance
level, indicating that their partner choice wasn’t based on rational trait reasoning. Adults overall
recruited rationally in both contexts, with almost ceiling performance in the cooperative context and
somewhat reduced rational choice in the competitive context. Considering that none of the adults
expressed confusion regarding partner competence and requirements of optimal choice in the two
co-action contexts, we think the effect of context isn’t indicative of the competitive scenario
presenting a harder task than the cooperative scenario, for adults. More likely, a few students weren’t
fully concentrated during some of their partner selections, which led to chance performance after just
one wrong choice. To gain clarity, though, differences of adults’ social selectivity in cooperative and
competitive tasks should be followed-up on in future studies.
In light of the fact that the older children in Experiment 1 performed well, the poor
performance of the older children who took part in Experiment 2 raises questions. Ample studies have
demonstrated that from four-years of age, children are capable of flexibly switching between models
that show expertise in different domains in the cooperative context (e.g., Hermes et al., 2016) and in
a very recent study, 5-6-year-olds avoided competent players in domain-relevant competitive tasks
(Grueneisen et al., 2023). Yet in the present experiment, not even the oldest children (seven-year-
olds) performed well in the cooperative context. One possible explanation is that children struggled
with the amount of information they had to consider simultaneously during the test trials. Despite
being able to recall single pieces of information (hence their good performance during comprehension
and advice questions, see ESM), they may have been overwhelmed by the amount of information they
had to consider during the test trials: When recruiting their co-action partner, they had to consider
two competence attributes per partner, one even being of a negative quality, i.e., incompetence, and
use these bits of information appropriately in light of the current context. Previous studies that
presented information of two characteristics per model used only one competence attribute in
combination with one social identity characteristic (familiarity/accent) when asking children to
endorse a model (Corriveau et al., 2013; Corriveau & Harris, 2009). An interesting line for future
research will be to explore the developmental trajectory of integrating several model characteristics
to make optimal decisions in selective trust scenarios.
General Discussion
We found that children from around five years of age succeeded in switching between choosing and
avoiding the same partner depending on task context, thus showing a new level of flexibility in
children’s social decision-making competence. At the same time, the majority of these children saw
fit to recruit co-action partners in a novel task based on the partners’ competence in an unrelated
domain – a pattern indicative of global impression formation rather than sophisticated trait reasoning.
In the relevant contrasts to differentiate between these two possibilities, children performed at
chance irrespective of age and context. These results stand in contrast to our predictions and are at
odds with previous research that found that 4-year-olds rationally recruit optimal partners for
cooperative tasks.
The children's unexpectedly poor performance may be explained by the relatively unfamiliar
first-person perspective, which may have masked children's abilities to strategically recruit between
the two models, as well as by the complexity of our task (see previous discussion). In addition, we
were operating with a minimal incentive structure – children’s only rewards were passively viewing
their virtual character win, and an animated prize ceremony where they were awarded virtual
trophies, at the end of the experiment. Thus, children had nothing to miss out on, and nothing really
to gain by making their choices. During in person testing, it is common to use incentive systems such
as collecting marbles or stickers to motivate children to choose wisely (e.g., Hermes et al., 2019). In
the absence of such incentives, some children may simply have chosen at random, despite having
understood all aspects of the task.
A final and more general point worth mentioning, is that statistically controlling for the effect
of experimenter ID affected the results of both experiments. For practical reasons, the use of multiple
experimenters is common practice in the field of developmental psychology. But despite awareness
that experimenters can bias results (Gallo & Dale, 1968), it is not common to see data divvied up by
experimenter ID in publications. Yet, information about number of experimenter identities and how
this detail has been controlled for in statistical analyses would help readers to assess the robustness
of findings. We decided to include experimenter ID in the random effects structure of each GLMM in
light of a recent publication that indicated it is possible to include a factor with just three levels as a
random effect (Gomes, 2022). We were surprised to find that even in ‘remote’ research where one
might think the experimenter could have little influence, there may still be the danger of unaccounted
for experimenter bias. Importantly though, with the current study we can’t be sure to which degree
and in which way experimenter ID affected results, or whether the difference in model results merely
constitutes a chance finding. In light of improved statistical methods, this may be a question to be
explored more systematically with appropriate a priori considerations in future studies.
In summary, we found that from around age 5, children’s social decision-making skills are
flexible enough to successfully navigate easy cooperative and competitive tasks. Our study also
showed that there are limits to children's rational selective partner choice abilities; children seem to
struggle when they have to consider multiple agent characteristics at once. We suggest future studies
investigate the effect of remote as opposed to in person testing, the effect increasing incentives has
on optimal decision-making, and the developmental trajectory of coping with an increasing amount
of information when choosing partners based on social evaluation judgements.