Will psychology ever ‘join hands’ with disability studies? Opportunities and challenges in
working toward structurally competent and disability-affirmative psychotherapy practice
Author
Joanne Hunt, MSc
Research Affiliate, Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden
joanne.hunt@uu.se
Orcid: 0000-0003-3868-5765
Email: joanne.hunt@uu.se
This preprint is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
Will psychology ever ‘join hands’ with disability studies? Opportunities and challenges in
working toward structurally competent and disability-affirmative psychotherapy practice
Abstract
Despite sustained efforts among critically-informed scholars to integrate thinking from
disability studies into psychology, the psy disciplines continue to largely neglect the lived
experience of disabled people and overlook disability as a form of social inequity and valued
diversity. This article makes a renewed case to integrate disability studies and psy, in
particular within the psychotherapy professions and in the case of ‘energy limiting
conditions’, a grassroots concept that includes clinically and socially marginalised chronic
illness such as long Covid. Exploration of opportunities and challenges in bridging the
interdisciplinary divide are informed by extant literature and the author’s experience as a
disabled psy practitioner. Largely unacknowledged institutional ableism within psy is
contended to re-produce and be reinforced by physical and attitudinal barriers for disabled
practitioners and service-users, engendering under-representation of disability in the
professions and lacunae in disability-affirmative hermeneutical resources. These lacunae are
argued to be bolstered by documented defensive clinical practices pertaining to disability. If
psychology is genuine in its commitment to equality, diversity and inclusion, then disability
must not be excluded. Disability studies offers a wealth of opportunities in this regard.
Keywords: energy limiting conditions; disability; chronic illness; psychology; psychotherapy;
politics of knowledge production; epistemic injustice; ableism
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
Introduction
Psychology more generally, and the psychotherapy professions more specifically, have
historically had a difficult relationship with disability as theorised within disability studies
(Goodley & Lawthom, 2006; Olkin & Pledger, 2003; Goodley, 2014, 2020). Here,
psychotherapy is conceptualised broadly to encompass counselling, psychotherapy,
counselling psychology, clinical psychology and clinical health psychology where
practitioners are in direct contact with patients and working with psychologically-informed
interventions. Despite this difficult relationship, it is increasingly accepted within critical
scholarship and activist work that disability studies can add significant value to the psy
disciplines and related practices through transforming them in a more socially just,
disability-affirmative, socio-politically and culturally cognisant direction (Goodley &
Lawthom, 2006; Olkin, 2007; Reeve, 2006, 2014; Goodley, 2020; Prilleltensky, 2009). Twenty
years ago, US psychologists Olkin and Pledger (2003) published a paper advocating for
greater integration of disability studies into (clinical) psychology, posing the titular question:
Can disability studies and psychology join hands? Their conclusion was that integration had
not been achieved but was both possible and desirable, with the recommendation that:
To move closer, psychology must shed its emphasis on disability as abnormal, deviant,
or special; join its sister disciplines in embracing disability studies; do everything
within its power to foster the training and development of students with disabilities;
and take the lead in ensuring that diversity includes disability and psychology includes
diversity. (Olkin and Pledger, 2003, p.303)
As a disabled practitioner and researcher in the UK working largely at the intersection
of (critical) psychology and disability studies, the author fully endorses the
recommendations of Olkin and Pledger (2003) and has experienced first-hand that, twenty
years later and despite parallel endeavours in the UK (e.g. Goodley & Lawthom, 2006;
Reeve, 2002, 2006, 2014; Simpson & Thomas, 2015), psychology has yet to join hands with
disability studies. For example, the author has worked with disabled people harmed by
psychotherapeutic modalities persistently grounded within traditional psy (individualistic,
pathologising and often responsibilising) models of disability that do not resonate with their
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
lived experience, and has sustained harms personally as a patient in similar contexts. The
author has also been excluded from her preferred training route (counselling psychology)
due to an inability or unwillingness of training providers to move some lectures to remote
delivery, which would allow her to manage the physical demands of clinical placement.
Finally, when publishing theoretical and conceptual research at this disciplinary intersection,
advocating for greater integration and structurally competent (socio-politically and
culturally cognisant) healthcare for disabled people including those with long Covid (Hunt,
2022, 2023a, 2023b), the author’s work and intentions have been subject to
misrepresentation and hostility from practitioners and researchers espousing
epistemologies and methodologies consonant with biomedicine and mainstream
(hypothetico-deductive, experimental) psychology. Yet, psychotherapy professional and
regulatory bodies within the UK and beyond variously emphasise the importance of
understanding more marginal epistemologies (notably those that are particularly amenable
for promoting socially just practice), the need to attend to the wider socio-political context
of service-users, and the importance of inclusive, non-discriminatory practice (APA, 2022;
HCPC, 2023; BPS, 2017; BACP, 2017). Disability studies can offer added value in all these
regards.
More specifically, the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC), the UK regulatory
body of clinical, counselling and health psychologists, includes a practice requirement for
clinical and counselling psychologists to “understand social approaches such as those
informed by community, critical and social constructivist perspectives” (HCPC, 2023, p.18;
see also Simpson & Thomas, 2015). Disability studies houses a wealth of precisely these
perspectives, importantly largely originating in the standpoint of disabled people moving
from segregated spaces into the academy and thus founding the discipline (Goodley, 2014;
Thomas, 2007). Moreover, the HCPC states that all practitioner psychologists must
“recognise the impact of culture, equality and diversity in practice and practise in a non-
discriminatory and inclusive manner” (HCPC, 2023, p.9). Whilst it hardly requires re-iteration
that disability studies has been at the forefront of seeking equality and inclusivity for
disabled people (Oliver, 1983; Oliver & Barnes, 2012), it is perhaps less widely known that
much work has been done within the discipline to establish, probe and theorise cultural
aspects of disability (e.g. Garland-Thomson, 1997; see also Goodley, 2014; Thomas, 2007).
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
In a similar vein, the ethical codes of professional bodies including the British Psychological
Society (BPS) and the British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy (BACP)
emphasise a need to attend to context, power and social norms, with a view to promoting
social justice; as will become clear in what follows, disability studies offers numerous
facilitative hermeneutical resources in this regard.
Beyond the UK, the American Psychological Association (APA, 2022) urges
practitioners working with disability to recognise how disability is bound up in intersection
with other forms of social (dis)advantage that shape lived experience; (critical) disability
studies literature abounds with such considerations (Goodley, 2013, 2014). Finally, and
again fully congruent with a discipline that “attends to the social, cultural, material,
economic and material conditions of exclusion” (Goodley, 2020, p.362), BPS practice
guidelines (2017) exhort all psychological practitioners to “move beyond the level of the
individual” and “address wider structural issues in society which maintain excluding
processes and power differentials” (BPS, 2017, p.36). Despite this ostensible commitment to
equality, diversity and inclusion (EDI) within psychology and psychotherapy, whilst other
forms of social inequity and sources of structural injustice are justly attracting significant
critical scrutiny, disability figures as something of a poor relation (Goodley & Lawthom,
2006; Ingham, 2018; Reeve, 2002; Olkin & Pledger, 2003). For example, the BPS houses
various faculties, sections and EDI initiatives that justly acknowledge and address systems of
oppression such as gender, sexuality, race and ethnicity (BPS, 2023a, 2023b); however,
disability is largely overlooked. The exception here are intellectual disabilities, which are
placed within traditional psy models invoking individualistic, medicalised understandings of
disability (BPS, 2023c, 2023d). A similar disparity exists with regard to educational literature
exploring socially just psychotherapeutic approaches (Reeve, 2002; Olkin & Pledger, 2003;
Hunt, 2023b), albeit with welcome exceptions notably from a counselling tradition (e.g.
Halacre, 2020). Given the on-going neglect of disability as a form of social inequity, and
failure to integrate thinking from disability studies into psychology and psychotherapy, this
topic deserves renewed attention. Indeed, given the emergence of long Covid and
predictions of a tidal wave of post-pandemic disability (Davis, 2022; Hunt 2023a),
psychology must evolve in a disability-inclusive direction as a matter of urgency.
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
In what follows, opportunities and challenges vis-à-vis integrating disability studies
into psychology, more specifically psychotherapy, are explored. As a person with a near life-
long diagnosis of ‘medically unexplained’ illness, the author’s research and practice have
gravitated toward this arena, more recently espousing the more inclusive grassroots term
‘energy limiting conditions’ (ELC) or ‘energy limiting chronic illness’ (Hale et al., 2020;
Chronic Illness Inclusion, 2021). ELC delineate chronic health conditions that share systemic
energy impairment (often minimised as ‘fatigue’) as a substrate of disablement and bear
particular pertinence both to the tensions between disability studies and psychology, and to
barriers to integration, as will become clear. Firstly, a brief overview of the tensions
between these disciplines is offered and the salience of ELC is explained. Secondly, models
and concepts from disability studies that offer opportunities to bridge the disciplinary divide
are discussed, using ELC as a practical example. Thirdly, on-going barriers to bridging the
disciplinary divide are considered, notably largely unacknowledged institutional ableism in
psy that sustains lack of demographic and epistemic diversity pertaining to disability. Given
that this inequitable status quo is entwined with a climate of neoliberal-ableism (Goodley,
2014) that shows no signs of abating, the article concludes with a question that is intended
to spark debate: are we reaching a point where we may contemplate a case of ‘ableist
ignorance’ within psy? By this, and drawing from work on white ignorance (Mills, 2007;
Martín, 2021), the author signals a form of largely unintentional yet systematic and
structurally incentivised ignorance among subjects and institutions that results in a
collective resistance among dominant groups to recognise the hermeneutical resources of
the disabled community and allies, a dynamic that further marginalises disabled people.
Before continuing, it is helpful to define terms that will be used throughout. Firstly,
the term ‘disabled people’ is espoused as opposed to person-first language as per a
foregrounding of the British social model of disability (Oliver, 1982) and extensions thereof
(Thomas, 2007), whereby disability is understood primarily as a form of social oppression
imposed upon people with impairments, but also arising from interaction between disabling
social structures and people with body/minds that diverge from social norms, thus deemed
‘impaired’ (Oliver, 1982; Thomas, 2007). Disability is also understood by the author as a
social identity and a society-enriching culture (Garland-Thomson, 1997; see also Thomas,
2007), thus identity-first language is adopted, whilst respecting arguments elsewhere for
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
person-first language (see Shakespeare, 2014). Whilst the author supports claims that the
social model’s disability/impairment binary is too simplistic (see Thomas, 2007), for the
purposes of this article chronic illness or long-term health conditions are considered
synonymous with impairment. Ableism, which can be differentiated from disablism, is
understood as a “cultural imaginary and social order centred around the idealised able-
bodied and -minded citizen who is self-sufficient, self-governing and autonomous” (Goodley,
2020, pp.366-367); the relevance of this concept will become clear. Secondly, whilst
‘structure’ refers to recurrent patterns of social practices and relations within a social
system, the term ‘social structure’ is understood as encompassing institutions, legislation,
policies, societal and institutional norms, attitudes and infrastructure (Metzl & Hansen,
2014; Martín, 2021). It follows that ‘structural competency’ represents awareness of how
health and healthcare are heavily shaped by social structures; whilst cultural competency
recognises social categories such as disability as a form of social inequity but typically
focuses upon individual (micro-level) interactions, structurally competent approaches reach
still further to encompass the structural (macro-level) context that constitutes forms of
inequity such as disability (Metzl & Hansen, 2014). However, whilst structural competency
has been justly and fruitfully applied in the arena of race, sexuality and gender (Metzl et al.,
2018; Willging et al., 2019), disability has remained heavily under-represented (but see Ali &
Sichel, 2020; Hunt, 2022, 2023a, 2023b). Finally, the term ‘disability-affirmative’ refers to an
active prizing of disability and disabled people, a focus upon flourishing and maximal
functioning as opposed to deficit, and recognition of disability as a culture that enriches
society (Olkin, 2007; Swain & French, 2000). Moreover, disability-affirmative approaches
can be understood as inherently structurally competent in that they consider “the political,
legal, economic, financial, social, educational, and familial, as well as the personal, impact of
disability in a cultural and historical context” (Olkin, 2007, 16).
Disciplinary divides
Through a disability studies lens, psychotherapy can be understood as part of the ‘psy
disciplines’: professions contended to construct normative discourse and promote
normalising practices in the realm of psychological phenomena (Rose, 1998; see also
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
Foucault, 1977). Such discourse and practices have been heavily criticised by disabled
activists and disability studies scholars for conforming to oppressive abled (able-bodied and
able-minded) ‘values’, norms and assumptions, operating under the guise of apolitical and
evidence-based policy (see Goodley & Lawthom, 2006; Goodley, 2014, 2020; Frayne, 2019).
Accordingly, foundational work in disability studies and disability activism served to turn the
tables on the prevalent, psy-mediated view of disability as individual deficiency, failure or
deviance, instead conceptualising disability as a social construction and source of
oppression whilst exposing social barriers created for disabled people by mainstream
practices (Oliver, 1983; Oliver & Barnes, 2012).
More specifically, a body of disability studies literature has problematised the
psychotherapy professions for supporting individualistic, pathologising and sometimes
responsibilising representations of disability as informed by the medical or tragedy model,
for largely ignoring disability-as-social-oppression in training programmes, professional
literature and practice, and for failing to address barriers to therapy and therapy training for
disabled people (Reeve, 2002; Levinson & Parritt, 2006; Ingham, 2018; Stannett, 2006).
Additionally, the psy disciplines have been subject to critique on grounds of promulgating a
hierarchy of knowledge and knowledge-producers, whereby practitioners are positioned as
experts, whilst patients are largely expected to be ‘compliant’ with clinical
recommendations (Goodley & Lawthom, 2006). Such hierarchies promote epistemic
injustice (harms against disabled people as ‘knowers’), concomitant loss of knowledge
arising from lived experience of disability, and the development of disability-denying (as
opposed to disability-affirmative) psychological interventions that may do harm. A similar
dynamic has historically prevailed in psychology research, where studies are conducted ‘on’
disabled people rather than with disabled people; in contrast, and congruent with the
disability rights movement slogan ‘nothing about us, without us’, disability studies scholars
advocate co-productive, emancipatory designs (Goodley & Lawthom, 2006; Olkin & Pledger,
2003). Finally, objections that psychotherapy is founded upon, and permeated by, ableist
norms and values are exemplified by lack of psychological testing and measures that
account for impairment and disability (Olkin & Pledger, 2003). Of particular pertinence to
ELC, where undue psychologisation in clinical settings has been documented, standard
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
measures for depression may over-diagnose owing to inclusion of items probing somatic
symptoms common in chronic illness (Olkin & Pledger, 2003; Pederson & Wagner, 2022).
Among forms of impairment and sources of disability, ELC represents a grassroots
concept that throws these interdisciplinary tensions into stark relief. A term created by UK
disabled researchers in co-production with disabled respondents (Chronic Illness Inclusion,
2021; Hale et al., 2020, 2021; Evans et al., 2023), ELC includes ‘rare’ conditions such Ehlers
Danlos Syndromes alongside more commonly occurring diagnoses such as fibromyalgia,
myalgic encephalomyelitis / chronic fatigue syndrome and, of particular topical relevance,
long Covid. Many diagnoses that sit within the ELC cluster are clinically and societally
‘contested’ chronic illnesses (sometimes referred to as ‘medically unexplained symptoms’),
troubled by histories of psychologisation, epistemic injustice and stigmatisation within
healthcare and wider social arenas, with physical and psychological and social harms
documented (Bê, 2016; Blease et al., 2017; Carel & Kidd, 2014; Evans et al., 2023; Hale et al.,
2020, 2021; Lian & Robson, 2017; Merone et al., 2022; Hunt, 2022). ELC are frequently
positioned as unworthy of disability status, not least since they often fluctuate and are
difficult to readily identify, thus defying prevalent stereotypes of impairment (Hale et al.,
2020) and engendering disbelief alongside many documented barriers within healthcare,
social security and employment arenas (Hale et al., 2020; Evans et al., 2023). Indeed, it has
recently been contended that ELC represent health conditions that have largely been
framed as ‘undeserving’ for (bio)political purposes (Hunt in press). For example,
reconstituting people with ELC as not disabled or undeserving of support serves welfare
reform agendas, including the removal of social protections, whilst pushing disabled people
into a hostile labour market and increasing competition (Hunt in press). Furthermore,
through a Foucauldian lens, people with ELC can be understood as subject to an apparatus
(dispositif in Foucauldian terms) of politically strategic truth-claims and actors and
institutions who construct those claims, that position ELC as a problem to be managed by
various corrective technologies (see Tremain, 2015; Hunt 2023d). This trend for ‘correction’
bears particular relevance to the psy disciplines.
Some diagnoses within the ELC cluster have politically troubling histories that bear
great relevance to psychotherapeutic framing. Higher rates of mental health co-morbidity
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
relative to the general population have been reported among people with ELC as with other
long-term health conditions (Daru, 2023; Naylor et al 2012). In the case of ELC, and
especially those diagnoses that are to some degree ‘medically unexplained’, debates have
raged over the role that mental health, and psychosocial factors, should play in explanatory
models (see Blease et al., 2017; Lian & Robson, 2017). The trend to position some ELC as
perpetuated by maladaptive psychology that can be ‘corrected’ by interventions such as
cognitive behavioural therapy (Hunt, 2022; Frayne, 2019), has been argued to be
underpinned by a neoliberal-ableist agenda of welfare state demolition (Stewart, 2016;
Rutherford, 2007), which serves to position ELC squarely within the purview of
psychotherapy and other psy disciplines. Accordingly, traditional psy dynamics of
psychologisation, pathologisation, individualisation and responsibilisation have been
demonstrated to occur frequently within the context of psychotherapeutic constructions of,
and approaches, to many ELC (see Hunt, 2023a). Chief among psy practices that may be
construed as structurally incompetent and disability-denying (as opposed to disability-
affirmative) is the interpretation of bodily restrictions and symptoms as a form of
somatised, unaddressed psychological conflict or thwarted social needs, or as a
manifestation of pursuit of secondary gain (see Hunt, 2023c).
Clearly, more disability-affirmative, socio-politically and culturally competent
approaches to psychotherapy (and other psy practices) are needed. A considerable body of
literature advocating for such approaches exists, which may be summarised as an entreaty
to abandon the tragedy model of disability, re-consider the prevalent emphasis upon the
medical model of disability and integrate insights arising from the British social model of
disability (Oliver, 1983), US socio-political or minority model of disability (Hahn, 1985),
human rights model (Degener, 2016) and developments thereof (Ingham, 2018; Halacre,
2020; Olkin, 2017; Olkin & Pledger, 2003). In amongst this conceptual and theoretical
panoply, some models and concepts stand out as being particularly amenable to informing
psychotherapy practice. It is to these models and concepts the article now turns.
Opportunities for integration
Chief among the contended benefits for psychology of interdisciplinary integration is
an enhanced ability to theorise “the psychological impact of living with an impairment in a
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
disabling society” (Goodley, 2020, p. 362). The social-relational model of disability and
related concept of psycho-emotional disablism (Thomas, 1999, 2007; Reeve, 2006, 2014)
greatly facilitate such theorising. Firstly, the social-relational model of disability (Thomas,
1999, 2007) offers a materialist-feminist inspired expansion of the British social model that
holds great potential relevance for integration into psychotherapy, and thus for more
structurally competent and disability-affirmative psychotherapy practice. Whilst this model
incorporates the social model’s understanding of disability as macro- and meso-level socio-
structural barriers (employment policies, healthcare access, the benefits system etc)
imposed upon people with impairments such as ELC, it also recognises the potential for
discriminatory and disabling interactions at a ‘micro’ (interpersonal) level. Recognition of
interpersonal relationships as vehicles of both empowerment and disempowerment, growth
and harm, bears obvious relevance to psychotherapy and is immediately amenable to
integration. Additionally, the concept of structural disablism (socio-structural barriers) can
productively challenge psychotherapists to develop structural competency, which in
practice may include advocacy-related work, for example, supporting service-users to assert
their civil and human rights (Olkin, 2007).
Secondly, the related concept of psycho-emotional disablism (Thomas, 1999, 2007;
Reeve, 2006, 2014) acknowledges ‘the socially engendered undermining’ (Thomas 1999,
p.3) of the psycho-emotional health of disabled people that operates from macro through to
micro level via pathways that include the impact of socio-structural barriers, invalidating or
otherwise distressing interactions with others and internalised ableism (Reeve, 2006, 2014).
In this regard, the concept incorporates space not only to work with the psycho-emotional
impact of disempowering interpersonal relationships and intrapersonal (intrapsychic)
dynamics, with which practitioners will be thoroughly familiar, but also the psycho-
emotional impact of navigating hostile socio-political and physical landscapes, which
represents a structurally competent extension that will be new to many practitioners.
Importantly, the concept of psycho-emotional disablism allows what may appear to be
individual distress (typically understood as mental illness) to be re-framed where
appropriate as socio-politically and relationally mediated distress, as the downstream effect
of disempowering, disabling relationships with other people and social structures. Not only
does this reframing reflect the testimonies of many people with ELC (see Bê, 2016, 2019;
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
Evans et al., 2023; Hale et al., 2020, 2021; Lian & Robson, 2017; Merone et al., 2020), but it
mitigates against psycho-pathologisation manifesting as blame, which as previously
referenced is well-documented in psy practices in the ELC arena (see Hunt, 2023c).
Thirdly, the social-relational model of disability and concept of psycho-emotional
disablism allows for recognition of the body, with space carved out for the lived and
embodied experience of chronic illness (e.g. Bê, 2016; Reeve, 2006, 2014; Thomas, 1999,
2007). Again, these are elements in which psychotherapists should be well-versed. Efforts to
bring the body into disability studies, exemplified through the related concepts of
‘impairment effects’ (Thomas, 2007) and ‘externally imposed impairment effects’ (Bê,
2016), are particularly amenable to integration into psychology. ‘Impairment effects’
delineate restrictions to activity attributable to the body; this ostensibly invokes the medical
model of disability which predominates in psychology and psychotherapy, and for which
loss, acceptance and adjustment models abound (Olkin & Pledger, 2003; Reeve 2002, 2006).
Whilst conceptualising impairment as loss and including acceptance and adjustment among
therapeutic tasks may be appropriate in some cases, work within medical sociology and
disability studies to develop a sociology of impairment demonstrate how impairment is
bound up with “geographies of privilege” (Sherry, 2016, p.733) and bio-social in character
(Thomas, 2007); such thinking underscores the need to acknowledge and challenge social
inequities that shape what appear to be individual phenomena. Following this line of
thought, the term ‘externally imposed impairment effects’ (Bê, 2016) describes impairment
effects such as pain and fatigue created or exacerbated by social phenomena, notably
invalidating interactions with people or social structures. This latter concept is thus
structurally competent and allows practitioners to understand a disabled person’s bodily
restrictions and symptoms as the potential effect of a disabling society, as opposed to
automatically reaching for individualistic explanations such as somatisation of unaddressed
psychological conflict or thwarted social needs (see Hunt, 2023c). Moreover, since disabled
people know best how society disables them, this understanding requires that practitioners
value disabled people as equal partners and epistemic agents within the therapeutic
relationship, thus promoting epistemically just, disability-affirmative modes of working. In
this respect, it is noteworthy that models and concepts highlighted here are the product of
disabled scholars (Thomas, 1999, 2007; Reeve, 2002, 2006, 2014; Bê, 2016).
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
It has elsewhere been noted that, to facilitate interdisciplinary integration, concepts
within disability studies require “some resonance as a psychological construct based on
psychological theory” (Simpson & Thomas, 2015, p.1302), not least with a view to
operationalising constructs for further psychological research. Accordingly, it has been
suggested that clinical psychology research on the psychology of emotions might offer a
theoretical bridge (Simpson & Thomas, 2015). Additionally, and broadly consonant with the
suggestion that social identity theory offers an interdisciplinary bridge (Dirth & Branscombe,
2018), the author’s practice experience suggests that constructs within social psychology
including stigma and minority stress could offer further bridging opportunities.
Stigma has been conceptualised as a multi-faceted construct where “labelling,
stereotyping, separation, status loss, and discrimination occur together in a power situation
that allows them” (Link & Phelan, 2001, p.377). The ‘power situation’ points toward a
broader socio-structural context which facilitates stigma, allowing a structurally competent
(disability-specific) comparison to be drawn with (dis)ableism. Concepts such as structural
stigma (Hatzenbuehler, 2016) and internalised or self-stigma (see Meyer, 2003) resonate
with structural disablism and internalised disablism respectively. Minority stress refers to
chronic and socio-structurally mediated stress to which members of stigmatised social
groups are exposed owing to their social positionality, and which represents additional
stress to that experienced by all people (Meyer, 2003). The minority stress model is
informed through a multitude of social psychological and sociological concepts, including
but extending beyond stigma to encompass intergroup relations, social identity and self-
categorisation theories (Meyer, 2003). The model, originally developed for work with
lesbian, gay and bi-sexual populations, has been applied widely for working with racially
minoritised persons and has recently been extended to disability (Lund, 2021). This model
helps to explain how stigma and discrimination engender negative psychological sequelae
through distal stressors (socio-structural phenomena such as discrimination) and proximal
stressors (subjective responses to discrimination such as minoritised identity concealment
and internalisation), thus resonating with the afore-mentioned pathways of psycho-
emotional disablism. Although the model does not address the physical and physiological
impact of minority stress, extant literature exploring how stigma and discrimination can
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
become embodied (biologically embedded) can help to fill this space (see Author 2022). In
this case, comparisons can be drawn to externally imposed impairment effects (Bê, 2016).
Such concepts and models can help explicate the impact that being marginally socially
situated can have on physical and mental health, with opportunities to build bridges
between psychotherapy and disability studies.
Whilst detailed recommendations for specific practice interventions are beyond the
scope of this article, one example will be offered drawing upon the author’s therapeutic
practice and using a cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) approach. CBT, the dominant
psychotherapeutic modality in the UK, US and beyond (Frayne, 2019; Pantalone et al.,
2019), has been subject to much critique among critically-informed scholars, additionally
receiving criticism from sub-groups within the ELC umbrella and mainstream scholars. In the
former case, objections have been raised over CBT’s resonance with the medical
(individualistic) model of disability and its subsequent co-option into neoliberal welfare-to-
work programmes and New Public Management (Frayne, 2019; see also Dalal, 2018). In the
latter case, debates persist over the clinical effectiveness and potential harms of CBT (see
Blease et al., 2017; Lian & Robson, 2017). Whilst the author strongly objects to CBT as a
clinical treatment for ELC, practice experience suggests that it is possible to adapt CBT in a
structurally competent and disability-affirmative direction as a supportive adjunct (to
mitigate psychological distress) for people who choose it. This can be done by drawing upon
principles from minority-group-affirmative CBT, sometimes referred to as culturally
competent or sensitive CBT (Austin & Craig, 2015; Pantalone et al., 2019) and from feminist
approaches to CBT (see Hurst & Genest, 1995).
Affirmative CBT is often informed by the minority stress model (remembering the
conceptual convergence with structural and psycho-emotional disablism) and particular
tasks include supporting service-users to identify discrimination and prejudice from macro-
to micro-levels, address internalised oppression, and draw upon community strengths
through seeking identity-affirming activities with supportive others (Austin & Craig, 2015). In
fact, such an approach is highly consonant with what has been termed Disability-Affirmative
Therapy (Olkin, 2007). More specifically, disability-affirmative cognitive-behavioural
interventions include formulating and addressing automatic thoughts, assumptions and core
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
beliefs as a partial product of structural ableism and psycho-emotional disablism, as
opposed to, or in complement with, working at the individual level (through a lens of the
service-user’s ‘unhelpful cognitions’). ‘Reality testing’ can then proceed both at a macro-
level (challenging the veracity and value of discriminatory social representations of
disability) and also at a micro-level (challenging the service-user’s internalisation of
structural and interpersonal ableism). Integrating feminist perspectives (Hurst & Genest,
1995) into this approach can add value in ‘normalising’ and affirming emotions and
vulnerability, and also in addressing power differentials within the therapeutic relationship.
Whilst further research is clearly necessary to determine acceptability and effectiveness (in
reducing distress) outside of clinical anecdote, this example hopefully serves to demonstrate
that possibilities for structurally competent adaptations exist for those who actively seek
them.
Before moving to consider barriers to integration, it is important to re-iterate that
disability studies concepts and models are highly suited to conceptualising the experiences
of people with ELC; that is, structural and psycho-emotional disablism can be invoked to
elucidate much of the reported psychological distress within this heterogeneous group. As
regards structural disablism, socio-structural barriers are evidenced in the form of the
benefits system, health and social care systems, education and workplace (Bê, 2016, 2019;
Evans et al., 2023; Hale et al., 2020, 2021). Consonant with the concept of psycho-emotional
disablism, documented struggles with these social structures (to obtain health and social
care, benefits, workplace and educative adjustments) have been demonstrated to leave
people with ELC feeling unwelcome, out of place and less worthy than others (Hale et al.,
2020; 2021; Bê, 2016, 2019; Evans et al., 2023; Wendell, 1996). Moreover, the distressing
impact of invalidating interactions with others (notably healthcare professionals but also
friends, family, educators, employers and benefits assessors) is well documented (see
Blease et al., 2017; Merone et al., 2022; Thomas, 1999), whilst internalised ableism can be
discerned in reported conflicts around requesting accommodations and communicating
disability-related needs and experiences to others, and through documented feelings of low
self-worth, low self-efficacy and identity-related stress (Hale et al., 2020, 2021; Hunt, 2022;
Wendell, 1996). Indeed, such findings raise the question of whether the afore-mentioned
elevated rates of mental health co-morbidity among people with ELC relative to the general
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
population might be explained, at least in part, by structural and interpersonal (dis)ableism
(see Halacre, 2020). This suggestion is broadly consonant with Meyer’s (2003) contention
that minority stress may explain the higher rates of mental health diagnoses among lesbian,
gay and bi-sexual persons relative to the general population (see also Lund, 2021); further
research in the ELC arena is indicated.
Despite a wealth of opportunities to build bridges between disability studies and
psychotherapy, at time of writing there is very little evidence of thinking from disability
studies being adopted by, or inciting interest among, practitioners, trainers or policy-makers
within the psychotherapy professions. The following section explores why this may be.
Barriers to integration
An overarching barrier to integration is contended to be institutional ableism (more
specifically, neoliberal-ableism), where ableism is largely unacknowledged within
psychology and psychotherapy. The social imaginary of the psychotherapy professions could
well be argued to be saturated with ableism, from theoretical concepts such as the idealised
‘fully functioning’ (self-determining, self-contained) person (Rogers, 1961) and exquisitely
rational subject (Ellis, 1962), to everyday professional parlance such as being ‘blind’ or ‘deaf’
to culturally sensitive matters (see Proctor, 2021). It has been noted that many
psychotherapeutic models were developed during an era that normalised the segregation of
disabled people (Halacre & Jalil, 2017); disability was thus not ‘present’ in the mainstream
social and clinical imagination and this may have contributed to prevailing pathologising psy
models of disability. Whilst the psy professions are increasingly recognising toxic legacies of
racism, transphobia, homophobia and sexism, as previously mentioned disability has been
posited as a poor relation in the EDI stakes (Goodley & Lawthom, 2006; Ingham, 2018; Olkin
& Pledger, 2003; Reeve, 2002, 2014) and the legacy of ableism within the professions has
attracted comparatively little attention to date.
Interestingly, the articulations between psychology, psychotherapy and neoliberalism
have been subject to increasing attention (e.g. LaMarre et al., 2019; Sugarman, 2015), but
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
largely without recognition that this ideology is heavily entwined with (dis)ableism, to the
extent that ‘neoliberal-ableism’ (Goodley, 2014) has become an established concept within
disability studies. Neoliberal-ableism, a “logic that pursues the (hyper)normal” (Goodley,
2014, p.21), recognises that both ideologies are inextricably entwined, and that the
idealised neoliberal subject is also an abled (able-bodied, able-minded) subject.
Nevertheless, academic discussion of neoliberalism and psy, whilst acknowledging the
neoliberal resonance of dominant psychotherapeutic modalities emerging against the
backdrop of this ideology, and the reproduction of neoliberal norms and subjectivities
within the therapeutic encounter (LaMarre et al., 2019; Sugarman, 2015), largely overlook
important parallel dynamics with ableism (but see Frayne, 2019). This largely disavowed
climate of structural ableism engenders further barriers. Broadly speaking, one of these
barriers coalesces around an institutional failure to embrace demographic diversity, whilst
another can be conceptualised as an institutional failure to embrace epistemic diversity,
understood as respect for diverse sources of knowledge (Xu, 2022). These barriers are
interlinked, as the following discussion demonstrates.
It is axiomatic that disabled people can offer unique insights into disability through
their lived experience; such insights are also invaluable in developing disability-affirmative
practice and policy (see Wendell, 1996; Hale et al., 2020, 2021). As previously mentioned,
the theoretical and conceptual contributions at the core of this article have been made by
disabled and chronically ill scholars. Yet, the under-representation of disabled people in
psychology and the psychotherapy professions has repeatedly been problematised
(Goodley, 2020; Levinson & Parritt, 2006; Reeve, 2002; Stannett, 2006); such under-
representation, and the exclusions that feed it, persist. For example, recent data from the
BACP suggest that disabled people represent just 11% of BACP members (Jackson, 2022),
despite representing a far larger percentage of the UK and world population as society’s
largest minority group; prevalence is estimated around 24% and 16% respectively (Kirk-
Wade, 2023; WHO, 2023). Recent BACP literature additionally demonstrates that disabled
people continue to face considerable physical and attitudinal barriers to entering the
professions, not only in terms of practitioners accessing training programmes, but also
service-users accessing therapy (Jackson 2023; Jackson, 2022). Lack of demographic and
knowledge-related diversity within the professions can be understood as a cause and effect
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
of institutional (dis)ableism: the historical and on-going ‘absence’ of disability within the
professions allows institutional ableism to emerge largely without challenge (Reeve, 2002,
2014) and the ensuing institutional order presents physical and attitudinal barriers
(structural disablism) for disabled people and their diverse knowledges who wish to enter
the professions. Similarly, barriers for disabled service-users mean that practitioners do not
gain adequate experience of working with disability; of particular note, the experiences and
epistemic contributions of the most marginalised within the disabled communities rarely
translate into training and practice. This creates a vicious cycle where lack of disability-
specific demographic diversity results in lack of disability-specific epistemic diversity,
resulting in conceptually-impoverished psychotherapy practice and policy that further
socially and epistemically marginalises disabled people.
Institutional failure within psy to embrace demographic and epistemic diversity
pertaining to disability may be all the more entrenched in the case of ELC. As previously
explained, people with ELC often struggle to obtain disability or impairment related
accommodations and adjustments, largely owing to the unfavourable positioning of ELC in
the clinical and social imaginary and its incongruence with prevalent stereotypes of
impairment and disability (Bê, 2016, 2019; Hale et al. 2020; Wendell 1996). The author’s
experience is that such dynamics, and associated disbelief or devaluation, extend to
professional training programmes and providers. In addition to the afore-mentioned
resistance toward remote delivery of lectures, resulting in exclusion from counselling
psychology training, the author has also faced barriers owing to conflation of ELC with
poorly managed or disavowed mental health diagnoses. This conflation then threatens
eligibility to train in many psy professions, indicating sanism alongside ableism. When
seeking alternatives to further clinical training (for example, PhD research at the
intersection of psychology and disability studies), further (dis)ableist barriers have arisen
(Author in press). Amongst such barriers is a trend to preferentially fund research that
prioritises medicalised understandings of disability over structurally competent approaches
(see Olkin & Pledger, 2003).
It could be argued that such dynamics engender a form of hermeneutical injustice, a
structural phenomenon occurring when socio-culturally dominant hermeneutical
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
frameworks fail to capture the knowledge, experiences and testimonies of a marginal group,
resulting in pockets of collective ‘conceptual impoverishment’ (Fricker, 2007; see also Carel
& Kidd, 2014). However, whilst hermeneutical injustice assumes that neither dominant nor
marginally situated groups have the necessary resources to make sense of marginal
experiences, this clearly does not hold true in the disability arena. As this article
demonstrates, disabled people and allies have developed a wealth of hermeneutical
resources to understand disability, but these are rarely acknowledged by the psychotherapy
professions. In the case psychotherapy and disability, the author suggests that the concept
of contributory injustice (Dotson, 2012), whereby dominant groups refuse to acknowledge
the well-established hermeneutical resources of marginally situated groups, is more
appropriate (see also Scully, 2018; Tate, 2019). This refusal has been termed ‘wilful
hermeneutical ignorance’ (Dotson, 2012; also see Pohlhaus, 2012), where “dominantly
situated knowers refuse to acknowledge epistemic tools developed from the experienced
world of those situated marginally” (Pohlhaus, 2012, p.715). Importantly, such ignorance
can be understood as a structural as well as agential phenomenon, whereby individual
defences necessary to maintain such ignorance (typically conceptualised in philosophical
literature as epistemic vices) are reinforced by institutions and other social structures
(Pohlhaus, 2017; see also Dotson, 2012; Medina, 2013). The author’s experience suggests
that similar dynamics, in the form of defensive practices, unwittingly play out within the
psychotherapy professions across training, practice and supervision contexts and on
individual and collective levels (Author, 2023c), and that this constitutes a significant barrier
to integrating diverse epistemic resources offered by disability standpoint and the disability
studies canon. It is to such practices that attention now turns.
A large body of disability studies literature probes the cultural representations of
disabled people and the positioning of disability in the non-disabled social imaginary (e.g.
Marks, 1999; Watermeyer, 2012; Goodley, 2011, 2014, 2020; Wendell, 1996). Indeed, it has
been contended that the integration of psychology and disability studies can add value
through the project of “exposing non-disabled people’s unresolved, unconscious conflicts
around their own bodies and personhoods” (Goodley, 2020, p.362). Within this literature,
much has been written on defensive behaviours that attempt to resolve such conflicts and
to manage how disability thwarts fundamental psychical needs or desires, including the
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
need to feel in control of the self and one’s environment, and the desire to avoid
confronting dependency, deterioration and death (Goodley, 2011; Watermeyer, 2012;
Wendell, 1996). Indeed, the embracing of psychoanalytic thinking by many disability studies
scholars represents yet another opportunity to bridge the divide between disability studies
and psychotherapy, particularly from the perspective of psycho-analytically and psycho-
dynamically trained therapists. More recently, and of particular relevance to this article,
such thinking has been applied to healthcare settings in the ELC arena, including
psychotherapy (Hunt, 2023c). Accordingly, it has been suggested that the well-documented
clinical dismissal, disbelief and negative stereoptyping of some people with ELC may
represent an unwitting (largely unconscious) clinical defence against psychological conflict
vis-a-vis poorly understood or poorly treated chronic illness that thwarts clinicians’ expertise
and desire to preserve and improve the quality of patients’ lives, whilst challenging wider
social investments in ‘just world’ beliefs (Hunt, 2023c).
Defensive (dismissive, stereotyping) clinical behaviours allow psychotherapists and
other healthcare professionals to unwittingly reinforce their preferred hermeneutical
frameworks, thus creating further barriers to integrating the epistemic diversity offered by
disabled people’s lived experience and the disability studies canon. As discussed elsewhere
(Frayne, 2019; Carel & Kidd, 2014; Hunt, 2023c), defensive clinical practice must be situated
in a broader structural context that incentivises such practice; in the psychotherapy arena,
this context is heavily shaped by neoliberal policies prioritising time-limited, individualistic
and recovery-oriented therapeutic modalities (Frayne, 2019). These policies are especially
pertinent to the ELC arena given the afore-mentioned clinical tendencies to psychologise,
individualise and responsibilise diagnoses that sit within the ELC umbrella (Hunt, 2023c). In
turn, such policies and the collective mindset that feeds them can be sited in the neoliberal-
ableist psy complex and overarching ‘wellness industry’ which invites or coerces individuals
to work upon themselves in pursuit of the idealised (productive, self-sufficient, self-
regulating) citizen (Goodley, 2014). In this climate, disability and impairment become the
archetypal Other, systematically denied or devalued.
Much of the work on defensive behaviours and epistemic vices pertaining to chronic
illness and disability is undertaken with the intention of lifting such phenomena up into the
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
conscious collective imagination so that they can become subject to critical scrutiny and
amenable to productive change (e.g. Carel & Kidd, 2014; Goodley, 2014; Marks, 1999;
Watermeyer, 2012; Hunt, 2023c). After all, the central ethical principle of psychotherapy is
to do good (beneficence), or at least to do no harm (non-maleficence), and any form of
resistance or failure to address discriminatory practices and overarching ideologies is
ethically problematic. Such endeavours should resonate particularly strongly with
psychotherapists, given the emphasis on critical reflection or reflexivity across counselling,
psychotherapy, clinical, counselling and clinical health psychology (HCPC, 2023; APA, 2022).
For example, the APA (2022) encourages all practitioner psychologists “to explore
their own beliefs, biases, and embodiment of cultural stereotypes toward affirmative,
respectful practice” (APA, 2022, p.19), whilst the UK HCPC states that all practitioner
psychologists should “reflect critically on their practice and consider alternative ways of
working” (HCPC, 2023, p.15). Moreover, psychologists and psychotherapists with an interest
in disability-affirmative practice have repeatedly noted that disability competent, ethical
practice necessitates critical self-reflection, in particular regarding conscious and
unconscious conflicts (explicit and implicit bias) around disability and impairment (Olkin,
2007; Halacre, 2020; Ingham, 2018; Reeve, 2002). Psychology’s engagement with disability
studies can therefore add value not only through offering alternative (or complementary
and integrative) ways of working therapeutically with disabled service-users, but also in
helping practitioners to work on themselves. Whist this latter point is particularly important
where practitioners rely on substantial ‘use of self’ as a therapeutic tool (notably, within
counselling and counselling psychology), professional and regulatory bodies emphasise that
self-awareness is crucial for all practitioner psychologists (APA, BPS, 2017, HCPC, 2023). As
has been noted elsewhere (Hunt, 2023c), greater emphasis on reflexivity within the ELC
arena is required in training, supervision and practice.
Final thoughts: a case of ableist ignorance?
The above discussions have revealed an ever-burgeoning body of disability studies literature
offering a wealth of conceptual and theoretical opportunities for integration, whilst also
demonstrating the continued failure of psychology to heed such hermeneutical resources
and to recognise disability as a source of social inequity and diversity. Given this persistent
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
dynamic, the article closes with a question that is intended to provoke debate: might we
now consider a climate of ‘ableist ignorance’ within psychology as a discipline and
institution?
In drawing upon work on contributory injustice (Dotson, 2012), wilful hermeneutical
ignorance (Pohlhaus, 2017), and white ignorance (e.g. Mills, 2007; Martín, 2021), the author
conceptualises ableist ignorance as both a sociological and normative concept that
delineates a pattern of ignorance (absence of knowledge vis-à-vis the lived experience of
disability) that does not arise coincidentally, but rather actively emerges from social
practices, playing an important role in (re)producing and reinforcing social inequity, here,
pertaining to disability. Whilst primarily understood as a form of epistemic injustice
(epistemic dimensions of ableism), it is inextricably linked with social injustice (see Medina
2013). In parallel with wilful hermeneutical ignorance, ableist ignorance is reinforced
through social practices, institutions, and the social imaginary which determines what can
be legitimately thought (Medina, 2013; Pohlhaus, 2017), whilst also being maintained by
individual- and group-level defensive cognitive-affective functioning (Medina, 2013). In
parallel with white ignorance (Mills, 2007; Martín, 2021), ableist ignorance may explain the
persistence of (here, disability-related) social inequities, make sense of how social practices
(here, psychotherapy) can re-produce ignorance that serves to marginalise already
marginally situated groups, and help account for conscious or unconscious resistance to
change (here, defences against unresolved conflicts around disability, incentivised by
neoliberal-ableist culture). Again in parallel to white ignorance (Mills, 2007), it is suggested
that group interest may well play a role (that non-disabled people have an interest in
promulgating the ableist status quo) but that such ignorance is not the exclusive province of
non-disabled people (problematic non-disabled/disabled binary acknowledged). In other
words, some disabled people may reinforce such ignorance and some non-disabled people
may actively work against it. Whilst understood as active (resistant to correction,
maintained by defensive practices), wilful (avoidable, motivated) and culpable (see Medina,
2013; Mills, 2007; Pohlhaus, 2017), it is also suggested that ableist ignorance can arise
without individual or group intent or conscious action.
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
Accordingly, a largely structuralist view of such ignorance (see Martín, 2021) is
preferable, whereby social practices are understood to promote ignorance by (i) creating
conditions that incentivise such ignorance (ii) influencing the cognitive-affective functioning
of individuals and groups (iii) generating external barriers to knowledge even without
influencing cognitive-affective functioning and without incentive (Martín, 2021). Following
this template, ableist ignorance is understood as promoted within psy through (i) the re-
production of neoliberal-ableism which incentivises disability denial and devaluation (ii)
influencing the cognitive-affective functioning of practitioners, educators and policy-makers
as can be discerned in defensive practice and discriminatory policy (iii) generating external
barriers to the full participation of disabled people as psy professionals and service-users,
with a resultant (unintended) loss of disability-affirmative knowledge. Finally, whilst full
discussion is beyond the scope of this article, it is interesting to consider that ableist
ignorance may also be gendered. That is, the disability-affirmative hermeneutical resources
as showcased in this article (Thomas, 1999, 2007; Reeve, 2006, 2014; Bê, 2016) arise broadly
from within feminist disability studies and represent the epistemic labours of chronically ill
and disabled women. Additionally, many (if not most) diagnoses that fall within the
umbrella of energy limiting conditions are those that disproportionately affect women (see
Lian & Robson, 2017; Merone et al., 2022). This, juxtaposed against the culturally masculine
modes of knowledge historically produced by the psy disciplines (see Rose 1998; Lafrance
and Wigginton, 2019), indicates that psy’s continued overlooking of disability-affirmative
frameworks may arise from androcentrism as well as ableism. In accordance with the notion
of conceptualising minoritised ignorance as a normative project (see Mills, 2007), the
concept of ableist ignorance seeks not to blame and shame, but to better understand a
particular pattern of injustice so as to eliminate it. It is hoped that this article has gone some
way toward elucidating disability-related injustices that exist within the psy arena, with a
view to eliminating these injustices.
In summary, this article has made a renewed case for integrating thinking from
disability studies into psychology and psychotherapy, and particularly within the ELC arena.
Tensions between the two disciplines have been outlined and opportunities to bridge the
disciplinary divide have been discussed, using ELC as an example of disability and
impairment that bears particular relevance to psychotherapeutic practice and policy.
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT
Challenges, in the form of barriers to integration, have been conceptualised as an
institutional failure to embrace both demographic and epistemic diversity pertaining to
disability. Specifically, unacknowledged institutional ableism has been contended to
reproduce and be reinforced by under-representation of disabled people in psychotherapy
professions and barriers for disabled service-users, sustaining conceptually impoverished,
disability-denying (as opposed to disability-affirmative) hermeneutical frameworks. Lacunae
in practitioners’ hermeneutical resources are then bolstered by defensive practices that
dismiss or deny the lived experience of disability, unwittingly perpetuating epistemic
injustices and the (dis)ableist status quo. If psychology and psychotherapy are genuine in
the institutional and disciplinary commitment to “move beyond the level of the individual”
and “address wider structural issues in society which maintain excluding processes and
power differentials” (BPS, 2017, p.36), then disability must be included. Disability studies
houses a theoretical and conceptual panoply that can greatly facilitate this endeavour.
Whether disability will be emancipated from its position as the poor relation of EDI practice
and policy remains to be established.
WILL PSYCHOLOGY EVER ‘JOIN HANDS’ WITH DISABILITY STUDIES? J.E.HUNT