Most people’s life satisfaction matches their personality traits: True correlations in multi-trait, multi-
rater, multi-sample data
René Mõttus
Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh
Institute of Psychology, University of Tartu
Anu Realo
Department of Psychology, University of Warwick
Institute of Psychology, University of Tartu
Estonian Academy of Sciences
Jüri Allik
Institute of Psychology, University of Tartu
Estonian Academy of Sciences
Liisi Ausmees
Institute of Psychology, University of Tartu
Samuel Henry
Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh
Robert R. McCrae
Gloucester, Massachusetts
Uku Vainik
Institute of Psychology, University of Tartu
Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu
This article has been accepted for publication to the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
(01/02/2024).
© 2024, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may not exactly
replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not copy or cite without authors'
permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its DOI: 10.1037/pspp0000501
Author Note
This work has been funded by the Estonian Research Council's grants PSG656, PSG759, PRG1291 and
PRG2190, and the University of Edinburgh PPLS Small Grant. We thank Rafaele Gidoro, Shivani Khanna and
Roxana Hofmann for help with recruiting and testing English-speaking participants. We also thank Wendy
Johnson and Ulirch Schimmack for reading an earlier draft of the manuscript, and Umberto Noe for
statistical help.
Personality and life satisfaction 2
Abstract
Despite numerous meta-analyses, the true extent to which life satisfaction reflects personality traits has
remained unclear due to over-reliance on a single method to assess both and insufficient attention to
construct overlaps. Using data from three samples tested in different languages (Estonian, N = 20,886;
Russian, N = 768; English, N = 600), we combined self- and informant-reports to estimate personality
domains’ and nuances’ true correlations (r ) with general life satisfaction (LS) and satisfactions with eight
true
life domains (DSs), while controlling for single-method and occasion-specific biases and random error, and
avoiding direct construct overlaps. The associations replicated well across samples. The Big Five domains
and nuances allowed predicting LS with accuracies up to r ≈ .80 to .90 in independent (sub)samples.
true
Emotional stability, extraversion, and conscientiousness correlated r ≈ .30 to .50 with LS, while its
true
correlations with openness and agreeableness were small. At the nuances level, low LS was most strongly
associated with feeling misunderstood, unexcited, indecisive, envious, bored, used, unable, and
unrewarded (r ≈ .40 to .70). Supporting LS’s construct validity, DSs had similar personality correlates
true
among themselves and with LS, and an aggregated DS correlated r ≈ .90 with LS. LS’s approximately 10-
true
year stability was r = .70 and its longitudinal associations with personality traits mirrored cross-sectional
true
ones. We conclude that without common measurement limitations, most people’s life satisfaction is
highly consistent with their personality traits, even across many years. So, satisfaction is usually shaped by
these same relatively stable factors that shape personality traits more broadly.
Keywords: personality traits; life-satisfaction: well-being; multi-rater
Most people’s life satisfaction matches their personality traits: True correlations in multi-trait, multi-
rater, multi-sample data
General life satisfaction (LS) – an evaluative assessment of the overall degree of being satisfied with one’s
life (Heller et al., 2004) – is among the most desirable psychological outcomes and often an end unto itself,
at least in the Western world (e.g., McMahon, 2006). Historically the purview of religion and philosophy,
studying LS’s causes and psychological background now involves scientists from numerous fields working
worldwide (Diener et al., 2018). Much of this work has focused on LS’s degree of reflecting a broader range
of relatively stable psychological characteristics, besides being directly influenced by short-term
situational influences and more enduring life circumstances like culture, societal and economic processes,
income, health, career, relationships and how people interpret these (e.g., Diener et al., 2018; Heller et al.,
2004; Jagodzinski, 2010; Luhmann et al., 2012).
Many of the psychological characteristics are summarized with the Big Five or Five-Factor Model (FFM;
Costa & McCrae, 1992) or HEXACO (Ashton & Lee, 2020) personality domains (Bainbridge et al., 2022). In
the Big Five, neuroticism tends to have the strongest (r ≈ .40) and openness the weakest correlation (r
≈ .10) with LS. In the HEXACO, LS correlates the strongest with extraversion (r ≈ .40) and the weakest with
emotionality, openness, and honesty-humility (r ≈ .10). These “Big Few” domains collectively account for
about 30% of LS’s variance (Anglim et al., 2020; Busseri & Erb, in press). Insomuch as the domains
represent relatively – albeit far from fully – stable individual differences, LS’s correlations with them are
consistent with other evidence of its trait-like nature, such as moderate long-term stability (e.g., Lucas et
al., 2018), similarity among genetically related people (Weiss et al., 2008) and visibility to others (e.g.,
Dobewall et al., 2013; Schneider & Schimmack, 2009).
Distinct but entangled
Regardless of its empirical correlations with personality traits, LS can remain conceptually distinct from
them. On the one hand, people’s differences in LS could mirror their personality traits in normal
circumstances that allow them to shape and evaluate their lives according to their psychological and other
Personality and life satisfaction 3
traits. In this case, LS can appear like any other trait – relatively stable, observable by others, and partly
tracking individuals’ genetic differences that provide distal backgrounds for any developmental asp ect
(Avinun, 2020; Bouchard, 2016; Johnson, 2010; Turkheimer et al., 2014). On the other hand, at least
hypothetically, it may be possible to imagine these same people living in such dreadful circumstances (e.g.,
in an active war-zone or concentration camp) that the majority are unhappy with most aspects of their
current lives, despite still differing in some personality traits that could otherwise track LS (e.g.,
assertiveness or self-discipline; Anglim et al., 2020). LS’s empirical associations with personality traits
would then be weakened, primarily due to reduced variance in LS.
When present, empirical associations may imply personality traits’ involvement in LS. For example, the
traits are weakly but pervasively linked with many life outcomes that may contribute to LS, as well as with
people’s interpretations of their circumstances (e.g., Beck & Jackson, 2022; Soto, 2019). But this does not
necessarily mean that the traits are LS’s directly interpretable causes. Aspects of people’s differences can
become indirectly entangled over time as individuals strive towards circumstances that match their traits
and possibly adapt their traits to the circumstances (Caspi et al., 2005; Johnson, 2010). For example,
multiple personality traits are often linked with academic, occupational, relationship, lifestyle, and other
outcomes (Seeboth & Mõttus, 2018; Soto, 2019; Stewart et al., 2022). Over time, these can further
contribute to other outcomes and traits, including LS and the personality traits that influenced the
outcomes in the first place (Caspi et al., 2005). Such reciprocal, crisscrossing interplay among traits and
outcomes can lead to correlation patterns without easily discernible one-to-one causal relationships
(Avinun, 2020). If this is the case, the overall predictability of LS from personality traits – the degree to
which LS typically becomes aligned with personality – might be an equally meaningful research question
compared to identifying which specific traits most closely track LS.
Here, we assumed that, in normal circumstances, LS is a relatively stable trait that both people themselves
and others who know them well can evaluate with some degree of accuracy. Given this, our unique multi-
trait, multi-rater design allowed us to ask exactly how strongly LS reflects numerous other traits when
controlling for previously unresolved methodological issues such as single-method and occasion-specific
biases, random error, and construct overlaps. In other words, with common measurement issues
eliminated, can individuals’ LS be accurately predicted from their personality traits, suggesting that it is
usually shaped by these same factors that shape personality traits? And if so, which traits become
particularly strongly linked with LS? Or is most of LS’s variance unshared with personality traits, implying
that it is largely shaped by social, cultural, situational, cognitive, and other factors that have little to do
with personality more broadly? These are among LS research’s most fundamental questions, and accurate
answers to them will necessarily constrain theorizing on LS’s nature and origins (Diener et al., 2018; Heller
et al., 2004). Currently, however, these answers are inconclusive despite hundreds of studies and multiple
meta-analyses (DeNeve & Cooper, 1998; Steel et al., 2008; Anglim et al., 2020).
Need to move beyond single-method studies
The typically-reported correlations between LS and personality traits may misrepresent their overlaps.
This is because most studies have relied on self-ratings to assess both, likely overestimating their
associations due to shared single-method effects like biased self-perception or characteristic response
styles (Paulhus & Vazire, 2007) that can make up much of trait score variance (McCrae & Mõttus, 2019). In
cross-sectional data, correlations may also be inflated due to occasion-specific short-term effects, such as
mood fluctuations or recent events. Conversely, random measurement error and raters’ idiosyncratic
interpretations of each construct’s measures can attenuate the correlations. So, observed correlations like
Here, unusual circumstances would be those that are unrelated to people’s own traits and that impose extreme constraints on people’s freedom
to live and/or assess their life according to their characteristics; examples could include active war-zones, extreme societal poverty or crime, or
strict pandemic lock-downs. It is likely that most of our participants did not experience such unusual circumstances, although some may have
experienced acute stress stemming from sources unrelated to their own characteristics (e.g., the death of a loved one). Data from Estonian- and
Russian-speakers were collected during mild anti-pandemic measures that did not restrict most individuals' freedoms. Only our English-speaking
participants were tested during a stricter pandemic lock-down.
Personality and life satisfaction 4
.10 or .40 may be either inflated estimates of much weaker or even non-existent “true” associations, or
attenuated estimates of much stronger true associations. Substantial overlaps among personality traits
can further distort the (univariate) correlations because it may often be the same personality variance that
is linked with LS under different trait labels (Busseri & Erb, in press).
Combining self-reports with other information sources can help better approximate the correlations’ true
magnitude (Schimmack, 2010). Ratings by informants like partners, friends, or relatives provide one such
source (Vazire, 2006) and show at least moderate and comparable agreement with self-reports for both LS
(Schneider & Schimmack, 2009) and personality traits (Connelly & Ones, 2010). Despite numerous calls for
multi-rater designs (Anglim et al., 2020; Diener et al., 2018), they remain rare (Dobewall et al., 2013;
Schimmack et al., 2004), especially in large multi-sample studies that are most likely to provide robust
estimates.
Disattenuating for invalidity
Self-reported LS’s correlations with informant-reported personality traits, and the other way around, are
not inflated by shared single-method or assessment occasion-specific biases. However, they are
attenuated by imperfect cross-rater agreement on both constructs – for example, due to different access
to trait-relevant information or each rater’s idiosyncratic interpretations of personality trait and/or LS
measures –, occasion-specific effects, and random error. But these factors also attenuate raters’ same-
trait correlations, so the ratios of average (across the two directions) cross-rater, cross-trait correlations to
the average of the two cross-rater, same-trait correlations approximate traits’ true associations, free of
single-method and occasion-specific biases and random error.
This approach exactly parallels the familiar method of disattenuating monomethod correlations for
unreliability, in which two variables’ (x and y) raw correlation r is divided by the square root of the
xy
product of their reliabilities r and r :
xx xyy
xy
dissattenuated
√r r
xx yy
This provides an estimate of the correlation that would be observed if both measures were perfectly
reliable. In the present study, we divide the cross-method, cross-variable correlation by the square root of
the product of the cross-method validities, such as:
x (self ) y (informant )
√r r
x (self ) x (informant ) y (self ) y (informant )
A second estimate of this value is given by disattenuating the complementary cross-method correlation,
r , and we define true correlations, r , as the geometric mean of these two, so:
x(informant)y(self) true
r r
x (self ) y (informant ) x (informant ) y (self )
r = .
true
r r
x (self ) x (informant ) y (self ) y (informant )
This is the correlation that would be observed if both measures were perfectly reliable and valid.
Need to move beyond broad trait domains
Because traits are hierarchically organized, broad domains may partly misrepresent LS’s relations with
personality traits. Domains can be subdivided into a few dozens of narrower traits, facets, and these
further into many dozens of yet narrower traits, nuances, that also demonstrate the essential properties
of traits such as relative stability over time, cross-method correlations, and partially unique etiologies
(McCrae, 2015; Mõttus et al., 2019). Facets and nuances often hold unique information about life
outcomes and other traits (e.g., Revelle et al., 2021; Seeboth & Mõttus, 2018; Stewart et al., 2022). LS is
likely no exception, attested by its different correlations with supposedly parallel domain and facet scales
that combine different nuances (Anglim et al., 2020), such as those considered similar in the Big Five and
HEXACO (Thielmann et al., 2021) or assessed with different Big Five questionnaires.
Personality and life satisfaction 5
LS’s evaluations may directly overlap with some personality facets and nuances, hence trivially inflating
their domains’ correlations with LS (Steel et al., 2008; Wood & Harms, 2016). For example, LS correlates m
ost strongly with scales asking people about self-esteem, happiness, and optimism and not feeling
depressed, hopeless, and inferior to others (Anglim et al., 2020). These traits – hidden behind facet labels
like depression and positive emotions – could be among life quality’s definitional characteristics for many
people, which would be evidenced by their r s with LS items being nearly equal to or even higher than LS
true
items’ r s among themselves (Campbell & Fiske, 1959). Net of such directly overlapping facets and/or
true
nuances within them, LS may reflect personality traits to a lesser degree than typical estimates show
(Mõttus, 2016).
But many domains’ constituent traits could also have meaningful links with LS such as agreeableness’ trust
facet or conscientiousness’ achievement-striving and self-discipline facets, or nuances within these facets
(Anglim et al., 2020). For example, a sociability facet’s nuance about enjoying others’ company might be
more strongly linked with LS than its talkativeness nuance. Moreover, LS can be linked with specific
personality traits not yet covered by most Big Five and HEXACO measures. For instance, given LS’s link with
relative as well as absolute income (Boyce et al., 2010; Cheung & Lucas, 2016), envy may be one narrow
trait tracking low LS (Rentzsch & Gross, 2015). Or, given LS’s links with having strong relationships (e.g.,
Diener & Seligman, 2002), low LS may have a distinct association with a tendency to feel
isolated/alienated/mistreated. In this case, using only domains or even their commonly assessed facets
may underestimate the overall extent to which LS reflects personality traits, let alone the associations’
details. A systematic description of LS’s correlations with a range of personality nuances is currently
lacking, but it would help to better understand LS’s broader psychological background. For example, not
only LS but many other desirable life outcomes tend to go with desirable levels of (nearly) all Big Five
domains (Bleidorn et al., 2020), whereas high LS may correspond to a more distinctive nuance-level profile
(Stewart et al., 2022). Combining self-ratings with informant ratings to calculate r s makes nuances’ and
true
broader traits’ degrees of reflecting LS directly comparable by removing artefactual differences due to
narrower trait assessments’ higher measurement error. This allows nuances’ distinct associations with LS
to emerge more clearly, should they exist.
Need to move beyond a single way to assess satisfaction
If LS is defined as people’s satisfaction with their lives rather than with themselves, its evaluation should
reflect a broad combination of satisfactions with life’s specific domains, such as work, financial and
residential circumstances, and relationships (Payne & Schimmack, 2020). If so, LS should not only track a
range of domain satisfactions (DSs) and especially their aggregate variance, but the DSs and LS should also
have similar correlation patterns with personality traits. Theoretically, this could show the extent that
population variance in being satisfied reflects a general trait rather than many domain-specific
evaluations, possibly because the same personality traits are similarly, if indirectly, linked with how people
shape different aspects of their lives and evaluate these. From a methodological perspective, assessing
DSs beside LS could mitigate the risk that correlations between personality traits and satisfaction are
merely due to superficial overlaps in constructs or their assessments: even if unspecific LS assessments
(e.g., “Am happy with my life”) may be directly based on behaviors, thoughts, and feelings also asked
about to assess personality traits (e.g., “Am energetic”), this could be less likely for individual DSs (e.g.,
“Am happy with my relationships” or “Am happy with where I live”). Therefore, we operationalize
satisfaction as both general LS and a combination of eight specific DSs, estimating their r s among each
true
other and with personality traits.
Personality traits might track with LS more strongly than with a broad combination of DSs. This may be
because people assess their life quality based on their personal characteristics besides their life
circumstances per se (Heller et al., 2004), LS’s links with personality traits are inflated by
construct/measurement overlaps that researchers could not avoid, and/or researchers did not consider all
relevant DSs. Therefore, we are skeptical that any given research design could fully disentangle the so-
Personality and life satisfaction 6
called “bottom-up” and “top-down” causal explanations (Heller et al., 2004; Payne & Schimmack, 2020)
whereby, respectively, personality traits are linked with satisfaction via shaping different life domains and
evaluations of these (personality traits —> DSs —> LS) versus primarily tracking general satisfaction that
then influences satisfactions with different life domains (personality traits —> LS —> DSs). Besides, these
explanations are not mutually exclusive (Heller et al., 2004). So, here we assessed both LS and DSs to study
satisfaction’s construct validity and the robustness of its links with personality traits to different ways of
operationalizing it.
Need for multi-sample studies
LS’s correlations with social and economic factors can vary across cultural and societal circumstances
(Oishi et al., 1999; Suh et al., 1998), and so could its associations with personality traits. For example,
although the domains of positive and negative emotionality, respectively resembling the extraversion and
neuroticism domains, are linked with LS, these associations’ strengths can vary, with the former being
stronger in individualist countries and the latter in countries valuing self-expression over survival (Kööts-
Ausmees et al., 2013; Kuppens et al., 2008).
So, research estimating LS’s (true) associations with personality traits should also examine the findings’
robustness across samples with diverse backgrounds. It is possible, for example, that narrower traits’ links
with LS are less generalizable than those of broad personality domains because subtle cultural and societal
effects may be diluted in the domains’ assessments. Likewise, using a multi-rater design to control for
methodological issues may either dampen or magnify cross-sample variations if single-method
associations have been differentially biased in different samples (e.g., random error or socially desirable
responding may vary with samples). In any case, the degree of the links’ robustness across samples speaks
to the extent to which LS’s variance reflects personality traits, besides being directly sensitive to
circumstances that vary between samples and do not influence personality traits more broadly. Here, we
examine the robustness of LS-personality trait links across three samples. While all samples are
predominantly of European heritage, they differed in historical-societal backgrounds (e.g., historical
welfare levels, political regimes or cultural influences) and languages spoken: an Estonian-speaking
majority sample of Estonian residents, a Russian-speaking minority sample of Estonian residents, and a
mixed-background sample of mostly Western Europeans who were tested in English.
This study
In this largest yet multi-trait, multi-rater, multi-sample study, we estimated LS’s and DSs’ true associations
with each other and a range of broad and narrow personality traits, controlling for single-method biases,
occasion-specific effects, and random error. We also avoided direct construct/measurement overlaps
between personality traits and LS/DSs by ensuring that LS’s indicators had higher convergent validity
among themselves than discriminant validity with personality trait indicators. We additionally tested LS’
true rank-order stability across several years and compared its cross-sectional r s to longitudinal ones.
true
Specifically, 20,886 Estonian adults provided self-reports and were rated by an informant using a diverse
pool of 198 items. These items were selected to cover LS and encompass a broader-than-usual range of
personality traits, including the Big Five. Participants also rated their satisfaction with eight life domains:
job, career choice, financial situation, residence, country, relationships, health, and appearance. In a sub-
sample of 514 participants, personality traits and LS had also been rated by participants and their
informants approximately ten years earlier. We tested the findings’ robustness among Russian-speakers
living in Estonia (N = 768) and English-speaking participants from various mostly European countries (N =
600). All this allowed us to estimate satisfaction’s overall extent of reflecting personality traits and the
associations’ details with a level of precision and robustness rarely, if ever, attained yet.
We may already know that some personality traits’ correlations with LS are greater than zero, at least in
usual circumstances. However, a more important but not yet compellingly answered question is: how
much greater? For example, it would be a two-fold difference if LS could be predicted from personality
Personality and life satisfaction 7
traits with an accuracy of .80 to .90 rather than an accuracy of .50 to .60, and we should care about such a
8 8
difference just as much as natural scientists would care whether the speed of light is 1.5×10 or 3×10 m/s
or whether the Earth’s atmosphere contains about 21% or 11% of oxygen. Thus, while our empirical work
is descriptive and predictive (Mõttus et al., 2020), the findings significantly contribute to our theoretical
understanding of satisfaction’s relatively stable psychological basis.
Methods
Transparency and Openness
Our sample sizes were determined by practical constraints rather than power calculations, but collectively
provide high power for any non-trivial effect sizes. We report all data exclusion criteria and variable
manipulations. We make our data analytic (R) scripts publicly available, as well as data from one (English-
speaking) sample (Mõttus, 2023). Other data cannot be made publicly available due to being part of a large
and ongoing biobank study, but researchers can apply for access
also publicly available. All statistical analyses were carried out with R language, version 4.3.1 (R Core Team,
2023). The analyses were not preregistered. Supplementary Material, Supplementary Analyses, and
Supplementary Tables can be found at the journal’s website and in Mõttus (2023).
Participants
The Estonian- and Russian-speaking data collections were approved by the Estonian Committee on
Bioethics and Human Research. The Estonian- and Russian-speakers were members (“gene donors”) of
the Estonian Biobank, a population sample of approximately 200,000 adults encompassing about 20% of
Estonian adult residents or past residents currently living abroad
online survey between November 2021 and April 2022 and participants could choose to participate in
either Estonian or Russian, most likely depending on their native language. Because Estonia has a
substantial Russian-speaking minority with a somewhat distinct cultural and historical background, we
treated Estonian- and Russian-speakers as separate samples. For example, although most Russian-
speakers were likely born or had been living in Estonia for many years and were integrated with the
Estonian society, many Russian-speakers are geographically concentrated, follow different (often Russian)
media and have partly distinct identities (Vihalemm et al., 2019); these are also among likely reasons that
Russian-speakers are underrepresented among the gene donors. Email invitations were sent to 182,405
gene donors, with up to two follow-up invitations as necessary. Participants who completed the survey
were offered feedback on their Big Five personality trait scores. To encourage participation, the study was
promoted on national radio, television, newspapers and magazines, and on social media. Participants
were optionally asked to provide an email of another person (informant) who could complete the third-
person form of the personality item pool about them. After reading information about the study, both
participants and their informants electronically signed a consent form.
Estonian-speakers. In total, N = 73,266 Estonian-speaking participants completed the survey. After
removing participants who either did not invite an informant or whose informant did not submit their
responses, and participants with more than ten missing responses in either self- or informant-report
surveys, we were left with 20,886 participants (sex assigned at birth: 14,228 women, 6,658 men; age:
range from 18 to 93; M = 44.0, Mdn = 45.2, SD = 13.7). The included and excluded participants somewhat
differed in their average personality traits and LS (Mõttus, 2023); the 52,380 excluded participants were
less open and life-satisfied than their 20,886 included peers (respectively, d = -0.25 and -0.14, p < .001),
while differences in their other traits were negligible (0.01 ≤ |d| ≤ 0.06). The informants were usually
partners or spouses, children/grand-children, friends, or parents/grandparents (56%, 14%, 14% and 7%,
respectively). Between 2008 and 2017, 514 of the participants (321 females; age: range from 18 to 79
Correlations have a non-linear scale. To make them comparable, they have to be z-transformed.
Personality and life satisfaction 8
years at the time; M = 38.7, Mdn = 38.0, SD = 13.3) had completed another personality test and answered
to an LS question. As 79% of them had participated by 2012, mostly from 2009 to 2010, and further 15%
participated in 2013, the typical re-testing interval was about 10 years.
Russian-speakers. Of the 3,719 Russian-speaking participants who completed the survey, we could retain
data for 768 after applying inclusion criteria identical to those applied to Estonian-speakers (sex assigned
at birth: 533 women, 235 men; age: range from 18 to 88; M = 43.4, Mdn = 43.0, SD = 13.0). Akin to
Estonian-speakers, Russian-speakers’ informants were typically partners or spouses, children/grand-
children, friends, or parents/grandparents (54%, 15%, 16% and 8%, respectively).
English-speakers. Between March and June 2020, 300 dyads completed personality and LS items about
themselves and the other dyad member in English (436 females, 7 preferred not to say; age: range 12 to 82
years; M = 28.5, Mdn = 23.0, SD = 12.9). These data were originally collected for student projects exploring
items’ cross-rater correlations, approved by the University of Edinburgh institutional review board. People
were recruited online, initially through the students’ and a volunteer research assistant’s personal
networks, and later through announcements on various social network sites. Participants were offered
feedback on their Big Five traits and most salient personality nuances, and how well they and their
informant agreed regarding each other's traits. The participants recruited through social media
announcements were also offered gift cards or PayPal transfers (£5). The person who started the study
participation was asked to identify another dyad member and provide their email, who was then invited to
similarly participate. Although the study was intended for adults, six participants invited adolescent dyad
members. Most participants were British residents (57%), but many resided in other European countries
(e.g, Italy: 7%; France: 3%; Spain: 3%; Greece: 2%; Poland: 2%), US (5%) or India (5%).
Measures
Main data collection (2021-2022). The 100 Nuances of Personality (100-NP), completed by people
themselves and their informants, is a 198-item pool designed to cover personality traits and LS reliably,
comprehensively and with reduced redundancy. It captures trait content associated with most facets and
domains assessed in standard Big Few measures as well as some individual differences measures beyond
these (e.g., LS, competition, envy, humor, sexuality, spirituality, and the “Dark Triad” traits). The 100-NP
items were iteratively selected from larger item pools such as the International Personality Item Pool
(Goldberg, 1999) and Synthetic Aperture Personality Assessment (Condon & Revelle, 2016) for their
content, and retained if they 1) had acceptable levels of empirical properties (e.g., test-retest reliability,
variance, and cross-rater agreement) and 2) were not redundant with other items. However, we included
some highly similar items to allow for assessing acquiescent responding and r s, or to provide a pair of
true
items for apparently less reliably assessable traits, such as impulsiveness. Besides completing the 100-NP,
Estonian- and Russian-speaking participants completed five items about satisfaction with job, choice of
career, financial situation, residence, and country; these items were only completed by participants
themselves due to the limited number of items that could be administered to informants. All items were
responded to using a six-point Likert scale from “Completely inaccurate” to “Completely accurate”.
Missing responses were replaced with the median. A detailed description of the 100-NP’s development
can be found in Henry and Mõttus (2022) and the full item list is in the Supplementary Material. Retaining
items for LS, DS, and personality trait assessment is described after introducing necessary statistical
analyses.
Earlier data collection (2008 to 2017). Personality traits were measured with the Estonian version of the
NEO Personality Inventory-3 (NEO-PI-3; McCrae et al., 2005). The NEO-PI-3 items were responded to using
a 5-point scale, and domains and facets were scored as sum-scores of their items, as per test manual. LS
was assessed with a single item: “All things considered, how happy are you with your life generally?”, rated
on a 10-point scale from “Not at all” to “Completely”.
Analyses to estimate true associations
Personality and life satisfaction 9
True correlations (r s). To estimate variables’, say x and y, r s, we correlated self-reported x with
true true
informant-reported y and vice versa, and calculated the geometric mean of these cross-rater, cross-
variable correlations. We then correlated self-reported x with informant-reported x and the same for y,
and calculated the geometric mean of these cross-rater, same-variable correlations. We treated the ratio
of the former geometric mean to the latter as the r between x and y, free of single-method biases that
true
are either specific to either x or y or shared among them, rating occasion-specific effects (e.g., mood) and
random error because these four variance components would similarly affect both cross-rater, cross-item
and cross-rater, same-item correlations and therefore cancel out in their ratio. The approach is based on
the simplifying assumption that both variables' valid (true) variance is at least partly shared between
raters — hence, partly independent of assessment method — whatever its fraction to total variance, and
that rating biases and occasion-specific effects are not shared between raters. The degrees of rater- and
occasion-specific effects and random error may differ across variables and raters, but as long as all four
correlations are used, they are equally represented in both the numerator and denominator of the r
true
calculation and hence cancel out in equal proportions. Among other things, this means that raters’
asymmetrical information about the traits does not influence the model’s estimates. An extended,
algebraic and graphical formalization of the variance decomposition model underlying the r calculation
true
is in Supplementary Material. The idea is similar to how Wood and colleagues (2022) used test-retest data
to estimate items’ semantic similarity, except that we used informant-ratings instead of retest scores,
which allowed us to additionally control for single-method effects.
True predictive accuracy. To estimate personality traits’ true combined overlap with LS (unbiased
“multiple R”) in the Estonian-speaking sample, we created elastic net models tailored to maximize the
traits’ out-of-sample predictive accuracy for aggregate LS in one sample partition (67%) and calculated the
correlation between LS and its values predicted from personality traits using this model in another sample
partition (33%). The elastic net models with .50 alpha parameter were trained to minimize prediction error
in 10-fold cross-validation within training samples. For true predictive accuracy, net of single method
biases and random error, we “cross-predicted” self-reported LS from informant-reported personality
traits and vice versa in 10 random training-validation sample splits and averaged the predictive accuracies
within each direction, and divided the geometric means (across directions) of these cross-prediction
accuracies by the geometric means of self-informant correlations for a) observed LS scores and b) their
predicted-from-personality values. For replications in Russian- and English-speaking samples, we used
models trained in the Estonian data, hence training and validating the same models across different
languages.
Domain satisfactions. Because most DSs were assessed with only self-reports, we approximated their r
true
s with LS by, firstly, correlating self-reported DS items with the informant-reported LS aggregate and then
dividing these correlations by the geometric mean of a) average cross-rater correlation of three DS items
for which cross-rater data was available (as a proxy for all DS items’ cross-rater correlation; .44) and b) the
LS aggregates’ cross-rater correlation. Likewise, we approximated the DS aggregate’s and LS aggregate’s r
by calculating self-reported DS aggregate’s correlation with informant-reported LS aggregate and
true
dividing this by the geometric mean of the LS aggregate’s cross-rater correlation and the cross-rater
correlation of the principal components of the three DS items for which cross-rater data were available.
Because not all cross-rater correlations were used in these calculations, and ratings of different variables
and/or by different raters could contain somewhat different degrees of biases and errors that were then
not equally represented in the numerators and denominators of the r s approximations, the r
true true
estimates pertaining to DSs could be to some degree biased, unlike the LS-personality trait r s based on
true
four correlations each.
Standard errors. Because most r s were based on four correlations each, the usual standard error
true
formulas did not apply to them. To find a formula to estimate the standard errors, we relied on an iterative
process of inductive reasoning and tinkering, comparing the results against the ground truth in simulated
Personality and life satisfaction 10
data until the formula results closely approximated the simulation results (see Supplementary Material).
The main sample of Estonian speakers was so large that the standard errors were bound to be small, but
they were larger for estimates in smaller Russian- and English-based samples.
Variable selection and aggregation
To proof-of-principle test whether the cross-informant design could approximate variables’ r s, we
true
considered some pairs of highly similar items (e.g., “Keep my promises” vs “Break my promises”). In the
main, Estonian-based data, these items’ |r s| reached .97, providing support for the research design (see
true
(i.e., face validity), we used r s for variable selection and aggregation, unless said otherwise, and relied
true
on the general idea that items measuring the same construct should have stronger correlations than items
measuring different constructs (Campbell & Fiske, 1959). We describe these analyses based on the
Estonian-based data, but Supplementary Tables S2 to S6 also contain correlations for Russian- and English-
based analyses, as applicable.
Life satisfaction (LS). Relying on face validity, we initially designated four 100-NP items to capture LS
because these either directly assessed being happy with life or required people to evaluate their lives’
different aspects: past, current direction and future. The |r s| among three of these items (“Am happy
true
with my life”, “Feel that my life lacks direction”, “Have a dark outlook on the future”) varied narrowly
comparison, their single-method absolute correlations varied between .48 and .52 in self- and informant-
reports. The fourth item that pertained to evaluating the past, “Life has been kind to me”, had lower |r
true
s| with other items (.32 to .56), so we removed it from further analyses to retain LS high construct validity
(its absolute single method correlations varied from .16 to .41). The cross-rater correlations of the three
retained LS items were .42, .37, and .36. Separately in self- and informant-ratings, we used scores of the
first principal components of the three LS items as aggregate LS scores (respectively explaining 66% and
68% of the items’ variance; all loadings > |.80|; cross-rater correlation .48). The items’ correlation pattern
In Supplementary Analyses 1, we show that latent trait scores based on these three items correlated
highly (r = .95, .90 and .80, respectively, among Estonian-, Russian-, and English-speakers) with latent trait
scores of a more widely used LS assessment, Satisfaction with Life Scale (SWLS; Diener et al., 1985), based
on additional self-reported data collected in Estonian, Russian, and English. Although we acknowledge
that our approach to LS assessment is unconventional, the very high correlations with the SWLS strongly
support the concurrent validity of our aggregate LS scores – at least, it was a very close proxy measure of
LS.
Domain satisfactions (DSs). Besides the five items completed only by Estonian- and Russian-speaking
participants themselves to assess their DSs, we also designated three of the 100-NP items to capture DSs
about satisfaction with relationships, health, and appearance: "Am satisfied with my relationships",
"Consider myself healthy for my age", and "Consider myself good-looking". Correlations among the eight
descriptive statistics) were lower than those for LS items, varying from .08 to .62 (Mdn = .20, compared to
recommended range of a typical scale’s inter-item correlations (Clark & Watson, 1995). So, we used the
scores of the items’ first principal component as an aggregate DS score (explaining 34% of items’ variance;
In Supplementary Analyses 1, we show that latent trait scores based on these eight DS items correlated
extremely highly (r = .96) with latent trait scores of the SWLS, based on additional self-reported data
collected among Estonian-speakers; in these data, the DS and LS latent factors also correlated r = .87. This
evidence clearly supports the validity of the DS aggregate as a measure of LS.
Personality and life satisfaction 11
Personality items. We dropped personality items that comparatively more strongly overlapped among
themselves (51 items) or with any LS item (one item: “Tend to feel very hopeless”), using |r | ≥ .75 as the
true
cut-off (given the |r | ≈ .75 among LS items) and dropping the weaker LS-correlate from each pair of
true
Russian and English). We also dropped three items (“Worry about my health”, “Worry a lot about my
looks”, “Wear stylish clothing”) that could semantically overlap with DSs about health and appearance.
We treated the remaining 136 personality items as markers of partly distinct personality nuances that
could have discriminant validity for LS and/or DS. Their cross-rater correlations ranged from .15 to .64
(Mdn = .30). English-speaking participants were not administered six personality items, two of which were
among the 136 retained items (“Work on improving myself”, “Try to provoke others just to get a
response”). Conceptually, we do not treat items as nuances per se, but as markers for both broad traits like
personality domains and narrow traits like nuances. However, we do use item-level correlations to
describe the nuanced-ness of LS’ personality correlates, where evidence for it exists.
Personality domains. So far, there is no universally agreed organization of nuances (or more concretely,
items) into facets and domains (Condon et al., 2020). Therefore, we skipped the facet level and combined
the 136 personality items into five domains by performing a principal component analysis on their r s
true
component to ensure a roughly balanced and most relevant content representation for each domain, and
re-calculated the five components based on the 75 remaining items; these accounted for 60% of items’
variance. After varimax rotation, these components’ loadings clearly resembled the typical Big Five
in self- and informant-ratings, multiplying standardized item scores by the items’ inverted correlation
matrix and the principal component loadings. Had we chosen more items per component, the loading
pattern would have started differing from what we considered typical Big Five content and some loadings
would have dipped below .40. This procedure ensured that domain scores were calculated similarly in self-
and informant-reports. The domains’ cross-rater correlations were .56 (emotional stability), .58
(extraversion), .57 (openness), .46 (agreeableness), and .50 (conscientiousness), which are comparable or
higher than usual (Connelly & Ones, 2010). In single-method designs using common Big Five instruments,
the domain scores can correlate as highly as .40s and .50s (van der Linden et al., 2010). Intentionally and
desirably, our domain scores’ correlations were lower, varying from |r| = 0 to .12 (Mdn = .04) in self-
reports and from |r| = 0 to .21 (Mdn = .02) in informant-reports; |r s| varied from .01 to .31 (Mdn = .07).
true
This relative independence of domain scores ensured that the domain-LS correlations would be less
inflated by the domains’ shared variance than usual. Our longitudinal data allowed us to estimate the
domains’ empirical similarity to those of a widely-used Big Five assessment, NEO-PI-3, although the
true
Results
The following five sections describe results from the main, Estonian-speaking sample.
Correlations with personality items
We started with LS’ correlations with the 136 items retained as possible markers of personality nuances
with discriminant validity for LS and DS, calculating their r s with individual LS items and the aggregate of
true
these. The three vectors containing the LS items’ z-transformed r s with the personality items were
true
highly similar (r ≥ .94), supporting the LS aggregate’s construct validity. For the LS aggregate, r s varied
true
true median true min
LS at |r | ≥ .20 (|r | = .33), while all 136 r s are in Supplementary Tables S7, alongside their
true true median true
Personality and life satisfaction 12
3,4
underlying cross-variable, cross-rater correlations and same-variable, cross-rater correlations. For
comparison, single-method correlations for these 70 items with the LS aggregate (Supplementary Tables
S7) varied from -.45 to .46 in self-reports (|r| = .17) and from -.50 to .44 in informant-reports (|r|
median median
= .20), so |r s| tended to be stronger despite not being influenced by single-method biases.
true
true
Estonian-speaking (N = 20,886; solid lines) and combined Russian- and English-speaking (N = 768 and 600;
dashed lines) samples. Items with greater and darker font size didn’t have r s higher than .50 with any
true
other personality items among the Estonian-speakers, thus reflecting relatively distinct personality
nuances. For items with asterisks (*), the 99% confidence intervals of the r combined estimate from the
true
English- and Russian-speaking sample did not span the estimate from the Estonian-speaking sample,
suggesting potentially meaningful uniqueness in the latter. Standard errors are in Supplementary Tables
S7.
For interpretation ease, we also highlight the LS aggregates’ strongest relatively unique correlates,
showing the 19 items not having |r s | > .50 with any other personality item with a larger and darker font
true
range of traits than our Big Five domains (12 were not included among the 75 Big Five items). Low LS
tracked with feeling misunderstood (r = -.69), lack of excitement (-.61), indecisiveness (-.51), envy (-.49),
true
boredom (-.45) and feeling used (-.41), whereas high LS tracked confidence in ones’ abilities (.44) and
believing that effort is rewarded (.40). Less strongly (.20 < |r | < .40), high LS tended to be uniquely
true
The .20 cutoff was chosen for presentation ease and because correlations of .20 and higher are said to heuristically represent “a medium
effect that is of some explanatory and practical use even in the short run” (Funder & Ozer, 2019, p. 156). Even if significant, small correlations
among psychological variables may sometimes reflect the pervasive “crud factor”, thus not being meaningfully interpretable.
The two directions of cross-variable, cross-rater correlations (self-rated LS’s correlations with informant-rated personality traits and the other
way around; Tables S7) were highly similar, with the z-transformed correlation vectors from the two directions correlating .98/.99 for the 136/70
items. This suggests that self- and informant-rated items contain broadly similar degrees of information about the variables involved, including LS.
This mitigates the possibility that LS’s informant-reports are (more) biased (than self-reports).
Personality and life satisfaction 13
characterized by taking risks, finding it easy to apologize, feeling special commitment to one's family,
being loyal, respecting authority, liking to visit new places, and working on self-improvement, whereas low
LS tended to go with making enemies, telling lies, forgetting things, and crying easily.
Correlations with personality domains
Next, we correlated LS with Big Five domains to represent the LS’ personality correlates more
parsimoniously and comparably with typical findings in the existing literature. The domains’ r s with the
true
stability, but remained below .05 for openness and agreeableness. For comparison, single-method
correlations of the five domains with the LS aggregate were r = .34, .36, .10, .11, and .28 in self-reports
and .41, .34, .07, .09, and .27 in informant-reports, respectively for emotional stability, extraversion,
true
were comparable or higher than single-method correlations for emotional stability, extraversion and
conscientiousness, despite not being influenced by variables’ shared single-method biases. These
correlations are also comparable or even higher than those reported in other single-method studies
using common Big Five scales. For openness and agreeableness, r s were lower than single-method
true
single-method biases and/or overlaps with other personality domains.
However, items primarily loaded on by the same domains often varied considerably in their correlations
with the LS aggregate, such as “Enjoy hurting others” (r = -.32) and “Believe that I am always right” (r
true true
partly explains why domains |r s| were lower than those of several items within and beyond the
true
domains. So, although domains provide a parsimonious representation of LS’s associations with
personality traits, they can also partly misrepresent these associations.
Meta-analytically Past results
Estonian- Russian- English-
combined (for
based data based data based data
(Russian and English) reference)
r (single
r SE r SE r SE r SE
true true true true
method)
Emotional stability .47 .008 .36 .053 .32 .053 .34 .038 .39
Extraversion .43 .008 .50 .052 .45 .048 .47 .035 .32
Openness .02 .011 -.05 .066 .00 .064 -.03 .046 .08
Agreeableness .04 .012 .02 .072 .10 .067 .06 .049 .20
Conscientiousness .30 .010 .47 .052 .26 .060 .38 .039 .27
S8. Past results (for reference) = meta-analytic estimates from Anglim et al. (2020), based on self-report
data.
The two directions of calculating the cross-variable, cross-rater correlations (self-rated LS’s correlations with informant-rated personality
domains and the other way around) yielded broadly similar, although not identical results. Informant-related LS’s correlations with self-rated
personality domains were .28, .20, .00, .03, and .14, while self-rated LS’s correlations with informant-rated domains were .21, .25, .02, -.01,
and .15, respectively for emotional stability, extraversion, openness, agreeableness, and conscientiousness.
Personality and life satisfaction 14
Life satisfaction’s overall predictability
Next, we evaluated the overall degree to which life satisfaction aligns with individuals' personality traits.
Predicting LS from the full set of 136 items and five domains, the respective true predictive accuracies
high correlations in psychological research (Funder & Ozer, 2019). To see whether the estimates were
driven by numerous predictors – either by many items individually or by many items contributing towards
domain scores – we also explored true predictive accuracies of smaller item sets such as the 70 items
true
items) and the three most strongly LS-related items among these 19 (“Often feel that others
misunderstand me”; “Find that nothing excites me”, and “Postpone decision”). These smaller item subsets
from even a few specific personality traits. For comparison, the predicted-observed LS correlations in
single-method data were .75 and .64 in self-reports and .76 and .64, in informant-reports, respectively for
models based on 136 items and five domains. For domains, this corresponds to R = .41, which is higher
than the R ≈.30 usually found in single-method studies (Anglim et al., 2020; Busseri & Erb, in press).
Estonian-/Russian-/English-based data from models trained in Estonian data.
Estonian-based data Russian-based data English-based data
r SE r SE r SE
true true true
Five domains .79 .008 .74 .046 .64 .049
136/134 items* .88 .007 .90 .040 .84 .035
70/69 items* .87 .008 .86 .050 .82 .037
19/18 items* .86 .010 .88 .050 .82 .042
Three items .81 .010 .82 .057 .82 .046
NOTE: r = true correlation between predicted and observed life satisfaction. SE = standard error. *
true
Smaller item numbers apply to English-base data.
Longitudinal analyses
We used the longitudinal assessments in the Estonian-speaking sample to assess the stability of LS and its
personality correlates over time. Should LS’ cross-sectional and longitudinal r s with personality traits be
true
similar and approach LS true stability, this would suggest that personality traits’ systematic involvement in
LS endures over time, irrespective of time-varying influences on either.
The two Big Five domains’ assessments, separated by approximately ten years, had r s between .73
true
true
correlated with the earlier and later LS similarly for all domains but conscientiousness, for which the cross-
sectional correlation was r = .30, but longitudinal r = .12; however, the earlier Big Five scores had
true true
similar cross-sectional and longitudinal correlations with LS. At the item-level, later personality traits’
correlations with earlier and later LS were highly similar, with the two vectors of item-LS correlations (z-
transformed) correlating .91. At the facet-level, the earlier personality traits’ correlations with LS were
The two directions of predicting LS from personality traits yielded similar results. For example, informant-rated LS correlated with its values
predicted from the 136 self-rated items .47, while self-rated LS’s correlation with its values predicted from 136 informant-rated items was .45. So,
there was no evidence that either informant- or self-rated LS would be more or less informative in relation to other traits.
The earlier single-item LS correlated with the later scores of the most similar single item, “Am happy with my life”, r = .72.
true
Personality and life satisfaction 15
partly driven by four facets: N3 Depression, N6 Vulnerability, E6 Positive Emotions, and C1 Competence
from the later-assessed 136 personality items and Big Five domains, omitting participants with earlier data
from model training; the respective true predictive accuracies were .75 (SE = .051) and .61 (SE = .058). So,
individual differences in both personality traits and LS as well as their correlations tended to endure over
time, and it did not matter much whether r s were calculated, and LS predicted, cross-sectionally and
true
longitudinally.
Correlations with earlier
Later LS Earlier LS
domains
r SE r SE r SE
true true true
Later domains (100-NP)
Emotional stability .47 .046 .40 .049 .73 .038
Extraversion .43 .045 .38 .049 .74 .033
Openness .02 .069 .07 .067 .82 .035
Agreeableness .04 .074 .06 .075 .82 .061
Conscientiousness .30 .054 .12 .066 .76 .047
Earlier domains (NEO-PI-3)
Emotional stability .53 .045 .59 .047
Extraversion .43 .042 .39 .045
Openness .13 .058 .08 .064
Agreeableness .03 .077 .06 .077
Conscientiousness .29 .053 .30 .055
Later LS .70 .056
NOTE: LS = general life satisfaction; SE = standard error; earlier = measured from 2008 to 2017 (mostly
before 2013); later = measured from 2021 to 2022. For consistency, we reverse-keyed NEO-PI-3’s
neuroticism as emotional stability.
Domain-specific life satisfactions
Next, we cross-validated LS and its correlations with personality traits against individual DSs’ and their
aggregate, representing an alternative way of conceptualizing and assessing general satisfaction. In
summary, the r between aggregate DS and LS was .87, suggesting that LS’s assessments closely tracked
true
how satisfied people were with several specific life domains combined; for reference, self-reported LS and
DS aggregate correlated r = .67. Likewise, LS was linked with all DS items, especially those referring to
true
different DSs’ correlations with informant-reported personality items were similar (vector correlation
Mdn = .81), and the DS and LS aggregates’ respective correlations with personality items were nearly
identical, with a vector correlation of r = .98; see Supplementary Analyses 2 for details. Finally, individual
DSs and their aggregate could be predicted from informant-reported personality traits with accuracies
comparable to predicting LS from these same traits. In fact, the model trained to predict LS predicted the
DS aggregate almost as well, and it also predicted all individual DSs; see Supplementary Analyses 2 for
details.
So, DSs’ overall extents and details of reflecting a broad range of personality traits were fairly similar
among themselves and with LS, providing strong evidence for the robustness of the findings across
different ways of assessing satisfaction.
Personality and life satisfaction 16
Replications in Russian and English
The patterns of findings among Estonian-speakers replicated well in smaller Russian- and English-speaking
samples, allowing for some sampling variance in these comparatively much smaller samples; see
Supplementary Analyses 3 for further details. As one of the key findings, the vectors of LS aggregate’s
correlations with personality items were highly similar in the three samples. We meta-analytically
combined the r s in Russian- and English-based data for the 69 personality items common to both
true
samples, which correlated r = .97 with the respective Estonian-based r s, even though the 99%
true
confidence intervals of these meta-analytic r s did not span the respective Estonian-based estimates for
true
true
Emotional stability, extraversion, and conscientiousness had r s with the LS aggregate from .36 to .50
true
among Russian-speakers and from .26 to .45 among English-speakers, with their meta-analytic
correlations being r = .34 (emotional stability), .47 (extraversion), and .38 (conscientiousness). Using
true
elastic net models trained in the Estonian-based data to predict LS in Russian- and English-based data, the
The findings pertaining to DSs also replicated well among people tested in Russian; data for most DSs were
not available in English, and hence we did not replicate DS-related analyses in those data. For example, the
true
speakers’ data were almost as predictive in the Russian-speakers’ data (Supplementary Analyses 2).
So, LS’s and DS’ true degrees of reflecting other personality traits, net of biases and random error, were
strikingly robust across samples and languages.
Further robustness analyses
To address concerns raised during the articles’ review process, we carried out three more robustness
checks that are fully described in the Supplementary Analyses 4 to 6. First, we reduced LS to a single item,
“Am happy with my life”, instead of an aggregate of three items. This somewhat lowered the nuances’ and
domains’ correlations with LS (e.g., among Estonian-speakers, r = .41, .34, and .23, respectively for
true
emotional stability, extraversion and conscientiousness, and prediction accuracy up to .82), but the overall
patterns of findings remained highly similar in all three samples. Second, we addressed the possibility that
LS could only be validly assessed using self-reports, and that the LS's cross-rater correlations only arose
because informants had observed the targets’ personality traits, which were correlated with the targets'
otherwise private LS. Specifically, we removed LS’s informant-reports from our calculations of true
associations and predictive accuracies. Thus, r s were calculated as follows, with x representing the
true
personality trait in question:
LS (self ) LS(informant)
r .
true
x (self ) x(informant)
Again, this somewhat changed the results, but the overall patterns of findings remained highly similar in all
three samples (e.g., among Estonian-speakers, r = .38, .44, and .30, respectively for emotional stability,
true
extraversion and conscientiousness, and prediction accuracy up to .83).
Finally, we used an alternative strategy for removing comparatively more overlapping personality
assessment items, removing the item with the stronger (as opposed to weaker) LS-correlations from each
highly correlating personality item pair; see Supplementary Analyses 6 for details. This resulted in
emotional stability having a somewhat stronger but extraversion and conscientiousness somewhat
weaker r with LS and openness and agreeableness still being virtually unrelated to LS: for example, the
true
respective correlations were .55, .39, .19, -.02, and .01 among the Estonian-speakers. The alternative item
retention strategy did not lower the domains and items true predictive accuracy for LS. Thus, although
Personality and life satisfaction 17
there is no inherent reason to prefer one strategy over the other, the strategy choice did not matter for
our main conclusions.
Discussion
In one of the most comprehensive studies on this topic yet, we analyzed data from and across three
samples where a range of personality traits and general life satisfaction (LS) were rated by participants
themselves and their informants. This allowed us to estimate LS’s and personality traits’ true associations
free of single-method biases, occasion-specific effects, and random error. Besides avoiding direct
construct overlaps at the item level, we cross-validated the findings with a different way of assessing
satisfaction: an aggregate of satisfactions with eight specific life domains (DSs). Our findings suggest that in
a world without common yet usually unaddressed measurement limitations, it would be possible to fairly
accurately predict someone’s satisfaction from a handful of personality traits. Specifically, correlations
between actual LS and its values predicted from the Big Five personality domains or nuances could
reach .90, even when the predictions were based on associations found in an independent sample tested
in a different language. Strikingly, even just three personality items allowed us to predict LS with .80
accuracy. Moreover, LS could be predicted from personality traits with around .70 accuracy over
approximately ten years, similarly to LS’s own stability.
We had no reason to a priori expect such findings. Because associations observed in typical single-method
studies are likely inflated by shared method biases and at least sometimes by trivial construct overlaps, we
could have found that LS’s true predictability is much lower than is usually observed. Yet, the
predictability of LS turned out to be considerably higher. It expected that LS overlaps with personality
traits to some degree in normal circumstances, where people can shape and evaluate their life according
to their traits. But our estimates of this overlap’s true extent are strikingly high, suggesting that how
satisfied people are with their lives is usually quite close to what one could expect from their personality
traits (Costa & McCrae, 1980). So, most life circumstances and other influences that are relevant for LS are
those that also shape personality traits more broadly and endure over time.
How much higher than the usual estimates?
Depending on the questionnaire, the Big Five domains have explained about 30% of LS’s variance in self-
report studies (Anglim et al., 2020; Busseri & Erb, in press). This translates to a maximum out-of-sample
predictive accuracy of .55, optimistically assuming no over-fitting (Yarkoni & Westfall, 2017).
Comprehensive facets sets such as those of the NEO Personality Inventory (Costa & McCrae, 1992) may
explain up to about 40% of LS’s variance (Anglim et al., 2020), translating to a maximum out-of-sample
prediction of approximately .65. But these facets’ assessments often directly ask about hopelessness,
worthlessness, happiness, and optimism, and may therefore suffer from construct overlaps with LS,
potentially leading to its over-estimated predictability. Indeed, less expansive facet sets explain less LS
variance. For example, in a large sample tested with the revised Big Five Inventory (BFI-2; Soto & John,
2017), Stewart and colleagues (2022) found out-of-sample predictive accuracies of .48 and .50 for LS,
respectively, for the Big Five domains and facets. In our single-method data, the Big Five domains provided
about .65 out-of-sample predictive accuracy for LS. This suggests that our Big Five scales inherently
captured more LS-related variance than many other Big Five scales, despite avoiding direct item overlaps.
One plausible reason is that our Big Five scores were nearly orthogonal, thus capturing more personality
variance in aggregate.
Generously putting the usual estimates’ higher bound at .65, this is less than two-thirds of the .80 true
predictive accuracy we observed for the Big Five domains and less than half of the .90 true predictive
accuracy for items that capture personality nuances besides domains (after having z-transformed the
correlations to make such comparisons meaningful due to correlations’ non-linear scale). Therefore, the
Our informal conversations with personality/LS researchers before writing this paper reinforced precisely that expectation.
Personality and life satisfaction 18
extent to which LS reflects personality traits may be underestimated by a factor of two or more in typical
single-method Big Five studies, including various meta-analyses (e.g., Anglim et al., 2020). But again, our
findings would have been equally meaningful even if the findings did resemble typical estimates of single-
method studies because these could have been biased upward or downward, and this could not have been
known a priori.
Even regardless of how individual researchers prefer to theorize on the personality trait-LS overlap, the
mere fact that this overlap may be about twice as strong as typical findings show is highly important in and
of itself and must constrain any theorizing on LS’s origins. That researchers care about this overlap’s
degree is evidenced by the thousands of citations to previous meta-analyses such as DeNeve and Cooper
(1998) and Steel et al. (2008) and the hundreds of citations already attracted by Anglim et al. (2020),
despite the results of these meta-analyses being likely distorted due to unaddressed measurement issues.
Not just semantically overlapping evaluations
It is possible that people’s general evaluations of their lives (e.g., “Am happy with my life”) partly overlap
with their personality trait evaluations (e.g., “Am energetic”, “Often feel misunderstood”) for reasons that
are trivial or make LS’s assessments inconsistent with its definition. For example, the items may appear
semantically overlapping, or people may (consciously or unconsciously) think about their personality
rather than their life per se when assessing their LS. However, assuming that people’s evaluations of
various specific life domains such as their job, career choice, relationships, financial situation, health,
appearance, home, and country are less likely to overlap with these same personality traits for these same
reasons, our results circumvent the possibility that LS’s associations with personality traits are trivial. This
is because LS was highly correlated with a combination of eight diverse DSs, and the different DSs largely
shared (informant-reported) personality correlates among themselves and with LS. Moreover, the model
trained to predict LS allowed predicting the DS aggregate almost as accurately, besides allowing to predict
each individual DS. Also, we ensured that no personality item correlated with LS items more strongly than
LS items correlated among themselves, supporting the traits' discriminant validity.
Robustness across samples and languages
It is also reasonable to think that LS’s meaning and correlations with personality traits may be sensitive to
context and/or assessment language, thus not necessarily replicating across diverse samples. Also, other
factors may influence LS to different degrees across samples, leaving more or less room for personality-
related variance. If so, for example, even findings based on the whole Estonian population would have
limited relevance for the French, Americans, Angolans, or Vietnamese. Indeed, there is already evidence
that LS’s correlations with positive and negative affect can systematically vary across countries (Kööts-
Ausmees et al., 2013; Kuppens et al., 2008).
In our data, some true correlations, r s, did indeed vary across samples tested in different languages. For
true
example, emotional stability’s correlation with LS was higher among Estonian speakers (r = .47) than
true
among those tested in Russian/English (r = .34), whereas the correlation with conscientiousness was
true
lower (r = .30 vs r = .38). Several individual items, reflecting partly unique personality nuances within
true true
and beyond the Big Five domains, also had somewhat different correlations among Estonian speakers than
in other samples. However, although these cross-sample differences could speak to important questions
about LS’s context-sensitivity (besides possible slight translation differences), here we focus on the big
picture according to our data: the patterns of how LS and DSs were related to one another and a range of
personality traits remained highly replicable across three samples tested in different languages. This is
best illustrated by our finding that models trained to predict LS in the Estonian-speaking sample tended to
almost as accurately predict LS among people tested in Russian (living in Estonia) and English (mostly living
in Western Europe). This would not have been possible if LS’s personality correlates were highly
For example, even if people (partly) base their rating of the item “Am happy with my life” on how well they think others understand them (or
these items are semantically overlapping), this seems less likely for items asking about satisfaction with health, appearance, and residency.
Personality and life satisfaction 19
contextual. Such cross-sample predictive accuracy also has methodological implications, making it unlikely
that the models were overfitted to data and that more complex models’ predictive advantages reflected
model complexity (Mõttus et al., 2020).
This does not mean that LS’s true associations with DSs and personality traits could not vary across more
diverse samples, such as those with non-European backgrounds or living in vastly different socioeconomic
circumstances. This could be tested in future research, for which our methods can offer a blueprint and
our results can offer a benchmark.
LS’s stable variance is largely shared with personality traits
Like personality traits, LS is far from perfectly stable over time. But personality traits’ involvement in LS
appears to endure over time because their longitudinal associations over several years were about as
strong as cross-sectional ones. In fact, people’s LS about ten years earlier could be predicted from their
later personality traits at least as accurately as it could be predicted from LS itself. So, like personality
traits, LS may fluctuate spontaneously or respond to variable circumstances, but its stable variance is
largely shared with that of personality traits. This finding also mitigates the concern that our findings may
be specific to circumstances concurrent to our main data collection, such as the pandemic or the then-
looming Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Is satisfaction just a reflection of other traits?
Although different ways of assessing satisfaction – LS and DSs – strongly overlap with personality traits in
usual circumstances, being satisfied (with life) can remain conceptually distinct from personality more
broadly. In some hypothetical circumstances, the associations of LS and DSs with some personality traits,
such as feeling understood by others, might be weakened because the satisfactions are primarily shaped
by strong external influences beyond an individual's control, while the personality traits may remain less
influenced. As one possibility, thus, the strength of the overlap between LS and personality traits can be
seen as a measure of the extent to which individuals can influence and assess their lives according to their
traits. The more satisfaction appears as a stable, observable, and partly heritable trait that similarly
manifests across different life domains and is entangled with other traits, the more it could reflect people's
own choices, aspirations, behaviors, skills, and emotional and cognitive processes, rather than external
circumstances imposed on them without their own involvement. While here this remains an untested
hypothesis meant to illustrate the conceptual distinction between LS and personality traits, it could be
tested by studying personality trait-LS associations in highly unusual, uncontrollable, and restrictive
circumstances such as living in a war zone (for relevant studies, see Cheung et al., 2020 and Coupe &
Obrizan, 2016).
It is also unnecessary to assume that particular personality traits are LS’s directly-interpretable causes
even when they strongly correlate with LS. People differ in many traits, and each of these can contribute
to, and be further shaped by, multiple traits and outcomes, including LS. This means that causal
contributions can crisscross multiple traits and outcomes in any number of ways (Avinun, 2020), making
them correlated over time but potentially leaving some or many of the individual pathways too complex to
be meaningfully interpretable on their own (Brown & Rohrer, 2020; Mõttus et al., 2020). If so, the overall
correlatedness among personality traits and variables like LS might often provide as much, if not more,
insight as their individual associations.
Still room for other influences
Although correlations as high as .90 are uncommon in psychology, even when corrected for measurement
error, they must not be over-interpreted. Even such strong population trends leave considerable room for
individuals to deviate from the expected, especially for those with the variables’ medium levels (Mõttus,
2022). For example, if we trisected both predicted and observed LS, their .90 correlation would mean that
the predicted and actual LS levels are different for every fourth individual. More specifically, every fifth
individual predicted to have a high or low LS would actually have a different LS level, whereas among those
Personality and life satisfaction 20
as the typical difference between two normally distributed measurements correlating at .90 is
approximately a third of a standard deviation, most individuals’ observed LS differs from its predicted-
from-personality value by about the influence one would expect from a consequential life event (e.g.,
Denissen et al., 2019; Luhmann et al., 2012). This means there is still room for factors beyond those also
captured personality traits to explain why some people’s LS is higher or lower than expected from their
personality traits. However, the factors that are also captured in personality traits – enduring life
circumstances, idiosyncratic experiences, or genetics – still matter relatively more for most people, most
of the time. So, our findings do not negate but constrain theories that aim to explain LS with factors
completely external to the individual.
but being incongruent for red individuals (26%).
Which traits are most strongly linked with LS?
For the Big Five domains, LS had .30 to .50 r s with emotional stability, extraversion, and
true
conscientiousness. Although somewhat higher, these correlations are consistent with those usually
common methodological limitations of these studies that could substantially deflate or inflate their
findings. However, agreeableness and openness had small r s with LS, while agreeableness usually has
true
Personality and life satisfaction 21
stronger correlations with LS in single-method studies (see Anglim et al., 2020). Given our single-method
correlations, this difference from previous research could partly result from our use of r s and partly from
true
the near-orthogonality of our Big Five domains; undesirably, the domains are usually more inter-
correlated in other Big Five measures, contributing to spurious correlations with other variables (Busseri &
Erb, in press; Stewart et al., 2022). Previous work with orthogonal Big Five scores has also resulted in
somewhat weaker Agreeableness-LS correlations, at least in self-reports (Busseri & Erb, in press; McCrae
& Costa, 1991). However, another part of the explanation may lie with cultural differences because the
NEO-PI-3 agreeableness domain also had relatively small r s and single-method correlations with LS in
true
true
speaking participants.
However, the Big Five items often differed in their r s with LS, as is common for many other outcomes
true
(e.g., Revelle et al., 2021; Seeboth & Mõttus, 2018; Stewart et al., 2022). Many items also had stronger
correlations with LS than any domain, including items not included in the domains. As for LS’s strongest
and relatively distinct correlates, its low levels were associated with feeling misunderstood, unexcited,
indecisive, envious, bored, and used by others, whereas high LS tended to go with confidence in one’s
abilities and believing that efforts are rewarded.
In fact, even three items, respectively reflecting feeling misunderstood, lack of excitement, and being
indecisive, provided (out-of-sample) prediction of LS with true accuracy of .80, suggesting that most
people with low LS could be recognized from just a few personality nuances. This is comparable to the
predictive accuracy provided by the Big Five domains that encompass a broad range of traits each, some of
which are more and some less correlated with LS, making the domain-level results more ambiguous
(Mõttus, 2016) and conducive to “just so” stories. For example, if we were only told that many people with
low LS are low on emotional stability, extraversion, and conscientiousness, we could explain low LS by
referring to any number of traits subsumed under these broad domains, only a few of which might actually
correlate with LS. So, without further specifics, we could easily indulge in baseless speculations. Instead,
now knowing that most people with low LS tend to feel misunderstood, lack excitement, and struggle with
making decisions, our degrees of freedom in explaining low LS become smaller. Also, low emotional
stability, low extraversion, and low conscientiousness tend to go with many undesirable outcomes,
offering limited discriminant validity in explaining these outcomes, although these outcomes often also go
with lower openness and agreeableness (Bleidorn et al., 2020) which don’t have non-trivial r s with LS. It
true
remains to be seen if LS’s more nuanced r s with personality traits are specific to this outcome, offering
true
greater discriminant validity and suggesting that there are factors that shape LS specifically rather than a
desirable life more generally.
In conclusion, although the Big Few domains will continue to provide a parsimonious representation of
LS’s associations with personality traits, supplementing domain-level analyses with nuances offers a richer
and more accurate picture of how LS intersects with psychological traits more broadly, besides providing
greater predictive accuracy. The ability to estimate error-free associations with multi-rater or multi-
timepoint data (Wood et al., 2022) is particularly useful for this research because it makes nuance-level
associations directly comparable to those of aggregate personality traits.
The self is not privileged to evaluate LS
One may think that people’s LS levels are private. However, if we accept that people’s personality traits
are to some extent observable to others (Connelly & Ones, 2010), then we have to accept the same for LS
because its cross-rater agreement is similar to that of personality traits (Dobewall et al., 2013; Schneider &
Schimmack, 2009). Moreover, we found that self-reported personality traits’ correlations with informant-
reported LS were similar to informant-reported personality traits’ correlations with self-reported LS
(footnotes 4 and 6), suggesting that self- and informant-reports of LS contained comparable degrees of
information about personality traits. Besides, we calculated domains’ and nuances’ r s with LS and their
true
Personality and life satisfaction 22
true predictive accuracies for LS based on just self-reported LS (Supplementary Analyses), and none of the
findings were different enough to change our conclusions, further alleviating the concerns that our
findings could have been an artefact of combining self-reported LS with informant-reported LS. Further,
our DS-related analyses did not include informant-reports, yet the patterns of findings were similar to
those of LS-related analyses that did include informant-reports.
Of course, self-informant agreement is high for neither LS nor personality traits. For example, if we
trisected self- and informant-report scores that correlate about .50, the targets’ scores would be similar in
only about half of the self-informant pairs (Mõttus, 2022). However, such moderate self-informant
agreement is the very reason why our findings are particularly novel and meaningful, showing that much
of trait scores’ variance is specific to a single method which can strongly bias the traits’ correlations among
themselves and with other variables. Besides, our method only required that there was some agreement
and, ideally, that self- and informant-reports were available for both variables being correlated; the
imperfect agreement would then cancel out because it would similarly influence both the numerator and
denominator in the r calculations (see Supplementary Material for the algebraic proof). For our analyses
true
involving DSs, informant-reports were unavailable, so their r s could have been somewhat distorted.
true
However, given that there was a substantial level of cross-rater agreement for all items for which both self-
and informant-reports were available – personality items, LS items, and three DSs items – and DS-related
and LS-related findings were similar, it is unlikely that even the DS-related r s were distorted enough to
true
bias our conclusions.
In short, we found no compelling evidence that our use of informant-reported LS, in addition to self-
reports, caused the observed pattern of findings.
LS’s construct validity
Desirably, the three LS items assessed slightly different aspects of the construct because their r s were
true
around .75 in the Estonian-speaking sample, unlike the near-unity r s among semantically nearly
true
identical personality items before we removed redundant items. In the smaller samples tested in Russian
and English, the three items had somewhat more variable but still high r s among themselves, with the
true
variability likely due to their higher sampling variance (all correlations were within +/- two standard errors
from the Estonian estimates). Substantially higher r s among the LS items would have been undesirable,
true
narrowing the construct’s scope (Clark & Watson, 1995). Supporting LS’s construct validity, its items
correlated among themselves more strongly than they correlated with personality items, and they had
highly similar correlation profiles with personality items, showing similar broader psychological
backgrounds. In the Supplementary Analyses, we also showed that LS’s r s with domains and nuances, as
true
well as personality traits’ true predictive accuracy for LS, would have been quite similar – although
generally somewhat lower due to LS being more narrowly defined – if we had assessed LS with only one
single item, “Am happy with my life”. Moreover, in Supplementary Analyses, we also showed that our LS
assessments correlated very highly – r = .80 (in Russian), .90 (in English), and .95 (in Estonian) – with the
widely used SWLS scale (Diener et al., 1985), and it had a high 10-year longitudinal correlation with
another LS’s assessment. Finally, LS correlated very highly with the aggregate of a range of DSs, which in
turn correlated extremely highly with the SWLS, further aligning the LS’s assessment with its definition.
Thus, although our LS assessment could be seen as unconventional by some, it provided a very close proxy
measure for LS.
Our three LS items covered a general life satisfaction assessment (“Am happy with my life”), purpose in life
(“Feel that my life lacks direction”), and perspective on the future (“Have a dark outlook on the future”).
Arguably, thus, our LS assessment had a broader scope than the SWLS (Diener et al., 1985) despite their
very high empirical overlap. For example, our LS assessment also covered an aspect of the eudaimonic
Personality and life satisfaction 23
well-being (purpose) besides the hedonic well-being aspects usually associated with LS (Ryff et al., 2021).
Given this, it is not surprising that the LS’s strongest correlates included items beyond those directly
referring to emotional well-being. In particular, our LS assessment and many of its correlates fit with the
components of Ryff’s (1989) model of psychological well-being, which includes: positive relations (e.g.,
items about feeling understood, trust, liking others, and enjoying cooperation), autonomy, environmental
mastery and personal growth (e.g., items about self-competence, learning quickly, solving complex
problems, leadership and influencing others, believing in hard work, taking risks, learning new things,
visiting new places, and self-improvement), purpose in life (e.g., items about lack of excitement,
indecisiveness, avoiding responsibilities, and boredom) and self-acceptance (e.g., an item about wisdom).
Thus, the hedonic and eudaimonic well-being aspects may overlap more than sometimes thought, both
empirically and in their broader psychological correlates. This is also consistent with previous work on the
hedonic and eudaimonic well-being overlap, based on self-reports alone (e.g. Disabato et al. 2016).
In conclusion, we believe that our findings provide strong evidence for the validity of a broad LS construct
in general and our LS assessments in particular.
Limitations
Our study did not have the usual limitations of personality research, such as relying on a monocultural
sample, self-report-only measures, brief questionnaires, broad trait domains, or a single
operationalization of the target construct, nor did it suffer from limited statistical power. However,
although our personality item pool was intentionally expansive, it almost certainly did not cover all
possible personality nuances, hence likely missing some LS-relevant personality traits. If so, we could
underestimate personality traits’ predictive accuracy for LS. However, given that our estimated true
predictive accuracy was as high as .90, the completely missed personality content could not have been
extensive. Likewise, our list of eight DSs likely missed some life domains that may be particularly relevant
to some people’s well-being. Also, the DSs were only assessed with self-reports, introducing possible
biases to their r s with LS and personality traits. Further, our samples were convenience samples with a
true
high percentage of females and high levels of education, possibly leading to underestimated correlations
due to reduced variance. Future studies should aim to generalize our findings to more diverse populations.
Conclusion
When addressing common methodological limitations, most people’s LS levels are accurately predictable
from their personality traits, even when avoiding direct construct overlaps. This does not mean LS is
inherently and irrevocably reducible to personality traits. Instead, the degree to which it reflects
personality traits may be considered a measure of people’s freedom to shape and assess their lives
according to their traits. At least hypothetically, there could be circumstances where LS is less aligned with
personality traits. But in usual conditions, there does not seem to be much reason to think that LS is mostly
shaped by circumstances unrelated to personality more broadly. For most people, and most of the time,
their satisfaction level is just about what we would expect from their personality traits. Personality traits
can be shaped by any number of factors, but usually, these same factors also shape LS, through personality
or otherwise.
We dropped the item referring to life having been kind to the person because it was less consistent with other LS items in all three languages.
However, the SWLS has a parallel item: “So far I have gotten the important things I want in life”
Personality and life satisfaction 24