THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
The Problem of Dependency
1,2 3 1
Toby D. Pilditch , Ulrike Hahn and David Lagnado
University College London, London
University of Oxford, Oxford
Birkbeck, University of London, London
Author Note
All authors contributed to the conceptualisation and writing of this manuscript, and thus the
order of authorship should be considered arbitrary.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Toby D. Pilditch, 26
Bedford Way, London, WC1H 0AP, UK. Electronic mail can be sent to t.pilditch@ucl.ac.uk.
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
Abstract
It is a wide-spread assumption that multiple pieces of evidence, whether they involve
measurements or testimony, provide stronger evidential support when they are independent
than when they are not. The standard view is that non-independence creates redundancy and
leads to over-confidence (see e.g., Soll, 1999; Nisbett & Ross, 1980). In keeping with this,
fields as diverse as law, statistics, and philosophy have sought to understand the implications
of non-independence and set out rules for dealing with it. In this paper, we set out how the
challenges posed by non-independence are both far more wide-spread and more challenging
than typically assumed. Specifically, we review how Bayesian probabilistic analysis reveals
“simple” inference cases that conflict with wide-spread assumptions about the value of
independence. These suggest that mere intuition is not a reliable guide in this arena. However,
we then show that the same framework cannot (in its current form) be scaled to common real-
world situations even in principle. We conclude with a discussion of the more modest, partial,
solutions that are currently available and outline possible future directions.
Keywords: dependencies, reasoning under uncertainty, testimony
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
1. Dependence and Independence
Consider the following: You are trying to judge whether there will be a thunderstorm
tomorrow. You already have an initial sense of how likely this is, but seek out further
information. You bump into your friend Alex who says that he thinks there will be a
thunderstorm. You believe Alex to be trustworthy (he’s your friend!), but he’s not an expert
meteorologist. Intuitively, you somewhat increase your belief in the possibility of a
thunderstorm in response. Carrying on down the street, you bump into a second friend, Jessie,
who also thinks there will be one. This corroboration, intuitively, further bolsters your belief
in a thunderstorm tomorrow.
Already, there are a number of relevant factors to consider in your evaluation. Are
thunderstorms commonplace in your area? How difficult is it for lay people to accurately
predict thunderstorms a day in advance? Neither Alex nor Jessie are experts, but they do live
in the area, so what weight should you give to their judgments? Such questions must be
addressed (implicitly or explicitly) whenever we adjust our views in response to those of others.
However, there is an important further issue here: how are Alex’ and Jessie’s judgments
related to each other? Does it matter whether they each came to their own separate conclusion
or just both heard the same radio forecast? And, if they both had their own reasons and heard
the same forecast, is there some way to factor out the common forecast so as to count it only
once and avoid ‘double-counting’? This is the central problem posed by the non-independence
of evidence sources. It applies not just to testimony (Alex and Jessie) but also to measurement
devices. For example, should we prefer a second measurement with the same device or should
we prefer to receive a measurement from a second, different device?
The question of whether to prefer repeat measurements or a second device has seen
decades of discussion in the philosophy of science and epistemology under the header of the
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
‘variety of evidence thesis’ (e.g., Fitelson, 1996) and impacts everything from choice of
physical devices to discussions about the value of replication within psychology (Oberauer &
Lewandowsky, 2019). It is, at heart, a question about the value of independence. At the same
time, there are many practical contexts where some degree of non-independence is simply a
fact one can do little about: current climate models, for example, share components raising
questions about how to account for this fact in evaluating ensemble predictions; scientists share
education, training and methods; court cases are stuck with the actual witnesses that could be
found.
Working out how we should respond to non-independence is a normative question, that
is, a question about how we ought to behave. In response, there have been many proposals of
both informal and formal rules –in legal systems, science, and everyday life. Ideally,
prescriptions of how we should form beliefs should rest on more than mere intuition or say so,
but rather have some independent justification. As a consequence, there has been widespread
application of a Bayesian probabilistic framework to these questions. In this paper, we detail
both what marks out the Bayesian framework as a suitable tool, and some of the insights its
applications have afforded. Those applications, in effect, treat people and testimony just like
any other evidence source such as physical measurement devices. The main contribution of
this paper, however, is to make clear the limits of such an approach. Specifically, we show how
and why the current Bayesian tool kit, in particular Bayesian Belief Networks (BNs) fails to
deal with the fundamental fact that much human exchange involves communication across
social networks. In other words, even where we ostensibly exchange information in pairwise
exchanges (such as with Alex and Jessie), we are part of a wider network of social exchange
because (some of) those we speak to also speak to each other. We are, in effect, individuals in
collectives (see Hahn, 2023).
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
Given that violations of independence may lead to over-weighting of evidence, and that
there is considerable concern about the way online social networks, in particular, may fuel the
development of extreme opinions, it is revealing that the same Bayesian tools that work well
with a small number of sources, do not work in this more general case. Furthermore, the reasons
for those are not just practical or computational considerations, but rather fundamental
representational limitations. This, in turn, shows the challenges posed by non-independence to
be deeper than previously assumed.
Specifically, the paper proceeds in four main parts. We first briefly detail ways in which
the Bayesian framework is seen as particularly suited for answering the normative questions
posed by non-independence. We then review some of the success its application has had in
clarifying the role of non-independence and providing appropriate guidance. We then outline
how and why the same tools fail once we extend sources to even a small social network. In the
final part, we describe how a more restricted answer to the normative challenge might be
derived by retreating to thinking about social networks as unanalysed aggregates. We conclude
with thoughts on future directions.
2. Bayesian Tools for the Normative Question
As already indicated, this paper draws on the Bayesian framework to explicate the
challenge of non-independence (Bayes, 1763). One might consider the Bayesian framework to
be sufficiently established that no further words on its suitability for conceptualising normative
questions are required. Bayesian models as computational level theories (see Marr, 1982) for
the study of cognition exist across many domains including learning (e.g., Kruschke, 2006;
Bramley, Dayan, Griffiths, & Lagnado, 2017), reasoning (e.g., Sloman & Lagnado, 2015;
Oaksford & Chater, 1994), argumentation (e.g., Hahn & Oaksford, 2007), and prediction (e.g.,
Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2006), among others. Bayesian approaches have also seen a
resurgence in statistics (see e.g., Wagenmakers, 2007), gaining territory on more traditional,
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
frequentist statistical techniques in deriving statistical inferences from empirical observation.
Furthermore, the Bayesian framework has been widely used in both the philosophy of science
and in epistemology in order to elucidate questions about how humans can arrive at secure
knowledge (e.g., Bovens & Hartmann, 2003).
We think it is nevertheless useful to be more explicit about the reasons for focussing on
the Bayesian framework in the present context and to consider some common critiques. One
such line of critique within cognitive science has taken issue, in one form or another, with the
value of rational models of cognition and the way they draw on Bayesian probability (see, e.g.,
Elqayam & Evans, 2011; Jones & Love, 2011 Bowers & Davis, 2012). Our goals in this paper,
however, lie firmly with the normative issue of how we should behave, not with the descriptive
question of how humans actually behave (though we very much consider the answer to the
normative question to be informative regarding descriptive matters). Whether or not rational
analysis is a useful method for studying human behaviour, or what value Bayesian models of
cognition have relative to process-level accounts or mechanism explanations is consequently
neither here nor there for the current paper. A second line of criticism rests on the idea that the
normative standard of ‘being Bayesian’ is too demanding computationally (Gigerenzer, 2008)
and/or it is unclear in practice ‘where the numbers come from’ (e.g., Walton, 2004). We are
sympathetic to these concerns, but again, we consider them irrelevant to the specific aims of
this paper. As outlined in the introduction, this paper seeks to identify both circumstances
where a Bayesian framework clarifies the problem of non-independence, and, more
importantly, cases where it can not. That even an ideal agent model cannot (currently)
adequately capture these circumstances is, we think, informative with respect to understanding
the full scale of the challenge human cognitive agents are trying to solve and it helps see clearly
the difficulties for finding practical solutions. In short, for sceptics, the Bayesian framework
may very much be treated in this paper as a crutch that is ultimately thrown away.
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
Nonetheless it is clear that a formal framework for addressing the normative question
is necessary, and that such a framework has to be quantitative. There have been many informal,
qualitative rules proposed for dealing with witness testimony, such as legal rules on hearsay or
rules proposed in the argumentation literature (see Walton, 2007). Unless one wants to simply
discard any type of evidence with dependence (a step which is arguably neither desirable nor
possible in many circumstances as will become clear), the normative question itself calls for a
quantitative answer. It may be intuitive that dependence is a kind of redundance as widely
assumed (e.g., Nisbett & Ross, 1980), but that alone doesn’t answer by how much we should
adjust our conclusions in response.
The Bayesian framework also recommends itself in as much as its prescriptions
generally accord with intuition. LaPlace famously noted that “the theory of probabilities is
basically only common sense reduced to a calculus” (LaPlace, 1825, pg. 124). But what about
cases where intuitions and probabilistic prescriptions depart? Why then follow probability
theory? It is here that it matters that ‘being Bayesian’ can be linked to instrumental goals of
human cognitive agents such as a desire for accurate beliefs and good decisions. Specifically,
‘being Bayesian’ minimises the expected inaccuracy of one’s beliefs (when accuracy is
measured by the Brier score, Pettigrew, 2016), and allows one to avoid bets that are guaranteed
to generate a loss (so-called ‘Dutch Books’, Hajek, 2008). Although there is ongoing debate
about the adequacy of both of these normative foundations, it seems important that there exists
at least some grounding of normative claims in goals reasoners might actually have.
The final, and possibly most important, reason for adopting the Bayesian framework
for the current investigation, however, is that the problem of non-independence has long been
one of its central concerns. Much of the scepticism toward probability theory within computer
science and articifial intelligence in the 1970’s and 80’s arose specifically from the fact the
problems non-independence pose for the application of Bayes’ rule in practice. The use of
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
Bayes’ rule as a means of belief revision is one of the central planks of what it means ‘to be
Bayesian’ (the other is assigning subjective degrees of belief in line with the probability
calculus).
Bayes’ rule allows one to calculate a posterior degree of belief in light of evidence. This
poses problems once there are multiple pieces of evidence to consider. As long as those pieces
of evidence are independent (e.g., multiple draws from an urn with replacement), the
multiplication rule for the probability of independent events provides an easy solution:
𝑃(𝑎 & 𝑏) = 𝑃(𝑎) ∗ 𝑃(𝑏) Eq. 1
If they are not independent, however, because the probability of one is affected by the
occurrence of the other (e.g., sampling without replacement), then that relationship must be
factored in:
𝑃(𝑎 & 𝑏) = 𝑃(𝑎) ∗ 𝑃(𝑏|𝑎) Eq. 2
This quickly leads to combinatorial explosion:
𝑃(𝑎&𝑏 &𝑐) = 𝑃(𝑎) ∗ 𝑃(𝑏|𝑎) ∗ 𝑃(𝑐|𝑎&𝑏) Eq. 3
In order to apply Bayes’ rule, one needs the so-called likelihood ratio, that is, one needs to
know how likely the evidence would be in the case that the claim of interest were true and how
likely it would be if that claim were in fact false (the likelihood ratio is just the former divided
by the latter quantity); but in order to calculate that, one needs to know all of the joint
probabilities. This combinatorial explosion made many Bayesian calculations unworkable in
practice.
A key turning point in the theoretical and practical application of Bayesian statistics
was, consequently, the development of so-called Bayesian Belief Networks (BNs) (see g.,
Pearl, 1988). BNs provide a graphical representation of probabilistic independence
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
relationships between variables which allows one to identify large parts of the joint probability
contains a simple three-variable example.
Simple three variable Bayesian Belief Network, with underlying probability tables.
Note: Nodes represent variables, and the directed arrows represent dependence relationships.
The three tables are the conditional probability tables for the variables ‘sprinkler’, ‘rain’, and
‘lawn’ respectively.
depends both on the the state of the sprinkler (on/off) and whether or not it is raining. As a
consequence, calculating the probability of the lawn being wet (or, for example, inferring the
probability that it is raining, given that we have observed a wet lawn) requires one to know the
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
probabilities for four distinct cases: sprinkler on & rain; sprinkler on & no rain; sprinkler of &
rain; sprinkler off & no rain. These probabilities must be specified in a so-called conditionl
need to know. Specifically, there is no (direct) link between ‘sprinkler’ and ‘rain’ which
indicates that (in this particular back yard, at least) whether or not the sprinkler is on or off is
independent of whether it is raining (e.g., because it is simply on a timer). As a result, we do
not need to specify (or even know) how likely it is that the sprinkler will be on at the same time
that it is raining. We only need to know how likely it is that the sprinkler is on or off, and how
likely it is that it is or is not raining. As a result, the CPTs for ‘sprinkler’ and ‘rain’ contain
only two entries each, in contrast to the four required for ‘lawn’.
This may not seem like a great simplification, but the potential savings become drastic
as the number of variables increases (i.e., n binary variables give rise to 2 possible
combinations of states). As a result, the introduction of BNs fuelled a dramatic subsequent rise
in the application of the Bayesian framework across a wide range of disciplines and practical
applications (Pourret, Na & Marcot, 2008). It is worth noting, however, that even with BNs
belief revision has a computational complexity (NP hard, Cooper, 1990) that means that exact
calculation rapidly becomes practically impossible as the number of variables increases and
approximation algorithms must be used (see e.g., Korb & Nicholson, 2010, for an introduction).
In short, BNs allow the application of Bayes’ rule for belief revision across a causally
structured Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) that exploit independence relations in order to allow
the calculation of optimal inferences (Pearl, 2009) despite the combinatorial explosion of multi-
variate problems. It is thus no accident that in the domain of evidential reasoning specifically,
BNs have been successfully used to clarify reasoning errors and fallacies, including evaluating
testimony (Madsen, Hahn, & Pilditch, 2018; 2019; Phillips, Hahn, & Pilditch, 2018; Pilditch,
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
Lagator, & Lagnado, 2020), zero-sum reasoning (Pilditch, Fenton, & Lagnado, 2019; Pilditch,
Liefgreen, & Lagnado, 2019), and various errors in legal reasoning (see e.g., Lagnado, Fenton,
& Neil, 2013; Dawid & Evett, 1997; Schum, 1994).
Nor is it an accident that this explicitly normative framework that has been developed
around the issue of dependence/independence provides a useful tool for shedding conceptual
light on how we should deal with dependent evidence in forming our beliefs. We next describe
some of the ‘success stories’ in this regard.
3. Bayesian Success: Dependence and the Role of Structure
The Limits of Intuition
The first area where the Bayesian framework has been helpful is in identifying errors
in qualitative and semi-quantitative evaluation rules proposed in the literature. As an example,
we take the way argumentation scholars have sought to apply putative evaluation rules for
argument to cases of testimony (Walton, 2007). In the informal argument literature, there is a
long standing distinction between convergent and linked arguments. The former involves cases
where multiple, independent arguments are used to support the same claim. The latter involves
cases where arguments somehow ‘work together’ to generate support. The so called MAX-
MIN rule recommends that for convergent arguments, the strength of the conclusion should
equal that of the strongest premise (MAX), whereas for linked arguments, conclusion strength
should be determined by the strength of the ‘weakest link’. The MAX-MIN rule has explicitly
been endorsed for independent and dependent cases of testimony, but it is normatively
appropriate for neither. In both cases, its recommendations conflict with Bayesian prescriptions
(see Hahn, Oaksford & Harris, 2013). The MAX rule ignores any further evidence that is
(arbitrarily) less strong than the strongest piece of evidence, so will treat as equivalent the case
of a single witness and that single witness plus thousands of additional, independent, only
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
marginally less reliable witnesses. The MIN rule ignores the fact that Bayesian inference across
chains (e.g., a three variable BN A -> B -> C) can give rise to support for C that exceeds the
strength of the weakest link (see Hahn & Oaksford, 2007) and ignores that fact that inference
across such a chain may lead to numerically different results depending on the order in which
the relative strengths occur (Phillips & Hahn, subm.). The rule consequently does not correctly
deal with these kinds of dependent and independent evidence (though related errors can be
found in lay reasoners judgments, for convergence/independent evidence see Phillips Hahn &
Pilditch, 2018, 2023; Phillips & Hahn, subm.).
Variety of Evidence
The second place where the Bayesian framework has been clarifying is with respect to
the variety of evidence thesis. As noted earlier, the variety of evidence thesis has seen
widespread discussion within the philosophy of science (Horwich, 1982; Earman, 1992, Borm
et al., 2009) and has implications for everything from choice of measurement devices to
experimental replication (Oberauer & Lewandowsky, 2019).
There has been a considerable amount of Bayesian analysis of the variety of evidence
thesis (Fitelson, 1996; Bovens & Hartmann, 2003; Landes, 2021). One, to many surprising,
insight to come out of such analysis is that the intuition that more diverse evidence provides
stronger support has boundary conditions, and is not always true. As Bovens and Hartmann
(2003) demonstrate, whether multiple tests with the same measurement measurement device
or whether the same number of tests with multiple devices is preferrable depends on the
reliability of the device. This has non-obvious implications where the reliability of the device
is not fully known. In this case, there are two opposing forces at work: positive tests from two
different measuring devices are, all other things equal, more confirming; but repeated positive
tests from the same measurement device increase confidence in its reliability (i.e., confidence
that it doesn’t just generate noise), and that benefits the confirmation a positive test confers on
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
the hypothesis. As a consequence, whether repeated tests with same device or tests with the
same outcome taken from different devices increase the probability that the hypothesis at issue
is correct depends on the perceived reliability of the device.
Not only do these analytic results refine our understanding of the variety of evidence
thesis, they also make clear a fundamental point about independence/dependence. On a
superficial analysis, one might not take the above result (or the variety of evidence thesis) to
be about dependence at all, because there is a vantage point from which repeated measurements
with same device (or replications of the same experiment) might be construed simply as
independent events, in the same way as repeated tosses of a coin or throws of a die. That,
however, ignores the fact that the outcomes of multiple tests of the same device or the same
experimental procedure are likely to exhibit greater correlation because of the shared design
(which is the driving factor underlying the variety of evidence hypothesis in the first place).
That shared design may be a source of dependence, much in the same way that an actual
physical coin may not give rise to wholly independent trials (Bartos et al., 2023) in the same
way that an idealised, hypothetical coin does.
This, in turn, highlights two things: The first is that the Bayesian framework (and with
it BNs) provides a formalism; the extent to which its application affords actual normative
insight depends on the adequacy of the model of the situation that we build with that formalism.
It doesn’t magically follow just from the use of the formalism itself. Second, seeking to build
such models leads to the identification of conceptually distinct forms of influence or
dependence. Moreover, those different forms of dependence have different structural
implications in the context of BN models. We describe this in more detail next.
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
Beyond Correlation
Before proceeding further, it is worth thinking about how the observation that more or
less direct replications of an experimental study, for example, share methods or materials
applies to cases of testimony. To this end, consider a new example. You are awaiting a
diagnosis at the hospital regarding whether you have a disease, “Conferrus Confusa”, having
had a series of tests conducted independently by two doctors, Crusher and McCoy. As in our
earlier example of Alex and Jessie, we are put in the position of considering several reports
(diagnoses) in relation to a hypothesis (our potential disease). Of critical interest is the
relationship between these two reports: are they truly derived independently? Should we
account for the two doctors having similar training (shared reliability)? Or using the same test
results (shared evidence)? Or have the two doctors passed information between them (direct
dependence)?
Bayesian analysis of the kind conducted by Bovens and Hartmann (2003) on the variety
of evidence thesis forces one to be clear about these distinctions, because they need to be
modelled in different ways. As a result, Bayesian Networks force one to be explicit about the
structure of different forms of dependence. Separating the influence of structure from
observation – the latter being used in determining dependencies via correlation-based measures
(e.g., Berg, 1993) – in this way, in turn, clarifies the impact of structural roles (and their
influences) across a wide-range of possible circumstances. This includes counter-factual
possibilities and greatly increases the analytic precision over that of a merely correlational
framework. By focussing on structure we can disentangle how different causal structures could
explain the same set of observations in one instance, but predict different sets of observations
in another. For example, if we consider three sources / reporters (Rep , Rep , and Rep ) are all
1 2 3
observed reporting the same thing, we could take the high correlation between these reports as
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
could in fact be due to one or more structural forms.
Graphical network structure of a reasoning problem.
Note: Problem structure shows three sources (Rep ), items of evidence used in their reports
1-3
(E ) concerning a hypothesis (H), along with reliabilities for each source (Rel ), and a shared
1-2 1-3
background (SR) informing those reliabilities.
Although (a) shared evidence, (b) direct conferring, and (c) shared backgrounds could
all give rise to correlations, they may give rise to very different effects across circumstances.
For example, whilst we have shown that lay reasoners fail to appreciate the redundancy entailed
by sources sharing evidence (Pilditch, Hahn, & Lagnado, 2019), in line with findings from
other frameworks (e.g., Gilliland & Schmitt, 1993; Heller, Saltzstein, & Caspe, 1992; Maines,
1990; Kahneman & Tversky, 1973), they seem more accurate in their estimations of the impact
of shared backgrounds (Madsen, Hahn, & Pilditch, 2018; 2019; 2020) relative to normative
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
predictions (see Bovens & Hartmann, 2003). Critically, these forms of dependence could be
masked by the same correlation-based pattern of observations, yet in fact may not only be
underpinned by different structural forms of dependence, but that these structures may produce
inferences of differing accuracy.
useful to disentangle structure from observation, and it also serves as a good example of the
insights that can be gained using BNs to map idealised cases of dependence. In recent work
using a simple hypothetical plane crash scenario (Pilditch et al, 2018; Pilditch et al., 2020), lay
reasoners were presented with a dependence case where the possibility is raised that one of two
(otherwise equally reliable) sources had passed information to the other (versus an independent
case where this information passing did not occur) during their otherwise independent analysis
of the plane crash (and thus prior to your observation of their final reports). Participants then
provided conditional probabilities that mapped onto the modulation of the reliability (i.e.,
chance of making errors) of the receiving source when given correct vs incorrect information
from the “sending” source. This allowed for differences in individual interpretation of the
nature of the dependency relationship (something outside of normative prescription) to be taken
into account for fitted (i.e., soft) normative model predictions.
As expected by traditional, correlation-based accounts, when the two sources are
observed in agreement, participants determine independence as providing superior support for
the hypothesis in question than the aforementioned dependency case. However, as dependence
was in fact a manipulated via the presence or absence of a structural relation, it was possible
to assess normative predictions for cases besides corroboration. These included when only the
receiving source has so far reported (i.e., partial observation – insufficient for inferring
dependence by itself). It included also the case when the sources actually disagreed (i.e.,
contradictory observations – anti-correlation being a traditional indicator of independence). By
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
mathematical proof, Pilditch et al. (2020) demonstrate how, in all of these cases, dependencies
may normatively give rise to an information advantage over independence – something that
lay reasoners fail to appreciate. This both echoes the Bovens and Hartmann (2003) insight on
the variety of evidence thesis, and it extends it to other, novel combinations.
A Closer Look at Modelling Considerations
We have so far touched on two sets of modelling considerations that apply when trying
to use the Bayesian Framework to clarify the normative impact of dependence. The first,
mentioned in the introduction above, is the question of ‘where do the numbers come from’.
The second, first raised in the context of the variety of evidence hypothesis, concerns the
appropriateness of a problem formalisation vis-à-vis the real world phenomenon of interest.
Neither of these is unique to the question of independence; rather these are general issues that
will arise in any Bayesian modelling context (and many non—Bayesian models as well).
As a result, there are several generic responses to these issues. The first is simply to
appreciate that whatever normative prescription a BN explication of a scenario involving
dependence contains is, in first instance, limited to that specific explication: that is, it is a
statement about that network structure, given those conditional probabilities in the CPT, and
those priors. From a theoretical perspective, such a single demonstration may be enough if the
theoretical conclusion is meant to be that a particular phenomenon exists: for example, there
exist cases where dependent witnesses have greater evidential value than independent
witnesses. It is for this reason that simple, extremely idealised, scenarios can be informative.
Theoretical generalisations, by contrast, need a firmer basis, and the strategy here is to show
that a particular conclusion (e.g., dependent evidence more confirming) holds over a broad
range of possible numbers, or possible structures. This is achieved either by systematic
exploration of a parameter space and/or mathematical proof (see e.g., Bovens & Hartmann,
2003; Pilditch et al, 2020 for examples).
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
In order to understand fully the limitations of the Bayesian framework in capturing
dependence that will become the focus of the following main part of the paper, it is also
important to be fully clear on what the numbers in BNs do and, more importantly, do not
is to calculate, given a bunch of numbers that we specified, what other numbers follow. This is
of use because the ‘other numbers that follow’ may cover a broad range of circumstances, and
we need to enter the respective probabilities associated with the possibility of the sprinkler
being on or off, and the probability of rain. These probabilities do not depend on other variables
(‘sprinkler’ and ‘rain’ do not have any arrows coming in to them), so these are not conditional
probabilities but priors. We also have to specify the conditional probabilities of a wet lawn,
given the various possible combinations of sprinkler status and rain. Given these specifications
in the CPT, the BN then allows us to calculate how probabilities change under a range of
observations. Some of these are wholly unsurprising: the network will tell us that, given that
the sprinkler is off and there has been no rain, there is a .01 probability that the lawn is wet.
This is wholly unremarkable, because we basically put that there with our entry in the top, far
right, cell of the ‘sprinkler’ CPT. However, the BN also tells us about the respective
probabilities of ‘sprinkler’ and ‘rain’ given that the lawn is wet, and these are not probabilities
that we specified. Furthermore, the BN tells us how our belief that the sprinkler was on should
change when we additionally discover that it rained. This additional observation should reduce
our degree of belief in the sprinkler having been on, a phenomenon known as ‘explaining
away’, and the details of that phenomenon are suffienctly complex that there exists a sizeable
empirical literature examining the extent to which lay reasonsers correctly understand such
inferences (e.g., Rottman & Hastie, 2016; Tesic, Liefgreen & Lagnado, 2020). The BN clarifies
not just that additionally learning that it rained should influence what our beliefs are, it tells us
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
exactly what that new belief should be, even though we did not specify any direct relationship
(conditional probabilities) between ‘sprinkler’ and ‘rain’ (because no direct relationship
exists).
How our beliefs concerning the sprinkler should change in those circumstances will
depend on the exact numeric values entered in the CPT. Those conditional probability values,
like the causal structure itself, reflect our assumptions about the situation. Those assumptions
might or might not reflect objective probabilities (to the extent that such probabilities even
exist, e.g, Nau, 2001). That is, they might or might not accurately reflect how reliably turning
the sprinkler on makes the lawn wet. Most importantly, for what follows, they represent
something about the way the sprinkler is, not about how the sprinkler ought to be. This may
seem wholly unnessary to emphasis with respect to a physical device like a sprinkler, but it
becomes relevant (as we will see) when we move to considering testimony. This is because
human agents (unlike sprinklers) might take actions that affect their reliability, and this
includes (potentially recursively) factoring in informational dependence when forming their
beliefs.
We next clarify how and why this sets hard limits on the extent to which the Bayesian
framework can capture certain common, naturally arising, cases of dependence, even under
extreme idealisation.
4. Bayesian Failure: The Fundamental Problem of Social Networks
So far, we have considered cases with few evidence sources (measurement devices or
human testimony). And we have, so far, seen nothing that would make one suspect this type of
formal treatment does not scale. In particular, it might seem possible (at least in principle) to
apply it to entire social networks of communicating agents. Both social networks and BNs are
graphs, so it seems plausible that we could capture entire social networks with BNs. This seems
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
all the more important given that recent years have made clear that humans, as cognitive agents,
are typically agents within a wider social network. Online social networks have arguably
changed the scale and density of such embedding, but, in first instance, they have simply made
clear the extant to which such embedding is ubiquitous. This means also that dealing with
evidential dependence is one of the fundamental challenges human beings need to navigate in
everyday life, whether they are actively aware of that challenge or not.
In fact, there are already known limitations on combining the Bayesian framework and
social networks. The first, and most obvious, is that in the real-world, we typically do not know
Comparison of social network and Bayesian Belief Network model structures
Note: In Social network models (a) communication passes between agents (nodes/circles) via
connection (red arrow relations), versus a Bayesian Belief Network (b) representation of an
expanded sprinkler problem (nodes reflect variables, and arrows the direction of inferences
between those variables).
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
The focal agent in that network (indicated by the yellow node in a)) is trying to form
normatively accurate beliefs based on the communication received from other agents. That
communication includes informational dependence that stems from the fact that the two agents
that ‘Yellow’ communicates with (the two ‘neighbours’ to whom yellow has direct links) also
indirectly communicate with each other, because there are paths through the wider social
network that link them. In the real world, however, `Yellow’ doesn’t know those other agents
beyond its neighbours, nor does it know exactly who among them does and does not
communicate directly. Without knowing that, however, an appropriate BN cannot be
constructed (see also Merdes, Hahn & von Sydow, 2020).
A second practical limitation stems from the computational complexity of inference on
Bayesian Networks, already mentioned earlier in the face of the fact that real-world social
networks (in the age of online social media) may comprise billions of nodes (Silberling, 2023).
That latter fact, incidentally, also magnifies the scale of the dependence problem itself, because
billions of nodes make for a lot of potential dependence.
A third limitation stems from the fact that BNs in the form used here are based on
directed acyclic graphs, that is, they must not allow cycles –that is, paths that return to the
originating node. Such cycles are already present with bi-directional communication links
to the problem of ‘loops’ or cycles in Bayesian networks (see e.g., Ghahramani, 1997).
These familiar limitations mean that, for example, Bayesian agent-based models
(Olsson, 2011; Madsen, Bailey & Pilditch, 2018) that simulate communication across social
networks make the simplifying (strictly false) assumption that all sources from which a node
receives communication are independent. This, demonstrably, can lead to ‘double counting’ of
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
evidence and resultant beliefs that are more extreme than justified by the actual data (see Hahn,
2023 for examples).
The key point of the current paper, however, is that there exist even more fundamental
limitations that stem from the fact that, in a sense, BNs are the wrong kinds of objects for
capturing social networks. In short, there is a deeper problem that prevents the mapping,
limitations plays a role. In other words, the Bayesian framework fails to provide a normative
answer for certain simple dependence problems even where all relevant nodes and paths are
known, their number is so small as to otherwise allow exact computation, and there are no
loops or cycles. In the following, we demonstrate exactly how and why.
Returning to our original example let us imagine that instead of receiving information
from Alex and Jessie about a potential storm, we instead hear from a third person, Danny. In
this version, it is Danny who has spoken to Alex and Jessie, whilst we only hear Danny’s report.
Crucially, whether Alex and Jessie derived their reports a) independently of one another, or b)
through a form of dependence (e.g., conferring) still intuitively matters just as much as it did
before. However, whereas previously we integrated Alex and Jessie’s reports ourselves, it is
now Danny that does this for us. So, our question now becomes: Given that we have only seen
a report from Danny (i.e., Danny has told us there will be a storm tomorrow), how should we
differentiate our belief in there actually being a storm tomorrow, based on whether Danny got
his information through case a) or case b)? How should our predictions differ regarding for
cases a) and b) given Danny’s report?
The problems that arise here reflect the just discussed difference between probabilities
a BN allows us to calculate, and the probabilities we ourselves need to supply. As we will see,
adding in Danny transforms the problem from one in which the BN calculates for us the effects
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
of dependence to one where we have to specify those effects ourselves: the very thing, in fact,
that we wanted to use the model for in the first place. We are left stranded here because the
probabilities that determine the (normative) effect of Danny’s testimony in both cases depend
on the values entered in Danny’s CPT. But those values represent a statement about how Danny
actually is, not about what Danny ought to do –in the same way that the CPT for ‘wet lawn’
implements (assumptions/beliefs about) the way our sprinkler works, not about how it ideally
should work in watering the lawn.
To make these points and their implications clearer, we next discuss them with a
concrete, reference BN.
The Representation Problem
To better understand this problem, we will explore it in more detail through the
Bayesian Network formalism. To do so, let us flesh out the two cases: one in which Source 1
(Alex) and Source 2 (Jessie) each receive independent evidence from the world, and the other
where they each observed the same piece of evidence (E; e.g., the same weather report).
underlying state of affairs (Hypothesis = there will be a storm tomorrow) and evidence for that
state of affairs dispensed ‘from the world”. This is not observed by you directly - rather, you
receive reports from two sources. Let us assume that the evidence observed (i.e., the weather
report(s)) is highly diagnostic, but not perfectly so (P(E|Hypothesis) = 80%, P(¬E|¬Hypothesis)
= 80%). Using our main example, the weather reports (E) correctly predict a storm occurring
is just one such piece of evidence on which both sources (Alex and Jessie) report (reduplication
condition), whereas in the second case each source passes on their own independent
observation. Remember also that your beliefs in the hypothesis are represented by the values
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
of the variable Hypothesis, which you are looking down on as an external observer. Your belief
in there being a storm tomorrow is represented in the network via the Hypothesis nodes in Figs.
4a and 4b, but you yourself are not a node in the network.
A (left). Shared route of information to sources (no reports observed). B (right). Separate
routes of information to sources (no reports observed).
C (left). Shared route of information to sources (first report observed). D (right). Separate
routes of information to sources (second report observed).
E (left). Shared route of information to sources (both reports observed). F (right). Separate
routes of information to sources (both reports observed).
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
Now let us contrast your (normatively derived) belief in the hypothesis in both cases.
In each case, the first report (Source 1 / Alex) boosts the posterior degree of belief in the
hypothesis from 50% to 68% (Figs. 4a to 4c for dependent case, and Figs. 4b to 4d for
independent case). In other words, when we have only seen Alex’s report, we retain the same
degree in belief in their being a storm tomorrow in either case. The second report (Source 2 /
greater confidence in the state of the evidence itself (i.e., given Alex and Jessie are using the
same weather report, you can be even more confident in the contents of that report), but this is
outweighed in the independent case by the fact that there are two pieces of evidence in
agreement (i.e., Alex and Jessie, using different weather reports, have still arrived at the same
conclusion).
However, what if we now want to introduce a third source (Danny, from the above
example)? Consider that both Sources 1 and 2 (Alex and Jessie) report to a third source
(Danny), and it is only the report of this third source that is directly observed.
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
First, we need to assign conditional probabilities to the third source as a function of the
two reports (from S / Alex, and S / Jessie). Let us keep this the same in both cases: Source 3
1 2
(Danny) has a 70% chance of saying “true” when both the sources it hears from (Alex and
Jessie) say “true”, and likewise a 70% chance of saying “false” when both say “false”. In the
remaining cases (i.e., when the two sources disagree), it responds randomly (50/50), as
S = True, S = True, S = False, S = False,
1 1 1 1
Source 3
S = True S = False S = True S = False
2 2 2 2
True 70 50 50 30
False 30 50 50 70
Now, as in our previous example, we then represent this new (network) structure as follows:
Shared (left) versus Independent (right) route models, no reports observed.
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
If this is what we do, however, we will get the same degree of confirmation for the
hypothesis in both cases on observing Danny’s (Source3’s) positive report. This is trivially the
case precisely because we specified the same CPT for Source3 in both cases. We can obtain a
difference that reflects the upstream dependence/independence only through those 8 values in
Source3’s CPT. And, fundamentally, those numbers are input to the Bayesian Network whose
determination is wholly outside the BN itself.
Danny/Source3’s CPT does not ‘see’ the rest of the network (and that was in fact the
point of capitalising on independence structure to enable BN calculations in the first place, see
section 3 above). Danny’s report only depends upon the reports of Alex and Jessie – not the
preceding dependent/independent structure that feeds into their reports. That leaves the CPT
blind to the potential effects of a dependency – as Danny is blind to it himself—in any way
other than by entering appropriate, dependency reflecting, conditional probabilities for Danny
that differ across the two cases. This requires taking an external, “gods-eye”, view of the
situation (that implicitly incorporates in Danny’s CPT structural information beyond his
available knowledge). It also, obviously, requires us to know what probabilities would
appropriately reflect the dependence, which was the very question we were trying to use the
BN to address. Simply adding Danny/Source3 transforms the problem from one where the BN
tells us something about the normative impact of dependence, to one where a normatively
appropriate impact will only emerge because we directly put it in.
Even though we have now realised that the BN itself now no longer helps us derive an
appropriate answer to what weight we should give to dependence, we might still hold out hope
that there could be a clever solution that would allow us to derive the CPT with which we must
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
In fact, we cannot. We are stopped by a fundamental representation roadblock, which,
in fact, is a more deep-rooted problem that the inclusion of Danny has exposed. Put simply,
communication across a social network (Alex and Jessie to Danny) is not the same
(representationally) as probabilistic dependence (evidence to Alex/Jessie) –even though what
is being communicated across a social network is evidence. In an agent-based model of
communication across social networks (such as Olsson, 2011; Acemoglu et al., 2013; Madsen,
Bailey & Pilditch, 2018), the Bayesian machinery is used to calculate agents’ degrees of belief
in the claim at issue, not whether or not they choose to communicate or what they communicate
if the do. Though an agent’s degree of belief may influence what they choose to say, there still
needs to be a communication rule that determines what agent’s say and that is not part of their
degree of belief per se (see Assaad et al., 2023 for discussion). For example, in the Olsson
(2011) model there is a fixed probability that, at a given time step an agent will communicate
with a neighbour, and the content of that communication is determined by the agent’s
‘threshold of assertion’. Specifically, the agent asserts that the hypothesis under discussion
across the simulated network is true if the agent’s current degree of belief exceeds a threshold
probability p. Conversely, if the agent’s belief is below 1-p the agent asserts that the hypothesis
is false; and in all other cases, the agent remains silent.
When we think about Bayesian agents in a social network (whether these be ‘Yellow’
beliefs. Instead, everything about Source3 represents the beliefs of an external observer. The
CPT represents our assumptions about the evidential value of Source3’s report. That might
depend on choices Source3 makes (i.e., if Source3 is human, how it aggregates evidence), but
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
that underlying process is nowhere represented. All that is recorded is our assumptions about
how reports will be true or false as a function of the states of other variables (Source1 and
Source2). Likewise the marginal probability associated with Source3 at any given time
represents our uncertainty about Source3, not anything about Source3 itself.
If *we* learn that Alex (Source1) provided a positive report, that will change the
probability of the node/variable `Danny’ (provided we have not yet received Danny’s report),
but the probability represents our remaining uncertainty about whether or not Danny will
provide a positive report, not anything about Danny’s own beliefs or how they might change.
Our beliefs about Danny change as we learn the values of other variables both upstream and
downstream from Danny.
In short, when we are trying to use a BN to form normatively appropriate beliefs about
the situation we are necessarily external to that BN, and that BN represents how our beliefs
change in response to different combinations of evidence for us as external observers. Trying
to solve the problem of how to respond to Danny’s reports recursively would entail having
Danny simultaneously be an observer and a node in the network.
And even if we could condense Danny’s belief formation and communication rules
with a hypothetical Danny as we think he ought to be. This means for a wider network, such
as that experienced by ‘Yellow’, that rather than enabling ‘Yellow’ to draw a normatively
appropriate conclusion based on the reports ‘Yellow’ receives from its neighbours, we have
simply constructed a counterfactual, hypothetical communication network involving what
reports ‘Yellow’ should have received, as opposed to the communication across the network
that actually unfolded as it did.
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
So where does this leave us? Seen from one vantage point, this is simply a Bayesian
Network representation problem. It is somewhat bad news for the Bayesian afficionado, but
who cares if one already doesn’t consider oneself part of that crowd. Such a response overlooks
what we were at pains to articulate in the early parts of this paper. Namely that the Bayesian
framework is our current best tool for elucidating dependence. Moreover, application of that
tool revealed the normative implications of dependence (as far as we can track them using the
framework) to be oftentimes counter-intuitive and suprising. This makes it bad news all round
that the only tool we effectively have has such a fundamental limitation.
This is made worse by the fact that the problem we need a normative tool (Bayesian or
other) to solve is not some niche possibility, but rather a fundamental feature of our daily
human existence.
Given that we wish to use testimony as evidence (i.e., communication), and we know
that informational dependence does affect the accuracy (and thus evidential value) of held
beliefs to gain any normative purchase on this issue requires us to capture and quantify those
changes in accuracy. The (current) limit on a Bayesian solution means we have no general
solution here.
This problem is even more damning than it first appears. The passing of communicated
testimony is ubiquitous, not just in formal social networks, but in almost all forms of (social)
learning (i.e., rarely do we rely on first-hand observation alone). The problem we have exposed
here in fact means we cannot understand how impactful dependence (and therefore
redundance) is on the strength of such testimony on an individual level. Therefore, given the
omni-presence of various dependence structures (i.e., extremely rarely can we assume
complete independence), we simply cannot, in general, know the strength of testimony
accurately.
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
The above example is not unusual, nor the consequence of modern phenomena (e.g.,
social networks), but is in fact present in all forms of communication. Information passing
through word of mouth, written accounts, traditional media (radio, tv), and the internet age, all
invoke hierarchical networks of sources stretching back through time. In any such instance,
each “layer” of sources adds an exponential degree of complexity (e.g., from one source
integrating the testimony of two antecedent sources, to in turn having to “grandfather” in the
sources of those antecedent sources).
Of course, when we consider the implications of this problem, social networks are an
increasingly relevant example of the potential impact of dependencies in belief updating.
Whether as a tool for the spread of misinformation (e.g., Wang, McKee, Torbica, & Stuckler,
2019), or as a cascading force of rapid opinion change (e.g., Watts, 2002), the multiply-
connected nature of social networks speaks directly to the dangers of underappreciating the
impact of dependencies. For example, to underappreciate the degree to which seemingly
independent, yet coherent, opinions may in fact be the product of information flowing through
the same shared route can lead to overconfidence. This in turn may explain the efficacy of
various dis/misinformation phenomena.
Although this paints a pessimistic picture of the prospects for gaining normative
purchase on the effects of dependencies in chains of reasoning, work on areas like the Wisdom
of Crowds has used the power of aggregation to make inroads: What if we had 1000 reporting
Dannys, or access to the votes of a social network as a whole, would that allow us to make
inroads?
5. Extant Solutions: The Wisdom of Crowds
The social network example opens the door to the notion of collective
judgments/inference – i.e., what does the population of individual network members conclude
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
when aggregated. Using aggregation, statistical methods might be brought to bear to deal with
the possibility of dependencies. In other words, we established in the previous section the
difficulties faced by ‘Yellow’ in forming an accurate belief given the informational dependence
within the social network. ‘Yellow’ can’t trace those dependencies and factor them out, either
practically or theoretically, but maybe ‘Yellow’ could have based their beliefs on a different
quantity, namely the aggregate judgment of a collective as a whole. What if, instead of trying
to fine tune responses to ‘Yellow’s immediate neighbours, ‘Yellow’ simply asks the entire
network to vote, and then bases their belief on that.
An agent looking to elicit and use such group judgments might lean on the literature
on collective intelligence. Here, past research has not only identified the “miracle of
aggregation” (also referred to as “wisdom of crowds,” Surowiecki, 2004), that is, the way
collective estimates may exceed individual accuracy, but also examined the relationship
between individual accuracy, collective accuracy, and informational dependence among
individuals. Specifically, while the original formulation of Condorcet’s Jury theorem
(Condorcet 1976/1785) assumed independence, more recent versions (e.g., Ladha, 1995) allow
for non-independence and make clear that collective accuracy increases with individual
accuracy and decreases with dependence between individuals. Crucially, it is only the means of
these quantities, that is, average individual accuracy and average pairwise correlation
between estimates that determine collective accuracy. To place this into more concrete terms,
the collective accuracy of Danny’s, ours, or ‘Yellow’s network peers’ estimates of how likely
it is there will be a storm tomorrow can be calculated from the mean of how accurate each
individual report is, and the average correlation between each pair of reports. Estimating either
of these quantities will, in practice, still be difficult, but may nevertheless provide
approximations. In particular, we no longer need to know anything more specific about network
structure or information flow.
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
One immediate limitation is that the non-independence versions of Condorcet’s Jury
theorem detailed by Ladha (1993, 1995) provide quantification only of a threshold level of
non-independence beyond which group accuracy is guaranteed to exceed individual accuracy.
They do not provide direct estimates of that collective accuracy. For example, that theorem can
provide a threshold amount of correlation between the reports about a storm tomorrow among
Danny’s network peers, below which Danny can expect the collective accuracy (i.e., averaged
report estimates) to be greater than that of individual network member accuracy. What we don’t
get from this is what the original (independence-based) version of Condorcet’s Jury Theorem
gave us, namely a probability that the majority vote is correct.
Subsequently, Dietrich and Spiekermann (2013) provided a different extension of
Condorcet’s theorem in order to deal with the likely presence of non-independence based on
Ladha’s (1993) work. They start by identifying the ways in which a deliberating group will
likely deviate from independence, ways that are already familiar from preceding sections of
this paper. Voters share background, share evidence and, during deliberation, may persuade
one another through communication. A shared sociological or educational perspective, for
example, might mean that some voters are prone to make similar determinations. This means
that learning how one voted allows us to refine our predictions about the votes of the others (as
we already saw with the coin or the experimental replication in section 3 above). This means
their votes are not (unconditionally) independent (i.e., P(vote 1) is not equal to P(vote 1|vote
2)), but they do become (conditionally) independent once the common cause of that
as an explication of shared background (SR)). The twist introduced by Dietrich and
Spiekermann (2013) is that we can use the same kind of approach with respect to the effects of
the deliberation itself. If, at the time of voting, our network members cast their votes
individually and separately, there are no causal arrows we need to include in our model between
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
mutual persuasion during the deliberation in the same way that we thought about shared
backgrounds. The deliberation itself becomes a common cause that gives rise to unconditional
dependence among those votes, but once that is conditioned on, the invidual votes are
conditionally independent. In fact, Dietrich and Spiekermann roll all such common causes
(shared background, the deliberation etc.) into a single variable (cause) that represents the
problem at issue (with all its specific features). Given a specification of that model, the
probability that the majority vote is correct, once again, follows.
Such a model is far more coarse-grained than the models we considered in the preceding
sections. It replaces detailed representation of what is shared and what influence exists with a
rough summary estimate of its effects. With that step, we still need to provide CPTs for the
individual voters, but those CPTs contain only two cells: the probability that a voter votes “yes”
(votes “no”) depending on the state of the summary problem variable. And that probability
reflects a purely descriptive quantity (the way the ‘sprinkler’ is, not the way it ought to be).
This representational move comes with a cost in as much as the main use of this model
will probably not lie in using it as a tool to derive concrete estimates in specific real world
contexts. It does allow insight into how competence, dependence, and group size interact,
including when and when not large groups will do better than small ones (and when not), and
when majority votes will approach infallibility.
Dietrich and Spiekermann’s Condorcet reconstruction using a causal network.
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
Note: The model illustrates true state of the world (x, what we have elsewhere called the
‘hypothesis’), shared factors such as voter background, shared evidence, or persuasive effects
during deliberation (c3, c4), and private (non-evidential) factors (c1, c2, c5, c6) that might
influence a hypothetical voter (voter1, voter2) such as what they had for breakfast.
Finally, because we started by outlining ways in which the move to BNs allows one to
go beyond what can be captured by thinking purely in terms of correlations, it seems
appropriate to finish by returning to them. The 1960’s and 1970’s saw much work in social
psychology trying to make sense of seemingly divergent results concerning the accuracy of
group judgments (for a review see e.g., Peterson & Beach, 1967). In this context, Hogarth
(1978) pointed out the importance of an organizing, quantitative framework that allowed one
to capture key determinants of group performance, in particular group members’ individual
accuracy and the degree of correlation between members. Drawing on formal results from test
theory (Ghiselli, 1974), Hogarth showed that the predictive validity of the mean of group
judgments (as a representation of the collective group answer) in the sense of the correlation
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
between that mean and the true value of the estimate is a function of the average validities of
the individual group members and their average pairwise correlation. This echoes the Ladha
(1993) result discussed earlier, but replaces Ladha’s in principle threshold with a specific
correlation. It reiterates, from a different angle, the main theme emerging from this section:
namely, that thinking about agents in networks as aggregates allows one to proceed with
dramatically reduced specifications. It seems far more realistic to provide a reasonable estimate
of an average competence or an average degree of dependence or correlation than it does to
provide individual estimates for all members of a group. That loss of detail in specification
comes with a loss of detail in outcome, that is, with respect to exactly what we, Danny, or
“Yellow’ should think in any concrete situation. However, it does allow one to gain insight
into the inter-play between individual competence, inter-dependence, group size and collective
accuracy.
Those insights can guide empirical work investigating the effect on group vs. individual
accuracy of communication such as undermining effects of social influence (Lorenz, Rauhut,
Schweitzer, & Helbing, 2011), the benefits of diversity (Shi, Teplitskiy, Duede, & Evans,
2019; Oliveira & Nisbett, 2018) or the influence of social network structures (Jönsson, Hahn,
Olsson, 2015; Becker, Brackbill & Centola, 2017). Both those theoretical insights and resultant
empirical work can help sharpen intutions (particularly as research with lay reasonsers suggests
the ability to appreciate the impact of dependence on collective accuracy is rather limited, see
e.g., Yousif, Aboody & Keil, 2019, even when participants have been part of the crowd being
assessed, e.g., Hahn, Pilditch, & Cruz, 2019). And, finally, such insights might be drawn on
when making design decisions about online systems.
In sum, the study of wisdom of the crowd effects, and the relationship between
correlation (dependence) and accuracy as group size and individual accuracy change has
yielded promising insights, both in terms of normative solutions and empirical findings. Such
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
insights are necessarily constrained to the aggregate level, and thus, while useful, side-step
earlier problems detailed in this paper, and the more limited resolution they afford nevertheless
furthers general understanding of the role of dependence. Placing this back into our original
example of Danny and the likelihood of a storm tomorrow, the normative solutions surrounding
the wisdom of crowds would allow us to determine the relationship between the accuracy of
individual network members (e.g., Alex, Jessie), their collective accuracy, the number of
network members providing estimates of storm likelihood (e.g., more than just Alex and
Jessie), and the estimated dependence between those estimates. This is useful (when we can
make such aggregations) even if it still tells us nothing about how Danny should deal with
dependence at the individual inference level (i.e., inference based on the report of just Alex,
and/or Jessie as discussed in the preceding section).
6. Conclusions
The question of how we should deal with dependencies is hard to avoid, given an
increasingly interconnected world it is also more and more pressing, and the dangers of falsely
assuming independence have been well covered in both theoretical (Hogarth, 1989; Pearl,
2009; Rehder, 2014; Schum, 1994) and applied domains (Kononenko, 1993; Bex & Prakken,
2004; Spellman, 2011).
We showed how the Bayesian framework can be used to ward of those dangers by
sharpening understanding of when, where and why dependencies matter. Specifically, the
framework can be used to identify cases that violate our unrefined, pre-analytic, intuitions by
revealing both cases where dependency hurts and cases where dependent measurement devices
or testimony actually provide stronger evidence.
With respect to testimony, however, our analysis revealed an a fundamental difference
between measurement devices and people. People, unlike measurement devices, are typically
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
part of wider social networks of communication in which they actively make choices both
about what to believe and what to say. Given the ubiquity of testimony and this basic
configuration in our daily lives it thus matters that we identified a suprising limitation to
normative insight that arises simply from hearing from Danny instead of his two sources Alex
and Jessie. Specifically we saw that what seems like an obvious step, using a BN to represent
agents in a social network, fails for fundamental representational reasons. BNs represent our
beliefs about sources, and how those change when we learn that something has been
communicated to them. They do not represent sources’ own beliefs as they are shaped by
communications. Our representation of such sources (e.g., Danny) reflects our uncertainty
about them. They do not represent those agents’ (e.g., Danny’s) own beliefs as we would need
to represent in a Bayesian agent-based model of social network communication. The inferential
problem we face when confronted with Danny’s report is not about what Danny believes, but
about the evidential value of Danny’s report, and that is a function of what Danny does, not of
what he ought to do. To the extent that ‘oughts’ should factor in to those actions, BNs are no
help in making the appropriate determination. Instead, we need that determination to make use
of a BN. Thus, although we know beliefs should update in light of testimony, and the evidential
value of that testimony will be affected by informational dependencies, capturing that impact
as communications pass between sources remains out of reach.
This rules out fine-grained accounts of what a given individual should believe in a
dynamically unfolding communication context. We also considered, however, whether an
individual faced with a group of connected sources could circumvent (to some extent) those
difficulties by seeking to derive a judgment based on an aggregate, collective output of such
sources. Techniques employed within Wisdom of Crowd effects have had some theoretical
success in deriving normative solutions (Ladha, 1995; Dietrich & Spiekermann, 2013), but, as
we saw, those remain limited in other ways.
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
Given the centrality of testimony to our lives, and the challenge posed by seemingly
ever increasing inter-connectedness, it is important, in conclusion, to consider possibilities for
bypassing a (currently non-existent) normative solution and instead move straight to practical
solutions. In particular, what exactly we communicate greatly influences the impact of
dependence in practice. Providing context and detail about a source may make transparent
when the same information reaches us via different routes and stop us from double counting:
being told that John saw a bear in the neighbourhood on Tuesday at 10pm, allows us to avoid
over-weighting the evidence when we hear that same thing from Sue, Janice, and Steve, in
ways we cannot when they simply tell us that ‘someone saw a bear’ (see Hahn, 2023). At the
same time, societies have at least some control over the density and scale of online social
networks. A project such as Facebook, didn’t merely move extant networks on line, it sought
explicitly to forge novel connections on an unprecedented scale. Potential downsides of
informational dependence is something societies might wish to consider with respect to such
projects. There may also be other tools that prove useful in trying to minimise the role of
dependence. There is some indication, for example, that prediction markets (Ahlstron-Vij,
2016) involve incentives that make them at least somewhat robust to informational dependence.
For example, if the indicator is average market price, and an individual believes themselves to
be in possession of highly diagnostic information that suggests it may be inaccurate, that
individual should be willing to place a substantial stake on the indicator being wrong. The
direction (high/low) and weighting (i.e., size of bet) allows for a signalling function /
mechanism that helps compensate for the dependence, and thus one can build a pragmatic
solution without requiring a normative one. In short, we may find a range of practical tools or
measures to de-correlate individual judgments in order to reduce the deleterious impact of
dependence.
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY
Finally, it is entirely possible that normative tools, such as the Bayesian framework,
might yet be expanded in ways that broaden their applicability. In an increasingly
interconnected world, where it is progressively more common place that information travels
via multiple routes, failing to appreciate the influence of dependencies carries greater risk than
ever. So increased research focus on these issues seems important. Although this paper could
only point to partial solutions, we hope that naming and describing the challenges raised may
prompt further work to rectify this situation.
Acknowledgements
The authors declare no conflicts of interest. UH was supported by a Mercator Fellowship
through Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) – Project
number 674439.
THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCY