Measuring Norms: A Comparison of the Predictive
and Descriptive Power of Three Methods
Diego Aycinena Francesco Bogliacino
School of Arts and Sciences, Dipartimento di Scienze Economiche
University of Pennsylvania University of Bergamo
diegoay@sas.upenn.edu francesco.bogliacino@unibg.it
Erik O. Kimbrough
Smith Institute for Political Economy & Philosophy
Chapman University
ekimbrou@chapman.edu
April 2, 2024
Abstract
We analyze and compare three methods of measuring social norms: the Krupka and Weber
(KW) coordination game, the two-step approach by Bicchieri and Xiao (BX), and a novel
Binarized Scoring Method (BSM) we introduce that elicits the full distribution of normative
beliefs. We discuss the properties of each method and test their effectiveness in two distinctive
ways. First, we compare the fit and predictive power of the norms elicited by each method
in 3 versions of the dictator game, which differ in how the pie is initially allocated. Then we
use vignettes to assess the extent to which the methods can recover existing norms for various
naturally occurring settings. We find that, within the framework of a norm-dependent utility
model, the KW method yields better predictive power. All three methods effectively recover
norms in field settings, although KW and BSM are more robust to false positives.
Keywords— Social Norms; Normative Expectations; Personal Normative Beliefs; Bina-
rized Scoring; Laboratory experiments
JEL Codes: A13; C91; D01; D64; D83; D91
We thank participants at the BEEC 2022, ESA Global Meeting Around the Clock 2021, REXCON21, Norms and Behavioral Change (NoBeC)
Talks, and the Giornata di Studi in Onore a Giorgio Rampa at the University of Pavia, as well as attendants at seminars at University of Bergamo,
University of Milan (Statale), ICES, at PSE-Paris I, GATE-Lab, and University of Konstanz. We also thank Christian Mora, Laura Jime´nez, and
Diego Sebastia´n Ram´ırez for assistance in conducting experimental sessions, Paula Remicio and Nicola´s Caicedo for programming, and Yaritza
Zambrano for outstanding research assistance. We acknowledge financial support from the Alianza EFI-Colombia Cient´ıfica grant No. 60185 and
FP44842-220-2018, from the Smith Institute for Political Economy and Philosophy at Chapman University, and the John Templeton Foundation
(22-0179).
1 Introduction
Social norms prescribing and proscribing behavior influence decision-making over a broad range of
domains, from compliance with laws, to gender roles related to labor market outcomes (Acemoglu
and Jackson, 2017; Bernhardt et al., 2018; Bursztyn et al., 2020; Jayachandran, 2021; Miller et
al., 2022a,b). Norms are well suited to explain why economic decisions are context-dependent
and culturally variable. Their explanatory power outperforms other behavioral accounts of why
small changes in choice sets or framing lead to sizable changes in behavior (e.g. Dana et al., 2007;
List, 2007), why decisions exhibit pronounced audience effects (Bursztyn and Yang, 2022), and
why incentivizing pro-social behavior may backfire (Gneezy and Rustichini, 2000; Bowles and
Polania-Reyes, 2012).
Social norms assign a key role to a well-defined class of beliefs: shared expectations over the
appropriate course of action. While the literature has devoted considerable attention to examin-
ing the measurement of factual beliefs (Danz et al., 2022; Charness et al., 2021; Holt and Smith,
2016; Schotter and Trevino, 2014), it seemed to overlook a comparative assessment of the meth-
ods to elicit normative expectations. As a first attempt in this endeavor, this paper develops an
experimental evaluation of the descriptive and predictive power of these methods.
We evaluate the two most prominent existing methods and introduce a novel one, developed
from the most up-to-date methodology for incentive-compatible measurement of beliefs. One
method (hereafter BX) follows from the work of Bicchieri (2006) and was first used by Bicchieri
and Xiao (2009). This method elicits normative beliefs directly using a two-stage approach. After
asking respondents to make a personal normative judgment in stage 1 about which action in a set
is normatively best, the second stage incentivizes them to guess the normative judgments reported
by others. Krupka and Weber (2013) introduced the second method (hereafter KW). This method
uses a pure coordination game to elicit shared beliefs about the social appropriateness of different
actions. Respondents are incentivized to match the modal response of others in their group. The
instructions are designed to spur respondents to use shared normative beliefs as a focal point.
These methods differ in the kind of information they collect about normative beliefs: The KW method offers
We compare the performance of KW, BX, and a new, intuitive, and incentive-compatible
method that attempts to bridge the gap between them. This new method elicits the entire dis-
tribution of normative expectations. It layers a binarized scoring method (BSM) of Hossain and
Okui (2013) upon the two-step approach of BX. In the first step, individuals have a budget of 100
tokens to allocate across a set of available actions in a given scenario according to their own be-
liefs about their relative moral worthiness. In the second step, they are asked to predict the average
distribution of tokens produced by other respondents. This second step is incentivized via a binary
lottery mechanism that pays a large prize with a probability that increases with how close their
prediction is to the actual distribution. The results from the second step thus give us a measure of
beliefs about the entire distribution of normative expectations. More importantly, this distribution
captures the relative intensity of personal normative beliefs, thus allowing the results to be used
within a norm-dependent utility model and facilitating the classification of types according to their
perceived injunctive norm profile (Aycinena et al., 2022a; Kimbrough et al., 2021).
We report controlled experiments that randomize the method used to elicit normative expec-
tations for three dictator game (DG) variants and a set of vignettes describing naturally occurring
situations governed by social norms. The variants of the dictator game allow us to test whether
norms vary as expected across contexts and -more importantly- to assess the predictive value of the
norms elicited by each method when used in models of norm-dependent utility. We elicit norms us-
ing each method for three dictator game variants that vary the source of the endowment (unearned,
earned by dictator, earned by receiver) in a way that has been shown to produce causal effects
on the distribution of dictator choices (Oxoby and Spraggon, 2008; Cherry et al., 2002). Subse-
quently, we run an auxiliary experiment on a separate sample drawn from the same subject pool
to collect behavioral data on the three variants of the dictator game. We then feed the normative
expectations elicited over the dictator game variants from the three methods into a norm-dependent
estimates of the degree of appropriateness of all actions in the set, while the BX method offers data on the share of
people seeing each action as most appropriate.
With a similar aim, Dimant (2023) elicits the distributions of normative expectations using a quadratic scoring
rule (QSR). The BSR has theoretical and empirical advantages over QSR, as BSR remains incentive-compatible under
weaker assumptions about preferences and reports probabilities more accurately than QSR, especially with risk-averse
subjects (Hossain and Okui, 2013).
utility model and examine their relative predictive power for observed behavior.
The vignettes represent a proof of concept. We describe to subjects several real-life scenarios
and associated action sets for which ethnographic observation offers relatively strong priors on
norms. One scenario involves a clear norm (tipping), others depict situations in which the norm
should be sensitive to contextual cues (greetings), one includes competing sources of normativity,
and the last is a placebo to test for false positives.
We observe strong evidence of differences in elicited norms across the methods in the dictator
games. Building upon the KW approach, we use the elicited normative expectations under each
method to estimate a norm-dependent utility model and assess the model’s fit to observed behavior
in dictator games from a separate sample. We find that the elicited normative beliefs differ some-
what across methods, and those elicited via the KW method offer the best fit to the data (with the
BSM method a close second). We go beyond putting “the horse (norm) before the cart (behav-
ior)” (Krupka and Weber, 2013, p. 496) as we run a horse-drawn cart race between predictions
implied by the norms elicited under each of the methods. Since normative expectations are not
directly comparable to behavior, we combine the normative expectations within a norm-dependent
utility model and estimate the model’s parameters on a random subset of data. Then, we assess the
predicted distribution of choices relative to observed choices in the testing sample. We find that,
within a norm-dependent utility model, the KW method outperforms the other methods regarding
predictive power.
In the vignette studies, all three methods perform well in identifying shared norms when they
are clear (tipping, greeting). Moreover, all three methods identify multiple normative views when
expected (e.g., in our dress code and parenting vignettes). However, we also find that the new
method we propose is less sensitive than BX to the risk of false positives, i.e., detecting a norm
when, in fact, there is none.
After describing the methods in the next section, the following describes the experimental
design. Section four presents the results, and section five presents a discussion and conclusions.
The horse-race approach to norm elicitation methods is similar, in spirit, to that of Trautmann and van de Kuilen
(2015) to test belief elicitation methods.
2 The Norm Elicitation Methods
Conceptually, social norms reflect shared expectations among a specific group of people about the
appropriateness of certain actions in a particular context. These higher-order beliefs are referred to
as normative expectations (or perceived injunctive norms).
The existing methods are plausibly effective techniques for eliciting higher-order normative
beliefs. However, they differ in the kind of information they collect about normative expectations.
We explain below the three methods and the information we recover from each method.
2.1 The BX method
BX uses a two-step approach to elicit second-order normative beliefs. The first stage is an unin-
centivized elicitation of Personal Normative Beliefs (PNB) regarding a situation. It asks subjects
to make a personal normative judgment (i.e., first-order or personal normative beliefs) about the
most appropriate action in a particular context. The second stage incentivizes them to guess the
normative judgments reported by others, i.e., to guess the action that most individuals from a ref-
erence group selected as the most appropriate action when reporting their personal beliefs in the
first stage. That is, step two is an incentivized elicitation of second-order beliefs regarding oth-
ers’ responses to the PNB question (e.g., normative expectations Bicchieri (2006)). Thus, this
method captures the extensive margin of expectations regarding the most appropriate action –the
proportion of members of a group who believe an action to be the most appropriate.
An advantage of the BX method is that it intrinsically offers direct evidence on peoples’ own
views about what is appropriate. This allows detecting instances where individuals might recognize
that there exists a social norm which is nevertheless not prescriptive for them (e.g. as when an
This approach is similar to the second-order belief elicitation approaches of Dufwenberg and Gneezy (2000);
Charness and Dufwenberg (2006); Vanberg (2008); Manski and Neri (2013). The main difference, besides incentive
rules, is that BX anchors second-order beliefs on personal normative beliefs in the first stage, while the others anchor
the second stage on factual beliefs about behavior in strategic settings.
The original BX method elicits the singleton (most appropriate action) in both the first and second stage. We
modify the second stage to recover the distribution of second-order beliefs over the singleton in the first stage. This
allows us to better compare it with the BSM elicitation and to filter the normative expectations within the norm-
dependent utility model -with a different interpretation.
individual travels abroad and recognizes that local customs differ from their own), or instances of
pluralistic ignorance, where shared but privately held personal normative beliefs differ from shared
perceived injunctive norms (see Bicchieri and Dimant, 2019; Bursztyn et al., 2020).
2.2 The KW method
KW uses an incentivized coordination game to elicit shared beliefs about the social appropriate-
ness of each outcome. It is underpinned by the assumption that widely shared normative beliefs
can serve as a focal point to resolve the coordination game, thus revealing higher-order normative
expectations. Subjects are incentivized to match the modal response given by other participants
(regarding the social appropriateness of each outcome). The ranking typically uses a four-item
scale with labelled categories: Very Socially Inappropriate, Somewhat Socially Inappropriate,
Somewhat Socially Appropriate, Very Socially Appropriate. Thus, this method captures the in-
tensive margin of normative expectations for each action; that is, the modal expected degree of
appropriateness for each possible action within a set.
These estimates of the degree of appropriateness of all actions in the set offer an advantage,
as they make elicitation output readily compatible with norm-dependent utility specifications, in
which decisions are modeled as utility maximization with preferences that reflect a trade-off be-
tween material self-interest and normative appropriateness (Krupka and Weber, 2013; Kimbrough
and Vostroknutov, 2016). To see what is at stake, consider two cases; in both, action A is unani-
mously recognized as the most appropriate while action B yields the highest payoff. In one case,
action B is slightly less appropriate than A; in the other, action B is seen as extremely inappropri-
ate. Under a norm-dependent utility model, data generated by the KW method can account for the
fact that people may resolve those trade-offs differently in the first case than in the second, but data
generated by the BX method cannot.
This approach is similar to others that leverage focal points in coordination games to capture shared social percep-
tions, such as Von Ahn and Dabbish (2005); Von Ahn (2006) to label images and as a fulcrum to human computation,
?Houser and Xiao (2011) to classify natural language, or Engle-Warnick and Soroka (2009) to rate the tone of news.
While for BX it is clear it captures second-order normative beliefs, for KW it is unclear the level of higher order
normative beliefs it recovers.
2.3 The BSM method
The BSM method attempts to recover the full distribution of the relative intensive margin per-
sonal normative beliefs and, in an incentive-compatible way, the full distribution of second-order
normative beliefs.
The method works as follows. Define the distribution of personal normative beliefs, D, as
the distribution of M data points across a discrete and finite set of distinct K options: D =
(cid:80)
K ˆ
{m , . . . , m }, where m = M . The method aims to elicit the predicted distribution: D =
1 K i
i=1
(cid:80)
{mˆ , . . . , mˆ }, where mˆ = M .
1 K i
i=1
To incentivize the subjects, we draw one option j and pay the participants π probability points
based on prediction accuracy. These probability points are translated into money through a lottery
that pays A with probability π /M and a with probability 1 − π /M . π = M if mˆ = m ,
j j j j j
otherwise π = min{mˆ , m }.
j j j
As long as A strictly dominates a, a subject will always prefer the lottery with a higher chance
of winning regardless of risk attitudes, reference-dependence, or probability weighting. Since
truth-telling induces the only lottery that maximizes the probability of winning, incentive compat-
ibility is ensured. We provide a formal proof in Appendix A.
Adapting it to elicit normative expectations, the BSM method can be implemented within a
two-step approach like the BX, with the following procedure:
0. Subject i read a vignette, describing the scenario and the action space (K) available to the
decision-maker.
1. In the first step, subject i must allocate M = 100 tokens across the action space available
to the DM, according to their belief over the normative appropriateness of each action. This
gives i’s believed distribution of the relative normative appropriateness over the K potential
actions.
When developing our design we were inspired by the Belief Elicitation by Superimposition Approach [BESA] of
Fragiadakis et al. (2019).
2. In the second step, they are asked to predict the average distribution of token allocation by
a well-defined reference group. 9 This gives i’s full distribution of the second-order beliefs
regarding the average relative normative appropriateness over the K potential actions.
Participants evaluate R situations, each with a description of the context and k actions available
to the decision-makers to be evaluated and predicted. Then, a binarized lottery determines the
payment.
Like BX, BSM offers information on both personal normative beliefs and normative expecta-
tions; however, BSM recovers the full distribution of both. Like KW, BSM focuses on the intensive
margin and captures the normative beliefs about the relative appropriateness from a set of actions. 10
This allows the results from this approach to be used naturally with norm-dependent utility mod-
els. Furthermore, the method is flexible enough to be implemented using intuitive pencil and paper
protocols (Fragiadakis et al., 2019), or in computerized interfaces via the “distribution builder”
approach of Crosetto and de Haan (2023).
3 Experimental Design
For this experiment, we use data from two sources: in the main experiment, we elicited norma-
tive beliefs; in the auxiliary experiment, we collected data on dictator game behavior to test the
predictive power of the beliefs elicited in the main experiment.
The main experiment was part of a larger project. This project consisted of laboratory sessions
with a nested between-subject design. Participants were assigned to treatment A or B. Both treat-
ments included part I and part II, each with different sub-treatments. The norms data for this
paper comes from part II of the experiments.
In the experiment, they predict the average distribution of ten randomly selected subjects in their session.
It differs in that the relative appropriateness under BSM is constrained (by the token budget set), while it is
unconstrained for KW. In addition, KW can recover (negative or positive) valence of the actions; under BSM that is
not possible.
In part I, we elicit normative beliefs for one of two variants of the dictator game, with half of the subjects assigned
to each dictator variant. We use the KW protocol for treatment A and the BX protocol for B. The data from part I are
reported and analyzed in Aycinena et al. (2023b,a). Full details of the experimental design and protocols are available
in Online Appendix B.
In part II of treatments A and B, we elicit normative beliefs for a set of vignettes depicting
everyday interactions and two additional variants of the dictator game, using the norm elicitation
method to which they were not exposed in part I. See Section 3.2 for details on the vignettes. The
variants of the dictator game used in part II include whichever variant a subject was not asked
about in part I and a third condition, called P2-Earned, where the receiver earned the money.
Our data consist of N = 228 and N = 219 subjects who had norms elicited via the BX
BX BSM
and BSM methods in part II of Treatment A, plus N = 103 subjects who had norms elicited
KW
via the KW method in part II of Treatment B.
All subjects reported their normative beliefs for M different scenarios. The first and last sce-
narios were two different dictator game variants that they had not seen before, the other M − 2
scenarios were drawn randomly from a set of 17 vignettes depicting everyday interactions. The
action space in the dictator games included 11 possible actions: sending 0, 10%, . . . , 100% to the
counterpart. The action spaces for the vignettes varied depending on the context. Vignettes were
presented in random order, as was the list of actions in each situation, except for those like the
dictator game in which actions are naturally ordered. In those cases, the actions are randomized in
decreasing or increasing order.
In the BX and BSM methods, we elicit personal normative beliefs for nine scenarios first, and
then we elicit normative expectations. In the KW method, we only elicit normative expectations
for 19 scenarios. The measurement of normative expectation is incentivized under all three meth-
ods, with one of the nine situations randomly selected to determine payment. In BX, subjects
are paid COP20, 000 if they correctly guess the (singleton) personal normative beliefs of 10 other
randomly selected subjects and nothing otherwise. In BSM, subjects reported their PNBs by dis-
tributing 100 tokens across the action space according to the “moral worthiness” of each action.
Their payment then depends on how accurately they estimate the average token allocation made
by ten other randomly selected subjects across each action: subjects again receive 100 tokens, and
they are incentivized by a lottery that pays COP30, 000 with probability p and COP5, 000 with
Treatment A also included 3 other sub-treatments that varied methodological aspects of the KW protocol (Ayci-
nena et al., 2023a); here we focus on the standard KW sub-treatment.
probability 1 − p, where p is equal to the minimum of the average number of tokens allocated
in the first part by ten randomly selected subjects, divided by 100, and the subject’s estimate of
that average, divided by 100. In KW, participants are paid COP30, 000 only if their estimate of
the “social appropriateness”, on a 4-point Likert scale, of one randomly chosen action matches the
most common response given by ten other participants.
3.1 Dictator Game Norms
We elicit norms in 3 variants of the widely studied dictator game that differ in how the initial
endowment is allocated. We include the Unearned variant (Forsythe et al., 1994; Hoffman et al.,
1994), in which the endowment is a provisional joint allocation exogenously given by the exper-
imenter; the P1-Earned (P1E) variant (Cherry et al., 2002), in which the dictator has earned the
endowment; and the P2-Earned (P2E) variant (Oxoby and Spraggon, 2008), in which the receiver
has earned the endowment. In the P1E (P2E) dictator game, the instructions state that player 1
(player 2) has earned the money being divided by correctly answering 10 out of 17 GMAT prob-
lems in 45-minute, while it is commonly known that player 2 (player 1) arrived at the lab 45
minutes after the dictator.
3.2 Vignette Norms
This paper uses 7 of the 18 vignettes for which we elicited normative expectations. We look at
(a) one vignette about tipping, where a known norm exists; (b) three vignettes depicting greetings,
where there are norms that vary with contextual cues; (c) one vignette about parenting, where
two competing norms coexist; and (d) two vignettes about clothing choices, where we manipulate
whether there is a norm at all.
3.3 Auxiliary Experiment: Dictator Games
To evaluate the predictive validity of the normative expectations obtained under each method,
we conducted auxiliary experiments to observe behavior in the three dictator games for which
we elicited norms: Unearned, P1E, and P2E. As discussed below, this allows us to test whether
changes in normative beliefs predict changes in observed behavior across treatments via the esti-
mation of a norm-dependent utility model.
In the Unearned treatment, participants arrived at the laboratory, where they were provisionally
given a sum of COP100, 000. The dictators had the choice of sending either 0 or any multiple
of COP10, 000 to the recipients. The instructions closely correspond to those used in the norm
elicitation experiment.
In the P1E and P2E treatments, half of the subjects were summoned to the laboratory one
hour earlier and were given a questionnaire containing 17 GMAT-type problems. If they man-
aged to solve at least ten problems within 45 minutes, they were given a provisional allocation
of COP100, 000 and were informed that the final distribution of the sum would be determined by
themselves or others at a later stage. If they failed to solve ten problems correctly, they were allo-
cated COP20, 000. After this stage, the remaining half of the subjects were permitted to enter the
laboratory (one hour later). These subjects took part only in the dictator phase, with the same set
of options as the Unearned treatment. The only distinction between P1E and P2E was who earned
the endowment: in P1E, the dictator had earned the money by answering the GMAT questions; in
P2E, it was the receiver who had earned the money.
We analyze the data of 85 Dictators (21 subjects for the Unearned treatment, 24 for the P1
Earned, and 20 for the P2 Earned) who play with an endowment of COP100, 000, matching the
high-stakes protocol described in the norm elicitation experiment.
The experiment was programmed in oTree (Chen et al., 2016), and the problem set questionnaire in Google Forms.
All subjects received an additional COP10, 000 for participation. Sessions were run at REβEL, drawing from the same
subject pool but excluding participants from the Main Experiment.
4 Results
4.1 Dictator Games
First, we present the normative expectations revealed by the three methods for each Dictator Game
(DG) variant. Specifically, for the Unearned, P1-Earned, and P2-Earned versions, we report the
distribution of the average normative expectations across actions according to BX and BSM on the
left vertical axis. For the KW method, we include an auxiliary vertical axis that encodes the social
All three methods indicate that giving 50% to the recipient is the normatively most appropriate
action in the Unearned variant, although to different degrees. In the P1-Earned variant, normative
expectations are highest for keeping the entire endowment according to BX and BSM, and for
keeping 90% according to KW. Note that the difference in mean social acceptability for any amount
between 0%-40$ is fairly small for KW. There is a larger discrepancy in the normative expectations
across methods for the P2-Earned variant. BSM and BX both agree that giving 50% is normatively
best, with a second peak at giving 100%. KW points to giving 60% as most appropriate and rates all
“generous” actions as socially appropriate, with relatively small differences among the 50%-90%.
The small differences between them may be due to the different margins of normative infor-
mation recovered by each method. Following Krupka and Weber (2013), we predict Dictators’
choices using a norm-dependent utility model that trades off the monetary payoffs (π) and the
normative appropriateness (N ) of different actions (a , ∀j ∈ {1, ..., 11}), according to the relative
weights (β, γ) individuals assign to each: 14
U (a ) = β π(a ) + γN (a ) (1)
j j j
To estimate the parameters β and γ, we combine the data from the main and the auxiliary
experiments. We pool the behavioral data (of the auxiliary experiment) from all three DG variants,
transform it into a panel with eleven dummies (the action set) per dictator game, and merge it
with the mean normative expectation for each action of each dictator game. With this data, we
estimate for each elicitation method the parameters β and γ using a conditional logit choice model
where the dependent variable is the observed choice (from the auxiliary experiment) by individual
i taking part in Dictator Game d.
The model includes two regressors: First, the payoffs (in thousands of COP) corresponding to
each action, π(a ), which are known and invariant across all DGs. Second, the mean normative
expectation, N a ), for each action in each DG variant elicited using each of the methods. 15 That is,
( j
we leverage the variation in normative expectations (and behavior) across DG variants to estimate
β and γ for each t ∈ {KW, BX, BSM }. The estimated β and γ parameters allow us to predict
t t t t
Dictator choices based on model (1) and compare how the predictions fit the observed choices
from our auxiliary experiment.
of behavior in each dictator game using the normative expectations from each elicitation method.
Visual inspection suggests that the norm-dependent utility model captures the observed data rea-
sonably well. Regardless of the elicitation method used to recover the normative beliefs, the fitted
This norm-dependent model was jointly proposed with the KW method to consider trade-offs along the intensive
margin of normative expectations. Given the different margins of normative expectations captured by each method,
the interpretation of the trade-off within the utility function must differ across methods.
Since we collect incentivized empirical expectations by the recipients in the DG, we also run a version of each
model including empirical, in addition to normative expectations, as regressors. We find that in this specification,
empirical expectations are not statistically significant.
distribution captures the observed peaks at 50-50 in the Unearned and P2-Earned treatments and
at 0 (followed by 10%) in the P1-Earned treatment. The fitted distributions also reflect the relative
absence of inequality-increasing generosity in the Unearned and P1-Earned variants.
Unearned P1-Earned
P2-Earned Pooled
We test which method yields normative expectation reports that, when filtered through the
norm-dependent utility model, best fit the observed data using the Akaike information criterion
(AIC). Using the pooled data, the AIC favors KW, but this advantage is only significant relative to
BX.
Next, we move the horse race from fit to out-of-sample prediction. Using again the elicited
normative expectations from the main experiment and the behavioral data from the auxiliary ex-
periment within the framework in model (1), we repeat the following exercise 1000 times: first, we
randomly split the data into a training set (50%) and a testing set (50%). Then, we use the training
set to estimate parameters β and γ. Next, we use the estimated parameters in the training set to
predict choice probabilities P (a ), ∀j = 1, . . . , 11, for each observation in the testing set. Finally,
we translate these probabilities into a predicted action (A ) for each observation (i) in the testing
set and compute the mean absolute distance between the observed (A ) and predicted actions:
(cid:88)
M AD = |A − A | (2)
i=1
We consider two ways of translating those probabilities into a predicted action (A i) for each
individual: (1) the realization rule, randomly drawing A ∼ P (a ), j = 1, . . . , k, and (2) the max
i i j
rule, choosing A = arg max P (a ). 17
i a ,j=1,...,11 i j
KW, 21.60 for BSM, and 23.14 for BX (all pairwise Mann-Whitney tests z ≥ 9.7, p < 0.0001).
Results are similar using the max rule to compute predicted actions: median MAD is 12.96 for KW,
13.33 for BSM, and 16.48 for BX; all differences are statistically significant (MW: z > 11.9, p <
0.0001), but the difference in accuracy between KW and BSM is economically small (0.98%). 18
4.2 Qualitative evidence from the vignettes
As mentioned above, our vignettes offer an opportunity to assess aspects of the external validity of
the three norm elicitation techniques.
Our first vignette asks about the appropriate tip at a restaurant, offering options from 0% to
AICs are 227.36 (KW), 229.18 (BSM), 245.29 (BX).
Appendix C explores an alternative rule for robustness along with more detailed statistics and analysis.
As we show in Appendix C, results do not vary if we add empirical expectations as a regressor to the estimation.
Realization Rule Max Rule
norm-dependent utility model for the Dictator Games.
50%, and assesses whether the methods can recover naturally occurring norms. In Colombia, tips
are regulated by law (Bill 1935 of 2018). The tip is voluntary; the business can ask whether to
include the tip (not to exceed 10%) in the bill. As a result, most businesses follow the rule of
asking and including 10%. It is extremely uncommon to refuse the tip, although this is based on
the authors’ own experience. As a conservative hypothesis, we expect data to reveal that the most
The next three vignettes examine greetings, allowing us to assess whether the methods readily
identify context-dependent variation in norms. Greeting norms tend to be highly contingent: small
changes in context evoke different scripts, and deviating from the script can be socially awkward.
In Latino cultures, it is customary to kiss on the cheek a female friend; in Italy it is customary even
among males; in Japan, both would be extremely inappropriate. In Colombia, greeting norms are
usually very gendered and depend on the context and the social ties among the persons involved.
Ideally, methods designed to elicit normative expectations should reveal norms that are sensi-
tive to those cues. Thus, we designed one vignette in which someone encounters an acquaintance (a
classmate), another in which someone encounters a close friend during the pre-pandemic era, and a
Tipping: a. 0%, b. (cid:15), c. 5%, d. 10%, e. 15%, f. 20%, g. 25%, h. 30%, i. 40%, j. 50%
Greeting: a. avoid visual contact and continue walking; b. nod at the visual contact by W, without
waving or saying anything, and continue walking; c. smile, wave at W from a distance and continue
walking; d. stop, greet, and shake hands with W and continue walking; e. stop and greet W without any
physical contact; f. stop, greet, and hug W; g. stop, greet and kiss W on one cheek; h. stop, greet and kiss
W on both cheeks; i. stop, greet and kiss W three times, alternating cheeks; j. stop, greet and kiss W on the
lips; k. (only for the COVID case) to take the mask off and verbally greet W (without physical contact).
Play Date: a. tell S a lie about how she needs his help with some chores in order to prevent him
from going b. allow S to go play at his friend’s house c. allow S to go, but forbid him to accept any food
d. not allow S to go to his friend’s place, but invite S’s friend to play at his house e. order S to end his
relationship with his school friend
Dress Code: a. go to class in pajamas? b. go to class in sweatpants and a T-shirt? c. go to class
wearing shorts and a T-shirt? d. go to class wearing jeans and a T-shirt? e. go to class in a formal suit and
tie? f. go to class in a tuxedo?
Dress Placebo: a. white, b. red, c. blue, d. black, e. green, f. yellow
third in which the close friend encounter happens during the COVID-19 pandemic when masking
and social distancing were common. Apart from the words acquaintance (vs. close friend) and
The municipality of Bogota collected evidence related to social distancing and other COVID-19
restrictions, documenting compliance rates above 90% (SDCRD, 2021b,a). Thus, we expect to see
reduced appropriateness of physical contact going from the close friend to acquaintance vignettes
and from the pre-COVID to during-COVID vignettes. This is consistent with the evidence shown
most appropriate action, but in both treatments, the normatively appropriate actions shift to those
that involve minimal physical contact, which suggests that the methods are sensitive to contextual
changes in norms.
Having shown that all three methods successfully recover norms in simple cases, we now con-
sider a more complicated situation in which there are competing norms. In the Play Date vignette,
a kid receives an invitation to visit a friend’s house in a squatter neighborhood, and we elicit norms
about the response by the mother. The setting creates a conflict between a social norm of protect-
ing the family in an objectively perilous environment and a norm of non-discriminatory behavior,
which would cause one to avoid offending the family who extended the invitation. Another assess-
ment of external validity asks whether the norm elicitation protocol can detect both of these norms.
Our final assessment concerns false positives: instances in which a method yields reports of a
shared normative expectation when, in fact, all actions in the set are normatively neutral. We elicit
norms for two scenarios depicting decisions about what clothes to wear to a university class. One
of the vignettes includes options that differ in appropriateness: the Dress Code vignette compares
appropriate casual options (e.g. jeans and a t-shirt) to inappropriate ways of under- or over-dressing
(e.g., pajamas or a tuxedo). In the other version, instead, respondents should be normatively indif-
ferent between all options: in the Dress Placebo vignette, the student plans to wear a t-shirt, and
the action space is limited to the choice of what color shirt to wear (white, red, blue, black, green,
and yellow).
it with the Dress Placebo vignette in 4(g). While the former distribution should be non-uniform,
the latter should be approximately uniform. Visual inspection reveals that all three methods favor
the casual options in the Dress Code vignette, but only KW and BSM yield reports visually con-
sistent with the hypothesis of normative neutrality in the Placebo vignette. The fact that the BX
method forces respondents to choose a singleton normative belief seems to induce false consensus
in situations where all actions are, in fact, equally appropriate.
5 Discussion
The incorporation of social norms in economics shares parallels with the incorporation of tech-
nological change-driven factor productivity. While economists have recognized its existence for
a long time, its formal incorporation has required advances along several steps: the development
of the conceptual framework and refining an operational definition, followed by empirical work
that first assumes it, then infers it, and finally measures it. Each step requires several advances,
including the development and evaluation of the instruments used for empirical measurement.
In this article, we systematically evaluate the methods developed to measure normative expec-
tations and report results from experiments in which we elicit normative expectations using three
methods: the well-known BX and KW methods (Bicchieri and Xiao, 2009; Krupka and Weber,
2013), and a new BSM method, which ensures the elicitation of the entire distribution of nor-
mative expectations is incentive-compatible. Overall, all methods perform fairly well and we
highlight some potential modifications to mitigate some weaknesses.
We show that all three methods can detect externally validated norms, normatively salient
cues, and changes in norms that track changes in context. For example, in the case of greetings,
normative expectations adjust to account for the effects of COVID-19 or whether the decision-
Although the methods are somewhat malleable and can be modified, our examination focuses on common imple-
mentations of these.
maker is interacting with an acquaintance instead of a friend. These methods are also robust in
situations involving competing norms, as demonstrated in our play date vignette.
However, the BX method may produce a false consensus in cases where no norm exists. In
our “placebo” vignette, where all actions are normatively equivalent, participants still identify one
action as a norm under BX. We believe this is because PNBs are elicited as singletons using a
forced choice instrument. To support this view, this false consensus effect dissipates when we
allow subjects to report the relative moral worthiness of all possible actions in the first step of the
elicitation in BSM. Thus, the BSM achieves this, and false consensus is reduced as in the KW
method. In this sense, BSM can be seen as an upgrade of the BX method.
In addition, we combine the normative expectations elicited across three variants of the dicta-
tor game (Forsythe et al., 1994; Cherry et al., 2002; Oxoby and Spraggon, 2008), with observed
behavior in each variant. With this combined data and a norm-dependent utility model we conduct
a horserace of norm-elicitation methods. The results show that within the norm-dependent utility
model, KW outperforms BX in both fitting and predicting observed behavior. It also outperforms
BSM in predicting behavior, by a smaller margin.
The different methods capture different margins of normative expectations: BX returns the
predicted proportion of individuals who believe each action to be the most socially appropriate.
KW returns the expected modal degree of social appropriateness for each action, and the new
BSM method returns the predicted mean of (constrained) relative moral appropriateness assigned
to each action. This paper sheds light on the properties, strengths and weaknesses of each method.
These strengths and weaknesses, together with the relevant conceptual framework and margins of
interest for researchers, should guide the appropriate use and modifications.
In some instances, the researchers may be more concerned with the intensive margin of normative expectations
(Aycinena et al., 2022b), while in others, they may be more concerned with the extensive margin (Dimant et al., 2023).