Modelling and explaining readiness to act against climate change
by integrating individual and system-related behaviours
1,2 1,2 1,2 3,1 1,2 2,1
Betsch* , C., Geiger* , M., Lehrer , L., Sprengholz , P., Temme , H., & Jenny , M.A.
Implementation Science, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Germany
Institute for Planetary Health Behaviour, University of Erfurt, Germany
Institute of Psychology, University of Bamberg, Germany
Corresponding author
Cornelia Betsch
Health Communication, Implementation Research
Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Germany
Bernhard-Nocht-Straße 74, 20359 Hamburg, Germany
cornelia.betsch@bnitm.de
*Shared first-authorship
Note: This is a preprint and has not been peer reviewed yet.
Abstract
Until now, behavioural science in the climate change field has focused mainly on understanding
and changing individual behaviours. However, in order to broaden the spectrum of behaviours to
acknowledge the need for systemic change, this paper introduces a novel model showing that a
trait-like ‘readiness to act against climate change’ explains variation in a broad spectrum of
behaviours: past individual high-emission behaviour, acceptance of climate change mitigation
policies and political participation for societal change to mitigate climate change. The model
underwent rigorous validation (N = 6,041) by psychometrically evaluating measurement
instruments and testing the explanatory power of a comprehensive set of predictors, including
perceived health risks, trust in institutions, social norms, perceived effectiveness of political
measures, self-efficacy and knowledge. This contribution offers theoretical advancement,
innovative measures bridging climate and social science, and a large dataset allowing
recommendations on how to advance climate action.
Main Text
To address urgent climate challenges, it is imperative to instigate climate-friendly
behaviours. International bodies such as the United Nations (UN), the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC), and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
1–3
(OECD) emphasise that using evidence from the behavioural sciences is crucial to drive the
necessary changes and to “deploy mitigation options at scale” . Demand-side changes could
indeed deliver 40–70% of the necessary greenhouse gas emission reductions by 2050 .
Understanding what makes people ready to act to mitigate climate change is therefore a focal
endeavour—and behavioural science can play an important part in supporting this process.
Environmentally significant behaviours take place in several levels : environmental
activism, non-activist public sphere behaviours (including policy support), and private-sphere
environmentalism. Research from the past decades has made clear that it is necessary to
transcend the individualistic approach, which mainly focuses on private-sphere behaviours. It has
become apparent that industries that emit large amounts of CO have used the focus on
individual responsibility to divert attention from system change, such as alterations to tax codes
5,6
and other regulation . Further, the work focusing on individual behaviours has been criticised for
missing out on the most impactful behaviours . While we do not aim at artificially dichotomizing
the individual-level focused i-frame with a system-level focused s-frame , we acknowledge that
behavioural science should indeed focus on a broader categorization of behaviour directed at
fighting climate change, including policy acceptance and political participation .
While much research exists aimed at explaining single specific behaviours (e.g. reducing
8,9 10,11
car use or eating less meat ), efforts have also been undertaken to categorise and
summarise behaviours on a higher level. Sustainable behaviours, for example, have been factor-
analytically classified as belonging to categories such as food, goods, transportation and
engagement . That work, however, also suggests that behaviours correlate even across
categories (see also ), indicating that there may be higher-order factors affecting the occurrence
of these behaviours. Analogies have been drawn to personality research, in which “empirical
methods have been used to map the structure of a system of variables” (p. 10173). In other
words, behaviours may be part of a hierarchical structure “with a very broad dimension at the top
that indicates the general tendency to behave sustainably” (p. 10190). Here, building upon the
work of previous scholars, we propose and test such a model (Fig. 1), which assumes that a trait-
like inclination, the general readiness to act against climate change, underlies a wide range of
behaviours on various levels. In addition, we propose a set of relevant predictors explaining
individual differences in readiness to act (Fig. 2, upper panel). We will now define the constructs
contribution to the discussion and what added value can be derived from the work.
We define readiness to act as a trait-like latent construct with three indicator groups: past
individual high-emission behaviour (labelled individual behaviour), acceptance of climate change
mitigation policies (policy acceptance), and political participation for societal change to mitigate
climate change (political participation). Each indicator group consists of a number of sub-groups
(e.g. individual behaviour consists of housing, mobility, food and other consumption behaviours,
Fig. 1), which, in turn, subsume a variety of single behaviours. This principle applies to all three
indicator groups of readiness to act.
Individual behaviour (i.e. private-sphere environmentalism) may be assessed using future
behavioural intentions or past behaviours. Many models focus on the intention to show a certain
14–18
behaviour as a meaningful predictor of behaviour . Recognising the significant intention–
behaviour gap documented in prior research and the fact that past behaviour is a good predictor
of future behaviour , we decided to incorporate self-reported frequencies of past behaviours as
7,21
an indicator of readiness to act. In addition, we have included only impactful behaviours . This
integration also addresses the limitations associated with previous measures assessing frequent
but not impactful behaviours (e.g. switching off lights) .
Policy acceptance is an important non-activist public sphere trait for integrating a
2,9
systems-related perspective . Policy acceptance is often considered a similar construct to
22,23
political attitudes, as both relate to evaluative responses towards certain objects or proposals .
Instead of collecting data on existing system-level factors that may facilitate or inhibit behaviour
(e.g. the existence of public transport in rural areas), we include the malleable component of
system-level factors : the acceptance of potential future policies (e.g. the expansion of public
transport). Policies may range from taxation adjustments via regulating the use of gas and coal
for heating to investing in climate-friendly infrastructure. Yet, in democracies, such policies must
25–27
receive public acceptance to guarantee their sustainability, effectiveness and societal peace.
Fuel taxes, for example, although effective for reducing fuel use, partly triggered large protests
across France in 2018; carbon taxes were rejected by voters in Switzerland and Washington
State in the US because they were poorly designed, poorly communicated, and poorly
understood by the public . Thus, the model includes the acceptance of a wide range of policies
that are not yet implemented and thus maps potential political action on the system level.
Finally, in democracies, individuals can actively influence policy-making via political
28,29
participation (e.g. by voting or engaging in political discussions). This should also be
considered high-impact behaviour, as the potential for substantial impact on the system is
greatest when people participate in the political process . Thus, we assume that the frequency
with which people engage in political processes or discussions to achieve pro-environmental
changes is an indicator of their readiness to act.
We also strive to explain individual differences in readiness-to-act factors by proposing a
14–16,18,30–33 4,17,34,35
provides definitions of all included constructs, and Fig. 2 (upper panel) provides an overview of
the full model. In general, there are several models that can be used to predict climate change–
4,16,17,22,34
related behaviours that have been summarised elsewhere .
Many models assume that problem awareness is a prerequisite for climate action or
17,18,22
policy acceptance . Problem awareness means being aware of the causes and effects of
climate change. As done in other work, we assess this in the knowledge construct , assuming
that greater knowledge about climate change and its causes is related to higher readiness to
act . The second part of problem awareness, being aware of and alarmed by potential
consequences, is part of our risk construct. Many behavioural change theories (e.g. the health
31 30
belief model and the protection motivation theory ) assume that perceiving some kind of threat
or risk is necessary to instigate behaviour. By linking climate change to health risks, these
abstract and often distant risks become personally relevant. We therefore propose that the
perception of health risks due to climate change (the greater likelihood and severity of heat
15,16,30,31,33
waves, allergies, air pollution, etc.) affects readiness to act . The social-cognitive
37,38
approach focuses on personal agency and emphasises the role of self-efficacy and outcome
expectations. To exhibit climate-friendly behaviour, people indeed need to be able to perform it
14–16,18,32
without perceiving relevant barriers . Self-efficacy is therefore included as a predictor,
representing the psychological translation of experiencing individual and system-related
14,18,30,39
barriers . Many psychological models that aim to explain environmental behaviours use a
40 41
strong focus on personal moral values (e.g. norm activation theory and value-beliefs-norms
theory). Indeed, numerous studies show that observing that others behave in a certain way or
17,18,32
feeling that others expect a certain behaviour can motivate behaviour . As empirical work
has shown that social norms are the most relevant predictor when looking at a wide range of
environmental behaviours on several levels (as we intend to do here), we selected social norms
as a predictor from this family of theories. Social norms are also included in other social cognitive
models of behavioural change, such as the theory of planned behaviour . Assuming that
mitigation policies are considered a means of coping with the health risks of climate change, a
greater perception of the effectiveness of these policies is expected to be related to higher
15,16,30,33,42
readiness to act (response efficacy ). Finally, as system change requires considerable
contributions from governments or scientific institutions, we suggest that trust in institutions is
22,32,43
related to higher readiness to act . Notably, the listed predictors aim to explain the readiness
to act (i.e. the shared variance of individual behaviour, policy acceptance and political
participation).
The theories mentioned above, of course, contain more variables related to pro-
environmental behaviours than are included here. Some of these are rather stable (such as
41 41
prosociality as an altruistic value in the value belief norm theory or world views ). In general,
we decided to include malleable rather than stable determinants to make the research especially
useful for change agents . If future research demonstrates the added value of including such
variables, they could be added in an update to the model.
12,17,22
The work presented here differs from previous work with similar goals in that we
consider generalizability theory . First, across many other models, behavioural intentions are the
dominant dependent variables. Their assessment is very similar to that of attitude-style predictor
measures. As a consequence, predictions of such models are at high risk of being inflated by
predictor-criterion contamination . We respond to this by using a different dependent construct,
readiness to act, with the discussed integration of behaviour on several levels . In addition, taking
into consideration that policy acceptance is similar to the attitude concept, we also avoid including
attitudes in the set of predictors to avoid predictor-criterion contamination. Second, most earlier
approaches (that of Hopwood and colleagues being a notable exception) lack a multivariate
approach. As such, they can only make predictions on the manifest variable level, not on the
latent construct level. That is, findings cannot generalise to overarching psychological traits but
12,46
are instead confounded by context-specific variation . Furthermore, earlier approaches cannot
distinguish different sources of variation in manifest variables (e.g. variance attributed to a
general underlying readiness to act factor and variance attributed to a specific individual
behaviour factor) or control for measurement error. The current model seeks to remedy these
shortcomings.
In summary, effectively addressing the climate crisis requires individual behavioural
change, systemic shifts supported by public acceptance of policies, and active political
participation by the population . While models exist that emphasise parts of these behavioural
47 22
levels (e.g. sustainability behaviour with or without engagement, policy acceptance or activism
as a facet of political participation ), we hypothesise that all three components can be integrated
in the overarching, trait-like construct of ‘readiness to act against climate change’. In addition, to
break silos and to assure the optimal and externally valid measurement of all constructs
representing the current state of the art in climate science, we integrate qualitative and
quantitative methods and data from a wide range of sources to create measures for these
constructs. These methods include interviews with climate experts and expert ratings and
psychometric methods informed the item sampling for the knowledge measure ; meta-heuristics
from computer science were applied on outcomes from the participatory process of the German
Civil Council on Climate to sample items for the policy acceptance measure ; CO tons emission
data drove decisions to select and weight relevant individual behaviours. Our use of these
methods responds to the call to integrate and theorise more solution-oriented work that explains
a wider range of behaviours and especially high-impact behaviours through a variety of
behavioural predictors, with strong emphasis on behavioural change potential and the scalability
5,12,24
of interventions .
Results
All items used in this work are derived from theory and were tested regarding their
psychometric properties . The scales represent the respective best versions obtained in an
iterative improvement process . The supplemental material provides a library containing all
scales with items and relevant psychometric information ; the supplementary analyses provide a
summary overview of the model fit for all constructs in Tables SM1 and SM2. The analysis used
data from N = 6,041 participants (six non-probabilistic quota samples representing the German
general adult population for the characteristics of age by gender and federal state , collected
between November 2022 and November 2023). As the complete set of predictors was only
available for four samples, analyses including the predictors used a subsample of n = 4,065. As
the readiness-to-act measurement model is strictly invariant across the six samples
Readiness-to-Act Measurement Model
Bivariate Pearson correlations across manifest aggregate scores for the three behaviour
types revealed significant correlations of up to medium size (individual behaviour and policy
acceptance: r = .497 (disattenuated correlation, i.e. correlations between the latent variables: ρ =
.718); individual behaviour and political participation: r = .171 (ρ = .393); policy acceptance and
political participation: r = .373 (ρ = .458). In all calculations, N = 6,041, ps < 0.001. These results
show a reasonably strong communality justifying a general readiness-to-act factor but also leave
room for specific factors explaining unique additional variance.
To test the idea of the existence of a general readiness-to-act trait underlying the
individual differences in the three behaviour types, we estimated a bifactor model, as shown in
Fig. 1. It includes a general readiness-to-act factor and three uncorrelated specific factors—
individual behaviour, policy acceptance and political participation—loading on the respective
indicators. To estimate factors without further constraints, at least three indicators per factor are
recommended. We therefore used the four formative scores from the individual behaviour sectors
individual behaviour and built similar parcels for policy acceptance and political participation. The
model had an acceptable to good fit (χ²(33) = 1226, CFI = .961, TLI = .936, RMSEA = .076,
SRMR = .042). Factor saturation for the readiness-to-act factor was acceptable (ω = .691). For
the specific factors, saturation was low for individual behaviour (ω = .129) and policy acceptance
(ω = .261) and acceptable for political participation (ω = .687). Lower saturation of the specific
factors is not surprising, as much variance in the items was already explained by the readiness-
to-act factor. Factor loadings, as shown in Fig. 1, were mostly large, with a few small but still
significant exceptions. The patterns of loadings indicate that readiness to act explained most
variance in policy acceptance and individual behaviour (as there were, on average, higher
readiness-to-act factor loadings than specific factor loadings) but explained relatively less
variance in political participation (as there were higher specific factor loadings than readiness-to-
act factor loadings). Yet, overall, the confirmatory factor analysis revealed good psychometric
properties of the readiness-to-act measurement model. Thus, the trait-like readiness to act
against climate change can be jointly captured by aspects of recent individual greenhouse gas
emission-related behaviours, the projected acceptance of potential future policies, and the
frequency with which people participate in the political process to improve climate protection.
Predictors of Readiness to Act
Bivariate latent correlations between potential predictors and the readiness-to-act factors
results from a latent-level multivariate regression analysis in a structural equations model. It
reveals differential predictor patterns for the general readiness to act compared to regressions
predicting the specific factors (i.e. the variance that remains after explaining the general
readiness to act). All factors significantly predicted readiness to act in the expected directions.
Effectiveness and knowledge had the greatest influence, followed by risk perception, trust, self-
efficacy and social norms. Specifically, knowledge was positively related to general readiness to
act, indicating that knowing about climate change and its consequences fosters readiness to act.
Interestingly, knowledge was negatively related to all specific factors, highlighting that high levels
of knowledge might be sufficient but not necessary for climate-protecting behaviours and
attitudes. Perceiving greater health risks due to climate change was most strongly and positively
related to policy acceptance and individual behaviour factors, suggesting that individuals who
perceive high risks to health due to climate change may try to reduce their climate impact and
approve greener policies.
Self-efficacy was most strongly and positively related to individual behaviour, which is not
surprising, because the items pertain to the ease with which certain behaviours can be shown.
People with high self-efficacy also tended to show less acceptance of policies and political
participation, indicating an individualised stance towards climate protection. Social norms had a
significant effect on political participation only, suggesting that people who tend to participate
politically also tend to be more affected by social norms. The perceived effectiveness of policies
had a strong positive relation with the readiness-to-act factor, making it a key factor for
interventions to foster readiness to act. Interestingly, we found a substantial negative relationship
of perceived policy effectiveness with individual behaviour, suggesting that some people assume
that acting against climate change is mainly a governmental duty but not an individual task, and
they are therefore not much engaged in reducing their own carbon footprint. Lastly, trust had the
strongest and most positive relationship with policy acceptance. Considering that trust refers to
trust in policy-makers and experts (e.g. scientists, doctors), this effect is highly plausible. The
negative relationship of trust with the readiness-to-act factor is best explained by multivariate
regression suppression effects, supported by the positive bivariate correlation of trust with
also considered sociodemographic variables in the regression model (including age, gender,
income, education increased R² of all factors by less than 5%; see Tables SM4 to SM7 in the
supplementary analyses) . This is in line with previous findings showing that the cumulative
variance explained by socio-demographics is negligible .
Discussion
This work recognises that behavioural science should focus on understanding a broader
categorisation of behaviour directed at fighting climate change . While prior research usually
concentrated on understanding either individual environmental behaviours, policy acceptance or
17,56,57
political participation , we add an important theoretical and empirical advancement to the
discussion by modelling readiness to act as the underlying trait explaining individual differences
on all three levels of behaviour. In addition to defining this readiness to act and identifying
52 58
relevant predictors, we crafted and provide psychometrically sound measures based on
various interdisciplinary sources and finally tested and evaluated the model .
In general, we found that an individual with high readiness to act is prone to show
individual climate-friendly behaviours, accepts policies that aim to protect the climate, and
participates in the political process in favour of more climate protection. Such a person is
probably knowledgeable about climate change and convinced that climate protection policies are
effective. They may also find it easy to show climate-friendly behaviours. While explanations from
previous models stop here, the current model can explain exceptions to these patterns. Imagine
an individual who has a low readiness to act but still saves energy, lives without a car and
refrains from flying or other high-emission behaviours. The data suggest that such a person (who
might think “I need to fix it myself”) perceives high risks and sees climate protection as their own
duty. This person does not perceive fighting climate change through transformations from the
political system as effective. Or imagine another individual who shows no or little individual
behaviour but exhibits high policy acceptance (“The government needs to fix it, not me”). This
person perceives great risks due to the changing climate and trusts that the government will do
whatever is necessary to mitigate climate change. Further, they neglect their personal
responsibility to act individually. Finally, imagine a person with low general readiness to act but
high political participation (“I can't fix it myself, we need to fix the system”). Such a person may be
somewhat overwhelmed by a combination of perceived high risks and low self-efficacy and could
be especially driven by their social environment, as indicated by the strong effect of social norms.
Thus, in summary, the model explains behaviours on different levels by the trait-like readiness-
to-act factor and specific factors.
While we acknowledge that the model does not deliver evidence about concrete drivers
and barriers to one particular behaviour (e.g. eating no meat, engaging in climate activism), the
model helps to paint a bigger picture by accounting for the fact that many behaviours were found
to be correlated . As just described, the bifactor model is also able to explain rather specific
behavioural patterns, as specific factors are not correlated with each other or with the general
factor. Simpler approaches, such as a total readiness-to-act mean score or separate scores for
individual behaviours, policy acceptance and political participation, or individual items from these
categories, would overlook such complex patterns. Considering the substantial communality
across indicators, the latter approaches produce highly correlated scores, ignoring the shared
variance captured by the general readiness-to-act factor. This oversight could lead to misleading
and overly simplistic results.
Recently, prominent scientists called behavioural scientists to conduct more solution-
oriented work with direct positive impacts for “citizens, policymakers and other change agents”
(p. 322). The six recommendations include (i) studying a broader spectrum of climate behaviours,
(ii) addressing the complexity and interconnectedness of behavioural determinants, (iii)
evaluating the mitigation potential of behaviour-change initiatives, (iv) diversifying methodological
approaches, (v) focusing on heterogeneity and robustness in research findings and (vi)
integrating these insights into a cohesive theoretical framework . The current work presented
here makes important contributions to all of these identified challenges and recommendations. By
focusing on high-impact behaviours in the individual behaviour factor and including policy
acceptance and political participation as indicators of readiness-to-act, we respond to the
important request to study a wider range of behaviours (i). Beyond this, and in line with
generalizability theory, we disentangle the communality among these behaviours between the
common readiness-to-act factor and specific factors representing orthogonal traits for each
indicator group. This addresses the second recommendation (ii), that the variety, complexity and
interconnectedness of behavioural predictors should be considered. By using a latent modelling
approach and as shown in Fig. 2, the relative importance of several predictors can be
assessed—both for the overarching readiness to act and for the remaining specific factors. This
allows us to understand complex patterns of behaviours (e.g. why someone with a low readiness
to act may still show frequent political participation). In addition, knowing about factors that
underlie the general readiness to act may allow inferences about technologies or policies that
have not yet been assessed (e.g. from the results one may conclude that communication should
focus on effectiveness when introducing carbon capture systems, the possibility to sue firms that
damage the climate or policies that regulate carbon tax refunds). This taps into the next
recommendation (iii), which states that behavioural science should focus on the behavioural
change potential and scalability of interventions. The fourth recommendation (iv) makes a strong
argument for augmented and strengthened methods and large-scale observation activities. The
presented data stem from a large-scale study designed to regularly monitor behaviours and their
determinants. Furthermore, the measures were developed using a wide range of sources and
qualitative, quantitative, and computational methods. They underwent extensive validation, with
constructs modeled at the latent level, allowing for measurement-error-free estimation of effects.
While we could not refrain from using self-reports in the monitoring, we used frequencies of
performance (as recommended ) or had participants report objective facts (such as square
footage per person). We agree that future work should complement the evidence by using real-
world data. With regard to recommendation five (v), we used data from six data collection waves
spread over the course of one year. Invariance analyses and consideration of socio-demographic
variables revealed that our models were stable and our effects were robust, allowing us to pool
the data.
Finally, we followed the recommendation (vi) to “integrate and theorize” . We are aware
that previous research has differentiated between individual behaviours, policy acceptance and
political participation—and even among single policies or single individual and participation
behaviours. Aiming to reach a broader understanding of a trait-like readiness to act that affects
many behaviours on the individual, social, political and systemic levels, we propose a new model,
provide psychometrically valid instruments and deliver evidence about the model’s validity for
further evaluation and discussion. By providing elaborately designed measurement tools for each
of the proposed constructs, we allow for testing and critical evaluation of the model. It has been
argued that, for many applications, a broader understanding will be useful . By integrating a
large number of models along with evidence for the validity of the model, we offer a starting point
for further discussion.
The results of our analysis suggest potential factors to be addressed in interventions and
communication — and potential pitfalls. For interventions, it seems advisable to target strong
predictors of readiness to act, for example, by explaining the effectiveness of political
measures , which was the strongest predictor, making this an integral element of communication
campaigns. However, the pattern also suggests that increased perceived effectiveness may be
related to fewer individual behaviours. Interventions aimed at enhancing self-efficacy could buffer
these potential unintended effects, as individual behaviour was related to high self-efficacy.
Interventions based on social norms seem particularly important if target groups lack political
participation, while activities targeted at increasing trust are identified as potentially helpful in
groups lacking the acceptance of political measures.
Some limitations of the study need to be mentioned. First, although we highlight
psychometrically reliable and valid measurement instruments, we need to point out that
psychometrically sound measures and our focus on multivariate assessment require a minimum
12,33
number of items, making the total instrument relatively long. Second, like other models , this
model was tested in a WEIRD (Western, Educated, Industrial, Rich, Democratic) setting. The
EU is the third-largest emitter of greenhouse gases, and Germany, where the data collection took
place, is the largest emitter of greenhouse gases within the EU. While understanding readiness to
act in this high-emission setting is important, adapting and replicating the model in other settings
will help embrace “heterogeneity and context-specificity [which will] strengthen theorizing and
research on mechanism of change, which can improve intervention development” (p. 17,
recommendation five by Nielsen as mentioned above). We assume that the model will work in
similar contexts, yet different contexts will require adjustments. This rigorous methodological
blueprint will serve this purpose and therefore comes with an extensive library of scales, reports
about their development, measurement models and psychometric validation available in the
Supplement . Third, causal relationships cannot be inferred due to the cross-sectional nature of
the study design; thus, testing causality in the model should be the subject of future studies.
Fourth, the broad conceptualisation of readiness to act and its partial rootedness in previous
behaviours may render the construct quite stable over time, limiting its utility in evaluating
interventions . However, adapting the questions to ask about intentions for the future instead of
past behaviours might solve this issue. Finally, the model may not encompass all aspects
relevant to predicting certain indicators in isolation. Factors such as individual benefits or
22,56
fairness , for example, might play a role when evaluating single policies (rather than overall
policy acceptance), or factors such as the desire for governmental support, as recently proposed,
may be relevant in explaining more variance in the policy acceptance factor. Affective factors,
61,62
such as climate anxiety, may also play a role and could be explored in future research to
enhance the model’s completeness.
Conclusion
The work presented here makes important contributions to identified challenges and
recommendations in the field of understanding climate- and environment-related behaviours on
several levels by showing that many behaviours can be explained by a general, trait-like
readiness to act against climate change. Including civil society in climate governance requires a
public that is willing to participate. A notable strength of this work lies in its departure from looking
at single behaviours or perceptions in order to focus on a more holistic understanding of the
factors influencing readiness to act against climate change. The results can contribute to
improving climate communication, political decision-making and transformation processes by
overcoming the limitations of an individual-centred approach to climate action.
Methods
Participants and Design
The cross-sectional data were collected for a German population based on a non-probabilistic
quota sample, which represents the general adult population (18 to 74 years) regarding age and
gender (crossed quotas) and federal state . The recruitment and incentivisation of the
participants were performed through an access panel provider (Bilendi), and the questionnaires
were implemented through the Unipark platform by Tivian. Data were collected as part of an
ongoing repeated monitoring study. The target sample size was N = 1,000 for each survey,
resulting in a total of N = 6,041 participants (for sample characteristics, see supplementary
1,016), March 2023 (N = 953), May 2023 (N = 1,006), September 2023 (N = 1,003) and
November 2023 (N = 1,103). As the readiness-to-act measurement model was strictly invariant
Supplement contains further details about the model fit of all measurement models (item level:
Library of Instruments
For this work, most measurement instruments were newly developed, as described below. An
open online library contains psychometric snapshots for all instruments, including the definition
of the construct, information about the test development, the item format and answer scale, the
measurement model. Tables 3 and 4 provide an overview of the instruments. The library thus
contains three psychometric snapshots for the readiness-to-act indicators (individual behaviour,
policy acceptance and political participation) and six snapshots for the predictors (perceived
health risks, trust in institutions, social norms, perceived efficacy of political measures, self-
efficacy and knowledge).
Demographics
As socio-demographics, we assessed age, gender, level of education and income. Other
demographics were collected but not analysed in this work .
Readiness to Act
individual behaviour (parcels: housing, mobility, food, consumption; each parcel being a formative
weighted mean compound score; weights were chosen according to the approximated average
CO -impact of each behaviour), policy acceptance (mean score parcels: guiding principles,
housing, mobility and food), and political participation (mean score parcels: conventional, activism
and peer-group participation).
Indicators of Readiness to Act
Individual Behaviour
For individual behaviour, we selected impactful behaviours, that is, those that result in the highest
CO emissions (or equivalents , resulting in seven items for heating and energy consumption,
responsible for 27% of CO emissions assessed in the study), two items for mobility (22%), five
items for food (17%) and seven items for other consumption (34%). In total, the assessed sectors
were responsible for 92.5% of individual emissions in Germany. The remaining 7.5% were public
emissions (water purification, state administration, health system, garbage administration, etc.),
which were equal for everyone. Participants indicated the frequency with which they performed
answered on a natural scale (e.g. in square meters when asking for the heated square footage of
one’s home per person) or with yes or no (e.g. when asking for the use of renewable energy).
Items were linearly transformed to a 0–6 scale before weighting, with 0 representing the worst
and 6 representing the best environmentally relevant behaviour. Individual ratings were then
weighted within their categories to represent their respective relevance to this category. For
example, about 75% of CO emissions in heating and energy consumption stem from heating
and how room temperature is maintained (during the winter). Thus, the respective heating/room
temperature items in total were weighted at .75 for the housing parcel.
Policy Acceptance
To measure policy acceptance, we asked participants whether they agreed or disagreed with the
policies proposed by the German Civil Council on Climate to mitigate climate change. This list
consists of 96 proposals on guiding principles, buildings and energy, mobility and food. We
combined the energy and building categories to parallel individual behaviours. In a pre-test,
participants rated all 96 items. To select the most appropriate items to measure this construct, we
(i) used an Ant Colony Optimisation (ACO) for eight rounds, (ii) selected items chosen in at least
two ACO rounds (which was true for 35 items), and (iii) had five experts from climate and policy
research rate 27 items (all but the eight guiding principles items) regarding policy effectiveness
from not effective at all (1) to very effective (7). From the 27 items, we selected the three most
e.g. “The first registration of cars with combustion engines is to be banned by 2030 at the latest”;
1 = strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree). For the guiding principles, we chose the three items
that had been chosen most frequently by ACO (e.g. “The climate transition must be fair to all
generations”).
Political Participation
To devise this measure, we identified a relevant taxonomy and several instruments in the
65–73
literature . Two authors (MG and LL) inspected all available items, excluded redundant items
and combined very similar items to build categories of political participation. This resulted in 25
categories; one item was chosen or created for each category based on the content of the
category. In a pre-test, many items showed extreme floor effects. We therefore selected 11 items
with the best distributions, falling into three categories, and had participants rate them on a
community activity; (ii) activism—demonstrations, safety in demonstrations, illegal acts when
demonstrating; and (iii) peer-group participation—social media, confronting peers, discussing with
peers, influencing peer opinion, influencing peers’ voting. All items explicitly referred to climate
action.
Predictors of Readiness to Act
readiness to act. The online library contains all items and detailed information on the
measurement of predictors. To establish indicator symmetry and allow for Robust Maximum
Likelihood estimation in our structural equations models, we built parcels where possible. The
rationale is provided below.
Knowledge
The knowledge test on climate change was designed based on a qualitative interview study with
experts from several disciplines and an existing environmental knowledge test . Items were
tested and consecutively improved in several rounds of data collection. Details about the
development process and more psychometric details of the scale are reported in Temme et al. (in
prep) . Previous work has shown that it matters how knowledge is measured—self-reported
knowledge is not a sufficient proxy for aptitude-based knowledge testing . To increase the
content validity of the test compared to other related knowledge tests (e.g. sustainability
knowledge ), items were created based on the experts’ answers to the question, which
knowledge people should have to act against climate change. Finally, 15 single-choice items with
four randomly presented answer options were summarised into three parcels: (i) ecology (e.g.
what are tipping points), (ii) societal aspects (e.g. what is CO emission trading), and (iii)
74,77
mitigation and adaptation measures (e.g. what is the goal of mitigation measures) .
Perceived Health Risks
We sampled the nine most important health risks due to climate change, as listed by Smith and
colleagues . Eighteen items assessed how likely (probability, rating scale of 1–7) and how
severely (severity, rating scale of 1–7) people think they would be affected by nine climate-related
78,79
health risks (e.g. spread of vectors for communicable diseases and extreme weather events ).
While theory suggests multiplying probability and severity , we found that both ratings were
highly correlated. For the analyses, the severity and probability items were therefore averaged
per health risk, as the homo-risk-hetero-rating correlations were large (ranging between r = .51
and r = .64) and larger than the respective hetero-risk-hetero-rating correlations (risks were the
nine climate-related health risks; ratings were probability and severity). Furthermore, the average
scores had better distributional properties than the multiplication scores. This resulted in nine
health risk parcels.
Self-efficacy
Self-efficacy items are anchored on individual emission-related behaviour items. All items from
the individual emission-related behaviour scale are high-impact behaviours based on their share
in individuals’ average CO -emission-related behaviours in Germany in 2022 (see also the
individual behaviour psychometric snapshot in the online library). For the self-efficacy scale, we
selected the most impactful behaviour from the housing, mobility, food and consumption sectors
(restricting heating in winter to 17°C, abstaining from flying and meat and buying only necessary
goods). The four items asked about how difficult or easy (1–7) it was for the respondent to
perform the four climate-friendly behaviours.
Social Norms
For the same four most impactful climate-friendly behaviours, participants rated how frequently
(1–7) relevant others performed (descriptive norm) or expected such behaviours from them
(injunctive norm). Even though the descriptive and injunctive norms are theoretically distinct , we
found high correlations between them; the homo-behaviour–hetero-norm correlations (ranging
between r = .50 and r = .65) were large and larger than the respective hetero-behaviour–hetero-
norm correlations. We therefore averaged the two norm items per behaviour.
Perceived Effectiveness of Measures
Perceived effectiveness items are anchored in policy acceptance items. All items from the policy
acceptance scale were rated by experts as high-impact policies (see above and the climate policy
acceptance psychometric snapshot in the online library). We selected the least accepted policies
per category to avoid ceiling effects in the perceived effectiveness ratings. As a result, four items
asked how effective (1-7) different policies from four sectors were perceived (energy: no more
coal mining after 2030 instead of after 2038; housing: no new oil and gas heating after 2026;
mobility: no more new combustion engines after 2030; food: support climate-friendly food, e.g. in
childcare).
Trust in Institutions
Items were taken from German COVID-19 Snapshot Monitoring (COSMO ) and the trust items
and instructions were adjusted to the climate crisis context . After the initial analyses, we
excluded items related to trust in media (trust in public media and content from social media), as
the social media item had an extreme distribution attenuating covariance, and the public media
item did not fit any of the remaining two item categories. The respondents were asked how much
they trusted in six different institutions (ratings from 1–7), which were clustered into two parcels:
experts (e.g. doctors and scientists) and politicians and political institutions (e.g. government and
the European Union). When participants indicated that no answer was possible, the answer was
coded as missing.
Measurement Models
In this work, we distinguished between formative and reflexive constructs. Formative constructs
are determined by their indicators—that is, they are a weighted function of the indicators—
whereas reflexive constructs determine their indicators . As for most psychological constructs, all
constructs in our model, except for individual behaviour, are considered reflexive. Individual
behaviour is considered formative, as it is defined as CO -emission relevant behaviour that is
weighted to approximate a CO footprint assessment . Formative constructs do not allow classic
evaluation of psychometric quality criteria; however, for reflexive constructs, we assessed their
reliability and factorial validity in confirmatory factor analyses.
First, we estimated the measurement models for all scales (including the indicator groups
of readiness to act) separately. Multi-faceted constructs (policy acceptance, political participation,
risk perception and social norms) were modelled as bifactor models ; one-dimensional
constructs (knowledge, trust, effectiveness and self-efficacy) were modelled as g-factor models—
that is, one general factor determines individual differences in all related indicators. The
psychometric snapshots in the online library include figures of the respective measurement
models on the item level and where applicable, also on the parcel level.
Second, for readiness to act, we defined a joint measurement model with a bifactor
structure , assuming correlated but not redundant indicators (Fig. 1), which can be interpreted as
a variance decomposition: it separates general communality (the general readiness to act factor)
from specific variance that is immanent to either individual behaviour, policy acceptance or
political participation. Specific factors explain specific variance in related indicators that are not
explained by the general factor. Assuming this model fits acceptably well, it allows testing effects
of the model’s factors (e.g. covariances with other factors) free of measurement error.
Furthermore, it provides the opportunity to consider complex individual patterns across the
indicators of readiness to act.
Statistical Analyses
To ensure that we could pool the data from multiple data collections, we also successfully tested
each item-level measurement model for strict invariance across the data collections. That is, the
constructs had the same measurement model for all the data collections. These results are
As estimations of the structural equations model (Fig. 2) were unstable due to the large
number of parameters to be estimated, we employed a two-step extension procedure
83,84
approach to reduce the number of parameters. First, we estimated the dependent variable
measurement model—that is, the readiness-to-act model—separately. Second, we fixed all
loadings of the dependent variables’ measurement model to the loadings, which were estimated
in the first step, and we eventually added the predictors and the structural equations.
All analyses were conducted with R (version 4.4.0) and the packages psych (version
86 87 88
2.3.3) , lavaan (version 0.6.8) , and semTools (version 0.5-6). The analysis code is available
in the Supplement . Reflexive measurement models were tested using confirmatory factor
analysis (CFA). Model fit was evaluated via the fit indices comparative fit index (CFI), Tucker–
Lewis index (TLI), root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA), and standardised root
mean square residual (SRMR). We deemed the model fit acceptable if CFI and TLI ≥ .90,
RMSEA ≤ .08 and SRMR ≤ .11. Model fit was deemed good if CFI and TLI ≥ .95, RMSEA ≤ .05
and SRMR ≤ .08.26–28. The reliability of constructs was assessed as factor saturation ω .
Factors were identified by standardising them. Models were estimated with robust maximum
likelihood (MLR) estimation—except for the climate change–related knowledge item-level model
in the supplementary material, which used weighted least square mean and variance (WLSMV).
All tests with symmetrical distributions were two-sided, and tests with asymmetrical distributions
were one-sided.
Competing Interests
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Funding
The project is funded by the Klaus Tschira Foundation (#00.003.2022), the German Federal
Ministry of Health (BMG) via the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) and the Federal Centre for Health
Education (BZgA). Additional internal funding comes from the University of Erfurt (UE) and the
Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine (BNITM).
Authors’ Contributions
The research was planned, performed and analysed by the whole team. CB, LL, PS and MG
devised the model. Scale refinement and data analysis: MG; support: HT. CB and MG wrote the
first draft of the manuscript. All authors provided critical feedback and helped shape the research,
analyses and manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The Planetary Health Action Survey (PACE) is a joint project of the University of Erfurt, the
Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, the University of Bamberg, the Robert Koch
Institute, the Federal Center for Health Education, the Leibniz Institute of Psychology and the
Science Media Center Germany. The authors thank the PACE team for its work in collecting the
data. The authors also thank Lena Süßmann for her support in preparing the manuscript.
Data Availability
Materials, data, analysis codes and output are available at
Ethical Approval
The project was performed in accordance with the general ethical guidelines established by the
University of Erfurt and the German Research Foundation. The institutional IRB at the University
of Erfurt provided ethical clearance (#20220525). The recruitment of participants took place
through access panel providers (currently Bilendi) that followed their own ethical guidelines,
which have been approved to be in line with the IRB guidelines. Prior to the research activity, the
participants were guaranteed confidentiality and anonymity. They were actively asked for
informed consent. The data were collected anonymously, without any possibility of identifying
single individuals.
Supplements
The Supplement is available at
materials, including the definition of all constructs along with items and psychometric properties
per construct, as well as data and supplementary analyses.