Reduced contextual uncertainty facilitates learning what to
attend to and what to ignore
Chris Jungerius1,2,3,✉, Sophie Perizonius2,3, and Heleen A. Slagter2,3
1 Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam
2 Department of Experimental and Applied Psychology, Vrije Universiteit
3 Institute for Brain and Behavior
✉ Correspondence: Chris Jungerius <d.c.jungerius@uva.nl>
Variability in the search environment has recently been shown to affect the ability to learn to ignore salient
distractors, as attentional capture is reduced when search context variability is low, but remains when it is
high. However, it is unclear whether this reduction in capture in low context variability conditions is caused
by contextual learning (due to repeated search contexts) or other mechanisms that facilitate generic context-
structure learning. To test this, we conducted a preregistered study in which participants (n=200) performed
two sessions of a visual search task, in which they gained experience with a small subset of search displays.
As expected, in this low context variability condition, capture of attention by colour singletons significantly
reduced over time. In a subsequent third session, we, then, tested participants on a mix of familiar and novel
search displays and examined whether the reduction in capture was specific to familiar displays, indicative of
contextual cueing effects, or would generalise to novel displays. We found no capture by the singleton in
either the familiar or novel condition, indicative of transfer of learning. Our findings, thus, suggest that
reduced contextual volatility may have reduced capture by allowing the development of generic predictions
about task structure present across search displays. These findings add to the current debate about the
determinants of capture by salient distractors by showing that learning to ignore is also affected by generic
task regularities, dependent on the volatility of the learning environment.
In recent years, it has become increasingly clear that brains continuously try to predict
what sensory signals are likely informative to the task at hand based on past experience
and statistical structure in the environment (de Lange et al., 2018; Friston, 2009), and that
such statistical learning affects how attention is oriented (Jiang, 2018; Theeuwes et al.,
2022). For example, many studies have now shown that attention is driven towards
locations where participants have learned targets are likely to be found and away from
likely distractor locations (Geng & Behrmann, 2005; Goschy et al., 2014; Miller, 1988; van
Moorselaar & Slagter, 2019; Wang & Theeuwes, 2018). These findings indicate that
attention incorporates memories about the statistical structure of information, providing
the brain with a mechanism to predict which aspects of the environment are likely relevant
for goal-directed action in the future and which can be safely ignored. One influential
proposal, supported by recent empirical findings, is that statistical learning allows the
brain to proactively suppress distracting information, preventing it from capturing
attention (Luck et al., 2021). For example, using a search-probe task in which the colour of
the singleton distractor was fixed and, hence, predictable across trials, Gaspelin et al.
(2015) showed that initial attention to the singleton was below baseline, indicative of
proactive suppression.
We recently demonstrated that whether or not individuals can learn to ignore distracting
information and prevent attentional capture, is dependent on contextual uncertainty
(Jungerius et al., 2023). In our study, we used a similar search-probe task (Gaspelin et al.,
2015), but varied the number of search elements (set size 4 or 8) and thereby the number
of combinations of search elements and, hence, possible search contexts. Moreover, we also
included a set size 8 condition, in which the number of visual search configurations shown
to participants was reduced to a small subset of the possibility space (from ~1160 to 24
configurations, i.e., the same number as in the set size 4 condition). We found that only in
the conditions with low variability in search context (set size 4 and the reduced contexts
set size 8 condition), participants demonstrated the ability to overcome attentional capture
by a salient distractor with a predictable colour. This disappearance of capture in the
reduced contexts set size 8 condition, notably, only emerged in session two, after
participants had already been exposed to the set of restricted configurations for one
session, and was not observed in the regular set size 8 condition of high statistical volatility
(which included all possible search configurations). These findings demonstrate that
contextual uncertainty can affect learning to ignore, and align with other, mostly separate
literatures that show that (expected) contextual volatility can affect learning speed (e.g.,
Behrens et al., 2007) and that contextual learning can strongly guide attention (Gao et al.,
2023; Ogawa et al., 2007; Sisk et al., 2019; Vadillo et al., 2021).
In this preregistered study, we set out to directly test how contextual uncertainty affects
the ability to ignore salient distractors. One possibility is that the acquired ability to reduce
attentional capture in contexts with low contextual uncertainty reflects contextual learning,
i.e., due to the repeated configurations. While it is well known that contextual learning
about target locations strongly affects search (Chun & Jiang, 1998), to date, few studies
have investigated effects of contextual learning about distracting or task-irrelevant stimuli,
but their findings suggest that context-dependent distractor learning can also facilitate
performance. In one study, suppression of distractors at a highly probable location was
shown to be contingent upon the specific spatial configuration of the search display (Gao et
al., 2023). In another study (Vadillo et al., 2021), it was found that learning which locations
in a search context do not contain targets facilitated search performance. As to our past
finding that low contextual uncertainty reduced attentional capture (Jungerius et al., 2023),
it is conceivable that in a restricted set of search contexts, these contexts start to serve as
attentional cues as participants become familiar with them.
However, an alternative possibility is that reduced environmental volatility experienced by
the participant generally enhances sensitivity to statistical structure in the sensory input
(Slagter & Moorselaar, 2021). It is well known that environmental volatility can affect
learning speed (e.g., Behrens et al., 2007). When contextual volatility is very high, it is
possible that the brain considers the sensory input not representative of a stable
environment, reducing new learning, while when contextual volatility is low, it is
considered more informative, enhancing the learning speed. Interestingly, recent work
suggests that reduced capture by salient distractors observed using search-probe tasks
with relatively low contextual variability may not simply reflect learning to ignore a
distractor with a predictable colour, but global feature enhancement of all items with the
possible (predictable) target colour (Oxner et al., 2023; van Moorselaar et al., 2023).
Contextual uncertainty could affect such generic learning across search displays. Indeed, in
the Gaspelin et al. (2015) study and in our previous study (Jungerius et al., 2023), not only
the distractor color was predictable, but the other search elements also had a fixed (and the
same) colour. Using such generic regularities in visual search may depend on the variability
of the search context.
To determine how contextual uncertainty affects learning to ignore a salient distractor, and
dissociate between these two possibilities, we used an experimental procedure often used
in the contextual cueing literature (Chun, 2000): after two sessions in which participants
became acquainted with a small set of repeated display configurations (as in our previous
study), we mixed familiar and novel search configurations in a third session to test whether
the learned reduction in capture, participants were expected to exhibit in session 2, was
specific to the search configurations they had become familiar with, or if it would
generalise to new search configurations.
We firstly hypothesised that the reduced contextual variability, caused by repeated
presentation of specific search displays, would reduce or even abolish initial attentional
capture over time, replicating our initial study findings (Jungerius et al., 2023). Specifically,
we predicted that attentional capture (as measured by the difference in probe letter recall
between singleton- and non-singleton distractor locations, see methods), would reduce or
disappear across the first two sessions. In addition, we expected that this reduction in, or
elimination of, attentional capture would be specific to the familiar contexts in session 3. In
other words, we predicted greater attentional capture, as reflected in higher probe letter
recall at singleton-distractor compared to non-singleton distractor locations, only for novel
search configurations in session 3. Note that in this case, the contextual cuing effect would
not be location based (as in Gao et al., 2023), but based on the combination of search
element shapes. If we instead observed a reduction in capture, which generalised to the
novel contexts, this would suggest that the reduction in capture was primarily driven by
context-independent predictive learning, such as global enhancement of target colour
(Oxner et al., 2023).
Methods
Participants
Based on estimates of required participant numbers (Brysbaert, 2019) and a simulation-
based power analysis using our previous design to estimate effect sizes (DeBruine & Barr,
2021; Green & MacLeod, 2016), we collected data from 200 participants (86 women, 114
men, mean age of 26.7 years), who were recruited through the online platform Prolific.
They were screened for age (18 to 40 years), normal or corrected-to-normal vision, and
normal colour vision. All participants provided informed consent prior to participating in
the experiment. The experiment was approved by The Scientific and Ethical Review Board
(VCWE) of the Faculty of Behavior and Movement Sciences of the Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam.
Stimuli, Design and Procedure
all trials, participants performed a search task, where they had to report the orientation of
a line segment within a target (here a diamond). B: In 1/3 of all trials, letters were shown
simultaneously to search display onset, followed by a mask. Participants were asked to
report all letters they detected. Singleton distractors and targets always appeared on the
four cardinal locations (top, bottom, left, and right).
Our experimental setup was repeated from our previous work using this paradigm
(Jungerius et al., 2023). The experiment was coded in JavaScript using the JsPsych library
At the start of the experiment, the size and resolution of the participant’s display and the
distance participants were sitting from their display was determined using a ‘virtual
chinrest’ (Li et al., 2020). These estimates were used to scale the stimuli used in the
experiment, which ensured that stimuli would have the same size in units of visual angle
for all participants.
On each trial, first a fixation cross was presented for 500 ms, followed by an 8-item search
display. Search displays contained a circle, a diamond, 3 squares and 3 hexagons. The target
shape (circle or diamond; counterbalanced across participants) and target colour (green or
red; counterbalanced across participants) were held constant for the entire experimental
session. In singleton-present trials, one of the distractor shapes had a unique colour (i.e.,
red or green, counterbalanced across participants). Stimuli were 2.4 by 2.4 degrees visual
angle in size. They were arranged evenly spaced with the centre of each stimulus on a circle
around fixation with a radius of 2.5 degrees visual angle.
During the experiment, participants performed two types of tasks, which were randomly
trials), each shape contained a line segment to the left or right of the shape’s center, and
participants were tasked with indicating whether a line inside the target shape was more
towards the left or right side of that shape, within a time limit of 2 seconds. The search
display disappeared upon response or after 2 seconds. In probe trials (1/3 of trials), the
search display only appeared for 100ms, with one letter displayed inside each shape of the
search display. This was followed by a mask consisting of a hash sign at each letter location
for 500ms, to prevent influence by iconic memory. Participants were then prompted to
report all letters they remembered seeing using the keyboard. Letters were chosen
randomly without replacement from all 26 letters in the Latin alphabet.
During an experimental run, participants first received instructions on the visual search
task before practising with it until they responded accurately in 70% of trials in a practice
block of 32 trials. Subsequently the probe task was introduced, and participants again
practised with blocks of 33 trials (11 probe trials and 22 search trials) to familiarise
themselves with the probe task and the proportion of probe to search task trials, until they
reached 70% accuracy in the search task (note that accuracy in the probe task was not
tested, as the perception of probe is expected to be difficult and the task does not have a
simple ‘correct’ response like the search task does). The main experiment would then
begin.
To reduce the contextual uncertainty of the task, we manipulated the variability of the
search display, following Jungerius et al. (2023): targets and distractors only appeared on
the four cardinal locations. For each of the four possible target locations, three search
display configurations were randomly drawn from the range of possible configurations. A
given participant would only ever be shown displays drawn from this restricted set. This
meant that the range of configurations a participant would be exposed to in sessions 1 and
2 would total 12. In addition, for a given context, the singleton distractor would always
appear in the same location. Therefore, each of the 12 configurations participants would
see was predictive of a unique combination of target and singleton locations.
Participants performed the task with this restricted set of configurations for 2 sessions on
2 separate days. In a third session, half the trials were drawn from the restricted set, with
the other half consisting of ‘novel’ configurations new to the participant. In these novel
configurations, targets and distractors could also only appear at the four cardinal locations.
The first 2 sessions consisted of 4 blocks of 96 trials (total: 384 trials), and the length of the
last session was 6 blocks of 96 trials (total: 576 trials), to allow for sufficient data collection
for a direct comparison of novel and familiar trials. Two thirds of the trials were search
trials (64 per block), and one third of the trials were probe trials (32 per block). A uniquely
coloured singleton distractor was present in half of the search trials and all probe trials.
To measure the degree to which participants had learned to recognise the set of contexts
they were exposed to in the first two sessions, at the end of the third session, participants
were presented with 8 novel and 8 familiar search display configurations and asked to rate
them on a scale from ‘completely unfamiliar’ to ‘completely familiar’ using an on-screen
response slider.
Analysis
All analyses were preregistered unless specified otherwise, and performed in R (R
Development Core Team, 2018). Mixed models and ANOVAs were fitted using the lme4 and
afex packages (Bates et al., 2015; Singmann et al., 2023), and Bayesian models were fitted
using the brms package (Bürkner, 2018).
Probe task
As in previous work (Gaspelin et al., 2015; Jungerius et al., 2023), our main outcome of
interest was the detection of letters during the letter probe task, as this allowed us to
selectively study attentional orienting during the early stage (i.e. the first 100 ms) of visual
search. In all analyses, attentional capture was defined as the difference in probe letter
recall at singleton vs. non-singleton (control) locations. Probe letter recall at non-singleton
locations was calculated by averaging probe letter recall across the two cardinal locations
that did not contain a target or singleton.
Participants with incomplete or corrupted data or 0% letter recall were excluded from
analysis (8 participants).
We first established the initial presence of attentional capture in the first half of session 1
(before extensive contextual learning), by contrasting probe letter recall at singleton
vs. non-singleton locations with a generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) with a binomial
(logit) link function.
Our first main prediction that attentional capture would reduce between session 1 and 2
was tested with a GLMM with a binomial (logit) link function, testing the
recall ~
model (confined to the first
session * location + ( session * location | subject )
2 sessions of the experiment). Of interest here is the interaction,
session * location
tested for significance using a likelihood ratio test against a model without an interaction
term. Model contrasts were used to identify significant differences between locations
(control, distractor) within each session.
Next, to test whether the loss of capture would be specific to familiar contexts, or would
generalise to novel contexts, another GLMM with a binomial (logit) link function was used,
testing the
recall ~ novelty * location + ( novelty * location | subject )
model. Of interest here is the interaction, tested for significance using
novelty * location
a likelihood ratio test against a model without an interaction term. Model contrasts were
used to identify significant differences between locations (control, distractor) within each
condition (familiar, novel). In case of a significant interaction, planned comparisons (model
contrasts) were conducted to establish the presence or absence of capture separately in
trials with a familiar and in trials with a novel search configuration.
Bayesian hierarchical model analogues of the models described above were also fitted to
the data, and the posterior marginal likelihood of the data for each model was compared to
obtain measures of relative evidence for and against the presence of an interaction term in
terms of Bayes Factors (Gronau et al., 2020; Kass & Raftery, 1995).
In line with Barr et al. (2013), we adjusted the model structure in the above analyses from
our preregistration to include a random slope for all effects per participant. In the event of
a singular model fit, random slopes with the smallest variance component were dropped
until models fit without such issues. In practice, this only lead to the dropping of the
random slope for in the GLMM for session 3 (final model structure:
novelty recall ~
novelty * location + ( location | subject )
In an exploratory analysis, to test the extent to which participants learned to selectively
attend to potential target locations, we also examined the difference in detection of letters
at non-singleton distractor locations on the cardinals (where a target could appear) and
diagonals (where a target would never appear) using a mixed model with a structure
comparable to the models listed above.
Search task
We also examined attentional capture at the level of reaction times in search trials. As
preregistered, participants with an error rate that differed 2.5 standard deviations from the
mean error rate were excluded from analysis (initial 2 sessions: 9 participants, session 3: 6
participants). Remaining incorrect and timed-out trials were excluded from analysis (initial
2 sessions: incorrect trials: 2.9% of trials, timed out trials: 0.1% of trials, session 3:
incorrect trials: 2.5% of trials, timed out trials: <0.001% of trials). Trials with a response
time of less than 200ms were also excluded from analysis (< 0.001% of trials in both
conditions).
The reaction time data was then filtered through a two-step outlier removal process; trials
were trimmed on the basis of a cut-off value 2.5 standard deviations from the mean per
participant. Next, participants whose average reaction time differed by 2.5 standard
deviations from the conditional mean were excluded from analysis. (initial 2 sessions:
within participant trimming: 8.35% of trials, between participant trimming: 5 participants.
session 3: within participant trimming: 5.29% of trials, between participant trimming: 7
participants).
The difference in the effect of singletons on reaction time between session 1 and 2 were
tested with a repeated-measures ANOVA on the dependent variable reaction time, with
within-subject factors distractor presence with 2 levels (true and false) and session with 2
levels (session 1 or 2).
The difference in the effect of singletons on reaction time between novel and familiar
contexts was tested with a repeated-measures ANOVA on the dependent variable reaction
time in session 3, with within-subject factors distractor presence with 2 levels (true and
false) and context familiarity (familiar and novel).
Contextual learning
To detect whether the familiarity ratings participants provided at the end of the
experiment differed significantly between novel and familiar search displays, their
familiarity judgements were tested with a paired t-test comparing the averaged familiarity
ratings for novel and repeated configurations across subjects.
Results
Probe task
The results from the first half of session 1 confirmed that capture was present during the
first half of session 1, when participants were not yet as familiar with the search contexts: a
GLMM, with location as a predictor, fit the data significantly better than an intercept-only
model (likelihood ratio test: Chisq(1) = 32.62, p < .001), with an odds ratio for letter
detection at the singleton over control locations of 1.29 (z = 6.032, p < .001). This result
confirms that singleton distractors initially captured more attention than non-singletons, as
reflected by enhanced letter recall.
Capture was present in session 1 (odds ratio for detection at the singleton over controls:
1.25, z = 6.366, p < .001), and present, but strongly reduced in session 2 (odds ratio for
A). This reduction in capture by singleton distractors over time was significant, as shown
by a significant interaction between session and location (likelihood ratio test between
model with and without interaction term: Chisq(1) = 16.20, p < .001). Comparing Bayesian
analogues of these models, we found a Bayes Factor of 556 in favour of the model with an
interaction term between session and location, which can be interpreted as decisive
evidence in favour of the inclusion of an interaction term (Kass & Raftery, 1995). As
expected, we, thus, replicated our previous finding that, in search tasks with low contextual
uncertainty, capture by singleton distractors is significantly reduced over time. We have
shown previously that this reduction of capture does not occur when contextual
uncertainty remains high (Jungerius et al., 2023).
sessions in a reduced contextual variability condition. (A): Shown is a comparison of recall
of probe letters at target, control and singleton distractor locations by participants during
the first 2 sessions. The difference in recall between letters shown at control and singleton
locations (i.e., attentional capture) went down significantly between sessions. (B): This
learned reduction in capture generalises to novel configurations: comparing recall of probe
letters at control and singleton distractor locations by participants for novel and familiar
displays during the third session, there is no capture (no significant difference in recall
between the two locations) in either familiar or novel displays. NS. not significant, * p < .05,
*** p < .001
Contrary to our main prediction that the observed reduction in capture can be explained by
contextual learning, comparing the results of novel versus familiar configurations in
session 3, however, revealed no difference in capture between the two conditions as a
significant (likelihood ratio test between full and restricted model: Chisq(1) = 1.18, p =
0.276), with no significant capture in either the familiar or novel condition (odds ratio for
detection at the singleton over control locations in familiar trials: 1.033, z = 1.025, p = .306,
novel trials: 1.000, z = 0.010, p = .992). Comparing Bayesian analogues of these models, we
found a Bayes Factor of 4.12 in favour of the model without an interaction term, which can
be interpreted as substantial evidence in favour of the exclusion of the interaction term.
These findings indicate that the observed reduction in capture was context-independent.
Exploratory analysis of letter recall at cardinal and diagonal locations
During the analysis of the letter recall data, we observed that, in line with our previous
study (Jungerius et al., 2023), the reduction in capture between session 1 and 2 was to a
large extent driven by an increase in recall of letters at cardinal non-singleton distractor
locations, while detection of letters at the location of the singleton distractor remained at
approximately the same level between sessions. We hypothesised that this increase might
be due to the development of generic predictions about the task relevance of different
elements of the search display. As targets could only be presented at the four cardinal
locations and had a fixed colour, it is possible that experience with the task led to a global
enhancement of any item with the target colour presented at one of the four cardinal
locations (cf. Oxner et al., 2023). If so, letter recall can be expected to be higher at task-
relevant cardinal non-singleton locations compared to task-irrelevant diagonal non-
singleton locations. We performed an exploratory analysis to determine if this was indeed
the case.
are recalled less often than letters at cardinal non-singleton locations (where the target
could also occur): Shown is a comparison of participant’s recall performance for letter
probes presented at diagonal and cardinal non-singleton distractor locations in the first
two sessions of the experiment. Letter probes at cardinal locations were detected
significantly more often in both sessions, with a significant increase in cardinal letter recall
between sessions. *** p < .001
We found that over time, letter recall increased selectively for those locations that could
potentially contain the target shape and that contained a shape of the target colour
130.53, p < .001) and significant interaction between non-singleton location (cardinal,
diagonal) and session (Chisq(1) = 24.24, p < .001), reflecting higher recall of letters at
cardinal locations in session two compared to session one (odds ratio for recall of letters at
cardinal vs. diagonal locations in session 1: 1.41, z = 10.98, p < .001; session 2: 1.62, z =
13.844, p < .001). This finding of increased letter recall at cardinal non-singleton locations
may reflect the development of attentional orienting towards elements that are known to
be task-relevant both in terms of colour and location, over time.
Search task
At the search reaction time (RT) level, singleton presence consistently slowed performance
(main effect of distractor presence: F(1,180) = 93.859, p < .001). This effect was
significantly reduced in session 2 compared to session 1 (significant interaction between
distractor presence and session: F(1,180) = 19.764, p < .001, difference in marginal means
for session 1: 25.7, t(180) = 9.723, p < .001, difference in marginal means for session 2:
12.6, t(180) = 5.563, p < .001), suggestive of a reduction in attentional capture by
singletons in session 2.
shown is a comparison of participant reaction times in singleton-present and singleton-
absent trials for the first two sessions of the experiment (A). While capture remained in
both sessions, it reduced significantly over time. (B): There was no difference in attentional
capture for novel and familiar displays. Comparing participant reaction times to singleton-
present and singleton-absent trials for familiar and novel displays in the third session of the
experiment, capture was similarly present in both conditions. *** p < .001
Comparison of singleton effects in the novel and familiar conditions in session 3 showed a
significant main effect of novelty (F(1,181) = 6.759, p = .010), reflecting generally faster
responses in familiar contexts. However, participants showed no significant difference in
between familiarity and distractor presence, F(1,181) = 0.193, p = .661), with capture
overall remaining at a level slightly below that observed in session 2 (significant main
effect of capture: F(1,181) = 36.49, p < .001, marginal mean difference between overall
distractor present and absent conditions: 8.75, t(181) = 6.041, p < .001).
This pattern of results is largely similar to that observed in the probe trials. Although the
modulation of capture over two sessions as measured by search RT appears smaller than
the effect of early capture as indexed by probe letter recall, this finding is in line with
previous work using this paradigm (Stilwell & Gaspelin, 2021; Wang & Theeuwes, 2020),
which has shown a dissociation between probe recall and reaction time as indices of
capture. This dissociation may reflect the fact that search RT reflects the summation of
many different processes, not just initial capture (as letter probe recall does), such as
filtering costs imposed by the singleton (Becker, 2007; Folk & Remington, 1998).
Contextual Learning
Comparing familiarity ratings between novel and familiar contexts, we found a small but
significant difference between novel and familiar contexts, with participants rating familiar
contexts as slightly more familiar than novel contexts on a 100 point scale (familiar
contexts: 58.8, SE 1.21; novel contexts: 56.4, SE 1.21; difference in marginal means 2.46, SE
0.846; z = 2.92, p = .0036).
Discussion
We previously found that the ability to prevent attentional capture by highly physically
salient distractors is strongly influenced by contextual uncertainty (Jungerius et al., 2023),
a factor that has so far not received much attention in any main theory of attentional
capture as a determinant of the ability to learn to ignore salient distractors (Luck et al.,
2021). Here, we replicate and extend this finding by examining whether the reduction in
capture observed in a condition of low contextual uncertainty is due to contextual learning
or learning about generic task structure. We show that the elimination of attentional
capture was not specific to familiar contexts, as salient distractors also no longer captured
attention in novel contexts during session 3. Therefore, the observed reduction in capture
cannot be attributed to contextual learning.
This lack of an effect of contextual learning is unexpected given that contextual learning
typically develops automatically and rapidly (Gao et al., 2023; Sisk et al., 2019). In typical
contextual learning tasks, contextual learning is based on the spatial configuration of the
search elements (Sisk et al., 2019), which was not possible in our task, as all search
configurations had the same circular spatial layout. There is also some evidence that the
presence of a singleton distractor can reduce contextual learning (Conci & von Mühlenen,
2009). It is thus possible that our specific search task did not create the optimal conditions
for contextual learning.
If not contextual learning, what, then, might account for the observed changes in early
attentional orienting, that we also previously observed but only when contextual
uncertainty was low, and not when it was high (Jungerius et al., 2023)? We propose that
the reduced contextual uncertainty may have facilitated the development of generic
predictions about what elements of the search display were generally (i.e., across search
configurations) task relevant and which were not. In our task, the target could ever only
appear at the cardinal locations, and furthermore, as in past work using this task (e.g.
Gaspelin et al., 2015; Oxner et al., 2023; Wang & Theeuwes, 2020) the target and non-
singleton distractor colour were the same and fixed for a given participant (e.g., green),
while the singleton distractor had a unique colour that was also fixed across trials (e.g.,
red). It is thus possible that participants learned that anything e.g., green at the four
cardinal locations was potentially relevant, and anything red was not. This possibility is
supported by the exploratory analysis of letter recall at task-relevant cardinal and task-
irrelevant diagonal locations, which showed that letter recall for letters at cardinally placed
non-singletons selectively increased over time as compared to letters at diagonal non-
singleton locations. Either in part or fully due to this effect, the reduction in capture
between session 1 and 2 was to a large extent driven by an increase in recall of letters at
cardinal non-singleton distractor locations, while detection of letters at the location of the
singleton distractor remained at approximately the same level between sessions. That is,
given that capture is expressed as the difference in letter recall between singleton and non-
singleton cardinal locations, the observed reduction in capture was at least to a large part
driven by enhanced letter recall at the non-singleton locations (i.e., in baseline letter recall).
This raises the possibility that global target colour enhancement contributed to the
observed effects. This could also explain why there was also no capture in novel contexts in
session 3: here, too, attention may have been selectively oriented towards the cardinal
locations with a shape of the target colour. Rather than contextual learning, a context with
low contextual uncertainty may have in other words, allowed participants to pick up on
generic predictive structure in the task, which may have induced an attentional strategy of
attending to anything e.g., green at the four cardinal locations.
As noted in our introduction, findings from a recent study provide direct support for the
possibility that the observed reduction in capture over time reflects global colour
enhancement. Using a similar search-probe task with search displays of set size 4 (i.e., a
condition with relatively low contextual uncertainty), Oxner et al. (2023) found that the
amount of capture observed varied as a function of target-non-singleton colour similarity:
the more similar the non-singletons were in colour to the target, the more letter recall at
non-singleton locations increased, and conversely, capture (the difference in letter recall
between singleton and non-singleton locations) decreased. Oxner et al. argued that
therefore the previously reported reduction in attentional capture reported in studies
using a similar search-probe task with predictable target and singleton colours does not
reflect proactive suppression, as is commonly assumed (Gaspelin & Luck, 2018; Luck et al.,
2021), but rather global target colour enhancement. Our findings are in line with this
proposal and moreover suggest that contextual variability may affect the development of
global feature attention.
Our data leave unresolved whether proactive suppression may have also contributed to the
observed reduction in capture, next to global target colour enhancement. Participants likely
also learned that anything e.g., red (the singleton) at the cardinal locations was not task-
relevant (see also Vadillo et al., 2021), as otherwise, one may also expect enhanced letter
recall at the singleton location due to target location learning. The fact that letter recall at
singleton locations did not increase over time could indicate the absence of global target
colour enhancement, distractor colour suppression, or both. Notably, a recent ERP study
found that the Pd, a distractor-evoked ERP component typically associated with distractor
suppression (Gaspelin et al., 2023), was reduced in amplitude when the target colour was
not predictable compared to when it was predictable, despite the fact that in both
conditions, the distractor colour was fixed and hence always predictable (van Moorselaar
et al., 2023). This suggests that target colour expectations can also account for reductions
in attentional capture observed in conditions in which the target and distractor colour are
both predictable, as in our study. Of further relevance, another recent study found that the
Pd reflects selection of non-target locations (opposite to the singleton distractor with a
predictable colour), not distractor suppression (Kerzel & Huynh Cong, 2023). Future
studies using EEG are necessary to better understand to what extent brains can proactively
suppress distracting information based on past experience, or mainly engage in target
feature up-weighting.
As mentioned above, in our previous study (Jungerius et al., 2023), when contextual
variability was high (all search configurations were possible), we found a general increase
in letter recall across two sessions at all task-relevant cardinal locations, regardless of
shape colour, indicative of target location learning. The fact that we did not find enhanced
letter recall at the singleton location over time in the current study, but only at the non-
singleton and target locations, may therefore suggest that under low statistical volatility,
more complex predictions can be formulated that combine target location foreknowledge
with target colour foreknowledge to bias attention towards possible targets (Saenz et al.,
2002) and away from distractors – in this case, because of a net shift of attention towards
items with the target colour (e.g., green) at possible target locations. Albeit an indirect
comparison, given that we previously did not observe this effect in a context of high
contextual variability, this suggests that such integration of colour and location
foreknowledge is dependent on (the estimated) statistical volatility of the search
environment. Indeed, a largely separate literature shows that learning is dependent on
(assumptions about) the uncertainty of the task context (Mathys et al., 2011; Zinchenko et
al., 2018). It is notable in this respect that previous studies showing alleged proactive
suppression typically used search tasks in which the target and non-singleton colours were
also the same and fixed and in which contextual uncertainty was relatively low, as the
search display only contained 4 or 6 items (e.g., Gaspelin et al., 2015, Wang & Theeuwes,
2020; but see Stillwell & Gaspelin, 2021). In general, our findings illustrate the importance
of taking contextual uncertainty, as well as of global feature enhancement into account in
the study of distractor suppression (Wöstmann et al., 2022). They also highlight the fact
that brains continuously try to predict what aspects of the environment are informative for
goal-directed behavior, and which are not, taking into account the estimated reliability of
the sensory environment (Feldman & Friston, 2010; Friston, 2010; Slagter & Moorselaar,
2021)
In conclusion, the present study identifies contextual volatility as a determining factor of
the brain’s ability to learn about, combine, and exploit task-relevant features in multiple
dimensions to efficiently guide attention during search. As contextual uncertainty also
varies as a function of search set size, and the number of search items is often manipulated
within experiments and typically varies across studies of visual search, it is important that
researchers consider this in future designs. Moreover, the present findings suggest that in
search tasks in which the colours of the targets and non-singletons are the same and
predictable, global feature enhancement may enhance task performance in face of
distraction, next to or rather than singleton suppression.
Declarations
The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this
article.
Open Practices Statement