TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 1
Modality Influences Perceived Film Suspense But Not Time Perception
Lara Kläffling1, Julian Sittel2, Markus Huff1,3
1: Department of Psychology, Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen, Germany
2: Institute of Film Studies, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, Germany
3: Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien, Tübingen, Germany
Author notes
Julian Sittel
We have no known conflict of interest to disclose.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Markus Huff,
Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien, Schleichstr. 6, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. Email:
m.huff@iwm-tuebingen.de
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 2
Abstract
The present preregistered study tested whether perceived suspense in horror films is
responsible for the feeling of time flying. Because suspense, the feeling of excitement,
narrows the attentional focus and time perception also relies on attentional processes,
suspenseful film watching might eventually influence the perception of time. We investigated
the effects of perceived suspense in horror film excerpts and film modality (visual vs.
audio-visual) on time perception by using a prospective time reproduction paradigm.
Participants watched short film clips from classic horror films in which a red cross was
overlaid for a short period of time. Participants reproduced the duration of the red cross and
rated their perceived level of suspense for each film clip. Results showed that audio-visual
film clips led to higher suspense ratings. However, the expected interaction of film modality
and perceived suspense level on time perception performance, higher levels of suspense
leading to shorter temporal reproductions for audio-visual than visual clips, was not
significant. Finally, an exploratory analysis showed that the presence of auditory information
influenced the perceived suspense more for endogenous suspenseful film clips (i.e., film clips
with ambiguous visual information) than for exogenous suspenseful film clips (i.e., film clips
with non-ambiguous visual information). We discuss the findings in the light of current
theories of emotion, time perception, and film.
Keywords: horror films, suspense, time reproduction, prospective time perception,
film perception
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 3
Modality Influences Perceived Film Suspense But Not Time Perception
The immersive power of a suspenseful narrative, enhanced by stirring audio and
visual cues, can transport viewers from the reality of their immediate surroundings to the
palpable tension of a cinematic world (Bezdek & Gerrig, 2017). This immersive experience
often distorts the perception of time, leaving audiences startled to discover that the movie has
reached its conclusion, seemingly sooner than expected - a phenomenon that highlights the
compelling influence of storytelling techniques that bind nature to the narrative.
Viewers generally appreciate the feeling of suspense (Zillmann et al., 1975), making
horror films popular and attracting millions worldwide (Martin, 2019). The effectiveness of
horror films in inducing suspense and altering psychological processes such as attention
(Bezdek et al., 2015) and immersion/transportation (Bezdek & Gerrig, 2017) is widely
acknowledged. Auditory information in horror films might play a crucial role in this process
because the audio tracks have a powerful impact on the viewers’ emotional (Boltz, 2001) and
attentional state (Meitz et al., 2020), as well as on transportation (Huff et al., 2023) and
memory (Meyerhoff et al., 2022; Meyerhoff & Huff, 2016). Using a prospective time
reproduction paradigm (Zakay, 1993), we studied how perceived suspense levels of visual
and audio-visual horror film excerpts affect viewers’ time perception.
Suspense, defined as “an anticipatory emotion, initiated by an event which sets up
anticipations about a forthcoming (harmful) outcome event for one of the main characters.”
(de Wied et al., 1992, p. 325), dissolves when the resolving event is presented. However, an
empathetic relationship with the main character is not necessarily required to evoke suspense.
In horror films, for example, even supporting characters become victims of a murderer (Sittel,
2023) (see Appendix A and Appendix B). Psychological models of suspense (Lehne &
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 4
Koelsch, 2015) propose that the feeling of suspense or tension originates from events
associated with conflict, dissonance, instability, or uncertainty. These feelings trigger
processes of prediction concerning future events. The divergence between the affective
values of the anticipated events leads to the experience of suspense. The bigger the difference
in valences of the possible outcomes, the higher the perceived suspense.
In the generation of suspense through the narrative structure of a story, timing is a key
aspect. The longer the wait for a resolution, the more time to build up suspense. The feeling
of suspense can be heightened by adding more sequences between the initiating event and the
outcome event (de Wied et al., 1992). This not only prolongs the period in which tension can
build up, but also delays the resolution event a bit after its expected appearance and also leads
to higher tension because it creates new uncertainty about the timing of the resolution, not
just the resolution itself (de Wied et al., 1992). Besides the narrative structure, other elements
of films, such as decorative elements (Delatorre et al., 2017) and music (Bezdek et al., 2015;
Boltz, 2001), are used to produce suspense through the guidance of attention or activation of
particular suspenseful schemata. Sound plays a crucial role in suspense generation, as it leads
to higher suspense ratings (Bezdek et al., 2017) and higher physiological reactions such as an
increased heart rate and skin conductance (Bente et al., 2022) compared to only visual
stimuli. Specific conventions regarding sound design linked to danger already lead to certain
expectations about the outcome of a scene (Auer et al., 2012; Bullerjahn & Güldenring,
1994). Boltz (2001) presented participants with three ambiguous film clips with positive,
negative, or no music. Their task was, among others, to extrapolate the film's ending and
evaluate the main character’s personality and motivations. The results showed that positive
and negative music significantly biased viewers' interpretation and subsequent memory of a
film in a mood-congruent fashion compared to the control group of no music. Thus it is not
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 5
surprising that congruent, that is, suspenseful film music leads to even higher suspense
ratings (Bezdek et al., 2017).
Often, a combination of methods is used in films to induce suspense (Neuendorf &
Sparks, 1988), and typical suspense techniques vary between genres and media types
(Bateman, 2017; Sittel, 2023). Based on research in film studies on horror films respectively
slasher films1 (Sittel, 2023), two forms of suspense can be distinguished by the type of
information on the proximity of danger: Endogenous and exogenous suspense.
Neuroscientific work (Hudson et al., 2020) suggests that the spatiotemporal proximity of a
threat is the central factor linking the complex and dynamic interactions between sustained,
anticipatory, and acute, reactive fear experiences. On this basis, semantic factors potentially
associated with anticipatory and reactive processes were classified in comparison with
additional cognitive and neuroscientific research (Auer et al., 2012; Bradley et al., 1993; P. J.
Lang et al., 1998; Wang & Wang, 2020; Willems et al., 2011). In the course of this alignment,
Sittel (2023) established the distinction between endogenous and exogenous suspense, which
mirrors the differentiation between anticipation and reaction.
Endogenous/anticipatory suspense is associated with spatiotemporal distance and
characterizes an implicit form of suspense in which the threat is not directly identifiable. In
the films studied, this is often carried by neutral visual information preceded by fearful
1 Slasher films are a sub-genre of the horror film that originated in the US and Canadian
independent films of the 1970s and 1980s (Petridis, 2019; Sittel, 2023). The films, some of
which are based on highly conventionalized narrative and staging techniques, usually center
around one (or, more rarely, several) killer. As a dramaturgical point of suspense, the killer
usually stalks and murders the members of a group that is gradually isolated from one another
with the help of various murder tools.
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 6
contextual information: It is not what the audience sees, but what they do not see. The
activities shown on screen are not inherently suspenseful but rather ambiguous. There is often
a discrepancy between the knowledge of the naïve protagonist and the viewer, who knows
how close the murderer is. These techniques make neutral activities, such as looking for a cat
or getting a car key, suspenseful (Redfern, 2012; Sittel, 2023).
Exogenous/reactive suspense is associated with a spatiotemporal directness, primarily
involving content that is accompanied by an identifiability of the killer - for example, when
he murders another character or chases a victim. Exogenous suspense is therefore
characterized by an acute threat situation, usually with little to no chance of the victim
escaping (Bradley et al., 1993; P. J. Lang et al., 1998; Redfern, 2012) or critical visual
information.
In the context of research on horror films, an annotation model has been developed
that distinguishes between endogenous and exogenous suspense, making it possible to
evaluate all films with consistent labels (Sittel, 2023). This allowed the statistical comparison
of shots that are similar in content across the corpus, especially in terms of the modal features
that occur in them. The analysis revealed that horror films, against the background of
endogenous and exogenous image semantics, tend to use modality-specific features that
support the associated processes of anticipation and reaction (see Appendix for examples).
Cinematically, exogenous scenes often involve increased editing frequency, a series of
close-ups, low lighting, and loud music. This stimulus constellation has a perceptual
activating effect and sets the audience, parallel to the fear-inducing image content, into a state
of high arousal (Wang & Wang, 2020); on the other hand, high sound intensity and reduced
visual input support the fear experience in general (Hudson et al., 2020). From a formal point
of view, endogenous suspense generation is much more implicit: Suspense is conveyed by
darkness, a relatively low volume and long shots (from the murderer’s point of view and
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 7
other shots showing the periphery). This fosters anticipatory processes as the audience,
spurred by fearful context, diligently searches the scene for visual cues of impending danger
(Auer et al., 2012).
The feeling of suspense influences the media recipient's affective, physiological, and
cognitive states. A suspenseful story is more absorbing and is perceived as more realistic
(Green, 2004). It also leads to higher enjoyment (Tal-Or & Cohen, 2016). Suspense structures
in media increase self-reported narrative absorption (Bálint et al., 2017; Tal-Or & Cohen,
2016). Additionally, suspense induces physiological responses such as a higher skin
conductance (Meinel & Bullerjahn, 2022). Perceiving suspense also affects cognitive
processes during media consumption. The greater the suspense in a film, the more
pronounced the alignment of hemodynamic brain activities among viewers, as measured by
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (Schmälzle & Grall, 2020). Like fear
(Finucane, 2011), suspense narrows the attentional focus. Viewing suspenseful films leads to
worse performance on a secondary task, like reacting to auditory stimuli, but to increased
selective attention (Bezdek & Gerrig, 2017). This effect was also shown in neuroimaging
studies. In a study by Bezdek et al. (2015), participants watched suspenseful film clips while
their hemodynamic brain activity in visual processing areas was measured via fMRI. The
results showed increased brain activity in central visual processing areas and, simultaneously,
a decrease in peripheral visual processing areas.
Taken together, the feeling of suspense changes basic psychological processes such as
attention. Further, sound plays a crucial role, including clips with an endogenous suspense
structure. In the following, we elaborate on the influence of sound on psychological film
processing. In this article, we use the concept “audio track” as an umbrella term for “film
music”, “sound effects”, and “ambient sound”. In particular, we do not distinguish between
music and other sounds but speak of the audio track in general.
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 8
Over the past years, methods of experimental psychology have been used to
understand the role of sound information in (Hollywood) cinema (Cohen, 2005). From this
research we know that attention (i.e., cut detection), perception (i.e., event segmentation),
recognition memory, and the feeling of presence are different for films with and without
audio track (Huff et al., 2023; Meitz et al., 2020). Sound also influences the attentional focus
in films. Smith and Santacreu (2017) investigated the influence of sound on edit blindness
(i.e., the film viewers’ inability to correctly recognize the temporal location of a filmic cut).
The results showed that participants were quicker and more accurate at detecting cuts in film
clips without sound than in clips with sound. This effect may have been due to less
engagement with the visual compared to the audio-visual content or due to the more cognitive
resources on the cut-detection task in the visual condition because the processing of
additional auditory information reduces the available resources for processing the visual
information in the for audio-visual stimuli (A. Lang, 2000). Film music as an example for
audio in film also serves as additional information that aids to structure a viewer’s visual
perception and can influence the processing of new information through “topdown” processes
in interaction with previously established schemata (Bullerjahn, 2001). The choice of music
in a film clip also has an impact on gaze patterns, which determines the perceived visual
information (Auer et al., 2012). The presence of audio tracks in movies thus seems to aid the
maintenance of the viewers’ engagement with the visual content (Smith & Martin-Portugues
Santacreu, 2017) and the perception of relevant information by guiding the viewer
(Bullerjahn, 2001) and, thus, might also be an important factor influencing experienced
suspense (Bezdek et al., 2017). The inclusion of audio tracks in films exerts a significant
physiological impact on viewers; clips featuring audio tracks induce elevated levels of skin
conductance, heart rate, and respiration rate compared to their silent counterparts (Wöllner et
al., 2018).
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 9
Taken together, auditory information in films changes psychological and
physiological processes. In the following, we elaborate on time perception as a central
perceptual process, also in film processing (Appelqvist-Dalton et al., 2022).
Time perception is complex and has many influencing factors (Block & Gruber, 2014;
Grondin, 2010) such as age (DroitVolet et al., 2015), stimulus length (Block & Gruber, 2014),
and experimental paradigm (Grondin, 2010). In the following, we focus on modality,
emotion, and attention as the dominant influencing factors in research on suspenseful films.
Visual signals are perceived as shorter than auditory signals with the same length (Zélanti &
Droit-Volet, 2012). Importantly, the affective state of the viewer also influences time
perception. Droit-Volet et al. (2011) used film clips to induce different moods in participants,
who then performed a temporal comparison task. After fear induction, stimulus durations
were judged longer than after induced sadness or neutral film clips. Happiness, too, seems to
prolongate the subjective duration of a stimulus (Droit-Volet et al., 2013). The effect of
attentional focus on time reproduction appears gradual, as Macar et al. showed (1994). In
their study, the participants were asked to actively change the amount of focus on time vs. the
second non-temporal task using different proportions. The more the participants focused on
time, the smaller the errors they made in a time reproduction task. In other words: the
underestimation of duration increased with a higher degree of attention on the second task.
Thus, attention is involved in suspense and plays a key role in time perception.
Taken together, modality, emotion, and attention influence time perception. These
effects also appear in time perception during film processing (Appelqvist-Dalton et al., 2022;
Droit-Volet et al., 2011).
Experimental overview and hypotheses
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 10
This study seeks to elucidate the perceptual underpinnings of horror films by
investigating the relationship between time perception, perceived suspense, and modality.
Attention plays an important role in film perception, including absorption and time
perception. It is also influenced by the feeling of suspense, which narrows the attentional
focus. The question arises whether the experience of suspense in film influences the
perception of time. One link is that suspense increases the absorption into the medium, which
leaves fewer attentional resources for stimuli outside the narrative. Because the modality of a
medium also influences the level of absorption and the amount of attentional resources used
(Koelewijn et al., 2010), the impact of sound in film on time perception must also be
controlled. To investigate this link, we chose clips from Hollywood horror films as stimulus
material and combined them with a time reproduction task. Using film clips as stimuli in time
perception studies is common (Droit-Volet et al., 2011). The film clips varied in suspense
level and included both exogenous and endogenous suspense scenes, and were varied in
modality as they were shown with and without audio track.
By examining how different types of suspense generation (endogenous vs.
exogenous) and auditory cues affect time perception, we aim to gain a better understanding of
how horror films induce fear and anxiety in viewers. Ultimately, this research has the
potential to inform the development of more effective strategies for inducing suspense and
enhancing the overall horror film experience.
Hypotheses
In the present study, participants watched (audio-)visual film clips. They were asked
to reproduce the duration of a superimposed red cross (prospective time reproduction task)
and to estimate the perceived level of suspense. We expected that audio-visual film clips elicit
higher suspense ratings than visual film clips (H1 and manipulation check). Further, we
hypothesized that audio-visual film clips would lead to a shorter temporal reproduction than
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 11
visual clips (H2a). As both suspense and sound are involved in generating absorption, we
expected that the difference in temporal reproduction between visual and audio-visual film
clips increases with increasing suspense level, which may be due to a super-additive
generation of absorption (H2b). In addition to those preregistered hypotheses
wording during the course of the study to better represent the state of research), we explored
the interaction of modality and suspense type on suspense estimation.
Method
We report how we determined our sample size, all data exclusions (if any), all data
inclusion/exclusion criteria, whether inclusion/exclusion criteria were established prior to
data analysis, all manipulations, and all measures in the study. The study was pre-registered
the local ethics committee of the ANONYMIZED INSTITUTION (ANONYMIZED
NUMBER).
Participants
We performed a power analysis following the approach outlined by Murayama et al.
(2022), utilizing data derived from a prior study on time reproduction (Gautier & Droit-Volet,
2002). To ascertain the requisite sample size, we employed the mixed-effects modeling
shinyApp-tool, focusing on a Level-1 predictor without incorporating cross-level interactions
for the primary Level-1 predictor, as recommended by Murayama et al. (2022). This power
analysis indicated that a sample of 43 participants would be necessary to achieve a statistical
power of 95%. To account for possible drop-outs, we collected data from 50 participants who
received either money (10 EUR) or course credits. The data of two participants were
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 12
excluded from further analysis due to the preregistered exclusion criteria of more than 25% of
their trials missing, leaving a sample size of 48 participants. The mean age of the sample was
M = 24.79 (SD = 3.59) years, 16 participants were male, and 32 were female.
Material
The experiment was programmed with PsychoPy. All instructions appeared in white
on a grey background. The stimulus material consisted of 20 film clips selected by Author 2,
a film scholar and a film expert, from classical Hollywood slasher films2 and had a mean
length of 67.85 seconds (SD = 19.37 s). The film clips showed different types of suspense
judged by the film expert: 4 clips were rated as “neutral”, 8 clips as “endogenous
suspenseful”, and 8 clips as “exogenous suspenseful”. An interrater reliability analysis,
including the category ratings of an independent second rater, confirmed this categorization,
k = .93, 95% CI [.84, 1.00] (Cohen's kappa, weighted).
The suspenseful clips ended right before the suspenseful situation was resolved. The
length of film clips was not different for the three suspense types, with the endogenous
suspenseful clips being longer (M = 78.75 s, SD = 23.43, range: 50-110 s) than the exogenous
suspenseful (M = 58.75 s, SD = 14.54, range: 44-92 s) or the neutral clips (M = 64.25 s, SD =
6.95, range: 56-73 s), F(2,17) = 2.59, p = .104, η 2 = 0.23. The clips contained no or minimal
irrelevant talking and were presented with and without sound.
Video stills of the stimulus material depicting the time reproduction stimulus (red cross) that
was presented in the upper left or right corner for 2.2 seconds.
2 In these films, the victims are often women, who were mostly chased by a male murderer.
We tried not to strengthen these images by selecting scenes that also showed men as victims
and women as offenders. A perfect balance was not possible.
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 13
During the time reproduction task, we instructed participants to reproduce the
duration of a red cross visual stimulus. The cross was displayed for 2.2 seconds and initiated
5.2 seconds prior to the clip's end, ceasing 3.0 seconds before the conclusion of the clip. The
duration of the time reproduction stimulus was determined considering the involvement of
attentional and cognitive rather than automatic processes, which are involved when studying
time reproduction tasks with shorter intervals (Mioni et al., 2013, 2014). The time
film clip had four versions: without sound and cross on the left, without sound and cross on
the right, with sound and cross on the left, and with sound and cross on the right. Four new
neutral film clips (about 30 s long) were used in the test trials. A full list of the films and the
film clips used in this study can be found in Appendix C. The red cross in the reproduction
task was in the center of the screen and had the size 0.5/0.5. The perceived suspense was
measured on a scale from 1 (“nicht spannend”, not suspenseful) to 9 (“sehr spannend”, very
suspenseful).
Procedure
Up to four participants were tested simultaneously in a multi-person laboratory. Partition
walls and headphones ensured that participants did not interfere with each other. After giving
informed consent to their participation and giving their demographic data (age and gender),
the participants received the instructions for the study on paper. The study contained four
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 14
practice trials comprising a film clip, the time reproduction task, and the suspense
measurement. The position of the red cross in the clips and the modality of the clips were
balanced in the practice trials. The practice trials were not included in the data analysis.
After the practice trials, the study consisting of 20 experimental trials commenced. As for the
test trials, each experimental trial consisted of one of the film clips followed by the time
reproduction task and the suspense measurement. A three-second countdown followed each
clip in green digits before another red cross appeared for the time reproduction task. So taken
together, the interval between stimulus presentation and the reproduction of its duration was
six seconds long. In the time reproduction task, the participants were instructed to press the
space key to indicate the end of the first cross’s presentation duration. The suspense
measurement followed this: the participants rated how suspenseful the clip was using the
digits of the keyboard. They had to press the space key again to start the next trial. Every
participant watched all 20 of the experimental film clips, half of the clips with sound and half
of them without sound. For every participant, half of the red crosses in the clips were on the
left side and half on the right side. The four versions of the clip were balanced among the
participants using the Latin Square method so that they appeared equally often during the
experiment.
At the end of the experiment, the participants were asked whether they had seen any
of the films used in the study before. To ensure that the participants did not leave the
experiment distressed, the study ended with a video of baby cats playing as a relaxing
experiment was approximately 35 minutes in total. Participants reported no signs of fatigue.
Design
Modality (audio-visual vs. visual) was manipulated within subjects. We considered the
perceived suspense level of the clips as a continuous variable. The duration of the temporal
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 15
reproduction in seconds and the perceived suspense rating on a scale from 1 to 9 were
measured as dependent variables.
Results
Data preparation and descriptive data analysis
Before analyzing the data, we applied the preregistered exclusion criteria to the data: all trials
for which the temporal reproduction was shorter than 0.20 seconds or longer than the upper
box plot criterion, lying outside the whisker with a length of 1.5 IQR, were excluded from
further analysis, leading to the exclusion of 24 of the 1000 total trials (2.40%). Two
participants were omitted from the analysis because more than 25% of their trials have been
excluded. Thus, the final sample consisted of 48 participants. We then calculated descriptive
statistics of the data set. The grand mean temporal reproduction in total was M = 2.59 s (SD =
0.78), mean suspense estimation was M = 4.87 units (SD = 2.43) on a scale from 1 to 9.
The influence of the modality of the film clip on suspense estimation (H1 and
manipulation check)
A paired t-test confirmed that the modality of the film clips influenced suspense estimation.
Film clips with sound were rated as being more suspenseful (M = 5.37, SD = 1.49) than clips
replicating earlier work (Bezdek et al., 2017). Repeating this analysis, only including the
participants who indicated that they had not watched any of the used films before (N = 34)
confirmed this finding, t(33) = -9.31, p < .001, d = 0.71. Since only a few participants (N =
14) have indicated that they have watched any of the films before the used experimental
3 Note that we inadvertently did not preregister this analysis.
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 16
design (i.e., within-subjects, film clips counterbalanced across experimental conditions)
prevents an in-depth analysis of this subgroup.
Suspense estimation for film clips as a function of modality.
The influence of modality and suspense estimation on time reproduction (H2a, H2b)
We hypothesized that the modality of the film clips influences temporal reproductions with
shorter temporal reproductions with audio-visual than visual film clips. However, temporal
reproductions for film audio-visual (M = 2.59 s, SD = 0.52) and visual film clips (M = 2.59 s,
using a noninformative Jeffreys prior revealed substantial evidence for the null hypothesis,
BF = 0.16 (Wetzels et al., 2011). Thus, we found no support for H2a, instead, we presume the
null hypothesis is true.
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 17
Next, we tested the hypothesis that modality and suspense estimation influence
temporal reproduction (H2b). In particular, we expected the difference in temporal
reproduction between visual and audio-visual film clips to increase with increasing suspense
levels. We used linear mixed-effects models, including modality and suspense estimation as
fixed effects and random intercepts for participants and film clip. We analyzed the model’s
parameters with a type-II ANOVA, using the ANOVA function of the car package (Fox &
Weisberg, 2010). Neither the main effect of modality, χ2(1) = 0.00, p = .959, nor the main
effect of suspense, χ2(1) = 0.10, p = .755, nor their interaction, χ2(1) = 0.873, p = .350, were
estimation as fixed effects and random intercepts for participants and film clip, revealed
decisive evidence for the null hypothesis, BF = 0.0008 (Wetzels et al., 2011). Thus, we found
no support for H2b, instead, we presume the null hypothesis is true.
Repeating these analyses, only including the participants who indicated that they had
not watched any of the used films before (N = 34) confirmed these findings. Neither the test
of H2a, t(33) = -0.62, p < .541, d = 0.05, nor the test of H2b, all χ2 < 1, all p > .622, were
significant.
To exclude the possibility that participants’ performance changes across the course of
the experiment (e.g., due to anticipation processes, tiredness, or boredom), we calculated the
differences between the mean time estimation time in the first and second half of the
experiment for each participant and submitted the values to a t-test. We did not find a
significant difference between the first and second half of the experiment, t(947.03) = 0.99, p
= .321, d = 0.06.
Temporal reproduction in seconds as a function of suspense estimation and modality.
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 18
The interaction of modality and suspense type on suspense estimation
Finally, we explored the interaction of modality (visual, audio-visual) and suspense type
(endogenous, exogenous) on the dependent variable suspense estimation. We excluded the
“neutral” film clips, aggregated the data on the participant level, and submitted them to a
two-way within-subjects ANOVA with modality and suspense type as the two categorical
variables. There was a significant main effect of modality F(1, 47) = 108.30, p < .001, η2 =
0.70, which is in accordance with the results of the manipulation check stated in H1, as well
as a main effect of suspense type, F(1, 47) = 42.79, p < .001, η2 = 0.48, on the perceived
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 19
suspense level. The suspense estimations were overall higher for exogenous suspenseful film
clips (M = 5.90, SD = 1.81) than for endogenous suspenseful film clips (M = 4.93, SD =
1.78). Notably, the significant interaction of suspense type and modality, F(1, 47) = 11.25, p
= .002, η2 = 0.19, showed that the presence of audio influenced the perceived suspense more
for endogenous suspenseful film clips (i.e. for the clips depicting more ambiguous visual
perceived suspense level between modalities was 1.4 units for endogenous suspenseful film
clips (M = 4.23, SD = 1.60 without sound; M = 5.63, SD = 1.68 with sound), but only 0.82
units for exogenous suspenseful film clips (M = 5.49, SD = 1.76 without sound, M = 6.31, SD
= 1.79 with sound).
Suspense estimation as a function of modality and suspense type (exogenous vs. endogenous).
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 20
Discussion
In the present study, we hypothesized that the modality in horror films (audio-visual
vs. visual) influences perceived suspense. Further, we expected that the modality is directly
related to time perception, with temporal reproduction in audio-visual film clips being shorter
than in visual film clips and we expected this effect to be more assertive with a higher
perceived suspense level. This hypothesis was based on a presumed conflict of attentional
resources proposed in the capacity models of attention (Kahneman, 1973; Tombu & Jolicœur,
2003). The additional perceptual information provided by auditory information should lead to
a higher attentional load, leaving fewer resources for the timing task. As suspense also
influences the attentional capacity, we expected a similar effect here.
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 21
However, although the suspense level was rated higher in audio-visual than in visual
film clips, thus replicating Bezdek et al. (2017), the perceived suspense level was not related
to temporal reproduction performance. Contrary to our expectations, time perception
remained unaffected by both the modality and the suspense level of the film clips.
Interestingly, a Bayesian analysis further substantiated this observation, providing compelling
evidence to support the lack of influence. Interestingly, those reported effects were consistent
whether we included the participants who have indicated having watched the used films
before or not. This finding contributes to the "paradox of suspense," which asks how viewers
can experience suspense when they already know the outcome of the story (Chun et al., 2020;
Smuts, 2021; Steinbeis et al., 2006).
Further, the exploratory analysis revealed that the perceived suspense level depends
on modality and suspense type. Auditory information in audio-visual film clips increased the
perceived suspense level more for endogenous suspenseful film clips than for exogenous
suspenseful film clips. In the following, we discuss how the findings of our study integrate
with research on attention, time perception, and suspense.
Suspense and sound
Our results show an effect of audio tracks in film on suspense estimations and align
with preexisting work (Bente et al., 2022; Martin, 2019). This connection might be explained
by looking at previous research on the effect of sound in film, which often focused on the
effect of film music on film perception: film music can impact film perception directly
through musical elements and indirectly by activating learned reactions, including suspense
(Bezdek & Gerrig, 2017). Film music can convey semantic information, leading to common,
predictable associations in recipients (Auer et al., 2012; Herget, 2021). As the classical
slasher films used in this study use similar audio tracks to indicate suspense the viewers
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 22
might have had previously learned reactions that connected the audio track to the experience
of suspense. Taken together, sound seems to play a crucial role in the generation of suspense
by impacting the emotional as well as cognitive processes of the viewer. Besides activating
particular schemata and the direct activation of suspense through music, sound also impacts
the guidance of attentional focus on the information perceived in a film scene (Auer et al.,
2012). We speculate that it may influence the degree of narrative absorption, which could
influence film reception and suspense generation. The effect of sound on suspense generation
and the underlying mechanisms need to be looked at more closely in further research.
This impact of sound on suspense varies depending on cinematic characteristics; the
present study suggests differences in the impact of sound on suspense generation depending
on the characteristics of the film scene, more precisely, the suspense type used in the film
scene. Auditory information influenced the generation of perceived suspense much more for
endogenous suspenseful film clips than for exogenous suspenseful film clips. This finding
aligns with the cinematographic differences between endogenous and exogenous suspenseful
film scenes. Endogenous suspenseful film clips depict mostly neutral visual scenes; other
elements like knowledge inequality, and shots from the murderer’s point of view are added to
create suspense. The activities shown on screen are not inherently visually suspenseful and
can be interpreted differently. In the presence of additional sound information, the scenes are
more likely to be judged as suspenseful as emotional and cognitive schemata associated with
suspense are activated, leading to the correct interpretation of the film scene (Boltz, 2001). In
contrast, exogenous suspenseful film clips depict suspense more explicitly displayed in the
fighting and chasing scenes (Redfern, 2012). In the present study, exogenous suspenseful
clips (i.e., with less ambiguous visual content) received higher suspense ratings overall. Yet,
additional sound information increased the suspense ratings for exogenous suspenseful clips
to a lower degree than for endogenous suspenseful clips. Thus, the relevance of auditory
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 23
information in suspense generation is more minor for exogenous suspenseful film clips, as the
suspense schema seems to be already activated by the visual characteristics of the film scene.
The presence of auditory information thus may be especially important when the visual
content of the scene does not suffice to provide complete information on the storyline as it
aids the correct interpretation of a scene as suspenseful by activating specific schemata, and it
also activates the adequate emotional response.
Further research is needed to investigate how different mechanisms of suspense
generation may interact and how the mechanisms differ depending on the cinematic type of
suspense generated. The present study conceptualized endogenous and exogenous suspense
as two distinct categories. Yet, it seems reasonable to assume that those suspense types are
the opposite ends of a continuum representing the spatiotemporal distance to the thread
(Hudson et al., 2020). Future research is needed to study this assumption and how it relates to
suspense estimations. In addition, differentiating auditory information in a film’s audio track
(e.g., sound, music) and measuring its influences on basic film perception processes seems
promising. This could help better understand the generation and the structure of suspense.
Attention
Cinematic characteristics such as cuts (Garsoffky et al., 2007) and sound (Meitz et al.,
2020; Smith & Martin-Portugues Santacreu, 2017) influence attention during film watching.
In suspenseful film watching, the narrative relevance of the spot and the activity influences
how much the focus of attention (Bezdek et al., 2015) lays on the target stimulus and,
therefore, which visual processing areas are involved in viewing the specific film clip. In our
study, the stimulus location differed regarding the relevance of suspense induction across film
clips. The high overall variance in temporal reproduction thus could be a reflection of the
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 24
variance in the focus of attention in accordance with the results of Bezdek et al. (2015). Next,
we will look at other processes besides attention involved with time perception.
Time perception
Although there was no effect of suspense on time perception, the complexity of time
perception could be considered here as multiple factors influence time perception besides
attention, such as memory (Droit-Volet et al., 2011; Waldum & Sahakyan, 2013) and attention
(Zakay et al., 1983). The longer the interval between the presentation of a stimulus and the
estimation of its duration in a prospective paradigm, the more memory processes are involved
in prospective time estimations (Zakay & Fallach, 1984). In our study, the time reproduction
task was not immediately after the presentation. Thus, memory processes might have also
influenced the performance in temporal reproduction.
In addition to cognitive processes, emotions influence time perception, too
(Droit-Volet et al., 2011; Mioni et al., 2016). Fear (Droit-Volet et al., 2011) and anxiety
(Mioni et al., 2016) both lead to an increase of the inner pacemaker involved in time
perception and lead to overestimations of durations. We speculate that the suspenseful
material used in the present study might explain the general overestimation of time, as
suspense is associated with the emotions of fear, hope, and anxiety (Lehne & Koelsch, 2015).
Yet, further research is necessary to directly address the question of whether suspenseful clips
lead to a general overestimation as compared to neutral or even joyful clips.
The modality of a film clip may have moderated the increase of the pacemaker
because auditory information plays a key role in eliciting emotion during film watching
(Droit-Volet et al., 2011). Thus, there may be a possible interaction of attentional and
emotional effects on time perception.
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 25
Additionally, the semantic structure of films also influences psychological processes
(Huff et al., 2014). Intervals containing event boundaries (i.e., time point at which observers
perceive a boundary between two meaningful units of time; Zacks et al., (2007) are generally
judged to be longer than intervals with the same duration without event boundaries (Bangert
et al., 2020; Meyerhoff et al., 2015). The presence of event boundaries varied in the film clips
in our study due to their origin from actual films for high external validity. Thus they could
have impacted the performance in the time reproduction task.
Taken together, time perception does not solely depend on attention but is heavily
related to memory processes, emotions, and the nature of the stimulus material. The
interactions of cognitive and affective effects on time perception need to be looked at more
closely in future research and be taken into account during study conception.
In addition to other influences on time perception besides attention, methodological
issues with the study need to be taken into account as well. They will be discussed more
closely in the “Limitations” section of the study.
Limitations
In the following, we discuss the limitations of the present study, which mostly relate
to study design decisions. This discussion allows the evaluation of the boundary conditions of
the reported null effects regarding time reproduction more precisely. The actual suspense
variation in the participants might have been less grand than expected because the interval
between the clips may have needed to be sufficiently long for the suspense to diminish.
According to the excitation transfer theory (Zillmann, 2008; Zillmann et al., 1975), the
suspense of a previous clip might still be present in the following clip, leading to higher
suspense even in otherwise neutral clips. Because the participants rated the suspense of the
present clip on a scale and there was no measure of their acute suspense level, there might be
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 26
a discrepancy between their rating and the experienced suspense leading to a distortion in the
results.
In the present study, the time reproduction stimuli (red cross overlay) length was set
to 2.2 seconds and was the same in each film clip. This methodology aligns with established
research in the field (Hellström & Rammsayer, 2004; Lewis & Miall, 2003). However, it
may have constrained the study's scope, given that time perception is known to vary with
different stimulus durations (Block & Gruber, 2014). Moreover, the consistent duration of the
stimuli across trials may have facilitated a learning effect, allowing participants to form
temporal anticipations that were independent of other variables. Such an effect could
potentially skew the results by enabling strategic forecasting of the stimulus duration by the
participants. Despite these considerations, we maintain that such a learning effect impacting
our results is unlikely for several reasons. First, the variable onset of the time reproduction
stimulus—owing to differing lengths of film clips—ensured that the interval between the start
of each clip and the stimulus presentation was not consistent. This variability in timing likely
mitigated the potential for anticipation based on clip duration. Second, literature on the
influence of spatial attention in dynamic visual contexts has demonstrated no significant
performance discrepancy when comparing predictable to unpredictable scenes (Huff et al.,
2010). Third, our analysis revealed no variation in time reproduction accuracy between the
initial and subsequent halves of the experiment, suggesting the absence of a learning curve
effect over the course of the study’s timeline.
In this study, we examined the impact of relatively short film excerpts, a method in
line with established practices in film perception research (Huff et al., 2023; Meitz et al.,
2020; Papenmeier et al., 2022). However, the extent to which the effects observed with these
excerpts translate to longer segments or entire horror films remains to be clarified. Further
research is necessary to explore this.
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 27
In addition, we did not control for the allocation of attention nor measure the locus of
attention with eye tracking. Although attention in film was shown to be highly synchronous
(Loschky et al., 2015; Smith & Mital, 2013), we cannot exclude that there is some variability
between and within the participants in the placement of their attentional focus. Some may
have only focused on the red cross instead of on the clip during the stimulus presentation.
Because the more the focus is on time the less and smaller errors are made in time
reproduction tasks (Macar et al., 1994), the possible variance in the placement of attentional
focus may have led to more variance in the data. This possible source of variance could be
diminished by marking the beginning and end of the relevant interval instead of the
continuous presentation of a visual stimulus. It would ensure the visual attention is on the clip
instead of allocating it to a visual stimulus.
Additionally, we expected that the difference between clips with sound and without
sound would be higher with greater suspense due to an over-additive increase in narrative
absorption. We did not measure absorption directly, making it difficult to identify whether
there was no interaction between modality and suspense related to the generation of narrative
absorption or whether narrative absorption and suspense. Time reproduction relies on such
different cognitive mechanisms that there is no connection between them. The interaction of
suspense and modality in generating narrative absorption should be the subject of future
research.
Conclusion
The present study was a first step into understanding the interplay of suspense in film and
time perception. Although we did not detect a significant effect concerning either film
modality or perceived suspense on time perception, different possible sources of variation
could have influenced the results. Further research that includes the direct measurement of
narrative absorption and considers the affective aspects of suspense is needed to enable a
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 28
clearer image of the underlying processes of suspense and time perception. The manipulation
check stated in H1 showed a strong relation between modality and rated suspense, which
mainly relates to different influences of music on emotion and cognitive processing. The
relation differed between the suspense types, suggesting an interaction between cinematic
characteristics of a suspenseful film scene and the relevance of the audio track for suspense
generation. This result aids in understanding the mechanisms involved in suspense generation
in film and could lead to a better understanding of the suspense structure. We propose to
continue adapting methods associated with time perception and attentional psychology for
research on film psychology to further understand the processes underlying suspense and
other domains of film perception.
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 29
Data availability statement
Data and analysis scripts (for the statistical programming language R) have been made
Acknowledgment
This study was part of LK’s Bachelor's thesis.
Author Contributions
LK, JS, and MH developed the study concept and design. JS selected the stimuli. LK and MH
designed the stimuli and programmed the experiment. LK performed data collection under
the supervision of MH. LK and MH performed data analysis. All authors drafted the
manuscript. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript for submission.
TIME PERCEPTION IN SUSPENSEFUL FILMS 30