Hearing with two pairs of ears: Simultaneous bilingual children
show language-specific phoneme perception for /b/ and /p/ in
English and Mandarin Chinese
1 1 2,3 2 1,3
Lei Pan , Han Ke , Beth A. O’Brien , Yi Ting Leong & Suzy J Styles
Psychology, School of Social Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Centre for Research in Child Development, National Institute of Education, Singapore
Centre for Research and Development in Learning (CRADLE), Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore
*Corresponding author at: LIFESPAN Research Centre #14-01, 11 Mandalay Rd, Lee Kong Chian
School of Medicine, Clinical Sciences Building, 308232, Singapore.
E-mail: panl0006@e.ntu.edu.sg
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Fei Ting Woon, Rui Qi Choo, Annabel Loh Kaihui and
Wong Jin Yi for their assistance on contacting parents.
Funding: This research was funded by the National Research Foundation, Singapore, under the
Science of Learning programme (NRF2016-SOL002-011), and the Centre for Research and
Development in Learning at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (JHU IO 90071537).
Credit Authorship Statement. Conceptualization: LP, SJS and BAO. Methodology and software:
LP and HK. Validation and formal analysis: LP, HK and SJS. Investigation: YTL and BAO.
Resources and supervision: SJS and BAO. Data curation: LP and YTL. Writing (original draft and
editing): LP, SJS, BAO, YTL and HK. Visualization: LP and SJS. Project Administration: YTL.
Funding Acquisition: SJS.
Data availability: The data and code generated for this study are available on Open Science
ORCID
Abstract
Adult perception of voice onset time (VOT) for early bilinguals of English and Mandarin shows a
mix of language-specific features (VOT boundary) and features shared across both languages
(shared perceptual slope). To understand the development of this pattern, 81 English-Mandarin
bilingual children in Singapore (7.6y - 9.1y) were tested for identification of words drawn from
/b/-/p/ VOT continua in each language. Principal Component Analysis of language exposure
extracted two components: bilingual balance and age of acquisition. In generalized linear mixed-
effects models, test-language was a significant predictor of perception, with earlier VOT
boundaries and steeper slopes for English. Contrary to predictions arising from adult studies,
children’s bilingual balance did not significantly predict phoneme perception. Children also show
lower slopes than adults overall, suggesting perceptual development is ongoing at this age. These
findings have implications for phoneme perception in screening for language or reading difficulties.
Keywords: phoneme perception, perceptual development, bilingual balance, language exposure
1 Introduction
Phonological perception of speech sounds in spoken languages is shaped by linguistic experience
from infancy (Kuhl et al., 1992; Werker & Tees, 1984), and perception continues to develop
through adolescence into early adulthood (Feng & Peng, 2023; Flege & Eefting, 1986; Hazan &
Barrett, 2000; Medina et al., 2010; Meng et al., 2022; Sussman, 1993). However, exposure to two
languages from birth, with dual phonological systems and lexicons, can result in different
pathways to language development for bilingual children (Hoff et al., 2012), including bi-/ or
multilingual phoneme development (Sebastian-Galles & Santolin, 2020). At present, the field of
phonological development is overrepresented by data about monolingual development, leaving a
gap in our understanding of how phoneme development proceeds for different kinds of bilingually
exposed children.
In phoneme perception tasks, adults show lower ability to discriminate between two speech sounds
drawn from a single phoneme category, than two speech sounds drawn from two contrasting
categories (Abramson & Lisker, 1970). Experiments can investigate either phoneme
discrimination (Liberman et al., 1957) or identification (Lisker & Abramson, 1964): During an
identification task, participants are tasked with making a decision on two target sounds they heard.
The identification function is described by the proportion of responses identified as one of two
categories, at each step in the continuum – with responses typically taking the form of a
characteristic ‘s-curve’ psychometric function. The crossover point denotes the position along the
speech continuum where an individual transitions from identifying one phoneme category to
another, and therefore represents the phoneme boundary for each participant. The slope value
corresponds to the gradient of the identification function precisely at the crossover point, and
therefore represents how well-defined the transition is between one phoneme category and another.
Phoneme perception changes rapidly in infancy (Burns et al., 2007; Kuhl, 2007; Werker et al.,
2012), with early linguistic experiences impacting perception into adulthood, even in the absence
of continued exposure to early-heard speech sounds (Choi et al., 2017; Singh & Seet, 2019). With
continued exposure, phoneme perception continues to develop through the childhood years. For
example, in one phoneme perception study for the /ba/-/da/ contrast, 5- to 6-year-old English
speaking children (N=10) showed less mature phoneme identification functions than English
speaking adults (N=10) (Sussman, 1993), and in a study of four consonant contrasts (/ɡ/-/k/, /d/-
/ɡ/, /s/-/z/ and /s/-/ʃ/) gradual refinement of the steepness of the identification function for
monolingual English speakers was observed for children (N= 84) across the age range of 6 12
years, with even further refinement for a comparison group of adults (N=13) (Hazan & Barrett,
2000). The upper bound of phoneme perception development seems to fall somewhere in the
teenage years, as shown by one recent study of Mandarin speakers (Meng et al., 2022), in which
adolescents aged 12 14 years (N=20) exhibited perceptual thresholds and identification functions
that did not differ from those of adults (N=24). In addition, some studies of the /d/ - /t/ contrast
have reported age-related differences in both the threshold and the slope of the identification
function (Flege & Eefting, 1986), while others report only age-related differences in the steepness
of the slope (Medina et al., 2010) — differences which may be due to different acoustic properties
of the phonemes in the test languages (English and Spanish, versus French, respectively). Taking
these studies together, immature responses are often identified by their shallow slope. Some
researchers have shown relationships between low slopes and developmental differences such as
weak phonemic awareness (Chiappe et al., 2001) and reading difficulty (Noordenbos & Serniclaes,
2015), albeit drawing their data from a narrow range of European languages. However, as little is
known about the nature of the slope of the identity function for children with different kinds of
linguistic exposures, further research on the trajectory of phoneme development in bi-/ and
multilingual children is needed.
Few studies have investigated the trajectory of phoneme perception in bilinguals, with the majority
of studies focussing on the infant years (c.f., Sebastian-Galles & Santolin, 2020). Following the
monolingual biases in the literature, many studies have investigated bilingual perception by
comparison with a supposed monolingual ‘standard’ (Mack, 1989; Williams, 1977). However, in
communities with stable intergenerational bilingualism, local varieties may emerge through
contact, whereby the perceptual targets do not align with monolinguals from different speech
communities. For this reason, it is important to conduct studies where bilingual perceptual models
are considered adaptive in their context, whether or not a relevant monolingual comparison group
exists. For example, Garcia-Sierra and colleagues found that Spanish-English bilingual adults
(N=15) show a dual perceptual model for /g/ and /k/ when presented in the context of their two
languages, while monolingual English speakers (N=15) did not (Garcia-Sierra et al., 2009).
According to their study, bilinguals show a skill relevant to their speech context, which
monolinguals are not able to perform to the bilingual ‘standard’.
Given the gap in existing knowledge about phoneme perception development in bilingual children,
this study investigates 7-to-9-year-old children growing up in Singapore. According to the
Singapore Census, over 90% of young adults, and 70% of 5 to 9-year-olds use two or more
languages at home (Singapore Census of Population, 2020). In Singapore, due to inter-generational
bilingualism, most people are exposed to both English (the main language of education, business
and governance) and another of Singapore’s official languages (Mandarin Chinese, Malay and
Tamil) from early in development.
One recent report on phoneme perception in early adult bilinguals of English and Mandarin in
Singapore has shown that the phonemic processing of stop consonants in bilingual speakers differs
across a bilingual speaker’s two languages (Pan et al., 2022). Adults’ early bilingual balance
demonstrates a significant correlation with the comprehensive slope of the identification function,
affecting both of their languages together: Bilingual adults with more exposure to English during
early childhood had steeper slope values in general, and those with more Mandarin had shallower
slope values in general. The present findings imply that individuals with proficiency in multiple
languages may refine their phoneme perception abilities towards a specific language during early
childhood. Subsequently, they may apply and adapt their perceptual framework to a language
acquired later in life, thereby adjusting the perceptual boundary while maintaining the slope
derived from their stronger language. The Slope Transfer Model was proposed to explain how this
aspect of tuning may occur across childhood, but to date, no developmental studies have tested
whether this transfer actually occurs. The current study is a test of whether the Slope Transfer
Model accurately captures the developmental trajectory of phoneme perception between childhood
and adulthood in English-Mandarin bilingual children.
2 Methods
Building on existing work on bilingual speech perception, we conducted phoneme identification
tasks in two language contexts and collected language background data for each participant,
including early language input and age of acquisition for each language. A child-friendly phoneme
identification task — Categorical Recognition for Onsets of Word Names (CROWN Game; Ke et
al., 2021) — in English and Mandarin was used to examine the identification of phonemic contrasts
in both languages known and used by bilingual children in Singapore. This study recruited children
who are bilingual in English and Mandarin to investigate how bilingual children perceive phoneme
categories within the context of two linguistic systems characterized by variations in the timing
and gap between typical articulations of /b/ and /p/ phonemes along the voicing continuum. To
assess phoneme perception in bilingual children, each individual underwent testing on two
languages, spaced across different days.
2.1 Participants
Participants in the current study were recruited in a longitudinal project that aims to investigate
the relationship between bilingual English-Mandarin children’s language environment and the
contribution of auditory skills to later literacy outcomes (O’Brien et al., 2019). In the longitudinal
project, the first wave of data collection (T1) recruited 155 children, 117 in their second year of
kindergarten and 38 in their beginning of primary grade 1. At T1, 138 children (age range: 5.7 7.1
years old, M = 6.3 years, SD = 0.4; 69 girls) performed the phoneme identification task in English.
The second wave of data collection (T2) included 105 children from T1 in the end of primary grade
2 to the beginning of primary grade 3. The current study tested phoneme identification in English
and Mandarin by the bilingual children from T2.
One hundred and two children bilingual in English and Mandarin participated in the study, seven
children only completed the English task, and eight children only completed the Mandarin task,
resulting in 87 children who completed both tasks in their languages. Among them, language
background questionnaire data were collected for 84 children. Three participants were excluded
on the basis that they did not perform one of the tasks in line with instructions. In total, data from
81 children (age range: 7.6 9.1 years old, M = 8.4 years, SD = 0.4; 45 girls) was analysed according
to the required sample size in the pre-registration. All parents reported the children were born,
raised, and presently reside in Singapore.
Parents rated the language proficiency of their children across the domains of ‘understanding when
people speak’, ‘speaking to others’, ‘reading’ and ‘writing’ using a seven-point scale (ranging from
7 for native-level proficiency to 1 for limited vocabulary, with 0 indicating non-applicability) for
each respective language. All children were reported to have strong language skills in English
(Understanding: Median = 7, IQR: 6 7; Speaking: Median = 7, IQR 6 ; Reading: Median = 7,
– : –7
IQR: 6 7; Writing: Median = 6, IQR: 5 7), and a range of language skills in Mandarin
– –
(Understanding: Median = 6, IQR: 5 7; Speaking: Median = 5, IQR: 4 7; Reading: Median = 5,
– –
IQR: 3 6; Writing: Median = 4, IQR: 2 6).
– –
2.2 Stimuli
Audio stimuli in the CROWN Game for English (Ke et al., 2020) and the CROWN Game for
Mandarin (Pan et al., 2021) are comprised of 16-step VOT continua of /b/ and /p/ initial words
ranging from -60ms VOT (pre-voiced) to +90ms VOT (aspirated), representing target words are
“beach” /biːʧ/ and “peach” /piːʧ/ in English and target words are “鼻” /biː2/ ‘nose’ and “皮” /pʰiː2/
‘skin’ in Mandarin Chinese. Stimuli for both languages were synthesized from natural tokens
spoken by a single bilingual native speaker of the Singaporean variety of English and Mandarin,
using the pitch-cued spoken vowels procedure (Styles, 2017), in a sound attenuating room. 16-bit
mono wav recordings were made at a sample rate of 44.1kHz with a Sennheiser MKH 416 Shotgun
Condenser Microphone connected to a ZOOM H4n Pro Handy Recorder. English and Mandarin
tokens exhibit distinct acoustic properties consistent with the prototypical articulations of their
respective target languages. Further details of audio processing are reported in Pan et al.'s (2022)
study. Testing was conducted online as part of a larger study which included a battery of
standardized assessments that assess sensory processing abilities and language and literacy skills
in English and Mandarin Chinese. Due to the time constraints in the testing battery, some
methodological adjustments were made to reduce the testing load for the younger age group. A
reduced version of the paradigm was created, by selecting alternate tokens to create an 8-step VOT
continuum, spanning the original VOT range, in 20ms steps. The reduced version comprised
precisely half the number of trials found in the complete version.
2.3 Procedure
We used the reduced English version and Mandarin Chinese version of the open access gamified
CROWN Game In the task, a participant is presented with audio tokens, and asked to decide which
of two words they heard (i.e., “beach” or “peach” in English; “鼻” ‘nose’ or “皮” ‘skin’ in
Mandarin Chinese). To help children engage with the materials, the task is embedded in a gamified
narrative about a “little monkey” (Chinese: “小猴子” /ɕjɑʊ3 xoʊ2 tsɯ3/), who is collecting tokens
to go to a party. In each version of the task, children are asked to instruct the monkey to do different
things depending on which word they hear. In the English version, children instruct the monkey to
"go to the beach” or "eat a peach". In the Mandarin version, children are asked to help the little
monkey at mealtime, by instructing him to "find a banana using your nose" or "clean up your
banana skin." While the target words are depicted on the screen, a speech sound is randomly drawn
from the continuum, and the participant is asked to respond by pushing a response key located
below the picture ("c" for the left image or "m" for the right image) to indicate their decision.
Following the keypress, an auditory 'pop’ plays, accompanied by animated visual feedback, to
show that the monkey followed instructions. The study begins with a short narrative introduction,
followed by two practice blocks, in which the /b/ and /p/ tokens were selected from the ends of the
VOT continua (four practice trials per block). Subsequently, each experimental block is comprised
of each token in the 8-step VOT continuum, presented in random order. At the end of each block,
the monkey collects a token, and after 10 blocks, the game is complete, resulting in decisions about
80 audio tokens.
screen depicts the presentation of stimuli. Right (Mandarin), a screen displays feedback following the
selection of the target image.
Parents of the recruited children were contacted via e-mail with a link to a digital Enrolment Form.
Upon the submission of the completed Enrolment Form, the parent was signposted to complete
the online Language Background Questionnaire, and an appointment for participation via Zoom
was arranged. All participants took part in a technical check session lasting approximately 15
minutes, and two experimental sessions on different days, within the same week where possible.
Testing for each session was conducted in the target language (Session 1: English, Session 2:
Mandarin) with bilingual language support for any child who was unsure of the task instructions
in one of the languages. Each session lasted approximately one hour, including the CROWN Game
(approx. 15 minutes). During the Zoom meeting, the researcher explained the CROWN Game to
the children, before starting the procedure for children to follow. The study was approved by the
Institutional Review Board (IRB-2018-11-002). Informed consent was obtained from parents of
all participants. Experimental procedures were in accordance with the relevant guidelines and
regulations. The study’s design and hypotheses were preregistered on Open Science Framework
2.4 Measurements
To assess the impact of bilingual balance on phoneme perception in both languages of bilingual
children, Generalized Linear Mixed-Effects Models (GLMM) were employed.
Early-year languages. Parents were asked to complete a Language Background Questionnaire,
which asked for an estimate of how much of the time each caregiver spent speaking different
languages to the child, along with the relative amount of time they spent with the child. These
estimates of language exposure were used to compute a Composite Language Input Profile of
English (CLIP-E) and Composite Language Input Profile of Mandarin (CLIP-M) were calculated
according to the formulae below (Woon, 2018).
CLIP-E = Caregiver 1 (% speaking English × % care time) + Caregiver 2 (% speaking English × %
care time) + …… + Caregiver 6 (% speaking English × % care time)
CLIP-M = Caregiver 1 (% speaking Mandarin × % care time) + Caregiver 2 (% speaking Mandarin
× % care time) + …… + Caregiver 6 (% speaking Mandarin × % care time)
Age of acquisition. Parents reported the age at which caregivers started using a specific language
to talk to the child. Age of acquisition of English (AoA-E) and age of acquisition of Mandarin
(AoA-M) were also collected using the Language Background Questionnaire.
Threshold and slope. The binary responses were used to calculate the proportion of /p/ selections
at each step on the continuum, and a psychometric function was fitted using the quickpsy function
in R (Linares & López-Moliner, 2016). The psychometric curve can effectively be described by
the 50% crossover point (i.e., point on the continuum where the fitted curve shows a threshold
between majority /b/ decisions and majority /p/ decisions) and the slope at this threshold (i.e., the
steepness of the slope at the threshold). Curve fitting was conducted separately for each language.
3 Results
A Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was conducted to include all linguistic background
variables in a multifactorial model of bilingualism. Following a power analysis based on the
previous study on bilingual adults from the same community, the analysis plan and stop rule were
preregistered before data linking and analysis.
3.1 Language exposure pattern
Correlations were checked for the early language exposure variables from the Language
inverse correlation between AoA-E and CLIP-E (r = −0.55, p < 0.001), and a positive correlation
between AoA-E and CLIP-M (r = 0.58, p < 0.001), indicating that earlier acquisition of English
aligns with more overall English exposure and less overall Mandarin exposure. In addition, the
early language input in English and in Mandarin are tightly correlated for most participants (r = -
have other languages contributing to their input profile in their early years.
Mandarin input) with the colour scales showing a ‘bilingual balance’ factor from more English dominant
(blue) to less English dominant (red). N=81. Right: scatter plot of AoA-E (age of acquisition of English) and
AoA-M (age of acquisition of Mandarin) with the colour scales showing a PCA-derived ‘age of acquisition
variance’ factor from earlier acquired Mandarin (orange) to later acquired Mandarin (green). N=81.
Horizontal jitter = 0.5; Vertical jitter = 0.3.
Given the issue of multicollinearity among independent variables in the estimation of GLMM, an
initial step involved performing a PCA on the interrelated language background variables. This
approach aimed to identify and extract factors that most effectively capture the shared variance
among these measures. The suitability of conducting a factor analysis for the correlated variables
was indicated by the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy (KMO = 0.63) and the
Bartlett's test of sphericity (χ (6) = 183.86, p < 0.001).
for language background variables.
Loading Loading Commun
Variables 1 2 3 4 Mean SD 1* 2* alities
1. AoA-E 1 0.45 1.08 0.78 0.20 0.64
2. AoA-M 0.13 1 0.26 0.76 0.05 0.98 0.97
3. CLIP-E −0.55** 0.10 1 58.97 29.45 −0.94 0.10 0.89
4. CLIP-M 0.58** −0.03 −0.92** 1 38.56 29.74 0.95 −0.11 0.91
* two principal components (PC1: bilingual balance, PC2: age of acquisition variance) were extracted
with initial eigenvalues of 2.39 and 1.03
** significant correlations at the alpha level of 0.01 (2-tailed)
variables were entered, with emphasis placed on factors that account for more than 25% of the
cumulative variance. As initial eigenvalues revealed that the two extracted factors accounted for
59.69% and 25.75% of the total variance, these factors were considered significant sources of
linguistic variance among children. The first factor (PC1) was identified as and termed ‘bilingual
balance’, and the second factor (PC2) was identified as and termed ‘age of acquisition variance’.
CLIP-E, CLIP-M, and AoA-E exhibited substantial component loadings on the bilingual balance
factor. Thus, individuals with higher PC1 scores were characterized by greater exposure to early
Mandarin input, less exposure to early English input, and an earlier acquisition of Mandarin
compared to those with lower PC1 scores. Two ends of the spectrum of bilingual balance can be
characterized as “more English dominant” (low scores) and “less English dominant” (high scores).
Across the board, children were reported to have more exposure to English than Mandarin,
meaning the less English dominant end of the scale can also be considered more ‘balanced’ in their
pattern of exposure. AoA-M had a large component loading on PC2, the age of acquisition variance
factor, such that individuals with higher PC2 scores acquired Mandarin earlier than individuals
with lower PC2 scores. The two ends of the spectrum can be characterized as “earlier acquired
Mandarin” (low scores) and “later acquired Mandarin” (high scores). English-Mandarin bilingual
children recruited in the study exhibited a variation in their degree of bilingualism. In general,
there was a large degree of diversity in children’s patterns of language exposure. Individual early
3.2 Behavioural response and curve fitting
B, C), and a single plot (D) combining the psychometric functions for each child in each language
(individual with median slope value highlighted). In general, the thresholds for the phoneme
identification task in English (M = 27ms, SD = 7.8) appear to be earlier than in Mandarin (M =
33ms, SD = 10.2), a finding which is consistent with previously reported acoustic measurements
for spoken Singapore Mandarin (Starr & Wang, 2018). Distribution of the individual behavioural
responses to auditory stimuli presented at each step of the VOT spectrum can be found in
languages, shown for three example children. The example children were selected according to the
difference between their slope value in English and in Mandarin, illustrating the interquartile range of
differences: Lower 25% (A); Median of both languages (B); Upper 25% (C). Bottom: Fitted identification
curves for all 81 bilingual children, with the median slope for each language highlighted (D). English = blue;
Mandarin = red.
This finding aligns with the pattern observed for adults from the same speech community. As the
logarithm of the slope values. The individual slope values differed between the two test languages,
with steeper slopes for the English language task (Back-transformed slopes. Median = 0.106;
Range: 0.021 6.031) and shallower for the Mandarin language task (Median = 0.082; Range:
3.3 Threshold
'bilingual balance' shown as a colour scale (blue: more English-dominant; red: less English-
dominant). To find out whether test language and language background predicted the threshold of
individual identification functions, a fully factorial GLMM was conducted on threshold using the
lmerTest R package (Kuznetsova et al., 2017). Fixed effects were test-language (effect coding:
−0.5; 0.5), PCA-derived bilingual balance, PCA-derived age of acquisition variance, and their
language had a signification impact on threshold (SE = 1.08, t = 5.26, p < 0.0001), with boundaries
for English phoneme identification falling at an earlier VOT step on the continuum than for
Mandarin phoneme identification (M = 27ms, M = 33ms). There were no further
English Mandarin
significant main effects nor interactions between the three fixed effects. Hence, we observed
discrete thresholds for children performing the phoneme identification task in English versus
Mandarin language contexts, without significant influence from children’s bilingual exposure.
N=81.
acquisition variance and their interactions, with random effects of participants (random intercept).
Fixed effects Estimate 95% CI SE t value* p value
(Intercept) 30.12 28.48 – 31.76 0.83 36.43 <0.0001
Test-language (Mandarin) 5.69 3.55 – 7.84 1.08 5.26 <0.0001
Bilingual balance (PC1) −0.08 −1.82 – 1.65 0.87 -0.10 0.925
AoA variance (PC2) 0.65 −1.01 – 2.32 0.84 0.78 0.438
Test-language:PC1 1.30 −0.97 – 3.57 1.14 1.14 0.258
Test-language:PC2 0.04 −2.12 – 2.22 1.10 0.03 0.973
PC1:PC2 −0.17 −1.45 – 1.10 0.64 −0.27 0.787
Test-language:PC1:PC2 1.20 −0.47 – 2.87 0.84 1.42 0.159
Random effects
Residual 47.36 (SD = 6.88)
By-participant intercept 31.68 (SD = 5.63)
N / Observations 81 / 162
AIC / BIC 1173.5 / 1204.4
log-likelihood −576.8
* Smaller t value in the GLMM for threshold indicates earlier thresholds (ms) in the VOT continuum.
3.4 Slope
test-language, with their PCA derived bilingual balance factor. To test whether test language and
language background predicted the slope of individual identification functions, a fully factorial
GLMM was conducted on log-transformed slope. Fixed factors were test-language (effect coding:
−0.5; 0.5), bilingual balance, age of acquisition variance, and their respective interactions, with
predicted the steepness of the fitted identification curve (SE = 0.14, t = −3.95, p = 0.000168), with
steeper slopes for the English phoneme identification task and shallower slopes for the Mandarin
phoneme identification task. Bilingual balance and age of acquisition variance did not predict slope,
nor did interactions between the three fixed effects. Hence, bilingual children demonstrated
different slopes in their phoneme perception for each language, and the language-specific
differences were independent from their bilingual characteristics.
acquisition variance and their interactions, with random effects of participants (random intercept).
Fixed effects Estimate 95% CI SE t value* p value
(Intercept) −2.15 −2.37 – −1.93 0.11 −19.61 <0.0001
Test-language (Mandarin) −0.57 −0.85 – 0.28 0.14 −3.95 0.000168
Bilingual balance (PC1) 0.16 −0.07 – 0.39 0.12 1.40 0.165
AoA variance (PC2) −0.13 −0.35 – 0.09 0.11 −1.16 0.248
Test-language:PC1 0.11 −0.19 – 0.41 0.15 0.75 0.456
Test-language:PC2 0.11 −0.18 – 0.40 0.15 0.76 0.450
PC1:PC2 −0.12 −0.29 – 0.05 0.09 −1.38 0.170
Test-language:PC1:PC2 −0.10 −0.32 – 0.12 0.11 −0.87 0.389
Random effects
Residual 0.83 (SD = 0.91)
By-participant intercept 0.56 (SD = 0.75)
N / Observations 81 / 162
AIC / BIC 518.8 / 549.7
log-likelihood −249.4
* Larger t value in the GLMM for slope value indicates steeper slopes of the phoneme identification curve.
measured threshold of the English phoneme perception in 7.6 to 9.1-year-old bilingual children
(M = 27ms, SD = 8) is somewhat earlier than one recent report of phoneme perception in 5.5-to-
6.5-year-old bilingual children (Ke et al., 2021), which reported a threshold for English (M =
33ms, SD = 13), however no previous studies have investigated perception using the same task in
Mandarin Chinese speaking children (M = 33ms, SD = 10). The current finding of different
thresholds in two languages is consistent with one previous report of adults from the same language
context, where Pan et al. (2022) reported adult bilinguals’ thresholds of phoneme identification
task in English (M = 26ms, SD = 5) and in Mandarin (M = 36ms, SD = 7). The measured slope of
the English phoneme perception in 7.6-to-9.1-year-old bilingual children (Median = 0.106, Range:
0.021 6.031) is relatively mature compared to the recent report of phoneme perception in 5.5-to-
6.5-year-old bilingual children (Ke et al., 2021), which reported the slope for English (Median =
0.045, Range: −0.006 0.213). Slope values reported in the current study are substantially different
for each language, with higher slope values for the English language task than for the Mandarin
language task (Median = 0.082, Range: 0.008 3.392). However, language-specific differences
between slope values of the children are independent of their bilingual exposure patterns. The
current finding of different slope values in two languages differs from one previous report of adults
from the same language context, where Pan et al. (2022) reported adult bilinguals’ slope values
did not differ significantly in a phoneme identification task in English (Median = 0.217,
Range: 0.044 8.656) versus in Mandarin (Median = 0. 171, Range: 0.042 7.902).
– –
identification tasks reported in the current study, Ke et al. (2021) study and Pan et al. (2022) study.
Ke et al. (2021) Current study Pan et al. (2022)
Children (5.5–6.5 y) Children (7.6–9.1 y) Adult (19–27 year)
Threshold (ms) Mean (SD) Mean (SD) Mean (SD)
English 33ms (13ms) 27ms (8ms) 26ms (5ms)
Mandarin - 33ms (10ms) 36ms (7ms)
Slope Median (Range) Median (Range) Median (Range)
English 0.045 (−0.006–0.213) 0.106 (0.021–6.031) 0.217 (0.044–8.656)
Mandarin - 0.082 (0.008–3.392) 0.171 (0.042–7.902)
Since all three studies were conducted in the same language context, using the same task, and the
same language stimuli, comparison of the threshold and slope data across different ages allows
insights into the developmental trajectory of speech perception in bilinguals. The speech
perception threshold for the /b/-/p/ VOT contrast in English is not yet adult-like for bilingual
children by the age of 6.5 as shown by the higher value and larger spread of responses, but aligns
with adult perception by the age of 9 years. In the studies with both English and Mandarin language
tasks, children and adults show discrete representations for language-specific thresholds, which
are not linked to their language exposure patterns. The slope of the identity function for the /b/-/p/
VOT contrast in English develops gradually for bilingual children across the ages from 5.5 to 9
years and into adulthood. However, bilingual balance had an impact on adults’ slopes across both
languages, which was not observed in children in this study: Bilingual children by the age of 9
years exhibited discrete slopes for phoneme perception in both their languages, without influence
of their bilingual exposure patterns. Hence, phoneme identification by bilingual children appears
to mature asynchronously in terms of the threshold (language-specific targets achieved earlier)
versus slope (language-specific adaptation continues to be influenced by bilingual balance into
adulthood).
4 Discussion
In general, our findings of gradual developmental change in phoneme perception align with
previous studies on phoneme perception in tonal and non-tonal languages (e.g., Mandarin, English,
Spanish, French), where age-related differences have been observed in identification and
discrimination for consonant contrasts by children aged 6 to 12 as compared to adolescents and
adults (Feng & Peng, 2023; Flege & Eefting, 1986; Hazan & Barrett, 2000; Medina et al., 2010;
Meng et al., 2022; Sussman, 1993). This is the first study to investigate phoneme perception in
two languages using a lexical identification task for English/Mandarin bilingual children of early
school age. We find that 7- to 9-year-old bilingual children exhibit distinct perceptual boundaries
for English and Mandarin, showing that their perception is ‘tuned’ separately for each of the
languages they hear.
Perceptual attunement (or ‘tuning’) to the speech sounds a child hears in the languages of early
childhood is known to generate enhanced perception for native language contrasts, as early as the
end of the first year (Kuhl et al., 2006; Werker & Tees, 1984). This process may include increases
or decreases in perceptual sensitivity depending on statistical exposure to particular speech sounds
in the languages of exposure (see Kuhl, 2007 for a review). Prior research has established that
early language exposure can have long lasting impacts on auditory processing and phoneme
perception throughout adulthood, even for forgotten languages of childhood (Choi et al., 2017;
Singh & Seet, 2019). In the current study, the finding of discrete slopes independent from language
exposure rates differed from our preregistered predictions based on the Slope Transfer Model.
Our findings partially support the Discrete boundary model and the Discrete slope model of speech
perception for bilinguals (Pan et al., 2022). In these models, for bilinguals who hear languages
with different acoustic prototypes will show discrete perceptual profiles for each language, guided
by the acoustics of each spoken language: the language with prototypical articulations occurring
at earlier VOTs on the spectrum will elicit earlier perceptual thresholds, and the language with
prototypical articulations that are closer together on the VOT spectrum will exhibit steeper slope
values at the transition between two nearby categories. However, unlike one previous report of
bilingual adults having a unified slope which patterns with their bilingual balance, slopes for the
bilingual children at the age of 7- to 9- years are discrete and language specific.
Pan et al. (2022). (C, D) Schematic of the revised Slope Transfer Model of bilinguals’ phoneme perception
proposed in the current study. Phoneme identification curves for English and Mandarin are illustrated in
blue and red respectively.
According to the Slope Transfer Model proposed in Pan et al. (2022), an English-dominant
bilingual may start out with an English-tuned steep slope in childhood, and later transfer their slope
Mandarin-dominant bilingual may start out with a Mandarin-tuned slope in childhood, and later
B). However, as the children in the current study did not show the ‘unified slope’ predicted by the
original model, based on the current findings, we propose a revised Slope Transfer Model. In the
revised model, children start with discrete threshold and slope for each of their languages, but the
slope of their identification functions comes to align later in life – as a kind of bias arising from
the representations of their stronger language. For example, a typical English-dominant bilingual
may have discrete representations for perceiving phonemes in both languages in childhood (earlier
threshold and steeper slope for English, later threshold and shallower slope for Mandarin), and
then later on in development, the slope of their less dominant language (Mandarin) shifts towards
similar way, a typical Mandarin-dominant bilingual may have discrete representations for
perceiving phonemes in both languages in childhood (earlier threshold and steeper slope for
English, later threshold and shallower slope for Mandarin), and then later on in development, the
slope of their weaker language (English) shifts towards the slope of their more dominant language
stage it is unclear whether these differences arise from developmental changes across the lifecourse,
or represent generational differences in children’s language exposure in Singapore over the past
15 years.
It should be noted that there were substantial individual differences in the response pattern for
children in the sample. The majority of children showed the expected language-specific pattern of
perception, with earlier thresholds for English than for Mandarin, while a few children exhibited
the opposite (less than 25%), with earlier thresholds for Mandarin than for English. Similarly,
while most children had steeper slopes for English than for Mandarin, around 25% of children
exhibited the opposite, with steeper slopes for Mandarin than for English. The wide range of slope
responses (including patterns of difference uncharacteristic of the group), could be due to large
differences in perception among the population, or to variable task performance of the individual
on separate days. Even so, variability in slope remained largely independent of bilingual balance,
and the findings of the current study suggest that bilingual children typically have dual perceptual
models for the boundaries and identify function between phoneme categories in their two
languages, but that their model for how categories differ was independent from bilingual balance.
In previous literature, children’s slope in a phoneme identity task has been shown to predict reading
skills later in life (Chiappe et al., 2001; Noordenbos & Serniclaes, 2015), making it an important
target for possible screening for pre-readers at risk of developing reading difficulties. According
to the findings of the current study, we show two important caveats for the use of slope as a
predicter of reading ability in global contexts. First, languages with a larger difference between
VOTs for typical articulations of voiced and voiceless stops (here, Mandarin Chinese) may
generate lower slope values in the transition for perception of one category to another. This means
that a threshold for performance on a screening test developed in one linguistic context may be
wholly unsuitable for use in another linguistic context. This means that differences in language,
dialect or even the accent of test takers may generate high rates of false positives in a screening
test. Second, while the majority of bilingual children exhibit separate perceptual profiles across
their different languages, but this may not always be the case for an individual bilingual child: At
the group level we observed a difference between the perceptual profiles for each language,
however, a small proportion of individuals exhibited a shared slope values across their languages.
As bilingual’s shared slope might align with the perceptual profile of a non-test language, any
screening test may need to consider the total language exposure of bilinguals in the determination
of risk for later reading difficulty. Further studies will be needed to establish whether a single-
language test of slope is predictive of later reading difficulties.
5 Conclusion
In this study, we investigated the perceptual properties of bilingual children’s hearing for speech
sounds /b/ and /p/ at the onset of familiar words in English and Mandarin Chinese, at around the
time of school entry. We observed that, on the whole, children do not share a representation for
these speech sounds across their two languages (a phoneme category merger), but like adults, they
maintain discrete representations for each of their languages, in a perceptual pattern that aligns
with the prototypes of the spoken languages. Furthermore, simultaneous bilingual children exhibit
more discreteness than adult bilinguals from the same speech environment, in that they have
discrete slopes for the transition from one perceptual category to the other in each of their
languages, and these slopes are tuned to the acoustic structure of prototypical speech sounds in
their two languages. This is the first study of its kind to demonstrate superior language-specific
attunement in school-aged bilingual children, relative to adults from the same linguistic
community. While slope in a phoneme identity task is thought be a good predictor of reading skills
later in life, our findings suggest such tests should be treated with caution when applied across
different linguistic contexts, or when applied to children with diverse bi-/multilingual language
exposure.