The Application of Narrative Research in Psychology to
Teaching and Learning in Education
Derek Price
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Krieger School of Arts and Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
Abstract: Since the beginning of the application of narrative research in education and
teaching, it has produced good effects and many experiences worth summarizing in
mental health education and teachers' teaching in schools and colleges in China.
Discussing the results of the application of narrative research in education and
teaching, and explaining narrative research from the aspects of school mental health
education and teachers' narrative research, it has practical significance for education
and teaching.
Keywords: narrative research; narrative psychology; pedagogical applications
In 1979, Sabin first put forward the ideas of experience and narrative structure at
the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association (APA), explaining the
important role of narrative in the formation of personality and the construction of
meaning. At the same time, he also made narrative as a core component of personality
psychology, which was widely accepted. 1986, Sabin's book Narrative Psychology:
The Storytelling of Human Behavior, which was edited by Sabin, was released, and it
elaborated on Sabin's viewpoints.
According to Sabin, "stories are the basis for modifying experience and guiding
judgment and action". This marked the beginning of the emergence of narrative
psychology as a formal field of study in psychology. Simply put, narrative is
storytelling, or events and behaviors related to storytelling, which is mainly used to
describe a series of events that occur sequentially. Narrative research is a qualitative
research method, as a storytelling method can study the complexity of human
emotions, for example, love, attachment, personality traits and other aspects of the
external validity. It is widely used in the field of social psychology, developmental
psychology, and counseling psychology.
From the perspective of exploring the purpose of narrative psychology, its main
purpose is to discover the patterns of behavior and make predictions and
corresponding behavioral control, rather than pursuing the same or unfulfilled goals of
traditional psychology. The goal of narrative psychology lies in the understanding of
individual life behavior and individual life stories. Some scholars, represented by Prof.
Connelly, believe that people, in the process of long-term development, not only play
a role in the dissemination of stories, but also are the organizers and creators of stories.
After careful research, they found that the best way to study human beings is to
comprehensively analyze and summarize, record and write human experiences
according to their storytelling characteristics. Since the introduction of narrative
research in China, it has begun to receive the attention of schools and has been
increasingly used in school education and teaching, playing a useful role. Its
application mainly includes the following three levels.
I. The use of narrative research at the level of school mental health education, the
The main applications of narrative research in school mental health education are
school mental health programs and narrative psychotherapy. From the point of view of
narrative psychotherapy, its founder and representative are Australian psychologist
Mike White and New Zealand's David Epston. The so-called "narrative
psychotherapy" usually
It refers to the process by which the counselor, through the selection of
appropriate methods, identifies the missing pieces for the specific client, and then
evokes the client's inner strengths. The reason why it can receive important attention
in school mental health education is that narrative can provide in-depth information for
psychological research. Narrative information is a good supplement to the data
resources of psychological research, and at the same time, it is also an important basis
for in-depth study and analysis of specific cases. At the same time, narrative is often
closely related to reflection. When we narrate our own life stories, we are actually
scrutinizing ourselves.
Secondly, narrative therapy separates people from things, and looks at people
from the perspective of humanity instead of educating people with morality. From the
point of view of the relationship between the client and the counselor of narrative
therapy, narrative therapy allows the client to believe that he is his own expert, he
should be full of information about himself, and then believe that he has the ability to
solve the difficulties he encounters, and the counselor plays the role of accompanying
him throughout the process. For example, the client-centered therapy proposed by
Rogers. Narrative therapy works well with most people who are suitable for
counseling and is one of the most important counseling methods today.
Narrative psychotherapy is to let the client tell his/her own life story about his/her
personal situation, experience, etc. The instructor will use appropriate theoretical
methods and language to provide skillful guidance on the basis of listening, and in the
process of positive communication and exchange, the client will be able to find the
missing pieces and cognitive misunderstandings in his/her story, and then rectify,
supplement, or rewrite the whole story, and then positively promote the client's
enhancement of life motivation, increase inner strength, and then contribute to the
formation of positive cognition and reconstruction of good behavioral patterns. In this
way, we can help the person concerned to strengthen his/her motivation and increase
his/her inner strength, which in turn will help him/her to form positive cognition and
rebuild good behaviors.
At present, many educators use narrative psychotherapy in the ideological and
political work of college students and psychological counseling of college students. It
has been proved that its effect is quite obvious. In the article "Peer Narrative Teaching:
Accelerating the Gray Psychological Whitening of College Freshmen", we are
introduced to how to use peer narrative teaching to make students' psychological
healthier. The principle of peer narrative teaching lies in the fact that human beings are
the constructors of the meaning of individual life stories, and they can deconstruct the
old stories and construct new ones through the dialog of multiple voices of the self.
The new story continues to shape life and the psychological world of the person.
Based on this principle, it is argued that through exploration, experimentation, and
completion
It is possible to identify a proven model for teaching peer narratives to alleviate or
eliminate the psychological problems of college freshmen on a large scale and with
high efficiency. Its practical application is to allow students to experience the problem
as something external to them through their own presentation of the story. In this way,
they will be able to rationally find the "beauty" in the life story and get rid of the
identification with negative roles.
School mental health class is also another important platform for the application
of narrative research. In the article "Narrative Research on "Experiential Teaching" in
Mental Health Classes", it is shown that the most important principle of mental health
classes is their practicality, therefore, under the guidance of the idea of curriculum
reform as a whole, the experiential teaching method is mainly utilized to focus on
experiential activities, and good results have been achieved. Therefore, under the
guidance of the idea of overall reform of the curriculum, the experiential teaching
method is mainly utilized, with experiential activities as the main focus, and has
received good results.
"Experiential teaching" is centered on classroom experiential activities. Teachers
design corresponding themes and experiential activities according to the content of the
teaching, stimulate students' emotions in the process of doing the activities, and after
the activities, students are asked to write down their "testimonials" to record their
emotional experiences and make self-analysis. Self-analysis. In this way, students can
realize their own problems while doing the activity and have a strong desire to solve
them. In the course of the activity, the students realized that what they were
experiencing was also experienced by others in their age group, which to a large extent
alleviated the students' anxiety.
Narrative approaches to school psychology counseling are varied and generally
include narrative writing tutoring, reading therapy, narrative tutoring, narrative
blogging, group narrative tutoring, and so on. Other forms of counseling are familiar.
It should be noted that in recent years, blog narrative counseling has begun to be used
more and more in psychological counseling. Blog, meaning "web log" in Chinese, is a
kind of group listening and expression activity on the Internet. It closely combines the
narrative counseling function of reading and writing with the function of computer
writing, communication and interaction, and becomes a modern narrative counseling
method. Network writing is secretive, convenient to participate and interactive across
time and space, and blog narrative counseling not only enables people to reveal their
hearts more openly, but also makes it easier to get spiritual help and support from
people who know each other or don't know each other.
II. The use of narrative research at the level of everyday education and teaching
The disconnect between theory and practice in education has been criticized by
many. Teachers' narrative research can be an effective way to bridge the growing gap
between theory and practice, between researchers and practitioners. The term
"educational narrative" usually refers to a first-person narrative that tells the story of
what has happened or is happening in education.
Educational narrative research refers to research that uses or analyzes educational
narrative material. Its basic characteristic is that the researcher expresses his or her
understanding and interpretation of education in the form of narratives and storytelling.
It does not directly define what education is or how it should be done, but simply tells
the reader one or more stories about education so that the reader can experience what
education is or how it should be done. The story is a past or ongoing educational event.
It contains specific characters closely related to the event and has a certain plot.
The study of teachers' narratives can include three major aspects. First, the study
of teachers' educational thoughts. For example, the study of teachers' thoughts behind
their daily behaviors and the study of teachers' thoughts in their life stories can provide
theoretical and practical support for the occurrence and development of teachers'
behaviors, and better construct a framework of thoughts for teachers' lives. Secondly,
research on teachers' teaching activities.
The value of the teacher's profession lies in showing oneself in teaching and
learning activities, and further developing one's own knowledge and that of the
students. Narrative research is based on teachers' educational and pedagogical
activities, which is conducive to teachers' understanding of themselves, and thus
contributes to the overall development of the field of education. Thirdly, the study of
learners-objects of education. For the learners
Multidimensional research (e.g., on students' cognitive characteristics, personality
traits, individual differences, etc.) facilitates a better understanding of learners'
interests, hobbies, and so on.
III. The use of narrative research at the level of school-based training
"School-based training" refers to a form of whole-person continuing education
under the guidance of educational experts, with the school in which the teacher serves
as the basic training unit, and with the main goal of improving the teacher's
educational and teaching abilities, training all teachers through educational teaching
and educational research activities.
Compared with other research methods, educational narrative research can
effectively bridge the gap between educational research and educational practice,
between educational theorists and educational practitioners, and is more in line with
the practical needs and conditions for primary and secondary school teachers to carry
out school-based research, thus making it an important means of school-based training
in primary and secondary schools.
Educational narratives have many advantages, but in practice, for example, in the
field of educational research, there is a lack of science. It is not possible to draw a
simple equation between "educational narrative" and "educational narrative research".
In the process of the introduction of educational narrative from abroad and its
localization, educational theorists have not formed a set of valuable operational
methods, and some people put on their own words, mechanically applying the specific
processes and techniques of educational researchers' narrative research, and treating
them as the methods of teachers' narratives. Therefore, how educational narratives
should be carried out needs further in-depth research by theorists.
The lack of universality is also a limitation. Educational narratives discover the
meaning of education from the specific story situations narrated by teachers, which
makes the interpretive conclusions drawn also situational, and such situations are
unrepeatable, unable to answer the universal questions and build a universal general
theory based on them. Therefore, the inability to obtain universal experience from
educational narratives also makes it seem difficult for educational narratives to be
recognized in the hall of fame. Moreover, because the authenticity and objectivity of
the educational story, the final outcome of the educational narrative, cannot be tested,
some scholars do not recognize it as a method of educational research.
From the above, we can see that psychological narrative research plays an
important role in the field of education and teaching. At present, our country's
educational work, first of all, we should improve the evaluation and incentive
mechanism, strengthen the methodological guidance to arouse the enthusiasm of
teachers for educational research.
When a teacher is able to conduct a serious review of his or her own educational
life, the author believes that it is entirely possible to write a high-quality educational
narrative. However, if it is only for the sake of fame and fortune or for the purpose of
accomplishing tasks, it is very difficult to write a high level of educational narratives.