REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
The Role of Rewards in Motivation—Beyond Dichotomies
Lisa Bardach1,2* & Kou Murayama2
1University of Giessen, Department of Psychology
2University of Tübingen, Hector Research Institute of Education Sciences and Psychology
* Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Lisa Bardach, University of
Giessen, Department of Psychology, Otto-Behaghel-Str. 10F; Phone: +49 (0) 641 99 26251;
E-mail: Lisa.Bardach@psychol.uni-giessen.de
Acknowledgments: This research was partly supported by the Alexander von Humboldt
Foundation (the Alexander von Humboldt Professorship endowed by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research; to Kou Murayama). Lisa Bardach is supported by a
Jacobs Foundation Research Fellowship.
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
Abstract
A vast amount of research has examined how extrinsic rewards influence motivation in
learning. Whereas some studies have indicated that rewards are beneficial for increasing
students’ motivation, others have argued that rewards undermine motivation, especially so-
called intrinsic motivation. In this review, building on the reward-learning framework of
knowledge acquisition, we argue that the two perspectives do not actually contradict each
other and that researchers should look beyond the simple dichotomy of whether rewards are
good or bad for motivation. Rewards can be conceptualized as either extrinsic incentives (i.e.,
extrinsic rewards) or internal positive feelings that arise from the learning process or from
knowledge acquisition itself (i.e., intrinsic rewards). Importantly, the framework suggests the
possibility of motivation transformations in that extrinsic rewards can serve as an “entry
point” for engagement, thus helping students start up the positive feedback loop of internally
rewarding learning processes. However, once such a positive feedback loop has been
established, extrinsic incentives could interrupt the process, potentially undermining long-
term engagement. We outline several mechanisms that may transmit motivation
transformations and related future research directions. Our discussions are enriched with
references to gamification and educational videogames.
Keywords: incentives, undermining effect, reward-learning framework, gamification,
reinforcement learning
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
The Role of Rewards in Motivation—Beyond Dichotomies
Should teachers worry that giving students gold stars or stickers for completing
writing assignments decreases their motivation? Will it backfire if parents buy their child ice
cream or give them extra pocket money as a reward for outstanding academic efforts or
achievements? Given the popularity of videogames for educational purposes, should we be
concerned that the rewards students receive in a game (e.g., badges, points, medals) have
long-term negative consequences for their engagement and motivation? Reward systems are
ubiquitous in education, and they have long been criticized for their potentially negative
effects on students’ motivation, especially intrinsic motivation (e.g., Deci et al., 1999; Kohn,
1993; Vansteenkiste et al. 2010). However, other groups of scholars have claimed that the
detrimental impact of rewards has been greatly exaggerated and that rewards can, at times,
even enhance (intrinsic) motivation (e.g., Cameron et al., 2001; Woolley & Fishbach, 2017).
To date, a large number of studies have investigated how rewards affect individuals’
motivation to learn, and empirical support is available for both perspectives: Extrinsic
rewards decrease motivation (e.g., Deci et al., 1999; Murayama et al., 2010), but extrinsic
rewards also increase motivation (e.g., Cameron et al., 2005; Woolley & Fishbach, 2017).
In this paper, we argue that the two perspectives do not actually contradict each other
and that the whole discussion of rewards and motivation would benefit from moving beyond
the simple dichotomy of whether rewards have positive or negative effects. We draw on the
reward-learning framework of knowledge acquisition (Murayama, 2022; Murayama et al.,
2019) to overcome this dichotomy and reconcile the contrasting perspectives. Specifically,
we suggest that extrinsic rewards can help set in motion the positive feedback loop of
internally rewarding learning processes, particularly for learners who are initially
unmotivated. Once learners engage in learning (initially, in order to receive extrinsic
rewards), many opportunities to experience internal rewards from learning arise. Hence,
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
motivation that is based on extrinsic rewards can transform into motivation that is based on
intrinsic rewards, a process we call motivation transformation. However, we also caution
that, as soon as a positive feedback loop of knowledge acquisition is established, extrinsic
incentives may interfere with the process, and this interference, in turn, harms long-term
engagement. We call for more research to build a robust body of knowledge on motivation
transformations. Such an evidence base can then potentially feed into the development of
personalized reward provision systems that acknowledge the significance of diverse types of
rewards that cater to distinct tasks and individual students in various stages of the knowledge
acquisition process.
Rewards and Motivation: A Long-Standing Debate
According to Schulz (2006, 2015), rewards induce particular behavioral reactions.
Rewards act as reinforcers and have the potential to produce learning. Rewards are attractive;
they are motivating, prompting approach behavior and decision making. Also, rewards have
the potential to evoke positive emotions. Put simply, rewards make people come back for
more; they are needed for survival, used for behavioral choices that maximize them and make
people feel good about them (Schultz, 2007). A large body of research has investigated how
motivation is affected by so-called extrinsic rewards, which refer to incentives that reside
outside of and are instrumental to the performed activity (Kruglanski, 1975). The issue of
whether extrinsic rewards increase or thwart motivation has been hotly debated, and scholars
in distinct research traditions have expressed opposing viewpoints on the roles of rewards.
These controversies have even led to the conclusion that, over the last few decades, “rewards
have become one of the most contentious concepts in social and educational psychology”
(Hidi, 2016, p. 62).
For instance, researchers studying Self-Determination Theory (SDT; Deci & Ryan
1985; Deci et al., 2001; Ryan & Deci, 2020; Vansteenkiste et al., 2010) have argued that
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
extrinsic rewards can be detrimental to (intrinsic) motivation (undermining effect; Deci,
1975).1 Intrinsic motivation refers to engaging in an activity for the inherent satisfaction and
enjoyment of the activity itself. By contrast, extrinsically motivated activity is performed for
separable outcomes (Ryan & Deci, 2000). According to SDT, rewards can undermine
intrinsic motivation, as they are perceived as controlling, and thus, they shift individuals from
a more internal to a more external perceived locus of causality (see Flaherty, 1996; Zentall,
2010, for a different explanation; see Hidi, 2016 for a discussion). This shift, in turn, curbs
individuals’ satisfaction of their psychological needs for autonomy and competence, which
are thought to provide the foundation for the development of intrinsic motivation (Ryan &
Deci, 2000). It has also been suggested that introducing a reward for an activity that has
previously been perceived as interesting prompts individuals to attribute their motivation to
the extrinsic reward, thus diminishing their intrinsic motivation (Lepper et al., 1973). Existing
empirical research has supported the undermining effect (also known as the overjustification
effect, Lepper et al., 1973, or the crowding-out effect, Frey & Jegen, 2001, depending on the
respective theoretical framework) of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation. The meta-
analysis by Deci et al. (1999; see also Lehtivuori, 2023) documented that extrinsic rewards
undermined intrinsic motivation in many of the investigated circumstances and for both
behavioral assessments of intrinsic motivation (i.e., the amount of time participants spent on
the experimental task in a free-choice period) and self-reported intrinsic motivation.
Other researchers have questioned the undermining effect (see, e.g., Reiss, 2005, for a
summary of methodological and conceptual problems) and contended that rewards have the
potential to increase (intrinsic) motivation (e.g., Cameron & Pierce, 1994, 1996; Eisenberger
& Cameron, 1996; but see Deci et al., 1999, for a critique). In this vein, Cameron et al.’s
1 In SDT, even though extrinsic rewards are presumed to be generally maladaptive for motivation, it is important
to add that the theory also suggests that the effects are more nuanced. Specifically, extrinsic rewards can have
positive effects to the extent that they affirm competence (e.g., positive feedback; Deci et al., 1999; Patall &
Zambrano, 2019; Ryan & Deci, 2020).
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
(2001) meta-analysis showed that rewards that were linked to the levels of individuals’
performance (performance-contingent rewards) either increased intrinsic motivation or did
not differ from nonrewarded control conditions. In another study, rewards were provided over
an extended period of time to undergraduate students, depending on their performance in
learning phases. The results revealed positive effects of rewards on free-choice intrinsic
motivation and self-reports of task interest (Cameron et al., 2005). Receiving extrinsic
rewards (e.g., snacks, colored pens) during an in-class assignment further predicted high-
school students’ persistence in schoolwork (Woolley & Fishbach, 2016; see also Liu et al.,
2022), and immediate rewards boosted persistence in a single session of studying among
college students (Woolley & Fishbach, 2017). Goswami and Urminsky (2017) also found that
the net effect of temporary extrinsic rewards on engagement was strongly positive.
The discussion of effects of extrinsic rewards has also been carried over to research
on gamification (i.e., the use of game elements in nongame contexts, including the
application of videogames for educational purposes, often referred to as serious games;
Deterding et al., 2011; Laine & Lindberg, 2020). One of the goals of gamification in
education is to increase learners’ motivation. However, concerns have been raised that game
elements (e.g., points or badges) may be viewed as a form of extrinsic reward that can
undermine intrinsic motivation (e.g., Amriani et al., 2013; Bitter et al., 2022; Hanus & Fox,
2015). As found in research on extrinsic rewards in nongame contexts, the empirical findings
of gamification have been mixed. For example, positive effects of gamified in-class activities
(gamified quizzes with points and a team leaderboard) on intrinsic motivation have been
documented (Sailer & Sailer, 2021), but gamification (e.g., points, badges, visualized goal
progress) was also found to undermine participation in an e-learning task (Amriani et al.,
2013). Aggregating the results of two studies, Bitter et al. (2022) showed that removing pay
significantly decreased intrinsic motivation, whereas removing gamification elements (e.g.,
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
points, feedback) did not; however, differences between the two effects (pay vs.
gamification) were not statistically significant. In general, the interpretation of the findings of
studies on gamification is complicated by the fact that the effects of different (extrinsic) game
elements are usually not tested separately. Instead, scholars often pit gamified versions,
which include a variety of elements (e.g., badges, points, but also competitive and
cooperative game elements, storytelling, use of avatars), and nongamified versions against
each other (see also Ratinho & Martins, 2023).
To conclude, both negative and positive effects of extrinsic rewards on motivation
have been proposed, and there is empirical support for both perspectives. Our aim is not to
dwell on the differences between these two lines of research but rather to reconcile
contrasting viewpoints and move beyond dichotomies. We do so by drawing on the reward-
learning framework of knowledge acquisition (Murayama, 2022; Murayama et al., 2019),
which we briefly describe in the following section.
The Reward-Learning Framework of Knowledge Acquisition
The reward-learning framework of knowledge acquisition (Murayama, 2022;
initiate and sustain learning processes. The framework incorporates ideas from interest
theories in educational psychology (e.g., Hidi & Renninger, 2006; Sansone & Thoman, 2005;
Wigfield & Eccles, 2002) in reward-learning models. The framework builds on and expands
such reward-learning (or reinforcement-learning) models (Dayan & Niv, 2008; Montague &
Berns, 2002), which outline that behavior is guided by the rewarding value of the behavior
that is computed and updated by means of reinforcement processes (see also Fitzgibbon et al.,
2020; Fitzgibbon & Murayama, 2022). In the traditional reward-learning models, extrinsic
rewards (e.g., food or money) reinforce behaviors (e.g., Berridge, 2000).
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
The same principle can be applied to interest-based learning—a person can be
voluntarily engaged in learning because knowledge acquisition is inherently rewarding and is
often accompanied by subjective positive emotions, which strengthen learning behavior
In the first place, an individual becomes curious about knowledge acquisition when they
become aware of a gap in their knowledge about a specific topic (Loewenstein, 1994).
Awareness of the knowledge gap makes the individual expect the rewarding value of new
information, which triggers learning (information-seeking) behavior (e.g., Gottlieb et al.,
2013; Gottlieb & Oudeyer, 2018; Renninger & Hidi, 2022). Specifically, the brain generates
reward signals linked to learning and the acquisition of information (Berlyne, 1960; Gottlieb
et al., 2013; Gottlieb & Oudeyer, 2018; see also Renninger et al., 2023, for a discussion in the
context of interest development). In fact, being curious about anticipated information elicits
activity in the brain’s dopaminergic system, the brain’s chief reward system (Gottlieb et al.,
2013; Gottlieb & Oudeyer, 2018; Gruber, 2019; Kang et al., 2009). Once the knowledge is
acquired, the individual experiences a feeling of reward, and this rewarding experience
reinforces future learning behavior (it increases the expected rewarding value of new
rewards (which traditional reward-learning models focus on) and intrinsic rewards (which the
reward-learning framework of knowledge acquisition focuses on) are governed by the same
reward-learning principles (see also Fitzgibbon et al., 2020; Gruber & Ranganath, 2019).
Importantly, while highlighting the similarities, the reward-learning framework of
knowledge acquisition also suggests the critical difference between interest-based
engagement and engagement based on extrinsic rewards. Specifically, the framework
indicates that interest-based engagement has inherent and unique mechanisms that make the
engagement more sustainable for a prolonged period of time. The critical fact is that
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
individuals always accumulate or update knowledge by learning new things. This knowledge
accumulation plays a crucial role in explaining the sustainment of interest-based engagement
motivates people to acquire more knowledge because, with more knowledge, individuals tend
to become more aware of further knowledge gaps that they did not notice before. This
awareness thus triggers more learning behavior because, the more you learn, the more you
become aware that there are many things that you do not know yet (Path A, “generation of
new questions”).
Second, accumulated knowledge can increase awareness of the importance of a topic
because, the more you learn, the more value you can see in the topic you are learning about
(Path B, “valuation”). Realizing the importance of a topic further enhances the value of new
knowledge, as the value of new information varies as a function of how well individuals can
connect new information with existing knowledge.
Lastly, the accumulation of knowledge increases individuals’ perceived competence
because, the more you learn, the more you feel that you have the competence to learn even
more about the topic (Path C, “increased capability”). This means that the acquisition of
knowledge makes it easy for learners to seek and comprehend newer information.
These three pathways create a positive feedback loop in the knowledge acquisition
process, increasingly generating internal rewards over a prolonged period of time. Once the
positive feedback loop has been established, people can engage in learning in a sustainable
manner (i.e., self-boosting effect; Murayama, 2022; Murayama et al., 2019). Research has
shown that people with a high level of interest have a strong commitment to learning for a
long period of time (Renninger & Hidi, 2015, 2016). The framework can explain this
phenomenon on the basis of reward-learning principles.
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
The Reward-Learning Framework of Knowledge Acquisition
Enjoyment of Learning as an Intrinsic Reward
Educational researchers tend to use the term reward to refer only to extrinsic
incentives (e.g., food, money; Murayama et al., 2019). However, if a reward is something that
strengthens behavior, there is no point in limiting the definition of rewards to extrinsic
incentives. For example, positive experiences from the pleasure of engaging in a task,
curiosity, or knowledge attainment (Deci & Ryan, 1985; Murayama et al., 2022) should also
influence learning behavior (e.g., if learning a topic brings a person joy, they will be more
inclined to learn about the topic again) and should be conceptualized as intrinsic rewards.
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
One important point of the reward-learning framework of knowledge acquisition is that
rewards can be conceptualized as positive internal feelings that arise from the learning
process or from knowledge acquisition itself (i.e., intrinsic rewards).
Extrinsic rewards (e.g., money) and intrinsic rewards (e.g., enjoyment from learning)
are of course different types of rewards. But critically, they are based on the same reward-
learning processes, which strengthen and motivate learning behavior. In fact, neuroscientific
research has shown that different types of rewards (extrinsic and intrinsic) are processed in
the same brain network, the so-called reward network, particularly in the ventral striatum
(e.g., Berns et al., 2001; Campbell-Meiklejohn et al., 2010; Daniel & Pollmann, 2012;
Delgado et al., 2005; Han et al., 2010; Knutson & Greer, 2008; McCabe et al., 2013;
Murayama et al., 2015; O’Doherty et al., 2001; Tricomi et al., 2006; Valentin & O’Doherty,
2009), suggesting that intrinsic and extrinsic rewards rely on a common reward-learning
system (for a more thorough discussion of neuroscientific research on motivation and
rewards, see Hidi, 2016; Hidi & Renninger, 2019; Murayama, 2019). In fact, it does not make
a lot of sense to assume that humans have different systems for processing intrinsic and
extrinsic rewards separately because extrinsic and intrinsic rewards are most often
intertwined in real-life learning contexts.
For example, say a student really enjoys programming and constantly seeks to expand
their knowledge base and learn new skills, in line with the self-boosting effects described
above. At the same time, students may learn these skills with the intention to pursue a career
in programming and earn a lot of money. Here, knowledge acquisition still serves as an
intrinsic reward, but the engagement is also driven in part by extrinsic rewards (e.g.,
monetary rewards) in the long run. Whereas the programming example captures the rewards
in different time frames, it is also possible for extrinsic and intrinsic rewards to become
intermingled in a single session. Consider a student who plays a serious game (i.e., a
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
videogame developed for educational purposes) about the history of the Roman Empire. The
game helps the student discover existing knowledge gaps (e.g., What were relations like
between the Romans and Barbarian tribes?), and the student derives great excitement from
the process of acquiring knowledge about the Roman Empire, setting in motion a positive
feedback loop of knowledge acquisition. At the same time, not only does completing
missions in the game contribute to intrinsically rewarding knowledge acquisition, but it is
also coupled with the receipt of extrinsic rewards (e.g., trophies, medals, or badges). From the
outside, one may be tempted to conclude that extrinsic rewards drive game play behavior and
motivation, when, in fact, it is very difficult to isolate “pure” intrinsic or extrinsic motivation
and their interplay with intrinsic and extrinsic rewards (see also Kidd & Hayden, 2015). In a
school setting, grades can even be both intrinsic and extrinsic rewards. Whereas many regard
grades as extrinsic rewards, depending on the level of interest in the subject, learners
sometimes perceive grades as a way to gauge their own learning progress (see also Renninger
& Hidi, 2022), which is a critical source of intrinsic rewards (Ten et al., 2024). In alignment
with the discussion, many motivational constructs proposed in the past literature arguably
have elements of both intrinsic and extrinsic rewards (see, e.g., attainment value from
Expectancy-Value Theory, Eccles & Wigfield, 2020; see also Pekrun’s Generalized
Expectancy-Value Theory of Motivation, Pekrun, 1993).
Of course, this is not to say that intrinsic and extrinsic rewards are always intertwined
as internal experiences. There are cases where these two types of incentives compete with
each other when the context clearly distinguishes them (e.g., undermining effect; Deci et al.,
1999). We will discuss this point later. But as illustrated above, in real-life contexts, it is
often difficult to separate these incentives in people’s internal experiences.
Beyond the Dichotomy: Whether Rewards Have Positive Effects or Not
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
The discussion of rewards has focused a great deal on the question of whether rewards
have positive or negative consequences (e.g., Cameron et al., 2001; Deci & Ryan, 1985; Deci
et al., 2001; Harackiewicz et al., 1984; Lepper et al., 1973). Here, we argue that researchers
should not care about this dichotomy. For instance, whereas most researchers would agree
that, in learning contexts, intrinsic rewards (and intrinsic motivation) are inherently positive,
the picture is likely more differentiated. For instance, Shin and Grant (2019) compared
intrinsic motivation and performance across multiple tasks and showed that employees with
the highest maximum intrinsic motivation in one task exhibited lower average and minimum
performance across other tasks as well as greater variability in performance across tasks. In a
second study, working on a highly intrinsically motivating initial task led to worse
performance on a subsequent task if the second task was uninteresting but not if it was
interesting (Shin & Grant, 2019). The authors concluded that the intrinsic rewards of working
on an extremely interesting task are likely to create contrast effects with respect to other less
interesting tasks, thus negatively affecting performance on these other tasks (see also Grant &
Schwartz, 2011; “too much of a good thing”).
These findings indicate that dichotomies (e.g., extrinsic rewards are bad, intrinsic
rewards are good) fall short of capturing the complexities of dynamic (motivated) human
behavior. Further, Shin and Grant’s (2019) findings take on new meaning when considering
principles of the reward-learning framework of knowledge acquisition (Murayama et al.,
2019, Murayama, 2022). In fact, a person cannot be interested in everything (see the
selectivity principle of the reward-learning framework of knowledge acquisition; Murayama,
2022; see also Fastrich et al., 2018; Ozono et al., 2021); and over the course of development,
individual differences in intrinsic motivation can underlie idiosyncrasies in educational and
career choices and determine individual life paths. More precisely, such individual
differences exist with respect to which tasks and activities are subjectively perceived to
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
generate intrinsic rewards (see also Kruglanski et al., 2018), thus allowing for the unfolding
of self-boosting effects (Murayama, 2022) and the development of domain-specific
competencies and competence beliefs (e.g., Wan et al., 2021). We provided just one example,
but the point is that there is a need to move beyond the dichotomy. To do so, we next
introduce motivation transformations.
Motivation Transformations
The dynamics of intrinsic and extrinsic rewards are complex, but the extension of the
reward-learning framework of knowledge acquisition discussed herein to account for
extrinsic rewards suggests the following possibility (see also, e.g., Renninger & Hidi, 2022):
Extrinsic rewards can be used as an “entry point” for engagement, by helping learners jump-
start the positive feedback loop of the internally rewarding process (Murayama, 2022;
Murayama et al., 2019). We call this process motivation transformation. To make the point
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
Extrinsic Rewards as the “Entry Point” That Helps Jump-Start the Process of Intrinsically
Rewarding Knowledge Acquisition
(enjoyment of learning) and extrinsic rewards (e.g., obtaining a good grade, although a good
grade could also signal good learning as indicated earlier). The two rewards operate with the
same reinforcement principle but contribute to the behavior differently. Extrinsic rewards
help strengthen the learning behavior through simple reinforcement processes (i.e., the
they also have additional mechanisms that sustain long-term engagement over time (i.e., the
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
boost interest-based engagement over time for themselves.
Critically, this self-boosting effect occurs only when the knowledge-acquisition
process has been started up, and learners accumulate a certain amount of knowledge
(Murayama, 2022). However, learners (e.g., school students) are not always motivated to
learn (Hidi & Harackiewicz, 2000), for example, because they are not interested in a subject
or task or because they do not see the value of learning something. This lack of motivation
prevents self-boosting recursive loops from being established, as the rewarding process of
knowledge acquisition is not even initiated, or, if it is initiated, it is very fragile (i.e., it is
easily disrupted and stops) and is thereby not sustainable. The framework supposes that
learning serves as an intrinsic reward, but if learners do not start learning, there is no way for
them to experience intrinsic rewards.
In such situations, extrinsic rewards can be a useful tool that can get learners to
initially support learners’ motivation to engage in learning behavior (internal loop), and the
learning behavior that is initiated helps learners acquire knowledge. As learners develop
knowledge—for whatever reason (e.g., just to get stickers)—more opportunities to
experience internal rewards from learning arise, and thus, their learning behavior is sustained
on the basis of the internal rewards. In other words, extrinsic rewards may function as a way
for learners to jump-start the positive feedback loop of knowledge acquisition. In this way,
motivation that was initially based on extrinsic rewards in a sense transforms into motivation
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
The Motivation Transformation Process
This idea is still theoretical, and there is not much empirical evidence to support it. To
illustrate, however, in a previous study, participants were promised bonuses for the next task
they would work on. They inferred that this task would be less pleasant and expected to be
less motivated than if they had not been offered a bonus (Woolley & Fishbach, 2021; as cited
in Fishbach & Woolley, 2022). Nonetheless, when measuring their experience, it was
revealed that those offered a bonus enjoyed the task more, and they connected this feeling of
excitement with the task (but see Sheldon et al., 2010, for contrasting findings). Another
interesting finding from the study was that people actually seemed to have an awareness of
this motivation transformation, but they did not have the right belief about how motivation
changes (i.e., inaccurate metamotivational belief; see Scholer et al., 2018). In fact, prior to the
task, the prospect of receiving a bonus suggested to the participants that the task would not be
intrinsically motivating. Hence, people who initiate a (learning) activity because of the
prospect of receiving an external reward may underrate the affective and motivational value
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
arising from the knowledge acquisition process initiated by external rewards (see also Hatano
et al., 2022; Kuratomi et al., 2022; Murayama et al., 2016).
Undermining Effect After the Motivation Transformation
After people establish a positive feedback cycle, extrinsic rewards can still help
sustain engagement to some extent (as noted earlier, there is no “pure” intrinsic motivation),
but extrinsic rewards can also disrupt the positive feedback loop process if they are too
salient. Such a disruption manifests as the undermining effect (Deci, 1975; Deci et al., 1999).
“If the reward is one too many—the person is already motivated and does not expect this
reward, it might undermine IM [intrinsic motivation]” (Fishbach & Woolley, 2022, p. 345,
brackets added). When confronted with explicit extrinsic rewards, people may start reasoning
(“Is this why I am engaging in the activity?”), which diverts attention and disrupts the self-
reinforcing cycle of knowledge acquisition (see also, e.g., Iten et al., 2018; Kammerman et
al., 2024). In other words, when extrinsic rewards are made salient after the positive feedback
loop has been established, the relative salience of internal rewards may be diminished. As a
result, learners experience smaller rewarding feelings from learning after the extrinsic
rewards are removed (in comparison with before the extrinsic rewards were introduced).
Similarly, Kruglanski et al. (2018) emphasized that when another goal (e.g., an extrinsic
reward) is brought into the realm of an already intrinsically motivated activity, under certain
circumstances, the reward can dilute the perceived fusion between an activity and its goal,
thus decreasing intrinsic motivation.
The undermining effect can thus be integrated into our account of extrinsic rewards in
the context of the reward-learning framework of knowledge acquisition. One important point
of divergence from the traditional account of the undermining effect is the scope of time.
Specifically, the undermining effect has often been studied as a phenomenon that occurs
within a short time frame (e.g., Deci et al., 1999; Esteves-Sorenson & Broce, 2022). By
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
contrast, the reward-learning framework of knowledge acquisition discussed the role of
extrinsic rewards in the development of longer term learning engagement as it unfolds in
naturalistic learning settings, highlighting that the effects of extrinsic rewards are not
dichotomized (i.e., good or bad) but that the effects depend on the time and context. For some
learning activities to ultimately turn into (more) intrinsically rewarding learning experiences,
providing extrinsic rewards may be the key to motivating students to become engaged in the
first place. For this to happen, extrinsic rewards should not be stopped too early but should
not be prolonged. Also, to the extent that extrinsic rewards do not discount the (established)
positive rewarding experiences that come from learning, extrinsic rewards can be a good aid
for sustaining long-term engagement (see also Renninger & Hidi, 2022), especially when the
positive feedback loop cycle gets stuck (e.g., facing a challenge in understanding learning
materials). Extrinsic rewards could have complementary or additive effects, depending on the
status of students’ learning and knowledge.
The argument that extrinsic rewards can be beneficial for unmotivated learners is not
entirely new. In fact, ideas relating to “motivation transformations” have been suggested in
several theoretical frameworks (e.g., Hidi, 2000; Hidi & Harackiewicz, 2000; Zimmerman,
1985). For instance, the four-phase model of interest development (Hidi & Renninger, 2006)
distinguishes between situational interest, which captures momentary rewarding experiences
that are externally triggered, and individual interest, which describes a person’s relatively
enduring predisposition to reengage with a certain kind of content. Hidi and Renninger
(2006) outlined how situational interest can provide a basis for individual interest to emerge.
The reward-learning framework of knowledge acquisition explains how this interest develops
through reward-learning processes. Similarly, SDT specifies that there is a continuum of
extrinsic motivation types that differ in their levels of self-determination. This continuum
ranges from external regulation, where behaviors are performed to satisfy external demands
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
or to obtain externally imposed reward contingencies, to integrated regulation, where the
reasons for actions are internalized, even though the behavior is still extrinsically motivated,
as it is carried out for its presumed instrumental value (e.g., Ryan & Deci, 2000). Individuals
can transition from one type of extrinsic motivation to another. However, one critical
assumption of the theory is that even if extrinsic motivation becomes more internalized, it is
never transformed into intrinsic motivation. Intrinsic motivation is always considered to be a
separate form of motivation that is located on a continuum that is distinct from that of
extrinsic motivation (Ryan & Deci, 2000, 2020). In other words, SDT would say that
extrinsic motivation cannot be transformed into intrinsic motivation (i.e., motivation from
enjoyment). The reward-learning framework of knowledge acquisition takes a different
stance. Intrinsic and extrinsic rewards have the same kind of reward processing, which
implies that individuals can transform one type of motivation into the other (Murayama,
2022; Murayama, 2019; see also Hidi, 2016; see also common currency in reinforcement
learning models, Montague & Berns, 2002; Niv & Schoenbaum, 2008).
Critical (Transmitting) Factors
We have made a case for the potential utility of extrinsic rewards to facilitate
motivation: Extrinsic rewards can be used as an entry point for getting people engaged in
learning. Of course, however, the dynamics we laid out for intrinsic and extrinsic rewards are
very simplistic. Reality is always more complicated, and various factors are in operation in
learning contexts. Here, we discuss factors that may transmit motivation transformation
processes and that should be empirically tested in future work using the reward-learning
framework of knowledge acquisition to better understand the potential utility of extrinsic
rewards and motivation transformations.
First, whether the acquisition of knowledge creates more knowledge gaps (i.e., one
prerequisite for establishing the positive feedback loop) depends on aspects such as the nature
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
of the task, the knowledge acquired, and the structure of learner’s prior knowledge (Prenzel,
1992; Renninger & Hidi, 2022).2 For example, short, self-contained trivia questions might not
spark further interest in exploring the topic (Murayama, 2022). The same likely applies to a
task such as finding the way to a train station. In these cases, learners acquire a simple
answer, and there is little room for the knowledge to be developed further. However, when
learners have strong prior knowledge about the question (e.g., the learner happened to know
the topic of the trivia question very well) or have the intention (goal or reason) to gather
further knowledge (e.g., the person just started living in the city and looked for a train station
to learn about the city), the situation is likely to be different. The role of knowledge or the
task structure and the development of curiosity are important points for future inquiry.
Second, effort should be considered. While learning often occurs automatically with
daily practice (e.g., learning one’s native language), in many formal learning situations,
knowledge acquisition is effortful and costly, and so is establishing the self-boosting
feedback loop inherent in the reward-learning framework. In the literature, effort has often
been considered something aversive that people tend to avoid (e.g., Kool & Bootvinik, 2018;
Shenshav et al., 2017). However, more and more studies have suggested that the inherent
value of effort can be increased through reinforcement. For example, rewarding participants
for exerting cognitive effort increased their motivation to engage in effortful tasks without
any prospects of gaining additional extrinsic rewards (Clay et al., 2022). Also, because effort
is likely to lead to better outcomes, effort can turn into a secondary reinforcer and become
increasingly intrinsically rewarding (see also learned industriousness; Eisenberger, 1992).
We thus argue that extrinsic rewards can “train” effortful mental engagement so that it
becomes natural—and rewarding in and of itself—to exert mental effort (Clay et al., 2023;
2 Further boundary conditions exist, as the likelihood of these processes also depends, for example, on aspects of
the context (e.g., in a threatening environment in which learning is performed due to external pressure, learning
is likely stopped once there is no longer any threat of punishment).
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
Lin et al., 2023). There is indeed evidence that effortful tasks activate the reward network in
the brain (Boehler et al., 2011; Sakaki et al., 2023; Ulrich et al., 2014). This activation, in
turn, helps to start up the self-boosting effect of knowledge acquisition. Relatedly, in
education, there is a long-standing recommendation that students should be rewarded for their
efforts and not their abilities or achievements (e.g., Mueller & Dweck, 1998; Zentall &
Morris, 2012).
continual efforts are rewarded (e.g., Granic et al., 2014). Further, it is possible to think about
daily life examples that support the proposed “effort transmission” within motivation
transformation processes. For instance, changing habits (e.g., working out regularly vs.
staying on the sofa) requires effort. Extrinsic rewards may be useful in the beginning; for
example, it may help you get started with a new fitness program if you are rewarded (or you
reward yourself) with a nice pair of new running shoes or a new shirt after sticking to the
fitness program for 1 week. However, over time, you may start to enjoy your workouts and to
exert yourself (see also, e.g., “runners’ high”), and your need for extrinsic rewards may
diminish or even disappear. In fact, Acland and Levy (2015) found that offering incentives
for exercising increased exercise behavior even after the incentives were removed.
Third, motivation transformation may be better achieved by integrating elements from
the means-end fusion theory of intrinsic motivation (Kruglanski et al., 2018; Kruglanski,
2000; see also Fishbach & Woolley, 2022). Means-end fusion theory presumes that the
greater the perceived association (fusion) between an activity and its end, the more the
activity is experienced as intrinsically motivated (Kruglanski et al., 2018). According to
means-end fusion theory, extrinsic rewards can enhance the total value attached to the
activity. This added value then “trickles down” or transfers to the activity, thus boosting its
interest value or appeal (Fishbach et al., 2004; Kruglanski et al., 2018; for a computational
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
approach, see Melnikoff et al., 2022). The same applies to the use of gamification, when
learning content is wrapped up in game elements that are enjoyable and offer added value
that can be carried over to the learning activity (e.g., Birk et al., 2016). Similarly, it has been
discussed that extrinsic rewards can add meaning to an activity, and this meaning is related to
the development of intrinsic motivation (see also Sansone & Smith, 2000). The reward-
learning framework of knowledge acquisition also refers to values or valuation: Accumulated
knowledge makes individuals realize the importance of a topic, which further increases the
reward value of new knowledge (Murayama, 2022; see also Hidi & Renninger, 2006). Hence,
extrinsic rewards may lead people to value a learning activity more; and acquiring knowledge
while engaging in the activity (initially, because external rewards were provided) becomes
intrinsically rewarding, resulting in a “double valuation” that underlies motivation
transformation. Future research in which experience sampling is applied within and across
learning situations could explore how learners come to value or devalue specific learning
activities by testing influences of extrinsic rewards on developmental trends and dynamic
shifts in self-reported valuation.
Fourth, social aspects should also be considered. In many learning situations in which
extrinsic rewards play a role, significant others (e.g., teacher or parents) who provide or
promise rewards are involved too. Social factors, including interactions and relationships
with teachers and parents, can be powerful sources of academic motivation (Bardach et al.,
2020; Burgess et al., 2018; Ojanen et al., 2010). Games also include social elements, and it
has been suggested that, in digital learning environments (e.g., videogames), learners can
develop strong attachments to virtual avatars or other game characters. Furthermore,
collaborative gaming technologies can help motivate students in educational gaming contexts
(e.g., Granic et al., 2014; Szolin et al., 2023). Accordingly, when motivation transformations
are referred to as “the way people can transform one type of motivation into another”
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
(Murayama, 2019, p. 141), taking social factors into consideration can lead to an expansion
of this description so that it becomes “the way others help us transform one type of
motivation into another”, whereby the involvement of others serves as an additional
rewarding factor. This involvement could take various forms, such as interest contagion (e.g.,
Burgess et al., 2018), value transmissions (e.g., Parrisius et al., 2020), and modeling effects
(e.g.., Bandura, 1977). For instance, if others deem a learning activity relevant (as signaled by
the reward they provide to the learner), initially uninterested learners may engage in the
activity (because they want to get the reward and because they infer that the activity is
perceived as important by other people they care about). This engagement with the activity
then sets in motion the self-boosting cycle of knowledge acquisition. It would be interesting
to empirically test this assumption in real-life learning contexts, for example, by combining
self-reports of motivation with information about social relations (e.g., social network data)
to understand when, how, and for whom social closeness to the provider of extrinsic rewards
facilitates motivation transformations. Relatedly, future studies could experimentally
manipulate whether another person assigns extrinsic rewards to learners, whether learners
assign these awards to themselves, or whether extrinsic rewards are externally provided, but
without the involvement of another person. Such a set-up allows researchers to study the role
of social factors for motivation transformations and to examine potentially differentiated
effects of different assignment scenarios for different periods of motivation transformation
processes. For instance, whereas unmotivated learners may initially be particularly likely to
benefit from the involvement of others in the reward provision process, rewards provided by
others may also be perceived as more controlling than self-assigned rewards, especially at
later stages of successful motivation transformations (but see Hidi, 2016, for a critique of the
notion that extrinsic rewards are controlling).
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
Finally, extrinsic rewards can increase the likelihood that individuals will try to self-
regulate their interest, that is, they will purposely attempt to make an uninteresting activity
more interesting (Sansone & Smith, 2000; Sansone & Thoman, 2005). Such interest-
enhancing strategies can involve, for example, making studying more enjoyable by turning it
into a game or focusing on the fun aspects of a task (e.g., Wolters & Benzon, 2013). Over
time, the use of interest-enhancing strategies (and not extrinsic factors) enhances persistence
with and the resumption of activities (see Sansone & Thomas, 2005; Wolters, 2003; Wolters
& Benzon, 2013; Yun & Park, 2020). This perspective is interesting, as it highlights the
active role of the learner, acknowledges that intrinsic motivation can be part of the process of
pursuing extrinsic rewards, and understands motivation transformation as embedded in a self-
regulatory system in which extrinsic and intrinsic parts work sequentially over time (Sansone,
1992; Sansone & Smith, 2000). On a related note, many games are designed in an interest-
enhancing way, which underlies their effects on motivation and engagement. However, here,
the interest-enhancement stems, to a large part, from the game itself instead of being self-
initiated by the learner (as in Sansone’s interest-enhancing self-regulation strategies). In
addition to diary studies that allow researchers to examine learners’ spontaneous use of
interest-enhancing self-regulation strategies following extrinsic rewards, experimental tests of
the effects of different isolated strategies in game and nongame contexts could offer
important insights.
Limitations and Future Research Directions
Of course, the reward-learning framework of knowledge acquisition is a general
framework, rather than a theory that makes a precise prediction, and empirical studies of the
herein discussed factors transmitting motivation transformations in the context of the reward-
learning framework of knowledge acquisition are currently lacking. Thus, there are clear
practical limitations. For example, whereas answering the question “When should we start
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
providing extrinsic rewards?” seems more straightforward (e.g., “provide rewards to children
who are initially not motivated to learn”), it is more challenging to find an answer to the
question “When should we stop providing extrinsic rewards?” One reason is that the latter
question may hinge strongly on a better understanding of motivation transformation
processes and learning contexts. For instance, is it possible to identify a clear end point in
that, from this point on, extrinsic rewards exert negative effects on intrinsic motivation
because motivation transformation has been “successfully completed”? Or is there a
transition period in which positive extrinsic reward effects fade out and then slowly start
unfolding negative effects? How do these scenarios vary within and between individuals and
motivation transformation processes? Further, does motivation transformation necessarily
have to come to an end, or can there be ongoing and mutually reinforcing motivation
transformations? Specifically, are there situations in which extrinsic and intrinsic
(knowledge-acquisition-related) rewards can be coupled over extended periods of time, even
when initially unmotivated students have already become motivated? The framework does
not offer a definite answer to these questions. Gamification may provide such a context in
which intrinsic and extrinsic rewards can co-occur over extended periods of time, as here,
extrinsic rewards (e.g., points, medals) and intrinsically rewarding knowledge acquisition
processes that derive from game play (e.g., enjoying acquiring knowledge about the Romans
in a history videogame) are often intricately interwoven within the game (e.g., receiving
points and medals for completing a mission that provided opportunities to expand one’s
knowledge).
Further, motivation transformations are not one-dimensional and do not operate solely
within one activity. Consider the example of a videogame on Barbarian tribes in the Roman
Empire developed for history classes, as it provides rewards for completing missions and it
sparks students’ interest. Consequently, students may start reading about the Roman Empire
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
in their free time when no rewards are provided, while they may also continue to play the
game and reap the game’s rewards without harming their motivation. This example raises the
possibility of motivation transformation generalization effects.
Another layer of complexity is related to individual differences. Motivation
transformation is very likely to be subjected to many individual difference factors. For
example, in the first year at university when students find themselves in a new place
surrounded by people they do not know yet, social processes may be more effective
motivation transformation mechanisms than later in a student’s academic career. And some
individuals do, in general, gain more from social interactions than others, thus making it more
likely that, in general, social factors provide a more useful motivation transformation
resource for them. Moreover, differences in prior learning experiences and interests and trait-
and state-level differences in curiosity, reward sensitivity, and mental health (and their
dynamic interactions) can come into play, among many other factors. Blain et al. (2023)
recently found that affective aspects of mental health were associated with sensitivity to
intrinsic but not extrinsic (monetary) rewards. They also showed that the sensitivity to
intrinsic rewards was domain-general, and they concluded that individuals with high reward
sensitivity will engage in a variety of intrinsically rewarding activities. Eventually, they will
find those they excel at, whereas low sensitivity individuals will not (Blain et al., 2023).
Expanding on this point, some individuals may find it easier to engage in or may be more
susceptible to (certain) motivation transformations. Some individuals may even actively seek
out situations that provide opportunities for motivation transformations (i.e., self-regulated
motivation transformation), a situation that will serve as a training bed for internally
rewarding knowledge acquisition and will boost learning, motivation, and domain-specific
performance across the life span. We hope that future research will adopt designs and
statistical methods that can capture motivation transformations at high levels of temporal
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
granularity, ideally across contexts, and that allow peak reward effects to be estimated (e.g.,
Hecht & Zitzmann, 2020, 2021). We additionally envision computational approaches that can
formalize motivation transformation mechanisms.
Potential Practical Implications
By itself, a theoretical framework, as presented in the current article, is not sufficient
to allow researchers to confidently derive strong practical recommendations. Robust
empirical evidence is needed before concrete recommendations on motivation
transformations can be derived. Keeping this current limitation in mind, we nevertheless
discuss potential practical implications that can be further expanded and refined later,
pending the availability of the respective empirical evidence.
The links between extrinsic rewards and motivation are presumably dynamic and
situationally sensitive. (They are likely also developmentally sensitive to some extent, even
though developmental differences were not the focus of our work.) We thus propose that
personalized reward provision systems that consider the roles of different types of rewards
for different tasks and different students in different moments of the knowledge acquisition
process may hold promise. Although personalization does not depend on the use of
technology, many technological solutions that could aid in personalizing reward provision are
currently available for personalized learning (Bernaki et al., 2018; Dumont & Ready, 2023).
These technologies include new developments around hybrid human-artificial intelligence
(AI) learning technologies with a combined responsibility between the system and the teacher
(Molenaar, 2022). Despite the potential that technology holds, the involvement of “real”
teachers with rich pedagogical knowledge, high levels of diagnostic competence, and close
and trustful relationships with their students are likely the keys for initiating motivation
transformations, as technologies alone may fall short of recognizing the complexities of these
processes. Moreover, to assess students’ motivational changes in motivation transformations,
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
self-reports are still indispensable for gaining insights into learners’ mental states (e.g.,
Pekrun, 2020). However, self-reports could be complemented by behavioral motivational
traces that can be unobtrusively collected (e.g., from log files, eye tracking) and
automatically scored and fed back to teachers using AI.
Also, in gaming contexts, state-based personalization, which considers patterns in
players’ motivation over time and can involve game-based rewards, has been discussed as a
promising route for engaging learners (e.g., Birk et al., 2016; Dumas Reyssier et al., 2023)
that needs further investigation. Overall, before any practical implementation, we need to
gain clarity on how to tailor rewards to learners’ motivational states and the stages of the
internally rewarding knowledge acquisition process. Such tailoring will require a change in
thinking but also in research approaches so that they better reflect real-life complexities and
the dynamic nature of rewards and motivation (“right award at the right time”).
Conclusions
Should teachers and parents worry about rewarding children for learning? Do
extrinsic rewards in educational videogames harm intrinsic motivation? Here, we have argued
that instead of continuing the search for a definite answer (extrinsic rewards are beneficial vs.
harmful for intrinsic motivation), it would be much more advantageous to move beyond this
dichotomy, in both real-world learning and virtual (e.g., gaming) contexts. Specifically, as
highlighted in the extension of the reward-learning model of knowledge acquisition discussed
herein (Murayama, 2022; Murayama et al., 2019; see also Murayama & Jach, 2024), rewards
need to be conceptualized in terms of both extrinsic and intrinsic incentives, and their effects
can be intertwined and are more complex than often assumed. Our proposal is that extrinsic
rewards can be useful for initiating the internally rewarding process of knowledge acquisition
in an early stage. At the same time, salient extrinsic rewards may actually harm motivation
REWARDS AND MOTIVATION
when learners have already established the positive rewarding cycle of knowledge
acquisition.
To conclude, albeit the question of how extrinsic rewards affect intrinsic motivation
has long been debated, we think that it is an auspicious time to conduct research on rewards
and motivation, particularly on motivation transformations. Historically, the motivational role
of extrinsic rewards has been downplayed due to the undermining effect. This may be true,
but when extrinsic rewards are used in an appropriate manner, they can enhance intrinsic
motivation. Future research should thus examine the motivation transformation effect more
systematically. Stated differently, giving children gold stars and stickers and letting them play
educational videogames that offer extrinsic rewards is not “good” or “bad.” Extrinsic rewards
move beyond dichotomies.