A. V. Reddy, et al Page 1 of 30
TRB Paper Manuscript #11-2016 (Revision 051A)
Measuring and Controlling Subway Fare Evasion:
Improving Safety and Security at New York City Transit Authority
Alla V. Reddy*, Jacqueline Kuhls, and Alex Lu
* Corresponding author
Alla Reddy
Senior Director, System Data & Research (SDR), Operations Planning
New York City Transit
2 Broadway, Office A17.92, New York, N.Y. 10004-2207
Tel: (646) 252-5662
Email: Alla.Reddy@nyct.com
Jacqueline Kuhls
Unit Chief, Resource Review, Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
New York City Transit
2 Broadway, Office D17.95, New York, N.Y. 10004-2207
Tel: (646) 252-2377
Email: Jacqueline.Kuhls@nyct.com
Alex Lu
Principal Transportation Planner
New York City Transit
2 Broadway, Cubicle A17.111, New York, N.Y. 10004-2208
Tel: (646) 252-5664
Email: Alex.Lu@nyct.com
Submitted for Publication in
Transportation Research Records: Journal of the Transportation Research Board
Word Count: 195 (Abstract) + 6,115 (Text) + 6 × 250 (Figures) = 7,810 Words
Submission Date: March 5, 2011
Note to Editors: Photos embedded in this document are not publication-resolution. Higher
resolution artwork will be supplied separately to TRB.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 2 of 30
BSTRACT
New York City Transit (NYCT) has a comprehensive framework for assessing, managing, and
combating subway fare evasion. The automated fare collection (AFC) system, implemented
1994~97, features lessons learned from field trials of prototypes specifically designed to limit
fare abuse. Subway crime has decreased 68% since 2000, and annual average subway evasion
rate remains low at approximately 1.3%. Today, the Authority measures fare evasion with
independent silent observers using stratified random sampling techniques, classifying passenger
entries into 19 categories. Evasion rate peaks at 3pm due to students dismissal, otherwise hovers
around 0.9% peak, 1.9% off-peak. Busy times and locations have higher evasions per hour but
lower evasions per passenger. More evasions occur in lower-income neighbourhoods. Staff
presence apparently doesn’t reduce evasions. Results are released to the press on request,
promoting transparency and accountability. To combat evasion, NYCT increased fines from $60
to $100 in 2008. Police issued 68,000 summonses and made 19,000 evasion arrests in 2009.
Arrests are a more effective deterrent than summonses; the proportion of arrests versus
summonses increased in 2010. Video monitoring equipment is used to identify and apprehend
chronic fare abusers, particularly “swipers” who sell subway entries by abusing unlimited fare
media.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 3 of 30
Fare evasion is a chronic problem in transit systems, especially large systems like New York’s.
From classic turnstile “vaulting” and “slugs” instead of legitimate tokens to elaborate schemes
involving stolen faregate keys, fraudulent electronic fare media, “forgetting” proof-of-payment
(POP) receipts, or “two card monte” that takes advantage of fare system features, many ways
exist to avoid paying fares. Indeed, industry standard revenue ‘leakage’ is reportedly 3%~6%
(1). If there’s a way to evade, criminals will exploit it. Evasion is so rampant in some cities that
conversion from POP to turnstiles is being proposed (2) or seriously considered (3).
Prior research focused on measuring evasion (4), relationships between automatic fare collection
(AFC) and fare evasion (5,6,7), between evasion and enforcement strategies under POP (8,9),
where evasion rate estimates ranged from 1%~9% (10,11,12). The many-faceted efforts made
by New York City Transit (NYCT) recently to identify, detect, and combat subway fare evasion
and associated issues is the subject of this paper. Non-paying bus ridership in New York is
discussed elsewhere (14).
Why Publicly Discuss Fare Evasion?
Discussions of evasion amongst transit professionals have traditionally been controversial. Often
considered adjunct to research in law enforcement (5), security (15), or fare collection (6,7),
published papers aren’t widely known amongst transit planners. However, measurement of and
strategies to quell evasion are important topics in transit management because:
1. Poorly controlled evasion creates perceptions of an unsafe or insecure transit system
amongst some patrons, leading to ridership declines
2. Effective fare enforcement has incidental benefits besides reducing evasion, like chance
arrests of wanted criminals
3. Understanding evasion and fraud methods helps to reduce abuse by improving operating
procedures, legal framework, and fare collection equipment design
4. Apprehension of “professional swipers” significantly reduces fare system vandalism and
revenue leakage, improving farebox recovery
5. Some law-enforcement personnel believe tackling “quality of life” issues like evasion
and panhandling creates an orderly environment and may deter more serious crimes
In the transit world, fare abuse studies are sometimes shrouded in utmost secrecy and treated like
classified information, when it is widely discussed in popular press (16–20), local television
news (21,22), criminal justice literature (5,9,23), economics research (24), and internet blogs
(25); in New York (14,16,17), New Jersey (2), Boston (1,20), Chicago (21), Atlanta (22), San
Francisco (12,19,25), Los Angeles (3,18), Seattle (11), Vancouver (4), Edmondton (9,26),
London (5), and Paris (27). Three agencies (4,11,26) made evasion audit findings public, San
Francisco presented a paper (12), while Toronto addressed evasion in a fare collection study (6),
at least one confidential international benchmarking study was published (8), and Federal Transit
Administration has even requested special studies of non-farebox passengers (14) within the
context of National Transit Database ridership reporting.
Different observation methodologies were used to estimate evasions: staff interviews (26),
operator counts (11), surveyor counts (12,14), and third party audits (4). Vendor patents (28)
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 4 of 30
provide fare system technical data, potential weaknesses are published in computer security
literature (29–31), and exploits are widely disseminated on the internet (29,32,33) together with
stern warnings and candid discussion of legal frameworks and contextual security making it “not
worth it” (32).
Evaders can already learn to beat the system by consulting public sources (34–36) or observing
others. Benefits from greater understanding of these issues and effective preventive measures
seem to outweigh risks that potential offenders can learn from such research. The Dutch Arnhem
Court said it best, denying an injunction sought by vendors looking to obscure security failures:
“… publication of scientific studies carries a lot of weight in a democratic society, as does
informing society about serious issues in the [smartcard], because it allows for mitigating of
risks.” (37)
Rather than attempting unsuccessfully to obscure information regarding evasion and fraud
tactics, encouraging its open exchange will actually make enforcement more effective and next
generation AFC more secure.
H F E N Y C
ISTORY OF ARE VASION IN EW ORK ITY
New York City’s transit system in the 1970s was in disarray. Subway ridership was spiraling
downwards, while private express buses mushroomed (38), exacerbating Transit Authority’s
(TA) problems. Crime was rampant; derailments, fires, breakdowns, and assaults were
commonplace. Trains and stations were covered in graffiti. Passengers were actually afraid to
ride the subway. To attract passengers, TA even introduced a premium fare “Train to the Plane”
– staffed by a Transit Police officer at all times. Comparatively, fare evasion seemed a small
problem. However:
Brazen forms of fare evasion may be especially harmful in evoking fear of crime among riders.
Legitimate passengers may perceive […] that the transit system has no control over these
lawbreakers. The literally free access […] could lead to increased use by vagrants and encourage
criminals to favour subways over streets […] one in six fare evaders arrested is wanted on an
outstanding warrant for another crime. (23)
TA’s strategy for restoring riders’ confidence took a two-pronged approach. In 1981, MTA’s
first capital program started system’s physical restoration to a State-of-Good-Repair. Improving
TA’s image in riders’ minds is as important as overcoming deferred maintenance. Prompt
removal of graffiti (39) and prevention of blatant fare evasion would become central pillars of
the strategy to assure customers that the subway is “fast, clean, and safe” (40):
In February 1984, one of our first publicly announced goals was to clean graffiti off our rolling
stock. Virtually nobody, inside or outside the Authority, believed it could be done. Yet on May
12, 1989, the last graffiti covered train [was] taken out of service, marking a 100% clean and
graffiti free subway car fleet. (41)
Similarly, fare evasion was taken seriously. The TA began formally measuring evasion in
November 1988. When TA’s Fare Abuse Task Force (FATF) was convened in January 1989,
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 5 of 30
evasion was 3.9%. After a 15-cent fare increase to $1.15 in August 1990, a record 231,937
people per day, or 6.9%, didn’t pay. The pandemonium continued through 1991:
The Authority’s [booth clerk estimate of nonpaying riders] found 187,160 people, or 5.9%, did not
pay […] Fare evasion had become such a major problem that [the FATF was] turned over to
Transit Police, headed by Chief William Bratton. (42)
To combat the mounting problem, FATF designated 305 “target stations” with most evaders for
intensive enforcement and monitoring (43). Teams of uniformed and undercover police officers
randomly conducted “mini-sweeps”, swarming and arresting groups of evaders (44). Special
“mobile booking centers” in converted citybuses allowed fast-track offender processing (17).
Fare abuse agents covered turnstiles in shifts and issued citations. Plainclothes surveyors
collected data for five hours per week at target locations, predominantly during morning peak
hours. Finally, in 1992, evasion began to show a steady and remarkable decline, dropping to
about 2.7% in 1994:
Two hundred additional daily patrols were added in 1990 and special procedures established to
expedite processing of summonses and fines […] Fare evasion arrests soared from 10,268 in 1990
to 41,446 in 1994, a 304% increase, while felonies dropped 50% during the same period. (45)
The dramatic decrease in evasion during this period coincided with a reinvigorated Transit
Police, a 25% expansion of City police, and a general drop in crime in U.S. cities. In NYC,
crime rate decline begun in 1991 under Mayor Dinkins and continued through next two decades
under Giuliani and Bloomberg. Some observers credited the “broken windows” approach of law
enforcement (46) where minor crimes like evasion are routinely prosecuted, and statistical crime-
fighting tools, whereas others have indicated different reasons for crime reduction (47,48).
Regardless of causality, evasion checks resulted in many arrests for outstanding warrants or
weapons charges, likely contributing somewhat to public safety improvements.
Arrests weren’t the only way to combat evasions. The early 1990s TA was examining methods
to improve fare control passenger throughputs, reduce fare collection costs, and maintain control
over evasions and general grime. Their secret weapon – the AFC system – was being designed,
and evasion-preventing capability was a key consideration.
Designing the Automated Fare Collection (AFC) System
TA’s queuing studies concluded purchasing tokens from clerks wasn’t efficient (49). Preventing
‘slug’ use required sophisticated measures like tokens with metal alloy centers and electronic
token verification devices. To provide better access control, TA experimented with floor-to-
ceiling gates and “high wheel” turnstiles. Prototypes installed at Lexington Av-110 St in East
Harlem during a “target hardening” trial reduced evasions compared to nearby “control” stations
(23). However, controls consisting entirely of “high-wheels” created draconian, prison-like
environments, with detrimental effects on station aesthetics. Compromises with more secure
low-turnstile designs were difficult:
Despite transit officials’ promises new turnstiles would virtually eliminate fare evasion [… riders
used] all the old tricks to slip through the prototype […] Within a few minutes, an investigator
watched three cheats beat the turnstile [at 18 St-7 Av…] One evader hurdled the bar, one limbo-
danced under it, and the third “back-cocked” it, pulling the bar back slightly and slipping through.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 6 of 30
Richard Trenery, TA’s program manager for AFC, said the agency’s investigators had never seen
anyone back-cock the T200 turnstile, which has a mechanism meant to prevent that […] the
turnstile is built narrow at knee-level to make crawling under harder, and has slanted edges at
waist level to make getting a handhold to hop over harder. (34)
Production AFC implementation began in 1994. New turnstiles, including unstaffed high
wheels, and floor-to-ceiling service gates, featured lessons learned from trials. As AFC
equipment was rolled out, evasion plummeted. Fare abuse agents, together with independent
monitoring, were eliminated.
Station Agents and Customer Assistants
NYCT had tried to reduce station agent positions since full MetroCard vending machine (MVM)
deployment in 1997. Agents, whose primary responsibility was selling tokens, now sell
MetroCards. However, AFC eliminated long booth queues, so fewer clerks were needed.
Passengers now interact with agents only for requests like mutilated farecards, concessionary
fares, or travel directions. Clerks weren’t cross-trained for AFC maintenance; that function was
assigned to turnstile maintainers. NYCT determined that each station required only one full-time
booth, serving dominant (or both) travel directions.
Some thought the station destaffing plan would lead to potential evasion increases, and
consequently more general crime. The original FATF (1988-1997) was reconvened in 2009 to
review trends and coordinate mitigation strategies between NYCT and New York City Police
Department’s Transit Bureau (NYPD). Further confusing the issue, agents themselves
historically provided evasion counts in their normal course of duty.
Decision to eliminate agents turned out controversial with both riding public and elected
officials. Representatives were concerned about constituents’ jobs, whereas riders were
concerned about susceptibility to crime:
“We don’t need those booths now because machines are doing the work of extra clerks,” said
Albert W. O’Leary, a spokesman for the MTA. […] cutbacks will save $6 million each year. […]
neighborhood groups, rider advocates and the Transport Workers Union, Local 100, which
represents the City’s 3,500 token booth clerks, say the closings will mean fewer eyes and ears to
deter crime. (50)
A 2004 compromise converted low volume booths to high-wheels, high volume booths to part-
time entrances called “kiosks” (51) staffed by Station Customer Assistants (SCAs).
Affectionately called “burgundy jackets”, SCAs don’t sell farecards, instead they walk around
solving customers issues, including fare machine usage.
Naturally, both sides put their story out in the press. Those favouring elimination frequently cite
a civil suit concerning the 2005 sexual assault at 21 St-Van Alst station, which occurred despite
alarm having been raised by the agent. The lawsuit was dismissed (52). The agents’
contributions are clear to some:
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 7 of 30
In 2006, a crazed man wielding two power hacksaws attacked [Michael Steinberg, in 110 St-
Cathedral Parkway station.] If it wasn’t for a quick-thinking station agent, [he would have died.]
“They do more then just sell MetroCards and give directions. They saved my life.” (53)
The 2009 fiscal crisis necessitated more agent reductions, leaving only one 24-hour booth per
station complex (54). Planned attrition program was converted to layoffs when fiscal situation
deteriorated further in 2010.
Issues with Station Agent Evasion Data
All clerks counted evaders for one day each month, and systemwide evasion rates estimated.
However, this data wasn’t independently verifiable. Based on the 2008 pilot study (24,175
observed entries), overall evasion rate was six times the station agent rates. The booth clerk
data, collected for the last time in March 2010, showed ludicrously low systemwide evasion rates
of 0.2%, even though monitoring program estimated rates of between 0.9% and 1.6%. What
might account for these differences?
Agents have other duties (selling farecards, providing customer information) simultaneously as
counting evaders. While definitive reasons were never conclusively determined, since many
evaders are regulars and have fast technique, distracted clerks could easily miss a few evaders.
Even though agents aren’t supposed to engage evaders and have little power to stop evasions,
some may nevertheless see it as performance measurement of how effectively they are
“watching” fare controls – introducing subconscious reporting biases. Decreasing agent
positions further exacerbated under-counting problems.
N M F E
EW EASURE OF ARE VASION
Evasion measurements are difficult for several reasons. Studies from the 1990s indicated
evasions are clustered and shows large time/location variability, requiring stratified sampling for
accurate estimation. Measurements must be discreet to get true rates, as observer presence may
discourage it. First “pilot” sample used 100 one-hour observation periods, considered too long
and easily detected by potential evaders. Second “pilot” survey used 700 12-minute observation
“bursts”, found to be inefficient. The production compromise was 300 half-hour periods.
The two pilots in 2008 determined stratification parameters. Observations correlated most
strongly with passenger entry rates (activity levels) and adjacent neighbourhood income levels
(55). Using these variables, a 40-strata random sample was selected (two income brackets by 20
activity strata). Other variables like fare control equipment configuration, time-of-day, day-of-
week, and subway operating division were deemed secondary correlation variables. Survey
forms and methods were incrementally improved during these pilot studies.
NYCT designed a random sample capturing 300 locations-time combinations per quarter using
dedicated surveyors, to yield approximately 25,000 system entry observations. Sequential
observations within half-hour periods were assumed to be independent, even though this isn’t
strictly true because criminal activity (e.g. petty theft) might be subject to coactor effects of
social facilitation (see, e.g. Laming (56)). Careful sample stratification is believed to provide
sufficient coverage representative of the underlying population. Based on these assumptions,
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 8 of 30
25,000 observations provide evasion estimates significant at 95% ± 0.2% level, although actual
confidence levels might be somewhat lower. Pilots found evasion rates of approximately
1%~2%, necessitating measurements down to ± 0.2% significance to determine quarterly
variations.
What is Fare Evasion?
To understand evasion, it is imperative to first understand interactions between fare control
hardware, fare tariff, and passengers. Evasion occurs when passengers gain access from unpaid
to paid side by interacting with fare controls in manners inconsistent with tariff. Transit’s tariff
is complex, sometimes requiring legitimate revenue passengers to defeat fare controls with
behaviors that resemble evasion to casual observers. Additionally, entry procedures aren’t
always strictly followed, though usually no actual revenue losses takes place. There are,
therefore, real debates about what constitutes evasion. Are common behaviors that result in no
revenue loss considered “evasion”?
Fare Collection Hardware
NYCT has four basic types of fare control equipment: low turnstiles (including agent-operated
special entry turnstiles, SETs), high entrance-exit turnstiles (HEETs), high exit turnstiles
(HXTs), and gates (including emergency exit gates (EXG), agent-operated gates (AOG), and
Autonomous Farecard Access System (AFAS) gates for wheelchair access). Passengers enter
emergency regulations (57).
Systemwide EXG installations since 2006 (58) introduced a weakness into otherwise secure AFC
systems. Gates were originally only unlocked via booths buzzers or employees’ keys. After
London Underground’s 2005 terrorism attacks, fire codes required “panic bars”, allowing each
gate to be opened from paid side, expediting emergency evacuation. While a loud, piercing, and
warbling alarm sounds whenever EXGs are opened, general public took to using gates for exiting
(substantially reducing queues), especially at unstaffed locations. Panic bars were also installed
on Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) in Boston and on Chicago Transit
Authority (CTA) (21). This provided an impetus for renewed interests in evasion, because
evaders could enter through gates when already opened by exiting passengers (36).
Transit Fare Tariff
Per NYCT tariff (59), exceptions to normal turnstile operations abound. Children under 44”
(turnstile machines’ top height) must crawl under when entering with fare-paying adults (not
permissible when travelling alone). Those with bulk items (bicycles, strollers, packages) must
request station agent witness their swiping farecard, rotating turnstile without entering, then enter
through AOG with their items. Passengers with paper half-fare or “block” tickets must
relinquish them to agent and enter through SET. School groups traveling with authorization
letters may be admitted through AOG.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 9 of 30
An added complication is several unofficial system entry methods resulting in no revenue loss
but forbidden by tariff are frequently practiced. At unstaffed locations, fellow passengers often
open EXGs for entry by customers with bulk packages after witnessing them rotate turnstiles
without entering. Good Samaritans occasionally pay fares for others – technically a tariff
violation. Children often squeeze through HEETs with paying adults (if under 44”, no revenue
loss occurred). At token booths, agents often admit passengers through AOG or SET for
operational reasons. Police in uniform, construction workers, contractors in safety vests,
employees, and concession vendors often enter with keys or agent’s permission. Police officers
sometimes allow student groups to enter through gates.
Fare Evasion Methodologies and Data Collection
(PID) cameras. Classification provides intelligence that help formulate prevention strategies.
Transit developed a systematic method of classifying system entries as illegal, questionable, and
surveyors aren’t overwhelmed by high volumes of normal turnstile entries. Hash marks reduce
miscounting in busy areas. Training includes accurate categorizations of entries. Information
about police/station agent presence, whether gate is locked/alarm is heard is also collected,
providing contextual information allowing later data analysis. Surveyors record any unusual
circumstances on the form’s reverse side. NYCT is currently developing a hand-held computer
data collection application, to replace paper forms.
To determine if surveyors were discouraging potential evaders despite their discreet posture, and
to verify field counts, NYCT obtained sample footage at times when surveyors were present at
PID-equipped locations, and at comparable times (e.g. same time next day) when no surveyors
were present. Field counts were compared with same-day and next-day video counts. No
significant discrepancies were found, validating data collection methods.
PIDs are fairly expensive to install and maintain. About half the subway stations – identified as
high terrorism risk for large passenger volumes or other reasons – have PID coverage. Since
PIDs aren’t available at all stations, video couldn’t be used to obtain systemwide counts.
Potential Issues with Observation Methodology
Surveyors don’t have authority to stop passengers and examine fare media or identifications, and
must remain discreet. Thus, only observable evasion behaviours are recorded. Several sources
of revenue losses cannot be monitored this way. Fare media fraud and electronic evasion is
believed to be small but not insignificant. Unlimited MetroCard misuse (e.g., “swiping in”
fellow passengers) occurs, but is difficult to track through silent observations. While surveyors’
comments occasionally indicate these activities, this anecdotal information doesn’t form part of
survey dataset.
NYPD has arrested “professional swipers” and “key sellers” who sell “discounted” system
entries for about $1, or gate keys for between $25 and $100. Organized fare abuse operatives
disable MVMs then sell “swipes” to customers prevented from purchasing MetroCards. MVM
vandalism rates are captured using machine repair staff’s fault codes, but associated evasions and
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 10 of 30
revenue losses are difficult to estimate. Nevertheless, vandalism rates serve as proxy for swipe-
selling hotspots.
F E T
ARE VASION RENDS
The new evasion monitoring program has been effective for over one year, collecting 255,436
entry observations in 1,741 assignments totalling 870 hours. For this tabulation, questionable
entries are ignored. Evasion rate per passenger is observably illegal entries divided by AFC
entries, producing straightforward inflation factors for adjusting AFC ridership statistics.
Evasion rates per hour are evader counts enforcement personnel expects to find during a one-
hour “sweep.”
Hourly Distribution
wisdom suggests evasion peaked during late nights when lawbreaking activity is thought to be
most prevalent. Peak hours should have lower rates because large passenger volumes (high
activity levels) provided “more eyes and ears”, previously described (60) as higher street crime
probabilities on deserted sidewalks. Data supports this hypothesis somewhat as rates average
about 1.6% in middays (10:00~14:59) and 1.3% in evenings (20:00~23:59), whereas it’s 0.9% in
peak hours (6:00~9:59 and 16:00~19:59).
However, evasion rate spiked to almost 3.0% during 15:00~15:59. Investigation revealed
students leaving high schools together evading in large groups cause this peaking – likely
explained by increased social facilitation. Indeed, AFC ridership at stations near schools
anecdotally show unexpected upward surges when police officers are present during afternoon
school hours (61). Subway incident logs even use the term “school condition” to describe
problematic service interferences resulting from concentrations of students.
Most students are allowed three daily trips with Student MetroCards; evasions allow those with
exhausted quota to gain extra trips. Because of distinct student evasion patterns, different
juveniles enforcement strategies required, and low potential revenue recovery, evasions during
15:00~15:59 are excluded from remaining analyses, to focus on general evasion trends.
System Entry Distribution
hour. As stations become busier, per-passenger rates trend down while per-hour rates trend
upwards. Per-passenger rates of 5.5% are observed at quietest locations and slowest times
passengers per hour – like Beach-105 in the Rockaways at 03:00. Despite high per-passenger
rates, per-hour rates are low (<1.0 evaders/hour), suggesting enforcement at these
times/locations isn’t cost-effective. One possible solution is to simply close fare controls during
low-traffic, high-evasion hours. Precedents exist: Dean St (Franklin Shuttle, between IND
Franklin Av/BMT Park Place, Brooklyn) was closed in the 1990s due to rampant evasion; more
evaders were recorded than revenue passengers.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 11 of 30
Conversely, per-passenger rates are low at largest stations and busiest times, averaging around
0.5%. But sheer volumes give rise to high per-hour rates hovering around 8.0 evaders/hour.
Random enforcement at busy locations during rush periods is thus an effective way to apprehend
evaders. Indeed, police are often seen at busy stations like Grand Central and Herald Square.
Evasion by Median Income
Median income of adjacent Census tracts was attached to stations, providing results by income
income of about $30,000 (not adjusted for inflation), then essentially flatlines – consistent with
conventional wisdom that more evasion activity occurs in lower income areas.
Seasonality of Fare Evasions
summer months can reach 1.7%, dropping to 0.9% during winter months, consistent with general
seasonality of crime. Systemwide evasion rates may also correlate with ridership, as both are
influenced by weather conditions.
Revenue Loss Estimation
While subway “menu fare” is $2.25, frequent rider discounts, concessionary fares, and periodic
passes are available. Some evaders are students; others hold valid passes but use gates simply
for convenience, thus no monetary losses occur. Conversely, if evasion were difficult, regular
evaders might divert to multi-ride fares or purchase passes. Clearly, stolen rides have some
value.
Originally, NYCT conservatively assumed evaders would pay $1.33 blended subway average
fare (including student discounts) if they paid. Losses could be higher if evaders were actually
occasional cash riders who otherwise might pay $2.25. However, both time-of-day distribution
and anecdotal evidence suggests students are overrepresented amongst evaders, thus NYCT
recoupable losses may be lower. Conversely, free subway-bus MetroCard transfers meant even
if evaders beat the $2.25 subway fare, fares might still be collected when transferring to buses
(free if subway fares were paid). If evaders don’t successfully skip bus fares, Transit may
actually recoup some losses. Using $1.48 adjusted average fare and 1.0% evasion rate, this
translates into annual losses of about $23.6 million.
Methods of Evasion
Predominant mode of evasion is children over 44” ducking under turnstiles, accounting for 43%
of observably illegal entries. Remaining methods are more or less evenly divided, with gate
contributing 24%, and other turnstile violations, 32%. For non-student evasion enforcement,
police should focus equally on gate and turnstiles. When monitoring began, perception was that
gates accounted for most evasions. As gate discipline improved, questionable entries declined
Another unexpected finding was that two-thirds of gate entries may actually be legitimate despite
their questionable appearance to casual observers, e.g. school groups with authorization letters.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 12 of 30
In some cases, group entries observed actually matched authorization letter records in
retrospective audits.
C F E
OMBATING ARE VASION
Properly Locking Emergency Gates
In pilot studies, surveyors discreetly checked prior to leaving each location whether gates were
properly locked from unpaid side. Evasion rates were computed by gate locking status. Gate
evasion rate was 1.5% unlocked, and only 0.8% when locked. Interestingly, unlocked gates also
invite more “questionable” entries; rate was 1.8% unlocked, but only 0.9% locked. Keeping
gates locked potentially halves gate-related evasions!
Following this finding, NYCT reinstructed station supervisors and agents on importance and
revenue impacts of keeping gates locked. Questionable gate entries decreased from 1.5% to
decrease when seasonality effects are accounted for. This measure seems to target mostly casual
evasions.
Fare Control Area Configuration
Originally fare control hardware and staff presence was thought to affect evasions. Unstaffed
HEETs (with emergency exits), a generally unsupervised environment, might invite rampant
evasions. However, pilot studies indicated these locations had similar gate evasions (0.9%) to
staffed locations (1.0%). At least in New York, agents don’t seem to deter evaders.
Unsupervised HEETs had similar turnstile evasions (1.2%) to staffed locations (1.0%).
Unsupervised exit-only locations have lower gate evasions (0.6%) than elsewhere, suggesting
evasion is a crime of opportunity. Exit-only gates are only opened when trains arrive and
passengers open them from paid side; evaders likely find it more time-efficient to evade through
entrances. Only the most determined evaders would wait at exit-only locations for others to exit,
to enter.
Communication of Child Height Restrictions
Passengers may be unaware of height guidelines determining when children must begin to pay,
are now being tested near turnstiles at the Bowling Green station.
Tackling Organized Fare Abuse Operations
MVM vandalism costs NYCT both in lost revenues and repair expenses. NYCT provides MVM
vandalism intelligence to NYPD, which utilizes hidden portable wireless digital video cameras in
“sting” operations to gather evidence against organized fare abuse rings and identify leaders.
These “professional swipers” can be difficult to apprehend because they are very mobile and
requires strategic and determined law enforcement efforts to monitor MVM vandalism patterns,
prioritizing stations with highest vandalism rates.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 13 of 30
In years past, theft-of-service crimes were often dismissed with time served (several days in
Riker’s Island), but by working with the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office and Midtown
Community Court, FATF achieved escalating sentences for recidivists. The coordinated efforts
resulted in a five-swiper ring being disbanded and sentences of over one year being imposed.
Measuring impacts of taking down fare abuse operations is diffuclt, because even large swiper
rings ‘sell’ very few fares compared to natural day-to-day fluctuations of the 8.0 million riders
on NYC’s system due to reasons like weather or special events.
Legal Framework and Enforcement
Most important evasion fighting tool is arguably comprehensive and functioning legal
frameworks to deal with evaders and counterfeiters. NYCT’s Rule of Conduct (62) has banned
evasions since the 1980s, rules having been established mainly for arresting persons likely to
commit other crimes (assault, graffiti). With appropriate legal framework, like traffic stops,
evasion checks can be effective in identifying and arresting criminals wanted on outstanding
warrants (63).
To round-up evaders, MTA fare inspectors continue to use the “surge” strategy first developed
by Transit police. Renewed enforcement interests led to several high profile cases. Swiss
tourists with allegedly valid passes were ticketed for bumping turnstiles (64). One passenger
was arrested for exiting, not entering, through an emergency gate (65).
Legal framework is more than prohibition of illegal acts and prescription of fines. Complete
regulations should address issues like: arrests versus summonses; arresting/summons issuing
powers; whether undercover enforcement is permitted; disputes/appeals process (e.g. “my
monthly MetroCard isn’t working, so I went through gate”); dealing with genuinely confused
tourists (e.g. “I flashed my pass, so going through gate is okay?”); required evidence for
conviction (e.g. whether video evidence are admissible). New York allows certain non-police
employees to issue evasion citations, and utilizes both uniformed and undercover police
enforcement.
Contextual security – expressly forbidding nonpayment and offering ways to punish rulebreakers
– is potentially as important as having secure hardware. In Boston, students used well-known
methods (29,30) to defeat Mifare Classic farecard’s proprietary encryption, publicly
demonstrating proof-of-concept forgeries (31). However, they didn’t acknowledge the highly
illegal nature of using forged cards, making cloning not worthwhile for $1.70 fares. Chips
implementing stronger open-standard encryption algorithms have now largely superseded Mifare
Classic.
Evasion Detection and Prevention Hardware
Video recording equipment may deter criminal activity, including evasion. Cameras are widely
deployed in modern Asian and European transit systems. Like other U.S. agencies, NYCT
installed counter-terrorism cameras at key stations. PIDs covers fare controls from every
conceivable angle with high fidelity video, positively identifying terror suspects. They also
produce clear pictures of entering and exiting passengers, including evaders. MBTA, CTA (21),
and Port Authority Trans-Hudson (PATH) also use sophisticated camera equipment, and MBTA
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 14 of 30
even apprehended vandals damaging AFC equipment while evading, publishing the video
footage (20).
On PATH (and some NYCT stations), hidden rooms with half-silvered glass or surveillance
portals are provided for covert police observation. Perpetrators are apprehended by police that
suddenly appear from behind closed doors when illegal acts occur.
Fare Evasion Fines
Transit’s $60 penalty was internally set by Transit Adjudication Bureau (TAB) with delegated
levy without further approvals, to support conversion to POP fare collection on a Bronx bus line
(67). In Boston, prior to CharlieCard AFC implementation and conversion of booth clerks to
roving agents, MBTA quietly asked Massachusetts State Legislature to make evasions a civil
offense (68) punishable by progressive fines ($15 first offense; $100 second; $250 third or
subsequent). On Newark City Subway, where POP is in effect, evasion penalty was initially
$75, but increased to $100 in 2008. On Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority
(MARTA), evasion fines range from $85 to $235 (22), whereas they “start at $50” on the San
Francisco Municipal Railway (19).
Economics of Casual Fare Evasion
NYPD focuses on arrests rather than summonses, because mandatory arrests of wanted criminals
are more critical to general crime reduction. Consequently, evasions-to-summonses ratio is low.
In 2009, 18.5 million estimated evasions occurred. A total of 120,000 summonses were issued,
thus routine evaders might expect one summons every 100~200 evasions. Average weekday
riders requiring three daily evasions would receive one $100 summons every 6 to 13 weeks.
Considering weekly subway passes retails at $27, evaders could save $162 in 6 weeks but pay
$100 in fines. Additionally, not all summonses are legally feasible to collect.
For occasional cash riders, evasion economics is quite different. With 0.7% risk of $100
summons, expected “price” per evasion is only 70 cents, compared to $2.25 cash fare. This basic
street economics might explain observed evasion behaviours. Higher fines or arrests may have
better deterrent effects.
Difficulty Evaluating Enforcement and Countermeasures Cost-Effectiveness
A straightforward method for evaluating cost-effectiveness would trade-off fare revenue losses,
enforcement impacts on evasion rates, fines revenues, and police costs. However, law
enforcement economics is complex: uncontrollable factors affect evasions besides enforcement;
evasion checks may have other benefits like preventing crime and confiscating drugs or
weapons, whose monetary benefit are difficult to estimate; police costs are subject to complex
deployment and overtime rules, and cost-allocation issues relating to critical coverage versus off-
peak utilization of available resources; fines revenues may be offset by court and administration
costs.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 15 of 30
P R
UBLIC ELATIONS
Transit agencies’ active efforts is sometimes required to correct misinformation from special
interest groups. Due to impending station agent layoffs, the New York Daily News decided to
look into the fare abuse issue. Initially, they developed a draft about changes in human presence
at stations over the last decade, highlighting agent position reductions. They requested from
NYCT evasion data, frequency of emergency assistance requests, and an interview regarding
rider perception and safety.
In response, Transit compiled statistics showing significant reductions in serious subway crime,
mayhem, destaffing actually occurred against an improving picture of public safety in the City.
Subway crime has decreased 68% since 2000, and annual average evasion rate remains low
(~1.3%).
However, evasion statistics was problematic. NYCT was aware of differences between
independent survey data (1.3%) and station agents’ one-day counts (0.2%). To forestall
appearance of instituting methodology changes purely to avoid negative press, Transit released
discrepancy. Simultaneously, NYCT announced future public reporting will use the more
accurate independent surveys.
While expected confusion about methodology adjustments arose, since data showed recent
destaffing hasn’t led to rampant evasions (still only 1.3%), and no reasonably accurate estimates
exist for historical evasions, Daily News chose not to focus on station agent issues. Instead, the
story highlighted that accurate measurements revealed more evasion than previously thought
(16). By keeping communication channels open with the press, and supplying accurate and
timely data, NYCT reduced a potential public relations disaster to a headline article about
focus shifted to illegal use of stolen keys (69) to unlock gates from unpaid side.
ONCLUSIONS
NYCT developed a multi-pronged approach for managing subway fare evasion. AFC was
designed with security features to physically prevent abuse, allow silent observations, and
facilitate audits. Legal framework gives transit police tools to enforce law and order. Data
collection and analysis keeps an accurate picture of evasion trends and MVM vandalism.
Taskforce-based multidisciplinary approach ensures participation by normally disparate
departments within Transit. A comprehensive press strategy ensures NYCT’s efforts in
clamping down evasion are publicly communicated – both as caution to evaders, and
demonstrating judicious use of resources.
Fare evasion is likely a crime of opportunity. Allowing it may have implications on system
security perceptions far beyond lost revenues. Riders are particularly irked by blatant evasions –
out of basic notion of fairness, also because abuses can symbolize unaccountability and
“nobody’s in charge”. An accurate, comprehensive, and transparent fare abuse measurement and
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 16 of 30
enforcement mechanism is a must for transit agencies – whether or not POP fare collection is
used.
Curiously, the hacker community is quite willing to share information about fare abuse (even
publicize its illegality), while the mainstream press is awash with opinions about evasions and its
prevention, whereas discussions amongst transit professionals seem taboo. Encouraging open
information exchange could allow agencies to learn about evasion from each other, and even
from evaders themselves.
Future Work
This study raised interesting questions, some beyond the traditional realm of transit research.
What are ancillary security benefits of clamping down on fare evasion? More importantly, can
they be quantitatively measured? Can correspondence between fare evaders and subway
criminals be conclusively demonstrated? What are evaders’ motivations? Trip purposes? How
do tariffs or fines discourage evasion? How much fines are actually collected? Do they cover
collection costs? What are “uncontrollable” factors affecting evasion rates? (e.g. weather,
poverty, special events?) What countermeasures are most effective? What factors determine
optimal enforcement rates? How much casual evasions are recurrent or habitual? What other
patterns are seen in evasion data and evader demographic? What explains high evasion rates
amongst students? How do evasions relate to social issues like homelessness? What about
evasions on other modes? What changes in legal frameworks could impact evasion rates?
Fare evasion, often thought of as a simple audit matter, is actually a complex phenomenon that
transcends transportation operations, fare equipment design, transit tariff, and law enforcement.
Far from being a black-and-white matter of either you paid your fare or you didn’t, each evasion
tactic can be linked to specific AFC design features and enforcement strategies. Aside from
being academically fascinating, this area deserves further research for its practical implications
and very real impacts on transit authorities’ bottom lines. A multidisciplinary approach bringing
together sociology, legal, enforcement, economics, transit management, and psychology
expertise will be necessary to answer these questions.
CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge Benjamin Lonner, Kishor Sharma, Justin Serina (MTA),
Chief Raymond Diaz, Captain Edward O’Brien, Sergeant Jim Donovan (NYPD), Antonio
Suarez, Matthew Holland (AFC), Larry Hirsch, Robert Hickey, William Amarosa, Qifeng Zeng
(OMB), Anthony Cramer, and Tewfik Berri (OP) for their contributions to this research.
Responsibility for errors or omissions remains with the authors. Opinions expressed are the
authors’ and do not reflect official policy of Metropolitan Transportation Authority, New York
City Transit, New York City Police Department, or any other organization.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 17 of 30
EFERENCES
(1) Kahn, Ric. No Fare – the MBTA Says its $203 Million System will Make Freeloaders Pay.
In Boston Globe, July 2, 2006.
(2) Davis, Tom. Hudson-Bergen Light Rail Loses Millions Each Year. In the North Jersey
Bergen_Light_Rail_loses_millions_each_year.html on June 8, 2010.
(3) Los Angeles Metro to Test Turnstile-Gate Waters at Four Subway Stations. In Progressive
article.asp?id=21115 on March 31, 2010.
(4) PriceWaterhouseCoopers. TransLink Fare Evasion Internal Audit, September 2007.
fare_evasion_pwc.pdf on October 5, 2010.
(5) Clarke, Ronald V. Fare Evasion and Automatic Ticket Collection on the London
Underground. In Crime Prevention Studies, Vol. 1, Criminal Justice Press, Monsey, N.Y., 1993.
(6) Toronto Transit Commission. Section 3.3: Fare Evasion. In TTC Fare Collection Study.
(7) Stern, Richard. Ch.3: Fare Evasion Issues. In Bus Transit Fare Collection Practices, TCRP
Synthesis 26, Transportation Research Board, 1997.
(8) Dauby, Laurent and Z. Kovacs. Fare Evasion in Light Rail Systems. In Transportation
Research E-Circular EC-112: Light Rail Transit: A World of Applications and Opportunities,
Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, 2007.
(9) Clarke, Ronald V., S. Contre and G. Petrossian. Deterrence and Fare Evasion: Results of a
Natural Experiment. In Security Journal, Vol. 23, pp. 5~17, October 19, 2009.
(10) Transit Cooperative Research Program. Ch.3: Policy and Enforcement Issues. In TCRP
Report 80: A Toolkit for Self-Service, Barrier-Free Fare Collection. Transportation Research
Board of the National Academies, 2002.
(11) King County Department of Transportation. Report on Fare Evasion on Metro Transit,
on October 5, 2010.
(12) Lee, Jason. “Passes and Transfers, Please”: Uncovering Proof-of-Payment Patterns to
Reduce Fare Evasion. In Press. TRB Paper #11-1589, Submitted for Publication at the
Transportation Research Board 90th Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C., January 23-27, 2011.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 18 of 30
(14) Lu, Alex and A. Reddy. An Algorithm to Measure Daily Bus Passenger Miles Using
Electronic Farebox Data for National Transit Database (NTD) Section 15 Reporting. In Press.
TRB Paper #11-0368, Submitted for Publication at the Transportation Research Board 90th
Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C., January 23-27, 2011.
(15) U.S. Department of Transportation. Ch. 4: Fare Evasion. In Transit Security: A Description
of Problems and Countermeasures, Report No. UMTA-MA-06-0152-84-2, Final Report,
October 1984.
(16) Donohue, Peter. Cheaters Cost MTA Millions – Fare Beaters Underestimated for Years. In
New York Daily News, March 16, 2010.
(17) Sims, Calvin. Fare Beaters in Subway Pay in the End, in Sweat. In New York Times,
February 18, 1991.
(18) Doyle, Sue. Metro Fare Evasion a Problem. In Los Angeles Daily News, October 25, 2007.
(19) Gordon, Rachel. MUNI Catching 50 Percent More Fare Evaders. In San Francisco
Chronicle, January 7, 2009.
(20) Haggerty, Ryan. MBTA Cracks Down, Fines Fare Evaders – says Gate Vandals Caught on
Camera. In the Boston Globe, July 26, 2007.
(21) Levine, Jay and E. Marshall. CTA Cheaters: People Ride Free At Brown Line Stop. In
CBS2 Chicago Area Local News, 10:39 pm Central, Feb 16, 2010. Retrieved from
(22) Shaw, Chris. MARTA Jumpers Costing MARTA $3 Million a Year. In My Fox Atlanta,
10:27 pm Eastern, July 12, 2010.
(23) Weidner, Robert R. Target-Hardening at a New York City Subway Station: Decreased Fare
Evasion – at What Price? In Crime Prevention Studies, Vol. 6, Criminal Justice Press, Monsey,
N.Y., 1996.
(24) Kooreman, Peter. Fare Evasion as a Result of Expected Utility Maximization – Some
Empirical Support. In Journal of Transport Economics and Policy, January, 1993. Retrieved
(25) Rhodes, Michael. Fare Evasion is Down as Muni Steps Up Collection Effort. In
is-down-as-muni-steps-up-collection-effort/ on July 30, 2010.
(26) Office of the City Auditor, Edmondton. 05148 – ETS Fare Evasion Review, May 10, 2005.
05148_Fare_Evasion_Final_Report.pdf on October 5, 2010.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 19 of 30
(27) Chu, Henry and D. Lauter. Paris Metro’s Cheaters Say Solidarity is the Ticket. In Los
Angeles Times, 8:58 pm Central, June 22, 2010.
(28) Cubic Corporation. U.S. Patent 6,789,736: Distributed Architecture for Magnetic Fare
Card Processing.
(29) Nohl, Karsten. Lost Mifare Obscurity Raises Concerns Over Security of OV-Chipkaart.
(30) Siekerman, Pieter and M. van der Schee. Security Evaluation of the Disposable OV-
Chipkaart, v1.7. Computer and Network Group, Universiteit van Amsterdam, 2007. Retrieved
(31) Ryan, Russell, Z. Anderson, and A. Chiesa. Fare Collection Vulnerability Assessment
Report – Analysis and Recommendations. Civil Action 08-11364-GAO, Document 10-2, Filed
08/09/2008 with United States District Court of Massachusetts. Retrieved from
em.pdf on June 30, 2010.
(32) Battaglia, J. The MetroCard Project. In 2600 Magazine, Spring Volume, Middle Island,
(33) Tanenbaum, Andrew S. Dutch Public Transit Card Broken – RFID Replay Attack Allows
Free Travel in the Netherlands, Department of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam.
(34) Strom, Stephanie. Cheats Outfox New Turnstile For Subways. In New York Times, May
16, 1991.
(35) Donohue, Pete. Millions of Fare-Beaters Take MTA for an $8 Million Bus Ride. In New
York Daily News, March 18, 2010.
(36) Lysiak, Matt and D. Goldiner. Exit Gates as MTA’s ‘Free’ Way, Farebeaters Use Busy
Stops to Advantage. In New York Daily News, April 30, 2009.
(37) De Winter, Brenno. Judge Denies NXP’s Injunction Against Security Researchers. In the
2008/07/18/judge-denies-nxps-injunction-against-security-researchers on August 22, 2008.
(38) Cohen, Alexander. The “Other” New York Bus System – Subsidized Private Buses in New
York City, 1974-2003. 1.259 Term Paper, Department of Urban Studies and Planning,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., 2003.
(39) Rivera, Joseph. Vandal Squad – Inside the New York City Transit Police Department 1984-
2004. Brooklyn, N.Y., 2008.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 20 of 30
(40) Metropolitan Transportation Authority. The 1980 “Train to the Plane” TV Commercial,
from the Transit Museum Archives, New York, N.Y., 1980. Retrieved from
(41) Gunn, David L. New York’s Transit Rebound. In Progressive Railroading, August, 1989.
(42) Sims, Calvin. Despite Curbs, Fare Beating Is Surging Again in Subways. In the New York
Times, August 16, 1991.
(43) New York City Transit Authority, Operations Planning. Methodology for Estimating the
Systemwide Number of Rapid Weekday Fare Evaders, New York, N.Y., August, 1992.
(44) Bratton, William and P. Knobler. Ch. 9. In The Turnaround: How America's Top Cop
Reversed the Crime Epidemic. Random House, New York, N.Y., 1998.
(45) Hom, Keith J. Reinventing Transit: the Twenty-Year “Overnight” Success Story of NYC
Transit. Presented at the Metropolitan Conference on Public Transportation Research, Chicago,
Ill., June 11, 1999.
(46) Kelling, George L. and J.Q. Wilson. Broken Windows: The Police and Neighbourhood
Safety. In Atlantic Monthly, March, 1982.
(47) Levitt, Steven D. and S.J. Dubner. Ch. 4: Where Have All the Criminals Gone. In
Freakonomics: A Rouge Economist Explores the Hidden Side of Everything. New York, N.Y.
2005.
(48) Langan, Patrick A. and M.R. Durose. The Remarkable Drop in Crime in New York City.
Presented at the International Conference on Crime, the Italian National Institute of Statistics,
relazioni/Langan_rel.pdf on October 4, 2010.
(49) New York City Transit Authority. Operations Planning Weekday Token Booth Queuing
Report. Unpublished Manuscript, May 24, New York, N.Y., 1990.
(50) Lee, Denny. Does a Plan to Shut Token Booths Turn a Blind Eye to Crime? In New York
Times, Neighbourhood Report: New York Up Close, July 22, 2001.
(51) Luo, Michael. Subway Riders Master The Art of the Swipe; Fewer MetroCard Glitches
Reported As Public and Transit System Adapt. In New York Times, July 18, 2004.
(52) Parker, Billy. G Train Platform Rape Victim Loses MTA Negligence Suit. In The
g_train_platform_rape_victim_loses.php on July 4, 2010.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 21 of 30
(53) Haddon, Heather. ‘They Saved My Life’: Rider Who Was Attacked in Subway Station
Protests Layoffs. In Urbanite Section, amNewYork, March 3, 2010. Retrieved from
station-protests-layoffs-1.1791593 on June 8, 2010.
(54) Reddy, Alla, T. Chennadu, and A. Lu. Safeguarding Minority Civil Rights and
Environmental Justice in Service Delivery and Reductions – Case Study of New York City
Transit Authority Title VI Program. In Transportation Research Record: Journal of the
Transportation Research Board No. 2163, National Academies, Washington D.C., 2010, pp.45-
56.
(55) Hickey, Robert L., A. Lu, and A. Reddy. Using Quantitative Methods in Equity and
Demographic Analysis to Inform Transit Fare Restructuring Decisions. In Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board No. 2144, National Academies,
Washington D.C., 2010, pp.80-92.
(56) Laming, Donald R.J. Understanding Human Motivation: What Makes People Tick. Wiley-
Blackwell, Oxford, England, 2003.
(57) Sclafani, Tony. ‘Panic Bar’ Exits OK’d for all Subway Stops. In New York Daily News,
June 29, 2006.
(58) Chan, Sewell. Anxiety Over Transit System’s Security Adds to Tensions at Negotiating
(59) New York City Transit Authority. New York City Transit Authority (including Affiliates)
and MTA Bus Company – Local Rates of Fare and Regulations Governing the Furnishing of
Passenger Transportation on Regular Scheduled Service, Effective December 30, 2010, New
York, N.Y.
(60) Jacobs, Jane. Ch. 2: The Uses of Sidewalks – Safety. In The Death and Life of Great
American Cities. Random House, New York, N.Y., 1961.
(61) Hirsch, Lawrence R. Unpublished Data. Office of Management and Budget, New York
City Transit Authority, New York, N.Y., 2008.
(62) New York City Transit Authority. Rules Governing the Conduct and Safety of the Public in
the Use of the Facilities of the New York City Transit Authority and Manhattan and Bronx
on June 9, 2010.
(63) Travayiakis , Lefteris K. Dorchester Man Arrested for Evading Fare at MBTA, Had 11
Outstanding Criminal Warrants. In Boston Criminal Lawyers’ Blog, May 6, 2010. Retrieved
on June 8, 2010.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 22 of 30
(64) Newman, William, S. Cheema and C. Moynihan. A Bigger Penalty for Riders Who Cheat
on the Fare. In New York Times, July 8, 2008.
(65) Boyle, Christina. Cops Cuff and Stuff Queens Man Todd Zielinski in Cell for 28 Hours for
Using Subway Emergency Exit. In New York Daily News, March 10, 2009.
(66) New York State Public Authorities Law, Title 9 New York City Transit Authority, Section
1204 General Powers of the Authority, Paragraph 5(a), and Section 1209-a, Transit Adjudication
Bureau, Paragraph 4.
(67) NYC Transit Increases Fare Evasion Penalty. In Transit Blogger, June 25, 2008. Retrieved
on March 31, 2010.
(68) Massachusetts General Laws, Title XXII: Corporations, Chapter 159, Section 101.
(69) McLaughlin, Mike, P. Donohue, E. Einhorn, D.E. Rosen and B. Paddock. N.Y. Key Party –
Angry Riders, Pols Rips MTA on Subway Gate Breach. In New York Daily News, April 26,
New York, N.Y., 2010.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 23 of 30
L F
IST OF IGURES
Note to Editors: Photos embedded in this document are not publication-resolution. Higher
resolution artwork will be supplied separately to TRB.
variety of fare control hardware developed in response to the rampant fare evasion problem of
the 1980s: (a) The fare controls at Cortelyou Road Station on the Brighton Line (paid side)
features three low turnstiles and two emergency exit gates (EXGs); (b) One unstaffed control
area at Howard Beach-John F. Kennedy Airport on the Rockaway Line (unpaid side) features
two high entrance-exit turnstiles (HEETs) and one EXG; (c) This exit-only fare controls (unpaid
side) features one stainless-steel high exit turnstile (HXT) and one EXG; (d) The exit-only
control-area (paid side) features an older-style painted HXT and one EXG.
counter-terrorism purposes offers a clear view of different methods of fare evasion practiced by
passengers: (a) Adolescent passenger not accompanied by adult crawls under turnstile to obtain
system access; (b) Two teenagers share one swipe by “bumping” the low turnstile; (c) Passenger
jumps over the low turnstile; (d) Passenger “backcocks” the turnstile by pulling it back while
entering. PID cameras also covers emergency exit gates, capturing examples of each type of
gate-related fare abuse: (e) Child backcocks to enter the station; (f) Moments later, child returns
to the emergency exit gate to allow parent to enter with stroller, allowing three passengers to
enter without paying a single fare; (g) Commuter entering the system by catching the gate left
open by passengers illegally using the gate to exit in a non-emergency situation; (h) Emergency
gates are occasionally left ajar or closed but not locked, allowing unpaid passengers to enter the
system; (i) A police officer opens the combined service exit/emergency exit for a stroller to exit,
a legitimate use of the gate, however, a bystander is waiting outside in the unpaid area; (j) For
reasons unknown, the policeperson allows the bystander to enter without paying, resulting in a
“questionable” entry.
Completed form from the Myrtle-Wyckoff station in Eastern Brooklyn, the local high school
dismissed students at around 15:06, causing the large number of opportunistic evaders and
turnstile jumpers. The revenue impacts of this incident is likely minimal, though, because most
students who ride the subway to school have free passes for system access; (b) Surveyor
instructions illustrate precisely how system entries are classified into one of 19 categories.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 24 of 30
data, and strategies to reduce evasion: (a) Evasion rates by system entry rate; (b) Evasion rates
by time-of-day (hour); (c) Time-series systemwide evasion rates showing seasonality effects; (d)
Evasion rates by Census 2000 median income of adjacent neighbourhoods; (e) Prototype signs
being tested near turnstiles at the Bowling Green station to indicate height guidelines
determining when children must begin to pay fare; (f) Fare evasion fines were increased to $100
in July 2008, and communicated to the public via informational posters.
mass media, supplying data to minimize averse press where possible: (a) Ten year trends
supplied to Daily News on major felonies, evasion rates (both methodologies), police activity,
and fine collection activity; (b) The resulting New York Daily News/Peter Donohue coverage on
NYCT fare abuse issue, including the misuse of Firemen’s keys to illegal gain access to the
subway (reprinted with permission).
Note to Editors: Photos embedded in this document are not publication-resolution. Higher
resolution artwork will be supplied separately to TRB.
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 25 of 30
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 26 of 30
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f) (g)
(h) (i) (j)
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 27 of 30
(a)
(b) Instructions for Subway Fare Evasion Data Collection 3. Police Badge: Passengers permitted to enter system by
approaching clerk and shows and does not give up some form of
Seven most common methods of illegal entry to the system have been identification that isn’t a transportation employee ID.
identified. Surveyors should classify each evasion as one of the following 4. Flash Pass: Passengers permitted to enter by approaching
categories: agent and shows and does not give up some form of
transportation employee identification (regardless of whether the
1. Crawling: Passengers not accompanied by fare paying adult, or employee class is authorized to ride).
over 44” in height, obtains system access by crawling under low 5. Key: Unauthorized passenger(s) entering via locked EXGs or
2. Bumping: Two or more passengers enter while turnstile employees, police, and firepersons.
mechanisms rotate once (i.e. 120 degrees or ⅓ of a turn), allowing
4. Backcocking: Passengers pulling back low turnstile mechanism (as measurement.
if to exit) but steps over or slip between turnstile’s lower legs to enter
5. Deliberate: Passenger(s) entering through EXGs or AOGs opened 44” in height, obtains system access by crawling under low
6. Opportunistic: Passenger(s) entering through already open EXGs 2. Paper Ticket: Passengers gives up to token clerk certain
or AOGs while others are exiting through same, without deliberate authorizing materials (e.g. block ticket), entering system through
7. Left Open: Passenger(s) entering via closed, but unlocked EXGs or 3. Bulk Item: Per tariff, passengers pay then rotate turnstile without
and bulk item through service gate.
Data is also collected on “questionable” entry categories, to understand
information is downloaded from the MetroCard AFC database. Data is
1. School Group: Large organized group of teachers, chaperones, collected in six-minute increments. AFC data (from which normal turnstile
and children shows or gives up to token clerk authorizing materials entry passenger counts are derived) is recorded to nearest six minutes.
(e.g. letter), entering through gate. Surveyors must synchronize their watch with local AFC Card Reader
2. Police Uniform: Passengers enter subway by approaching clerk machine prior to commencing survey.
while wearing full police, fire, court officer, postal, military, and other
public service uniform (regardless of whether the uniform is
authorized or not).
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 28 of 30
2.5%
Weekday Evasion by Median Income
2.0%
1.5%
1.0%
0.5%
0.0%
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
81~6 42~81 82~42 23~82 63~23 24~63 84~24 26~84 07~26 68~07 671~68
Station Median Income Range ($ Thousands)
)rgsP
rep(
etaR
noisavE
eraF
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
)ruoH
rep(
etaR
noisavE
eraF
2.0%
Seasonality of Fare Evasion
1.8%
* Excludes afternoon school
1.6%
discharge hour (15:00-15:59)
1.4%
1.2% Evasion per Psgr
Evasion per Hour
1.0%
0.8%
0.6%
0.4%
0.2%
0.0%
Sample size = 167,817 entries
60/90~40/90 70/90~50/90 80/90~60/90 90/90~70/90 01/90~80/90 11/90~90/90 21/90~01/90 10/01~11/90 20/01~21/90 30/01~10/01 40/01~20/01 50/01~30/01 60/01~40/01 70/01~50/01 80/01~60/01
Reporting Period (Rolling Average)
)rgsP
rep(
etaR
noisavE
eraF
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
)ruoH
rep(
etaR
noisavE
eraF
6.0% Weekday Evasion by System Entries*
5.0%
4.0%
3.0%
2.0%
1.0%
0.0%
Evasion per Psgr
Evasion per Hour
Sample size = 37,269 entries per period
)20.0~10.0(
20.0
)40.0~30.0(
40.0
)70.0~50.0(
60.0
)01.0~80.0(
90.0
)31.0~11.0(
21.0
)81.0~41.0(
61.0
)22.0~91.0(
12.0
)72.0~32.0(
62.0
)33.0~82.0(
13.0
)24.0~43.0(
93.0
)25.0~34.0(
84.0
)96.0~35.0(
16.0
)00.1~07.0(
48.0
)65.5~10.1(
66.1
Avg & Range, System Entries per Hour (Thousands)
)rgsP
rep(
etaR
noisavE
eraF
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
)ruoH
rep(
etaR
noisavE
eraF
Evasion per Psgr
Evasion per Hour
* Excludes afternoon school
discharge hour (15:00-15:59)
Sample size = 170,615 entries
snoitats
teiuQ
snoitats
ysuB
3.5%
Weekday Evasion by Hour
3.0%
2.5%
2.0%
1.5%
1.0%
0.5%
0.0%
4 5 6 7 8 9 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 71 81 91 02 12 22 32 0
Hour of Day
)rgsP
rep(
etaR
noisavE
eraF
1,000
)ruoH/rgsP(
etaR
yrtnE
metsyS
(a)
Evasion per Psgr
Entries per Hour
(b)
Sample size = 124,069 entries
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 29 of 30
, New York City Transit D R A F T -- Preliminary Use Only
Station Entry Count Study Issue Date: 2010/05/05
Monitoring Report for 1st Quarter 2010
2009Q2 2009Q3 2009Q4 2010Q1 Overall 2009Q2 2009Q3 2009Q4 2010Q1 Overall
I Station Entry Observation Detail Psgrs Psgrs Psgrs Psgrs Psgrs % Total % Total % Total % Total % Total
Children Over 44" Entering Under Turnstile 204 155 85 104 548 0.64% 0.63% 0.36% 0.30% 0.48%
Passengers Jumping Over Turnstile 34 17 37 63 151 0.11% 0.07% 0.16% 0.18% 0.13%
Passengers Backcocking Turnstile 8 10 9 16 43 0.03% 0.04% 0.04% 0.05% 0.04%
Passengers Bumping Turnstile 32 21 21 21 95 0.10% 0.08% 0.09% 0.06% 0.08%
L More than One Passenger Entering HEET on One Fare 26 42 31 22 121 0.08% 0.17% 0.13% 0.06% 0.11%
Opportunistic Gate Entries 30 33 22 51 136 0.09% 0.13% 0.09% 0.15% 0.12%
Deliberate Fare Evasion Through Service Gate 31 24 25 21 101 0.10% 0.10% 0.11% 0.06% 0.09%
Passenger Entering while Service Gate is Unlocked 20 29 19 9 77 0.06% 0.12% 0.08% 0.03% 0.07%
Total - Illegal Entries 385 331 249 307 1,272 1.2% 1.3% 1.1% 0.9% 1.1%
U Passengers Entering Through Gate without Authorization 59 49 14 9 131 0.19% 0.20% 0.06% 0.03% 0.11%
Agent Authorized Entry by Large School Groups 239 0 27 6 272 0.75% 0.00% 0.11% 0.02% 0.24%
Agent Authorized Entry by Holders of Official Badges 9 5 11 7 32 0.03% 0.02% 0.05% 0.02% 0.03%
Authorized Entry by Persons Wearing Official Uniform 52 22 21 13 108 0.16% 0.09% 0.09% 0.04% 0.09%
Agent Authorized Entry by Holders of Employee Passes 119 110 54 71 354 0.38% 0.45% 0.23% 0.20% 0.31%
Entry by Holders of Gate Key 23 35 58 0.10% 0.10% 0.05%
A Total - Questionable Entries 478 186 150 141 955 1.5% 0.8% 0.6% 0.4% 0.8%
Fare Evasion by Entry Type
Turnstile Related 278 203 152 204 837 0.9% 0.8% 0.6% 0.6% 0.7%
HEET Related 26 42 31 22 121 0.1% 0.2% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1%
Agent, Gate, or Panic-Bar Related 559 272 216 222 1,269 1.8% 1.1% 0.9% 0.6% 1.1%
TOTAL - Illegal and Questionable Entries 863 517 399 448 2,227 2.7% 2.1% 1.7% 1.3% 1.9%
Children Under 44" Entering Under Turnstile 244 163 85 88 580 0.8% 0.7% 0.4% 0.3% 0.5%
Authorized Entry by Persons Giving Up Paper Tickets 28 30 19 30 107 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1%
Authorized Entry by Fare-Paying Persons with Bulk Items 256 258 153 200 867 0.8% 1.0% 0.6% 0.6% 0.8%
Legal Non-AFC Entries 528 451 257 318 1,554 1.7% 1.7% 1.1% 0.9% 1.4%
Normal Turnstile Entry 28,800 22,581 21,950 32,820 106,151 90.8% 91.4% 92.9% 93.9% 92.3%
Normal HEET Entry 1,523 1,161 1,013 1,369 5,066 4.8% 4.7% 4.3% 3.9% 4.4%
Legal AFC Entries 30,323 23,742 22,963 34,189 111,217 95.6% 96.1% 97.2% 97.8% 96.7%
TOTAL - Legal Entries 30,851 24,193 23,220 34,507 112,771 97.3% 97.9% 98.3% 98.7% 98.1%
TOTAL - by Entry Type (All Control Areas, All Hours) Psgrs Psgrs Psgrs Psgrs Psgrs % Total % Total % Total % Total % Total
Turnstile 29,322 22,947 22,187 33,112 107,568 92.5% 92.5% 93.9% 94.7% 93.5%
T High Entrance-Exit Turnstile (HEET) 1,549 1,203 1,044 1,391 5,187 4.9% 4.9% 4.4% 4.0% 4.5%
Service Gate and Agent-Authorized Entries 843 560 388 452 2,243 2.7% 2.7% 1.6% 1.3% 2.0%
Total Number of Station Entry Observations 31,714 24,710 23,619 34,955 114,998 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Control Area Observation Detail Periods Periods Periods Periods Periods % Total % Total % Total % Total % Total
Police Present 109 70 50 83 312 10.6% 8.2% 6.5% 7.6% 8.3%
Station Customer Assistant Present 63 78 30 40 211 6.1% 9.1% 3.9% 3.7% 5.6%
Panic Bar Alarm Sounded 172 125 120 177 594 16.8% 14.6% 15.7% 16.2% 15.9%
Total Number of Six-Minute Periods Observed 1,026 857 764 1,095 3,742
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
A. V. Reddy, et al Page 30 of 30
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2000-09 Chg
Annual Ridership (millions) 1,381 1,405 1,413 1,384 1,426 1,449 1,499 1,563 1,624 1,580 14.39%
Subways Major Felonies 4,262 3,756 3,705 3,218 3,286 3,100 2,707 2,359 2,291 2,034 -52.28%
# of Major Felonies per 1,000,000 Riders 3.09 2.67 2.62 2.33 2.30 2.14 1.81 1.51 1.41 1.29 -58.28%
Subways Percent Change from Prior Year -13.39% -1.91% -11.32% -0.89% -7.16% -15.58% -16.40% -6.55% -8.74%
NYC Population (millions) 8.008 8.062 8.084 8.086 8.104 8.143 8.214 8.275 8.364 TBD
NYC Major Felonies 252,107 234,229 223,597 212,587 205,804 198,751 189,586 186,685 185,979 TBD
# of NYC Major Felonies per 1,000,000 Population 31,481 29,053 27,658 26,292 25,395 24,407 23,080 22,561 22,236
NYC Percent Change from Prior Year -7.71% -4.80% -4.94% -3.41% -3.89% -5.44% -2.25% -1.44%
Major Felonies: Murder, Rape, Robbery, Fel.Assault, Burglary, Grand Larceny Source: NYPD, NYCT, NYS DCJS, NYS DOH
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2000-09 Chg
Reported Fare Evasion Rate 0.40% 0.32% 0.36% 0.38% 0.38% 0.37% 0.33% 0.32% 0.32% 0.32% -20.00%
Absolute Fare Evaders* 209,505 168,176 201,331 213,416 214,141 205,316 186,071 188,328 193,941
Revenue Loss from Evasion (millions) $6.1 $4.6 $5.3 $6.4 $6.8 $7.0 $6.4 $6.6 $7.0
Annual Subway Revenue (millions) $1,528 $1,526 $1,506 $1,667 $1,795 $1,857 $1,947 $2,030 $2,176
Fare Evasion Rate - New Methodology** 1.20%
* no data available for September 2001 fare evasion
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2000-09 Chg
Fare Evasion Arrests 20,126 15,569 12,306 16,180 16,490 12,985 13,068 16,248 1 6,315 19,061 -5.29%
Fare Evasion Summonses 98,830 83,038 91,101 95,877 103,139 86,029 89,430 84,955 7 8,001 68,225 -30.97%
Total 118,956 98,607 103,407 112,057 119,629 99,014 102,498 101,203 9 4,316 87,286 -26.62%
Transit Adjudication Bureau (TAB) Activity
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2000-09 Chg
Revenues Accrued (All Categories) $8.4 $9.5 $6.2 $6.3 $7.0 $9.1 $11.8 $11.9 $10.6 $10.1 20.24%
Notice of Violations (All Categories) 223,036 185,676 195,214 170,955 165,743 125,657 131,624 137,971 125,155 115,404 -48.26%
PRE-PUBLICATION DRAFT – March 5, 2011
subway_evasion_paper_051a.doc (1/31/2012; 207k)
dohteM
dlO
NYCT Subways Major Felony Statistics
Subways Fare Evasion Rates
** In response to MTA Audit Subway Fare Evasion Study, a new sampling method was developed to monitor fare evasion independently. Data collection started in April 2009.
Police Activity
(a)
(b)