Towards a Vision for Team Science at Tilburg University
Team Science Working Group
Use (Y)our Talents Program
December 12th, 2023
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Team Science and Tilburg University . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.1.1 Curiosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.1.2 Caring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.1.3 Connectedness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.1.4 Courage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2 Defining Team Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.3 Benefits and Challenges of Team Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.3.1 Benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.3.2 Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2 Good Practices 6
2.1 Local Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.2 National Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3 International Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4 Open Science: Lessons Learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3 What the Science of Team Science Says 15
3.1 Team Effectiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2 The Role of Trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3 Communication and Team Success . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4 Procedural Fairness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.5 Team Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.6 Permeable Team Boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.7 Support staff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4 Institutional Policies and Support 21
4.1 Flexible Hierarchies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2 Top down and Bottom Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.3 Funding Team Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4 Funding Pitfalls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.5 Technology and Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.6 Team Science and the Physical Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5 Training and Professional Development 28
5.1 Training for Team Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.1.1 Training for Team Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.1.2 Training for Teams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2 Leadership Training for Team Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6 Recognition and Rewards 32
6.1 Recognition and Rewards in Relation to Team Science . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.2 What to Recognize and Reward? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.3 (Inter)national Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.4 Crediting Author Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.5 Monitoring and Evaluating Team Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7 Considerations for Team Science at Tilburg University 37
References 43
Appendix A: Members of the working group 55
Appendix B: Methodology 56
7.0.1 Textbook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7.0.2 Systematic Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7.0.3 Qualitative Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7.0.4 Publication Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7.0.5 Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7.0.6 Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.0.7 Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Appendix C: Library Report 58
ii
1 Introduction
Much of the work conducted at Tilburg University already occurs in a team context.
But the term “Team Science” has taken on a new meaning and relevance in the context
of the Recognition & Rewards program. The university has committed to establishing
a vision on Team Science in 2023. To meet this mandate, a working group “Team
Science” was established within the university-wide program “Use (Y)our Talents” (of
which Recognition & Rewards is a part). The working group Team Science was asked to
write a policy brief to inform the future of Team Science at Tilburg University, paying
attention to the following:
1. Define team science in the context of Tilburg University (with special attention
to the Social Sciences & Humanities, SSH);
2. Explore the scientific literature on team science;
3. Develop practical starting points for the implementation of team science;
4. Chart national and international best practices for team science.
1.1 Team Science and Tilburg University
What does Team Science mean for Tilburg University? To answer this question, we first
turn to the University’s “Strategy towards 2027”, which states that our organization is
guided by its four core values of curiosity, caring, connectedness, and courage. These
values are intrinsically related to the topic of Team Science.
1.1.1 Curiosity
Curiosity motivates us to ask challenging questions that require more than a single mind
to answer. It drives us to seek each other out and learn from each other’s perspectives
and expertise.
1.1.2 Caring
Caring reflects a respectful and supportive work environment, with attention to diverging
perspectives, social safety, and the wellbeing of team members at all career stages. We
1 Introduction
also care about society at large, and strive to make a positive and ethical impact through
our research.
1.1.3 Connectedness
Connectedness is fundamental to team science, which requires strong, collaborative ties
among team members from different areas of expertise across all parts of the organiza-
tion. It also reflects our relationships with other regional, national, and international
stakeholders.
1.1.4 Courage
Courage in team science is about daring to challenge conventional wisdom and take
intellectual risks. It involves critically evaluating existing knowledge, being open to novel
approaches and methodologies, and sometimes going against established views. Teams
benefit if members take on complementary roles, and courage empowers members to
challenge established views and voice minority opinions, epitomizing the university’s
commitment to innovation and excellence.
1.2 Defining Team Science
In the academic literature, Team Science is defined as a mode of scientific collaboration
where research is conducted by more than one individual in an interdependent fashion
(Cooke, Hilton, and Council 2015). Most common is collaboration within small science
teams, typically comprising 2 to 10 individuals, but large teams, sometimes involving
hundreds or even thousands of scientists, also occur. Smaller teams are more agile and
can drive disruptive innovation, while very large teams can achieve unrivaled impact.
A thriving research ecosystem requires a balance of these approaches (Wu, Wang, and
Evans 2019). Large teams typically have a differentiated division of labor and an inte-
grated structure essential for coordinating the efforts of many team members. Although
team Science is often interdisciplinary, the two are not synonymous: team science may
be characterized by different degrees of interdisciplinarity and different levels of integra-
tion across disciplinary perspectives. It has been argued that (interdisciplinary) team
science is absolutely essential for tackling some of the world’s most pressing problems
(Ledford 2015), whether it be climate change, peace and security, socio-economic in-
equality, health and wellbeing, or even spiritual renewal (Korthals Altes 2014).
While the academic definition of team science in terms of team size may be objective, it
does not convey the core ideals of team science as envisioned by the working group Use
(Y)our Talents. In the context of Use (Y)our Talents, this working group defines team
science as:
1 Introduction
Definition: Team Science can be defined as collaboration with a larger number of part-
ners than is standard in a particular domain of study, addressing a goal that transcends
what could be achieved by a single scholar, capitalizing on team members’ strengths,
with attention to their diverse perspectives, and members from multiple branches of the
organization (including scientific and support staff), and/or other stakeholders.
1.3 Benefits and Challenges of Team Science
1.3.1 Benefits
Team science has many advantages for individual team members, the organization, and
academia and society at large (C. Allen and Mehler 2019). As part of a team, scholars
can address larger (societally relevant) challenges than they would be able to tackle in-
dividually. In this time of unprecedented social, economic, and ecological crises, this is
more urgent than ever before (Cannon 2020). Within the context of Use (Y)our Tal-
ents, it is also relevant that team science allows people to contribute according to their
strengths and share the benefits - some excel in writing, others in data collection, analy-
sis, or public engagement. Team science creates opportunities to join forces, rather than
each individual needing to excel on all fronts. Team science allows researchers to pool
resources, thus increasing the statistical power to detect an effect and enabling them
to systematically examine heterogeneity in effects (R. A. Klein et al. 2014). Team sci-
ence also offers enhanced depth of insight by integrating diverse perspectives - in terms
of both interdisciplinarity and intersectionality. Interdisciplinary research teams exhibit
increased creativity, productivity, and impact (Cannon 2020; Hinrichs et al. 2017). Still,
interdisciplinary team science faces funding challenges due to bias in grant evaluations,
favoring narrowly focused proposals (Bromham, Dinnage, and Hua 2016). Science teams
can comprise academic and support staff, enabling specialization and a more eﬀicient
division of labor. Science teams can also incorporate societal stakeholders or corpo-
rate partners, amplifying impact and potential valorization, respectively. Team science
benefits individual researchers because resulting publications have a citation advantage
(Wuchty, Jones, and Uzzi 2007); an advantage that may be particularly attractive to
early career scholars. It also benefits early career scholars by creating opportunities
for mentoring by more experienced staff (DeHart 2017). Collaboration in science also
significantly benefits employee well-being and empowerment, while addressing issues
like workplace isolation and underperformance (Mydin, Radin A. Rahman, and Muna
Ruzanna Wan Mohammad 2021). Team science benefits the work culture by cultivating
a sense of community. It can also increase the sense of social control and accountability,
benefiting the reproducibility and trustworthiness of results. Teams offer networking
opportunities and foster peer-to-peer skills transfer, as members are exposed to various
methodologies and perspectives. A diverse, collaborative environment is not just a cat-
alyst for innovative research but also a bedrock for cultivating well-rounded scientists
equipped for the multidimensional challenges of contemporary research.
1 Introduction
Summary: Team science benefits both individual team members, the organization,
and society at large, and allows scholars to provide complex solutions to large-scale
public challenges. It promotes collaboration, cohesion, and knowledge exchange within
organizations, increases impact, and may benefit research quality.
1.3.2 Challenges
Team Science, while beneficial for advancing research, presents several challenges that
can impact its effectiveness. Like any change in workflow, it incurs initial “start-up costs”,
to individuals and the organization, in terms of building relationships and aligning per-
spectives. Of course, these investments may pay off in the long-term through the afore-
mentioned benefits. Some have argued that the average quality of team work is lower
compared to the average quality of highly specialized individual research (Bromham, Din-
nage, and Hua 2016). Individual scientists might be able to explore ideas with greater
focus, free from the need to coordinate with others (Forscher et al. 2023). At the same
time, team science involves more checks and balances to detect errors or even malprac-
tice than individual work (Vazire 2020). Science teams also face challenges in measuring
and comparing team science performance (Gibson, Daim, and Dabic 2019). In the lit-
erature, seven specific challenges of team science have been identified (Cooke, Hilton,
and Council 2015). Firstly, the high diversity of membership in terms of disciplines,
cultures, and backgrounds, while enriching and promoting innovation and creativity for
impactful discoveries (Nielsen et al. 2017), can also lead to communication barriers and
differences in methodologies or perspectives, which can negatively impact the research
process and result quality (Kosmützky 2018; Wallerstein et al. 2019). Teams should be
suﬀiciently diverse to ensure different perspectives are represented, engage in reflexivity
- considering how the researchers’ perspectives influences the research, and considering
whether relevant perspectives are represented - and strive for successful communica-
tion and mutual understanding. Secondly, deep knowledge integration across various
fields requires overcoming intellectual silos, demanding a synthesis of diverse theories,
tools, and data (Conn et al. 2019). Teams should actively synthesize contributions
from different members. Thirdly, managing large teams poses logistical challenges in
coordination, communication, maintaining a unified vision, and the fair distribution of
resources (Conn et al. 2019; Campbell-Voytal et al. 2015). The paradox of team size
is that smaller teams are typically better coordinated, while larger teams nonetheless
outperform in publications, patents and citations (Cummings 2018). Furthermore, goals
can often become misaligned, both within the team, and between teams within the orga-
nization, which can lead to conflicts in priorities and directions. When private partners
are involved, goal conflicts can also arise from the tension between scientific best prac-
tices and commercial interests. To overcome this challenge, participatory goal setting
is advised (Campbell-Voytal et al. 2015; Patel et al. 2021). Particularly in light of
the precariousness of (early-career) academics, teams can have permeable boundaries,
with members transitioning in and out of teams, requiring the rest of the team to adapt
and realign. Geographic dispersion of team members across different time zones and
1 Introduction
locations requires the use of digital tools, hybrid work, and asynchronous collaboration.
The distance can be a challenge for communication and team cohesion - but at the same
time, the past years have seen extensive professionalization of hybrid work infrastructure,
which helps overcome some of these challenges (Earley and Mosakowski 2000). Lastly,
high task interdependence means that the success of the entire project depends on each
member’s contributions, amplifying the effects of any discordance or ineﬀiciency within
the team. Overcoming these challenges requires institutional support, strategic manage-
ment, and effective communication (Conn et al. 2019; Surratt et al. 2023; Read et al.
2016; Jeong and Choi 2015; Forscher et al. 2023; Campbell-Voytal et al. 2015; O’Rourke
et al. 2023; Ghamgosar, Nemati-Anaraki, and Panahi 2023).
Summary: Any science team should be aware of, and reflect on how they relate to,
the seven challenges of team science: diversity, knowledge integration, team size, goals,
permeable boundaries, geographic dispersion, and task interdependence.
2 Good Practices
To observe good examples of team science projects, we can take a local, national, and
global perspective. Within our own university, there are many great examples of team
science in different forms.
2.1 Local Perspective
The University Library provided data on authorship of scholarly output produced at
Tilburg University between 2017-2023. While these data have some limitations - for
example, not all authors may have registered their output, and not all team science
contributions are reflected in co-authorship of scholarly output - they nonetheless provide
some insight into the state of team science at TiU. The main conclusion is that team
science already comprises a substantial part of research conducted at Tilburg University.
When analyzing publication records of our staff of the past five years, we observe that
the majority of publications has two or more authors; the proportion of single-authored
publications is decreasing steadily, and the proportion of publications with more than 5
Team science is thus quite common at TiU, but analysis of author aﬀiliations provides a
more nuanced picture. Specifically, only 3% of publications between 2019-2023 included
authors from more than one school. By comparison, 66% of publications in the same
timeframe included authors from outside TiU. In terms of societal stakeholders, 18%
of publications in this timeframe included authors not aﬀiliated with any university
(government employees, those at independent research institutes, corporate stakeholders,
medical professionals, those working in media, and at private non-profits).
If connecting the schools is a desired goal, then these statistics suggest that there is still
much room for improvement. Especially considering that TiU is a relatively focused
institute - all schools fall within scope of the social sciences and humanities - fostering
stronger ties between the schools is highly feasible and should be considered low-hanging
fruit. TiU appears to do well in terms of collaboration with external partners, which
makes sense considering it is an impact-driven university, which strives to connect to
society, and is strongly embedded within the province. Initiatives like the recent Regio
Deal Midden-Brabant, “Ondernemen, innoveren en experimenteren met de mens cen-
traal” continue to raise awareness about impactful projects that can involve multiple
schools and societal partners. According to research, well-established senior researchers
2 Good Practices
1.00
More than 5
0.75
0.50 2−5
0.25
Single
0.00
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Year
noitroporP
2 Good Practices
are more likely to collaborate with societal partners, but face obstacles like differing goals,
reduced government support, and concerns about intellectual property, and uncertainty
about both the economic and academic success of team science involving industry part-
ners (Anić 2017). If the goal is to further enhance collaboration with external partners,
the first step is to identify promising areas of potential collaboration, organizing oppor-
tunities to meet external partners, and facilitating effective information exchange with
societal partners (Capaldo et al. 2016). Finally, these statistics show that collaboration
with external scholars already abounds, and may thus be less of a priority.
Of course, these quantitative data have many limitations; not all scholarly output is
accounted for by the University Library, not all contributions are reflected in authorship
(e.g., support staff might not be named as co-authors), and aﬀiliations are not always
correctly listed.
Consideration: At present, only 3% of academic output involves authors from multiple
Schools. If connecting the schools is considered important, then promoting team science
initiatives that connect the schools is low-hanging fruit.
Existing initiatives aimed at fostering collaboration across the schools are the academic
collaborative centers in which researchers from different disciplines are invited to collab-
orate, together with societal partners, on socially relevant problems. Also, the Digital
Sciences for Society program requires the involvement of two or more different schools in
projects supported by their funding instruments (Icon, growth projects). These existing
initiatives could potentially yield a wealth of relevant insights regarding the challenges
and opportunities of team science conducted at TiU locally. These insights should be
collected and evaluated to build knowledge on best practices regarding the conduct (and
the funding of) team science in practice.
Within some schools, (e.g., TSHD, TSB) there is seed funding for interdepartmental
collaborative projects on several themes. Of course, as these instruments are provided
at the school level, the scope of collaboration is somewhat limited.
To provide a more complete picture of what constitutes team science at our university,
and give some insight into the lived experience of team members and leaders, we con-
ducted qualitative interviews with colleagues involved in several such initiatives, which
are described in the vignettes below:
Digitalization of Health and Wellbeing (a) [several team members]
Goals. Establishment an interdisciplinary research program/group about digitalization
of health and wellbeing.
Team Composition. Six assistant-professors from various schools of the university +
the dean of TSHD.
2 Good Practices
Successes. The team has built relationships, secured internal ICON funding, and made
progress in defining practically achievable goals.
Challenges. Establishing the team was complicated by lack of clarity about member-
ship and functioning when members signed their contracts. The project’s goals have been
unclear, and attempts to clarify them are sometimes hindered. There is tension due to
the hierarchical structure. This leads to an information asymmetry between leadership
and members. Some members would prefer a more egalitarian peer-to-peer network.
Some noted conflicts due to misalignment between team members’ individual interests
and the project’s scope, feeling as though the group was formed more for administrative
reasons than in pursuit of a shared research goal. A grant application that many team
members had contributed to was shelved because the core team received ICON funding,
leaving other contributors to feel passed over after investing effort.
Digitalization of Health and Wellbeing (b) [vision manager]
Goals. Establishing an interdisciplinary research group to collaborate with partners,
exchange knowledge, create academic and societal impact, and work towards long-term
improvements in mental wellbeing.
Team Composition. The research team is in progress, aiming to unite all five schools
at Tilburg University. Currently, TSHD, TSB, and TLS are actively engaged, while
TiSEM and TST are less involved. The goal is to also eventually involve all relevant
external parties, but some contracts are still being finalized.
Successes. Many want to join this open project without strict criteria, fostering inter-
disciplinary exchange. Partners are equal, though the core team holds more control and
tasks are divided by the core team but with team member’s consent.
Challenges. Participating in the research team alongside existing work is challenging
due to resource constraints. Aligning goals with partners can be a challenge, but joint
goal-setting based on overlapping challenges and missions seem to be successful. Age
diversity exists among team members, but there’s limited cultural diversity.
Brabant Study
Goals. A large longitudinal cohort study of women, from pregnancy to 5 years postpar-
tum. The aim is to improve mothers’/children’s/partners’ biopsychosocial well-being.
2 Good Practices
Team Composition. Collaboration between 7 departments of TSB. Currently there
are 4 PhD students and 2 postdocs involved. The core research team consists of experts
from various disciplines involved in perinatal well-being. The project was based on
existing collaborations, and attracted new partners.
Successes. Interdisciplinary research and high output. Collaboration is central, so data
are analyzed from different perspectives. Another success is the close collaboration with
midwifery practices and hospitals in the region, which helped recruit a large sample
(N=2800).
Challenges. Due to the many collaborators, it is important to keep an overview so
that everyone can provide equal input. This also complicates swift action and decision
making.
These vignettes illustrate the status quo of team science at our university, across different
schools and levels of the organization. They also provide real-life examples of lessons
learned in terms of rigid hierarchy (see Section 4 and Section 3.2), shared goals and
representations (see Section 3.1) and transparency and fairness (see Section 3.3). Future
team science efforts at TiU should build upon these lessons learned, and build in a
flexible hierarchy, transparency and procedural fairness from the start, and engage in
shared activities and/or trainings to establish shared goals and representations.
2.2 National Perspective
Of course, team science is not confined to collaboration within the university. Especially
since our assignment was to look at national best practices, we also conducted interviews
with members of nation-wide team science initiatives (see the vignettes below). Both
initiatives do have ties to our university; the first involved members of our staff, and the
second involved staff members from four schools ODISSEI (TLS, TiSEM, TSHD, and
TSB).
Voting advice applications (EU funded project)
Goals. Understanding the effect of voting advice applications on the population, and
society at large.
Team Composition. Three universities in three different countries (NL, UK, TR). A
core consortium convened a larger research team and partners.
2 Good Practices
Successes. The project was successful: training three PhD students, collecting substan-
tial data, and publishing papers. It had social impact through conference participation
and non-academic output. The initial goal was further concretized over time. Interdisci-
plinary communication challenges were overcome, providing learning opportunities. The
team’s disciplinary and demographic diversity did not hinder collaboration.
Challenges. Communication challenges arose due to team members being geograph-
ically dispersed. Phone and internet communication were perceived as less effective
than in-person interaction. Scheduling conflicts and varied commitments across coun-
tries complicated collaboration. Involving companies added complexity since aligning
business goals with the academic focus on publications is not always straightforward.
While there was no goal misalignment, strategies to pursue those goals differed. Task
interdependence occasionally caused delays, but wasn’t a major issue.
ODISSEI
Goals. This national research infrastructure supports ~300 interdisciplinary projects
annually. It facilitates collaboration among social science and economic faculties in the
Netherlands, removing barriers for researchers, such as connecting them with interdisci-
plinary expertise and data.
Team Composition. Every social science faculty and some economic faculties in NL,
and ~80 team members working at ODISSEI. The 300 annual projects each have teams
with about 1-4 team members.
Successes. The successes lie in its eﬀicient online communication which promotes flexi-
bility, a simplified and (disciplinary and demographically) diverse team, and a horizontal,
federated structure that empowers individual researchers, fostering bottom-up innova-
tion. The project has successfully united an interdisciplinary diverse group, enabling
groundbreaking research through collaborative expertise.
Challenges. Managing the complexity of diverse disciplines with distinct languages
and taboos remains a challenge. Task-interdependence requires effective communication,
with regular interventions to keep team members informed and engaged. The project
tries to emphasize the effort needed to avoid assumptions and maintain collaboration, as
it’s easy to overlook progress and responsibilities within a complex team-environment.
2 Good Practices
2.3 International Perspective
Team science that spans country borders is relatively rare, with approximately 90% of
papers published by authors from a single country (Akbaritabar & Barbato, 2021). Many
of the most notable international team science examples hail from the natural and phys-
ical sciences. But still - there are inspiring examples of global team science initiatives
in the SSH domain. One of the most well-known examples is the “Many Labs” project,
established by former TiU-employee Richard A. Klein. Motivated by the so-called “repli-
cation crisis” (Open Science Collaboration 2015), this crowdsourced initiative recruited
several hundred social science departments around the world (R. A. Klein et al. 2014).
The consortium set out to replicate published psychological effects, increase power and
ensure methodological rigor, and study variation in replication results across samples and
settings. Similar “Many Labs” projects have been established in developmental science
(ManyBabies, Byers-Heinlein et al. 2020) and neuroscience (EEGManyLabs, Pavlov et
al. 2021). A more general consortium has been established to empower future many labs
studies: the Psychological Science Accelerator (PSA) is a globally distributed network
of researchers (2468 researchers from 73 countries) that pool their resources to replicate
submitted studies. Another example of SSH team science is the PsyCorona consortium,
an ad-hoc collaboration with over 130 scholars from 70 different countries, established
within the first week of the COVID-19 pandemic (Leander et al. 2020). Before vaccines
were developed, behavioral measures were the only countermeasure to slow the spread
of the virus, and this consortium set out to collect social scientific data to advise policy
for effective behavioral interventions. PsyCorona was founded at Groningen University
by Pontus Leander, and its data science team was headed by TiU-employee Caspar
van Lissa. By making all analysis code and datasets FAIRly available, the PsyCorona
consortium was able to increase productivity and publish 23 papers. These examples
highlight the potential of large-scale consortia in the social sciences in terms of increasing
methodological rigor, statistical power, impact, and output.
2.4 Open Science: Lessons Learned
According to UNESCO (2021), open science is defined as follows:
[Open science is] an inclusive construct that combines various movements and
practices aiming to make multilingual scientific knowledge openly available,
accessible and reusable for everyone, to increase scientific collaborations and
sharing of information for the benefits of science and society, and to open
the processes of scientific knowledge creation, evaluation and communication
to societal actors beyond the traditional scientific community. It comprises
all scientific disciplines and aspects of scholarly practices, including basic
and applied sciences, natural and social sciences and the humanities, and it
builds on the following key pillars: open scientific knowledge, open science
2 Good Practices
infrastructures, science communication, open engagement of societal actors
and open dialogue with other knowledge systems.
It is evident from this definition that there is a fundamental correspondence between
the perspectives and methods underlying team science and open science (Cheruvelil
and Soranno 2018). Removing barriers to more eﬀicient and effective collaboration,
including within teams, is a prime goal of open science, and the open science movement
was fueled in large part by team science efforts (Ross-Hellauer et al. 2022). The open
science transition has been a widely successful paradigm shift; In 2021, the UNESCO
framework on open science was adopted by 193 signatory countries (UNESCO 2021).
Open science is now considered “standard practice” by the Dutch government (Ministerie
van Onderwijs 2019), the EU (os4os 2023), and the United States government (“FACT
SHEET: Biden-Harris Administration Announces New Actions to Advance Open and
Equitable Research | OSTP” 2023). Given this extraordinary success, we can look to the
“open science transition” for examples of best practices for promoting team science. One
crucial ingredient of the open science transition was support of the scientific community.
Implementing a desired cultural change is a social challenge that requires a critical mass
of support from employees (INOSC n.d.). In this sense, the Open Science Community
Tilburg can serve both as a model and an ally in promoting the desired cultural change
towards more interdisciplinary team science. The book chapter “Building a Strategic
Advantage with Open Science”, by colleagues Hannes Datta and Harm Schütt, delves
deeper into the potential value of open science for TiU (2022).
Consideration: The open science transition serves as a template for the transition
towards more team science, and the Open Science Community Tilburg is a natural ally
in achieving this transition.
Specific open science practices are also invaluable in team science contexts. For instance,
the open science practice of making scholarly output (protocols, materials, data, anal-
ysis code, and reports) FAIRly shareable increases the reusability of team members’
contributions and eliminates the need for time-consuming onboarding, thus improving
the scalability of team science (Baumgartner et al. 2023). Transparency also allows
team members to replicate and verify each other’s work more easily, enhancing the rigor
and reliability of interdisciplinary research. The practice of public engagement is also
associated with open science, and constitutes a particular form of team science. Public
engagement can add knowledge to teams, and increase the relevance of social scientific
research for its target audience (Tebes and Thai 2018). The practice of preregistration
serves a dual purpose of clearly outlining the scope of work to be done by a team, and
preventing post-hoc disagreements about analytic decisions from arising after the data
are collected (Peikert, Van Lissa, and Brandmaier 2021). Going beyond preregistration,
submitting a Registered Report offers team members a “guaranteed payoff” to the effort
invested (Baumgartner et al. 2023). Finally, open access publication makes scholarly
output accessible to a wider audience. In team science, this can be especially valuable
because the number of stakeholders is often larger; not all stakeholders may have ac-
cess to certain outlets. In team science, it may be the case that not all team members
2 Good Practices
are aﬀiliated with an institution that (can afford to) pay for access to paywalled jour-
nals. Publishing open access ensures that all who have contributed retain access to the
finished work, and additionally allows for dissemination to a broader community of re-
searchers, policymakers, and practitioners. To empower team science using open science
methods will require a persistent funded commitment to openness, rigor, and collabora-
tion (Thibault et al. 2023). Recognizing and rewarding open science practices further
incentivizes their adoption (see Section 6.1).
Consideration: Open science practices facilitate team science, reduce onboarding ef-
forts and improve scalability, increase the reusability of materials, data, and code, in-
crease scientific rigor, and offer a greater potential payoff to team members.
3 What the Science of Team Science Says
3.1 Team Effectiveness
Team effectiveness, or team performance, is defined as the team’s ability to achieve
its goals and objectives, leading not only to improved outcomes for individual team
members, but also to significant team achievements, including academic breakthroughs,
methodological innovation, and translational (interdisciplinary) applications of the re-
search. The concept of team effectiveness has been extensively explored in the literature,
with substantial influence from the input-process-output (IPO) model (McGrath 1964).
The input-process-output (IPO) provides a way to understand how teams perform, and
how to maximize their performance . Team effectiveness hinges on inputs such as the
team composition and the nature of the problem at hand. The processes, involving the
team members’ cognition, motivation, affect, and behavior, are crucial in enabling the
team to meet task demands effectively. When the output resulting from these processes
aligns with the task demands, a team is considered effective.
Central to effective teamwork are processes like team mental models and transactive
memory, which entail shared understanding of task requirements, procedures, role re-
sponsibilities, and an awareness of each member’s knowledge and expertise (Patel et al.
2021; Ghamgosar, Nemati-Anaraki, and Panahi 2023; Mehta and Mehta 2018).
Formulating explicit goals, adaptive problem formulation, and participatory processes
help build mutual understanding among team members (Vogel et al. 2014; Pennington
2016).
At the team level, team climate also plays a pivotal role, and is shaped by organiza-
tional strategies, team leaders’ communications, and the interactions and shared under-
standings among team members. Team spirit benefits from a healthy balance between
individual and collective needs and expectations (Getha-Taylor, Silvia, and Simmerman
2014).
At the institutional level, well-structured support for team science and an innovation-
friendly academic culture benefit optimal transdisciplinary collaboration (Crow and
Dabars 2019). There is an association between interpersonal relationships and scien-
tific productivity on a scientific team (DeHart 2017; Love et al. 2023). Psychological
safety fosters a climate supportive of risk-taking, learning and daring to speak out, which
is crucial for trust, cohesion, effective error management, and achieving team goals (Ed-
mondson 1999; Patel et al. 2021). Moreover, motivational and affective processes within
a team, such as a sense of team eﬀicacy, are essential.
3 What the Science of Team Science Says
Consideration: Team effectiveness is enhanced by thoughtful team composition, team
professional development, building a shared understanding of goals, task requirements,
and team member competencies, and inspiring person-focused team leadership.
3.2 The Role of Trust
Effective interdisciplinary collaboration and team science hinges on the establishment of
trust between all parties involved (L. M. Bennett and Gadlin 2014; Read et al. 2016;
Zajac et al. 2021). Increased engagement between scientists and stakeholders leads to
more mutual trust as well (Meadow et al. 2015). Trust is not just about believing
in each other’s competence, but also involves perceptions of fairness and transparency
in the organization, which is crucial for nurturing a collaborative environment. Inter-
nal ties between team members positively influence trust, which in turn contributes
to higher-quality relationships and knowledge sharing among team members (García-
Sánchez, Díaz-Díaz, and De Saá-Pérez 2019). Transparent communication, decision-
making, and enforcement also build trust; for example, by drafting formal collaboration
agreements before teamwork begins (Forscher et al. 2023). Building through joint
identification of objectives, co-developed guiding principles and ongoing team reflexivity
throughout the evaluation strengthens trust between project members and evaluators
(Roelofs et al. 2019). Team trust facilitates coordination and cooperation, thereby en-
hancing team effectiveness (Breuer, Hüffmeier, and Hertel 2016). Some aforementioned
challenges to team science (Section 1.3.2), such as rigid hierarchy and diverse profes-
sional backgrounds, can pose challenges to building and maintaining trust, particularly
in multidisciplinary dynamic teams with changing memberships (Zajac et al. 2021).
Trust is especially important in virtual teams relative to face-to-face teams, which could
be attributed to the unique challenges of remote collaboration, where trust compensates
for the lack of physical presence and direct oversight (Breuer, Hüffmeier, and Hertel
2016).
3.3 Communication and Team Success
Transparent communication is integral to team success, particularly in scientific and aca-
demic settings (Forscher et al. 2023; Conn et al. 2019; Patel et al. 2021); effective com-
munication can facilitate interpersonal trust, increase productivity, and spark innova-
tion. A “culture of dialogue” establishes deep listening and engagement as norms, which
helps overcome challenges, achieve project goals, and establish shared representations
(O’Rourke et al. 2023). Training communication skills is beneficial for trust-building,
exchanging worldviews, and conflict management (Read et al. 2016). Nevertheless, in-
tellectual conflicts are inevitable in team contexts, and if managed appropriately, these
may play a role in advancing knowledge (Collins 1998). Successful science teams pro-
mote intellectual disagreement and discussion (L. M. Bennett and Gadlin 2012). Such
3 What the Science of Team Science Says
an environment encourages ongoing dialogue, working through issues, and prevents the
accumulation of unresolved problems, simultaneously fostering the development of trust
(Brody et al. 2019). Via shared dialogues, teams can define a team mission, establish be-
havioral standards, cultural understanding, and expectations, foster cultural intelligence
and realistic interpersonal assessments (Shelley et al., 2022).
Effective conflict resolution is also important (Read et al. 2016). There are two primary
conflict management strategies: reactive and preemptive (Marks, Mathieu, and Zaccaro
2001). Reactive conflict management involves resolving disagreements through problem-
solving, compromise, and flexibility, while preemptive strategies anticipate potential
conflicts, guiding them in advance through cooperative norms, charters, or other struc-
tures. Kozlowski and Bell (2013) further emphasize the importance of these approaches
in shaping conflict processes constructively. In essence, the eﬀicacy of team communica-
tion, particularly in handling intellectual disagreements, is a significant determinant of
a team’s success in the scientific field.
Consideration: Team members should be able to disagree constructively in a safe,
supportive context. When possible, preemptive conflict management strategies should
be used; anticipating disagreements and establishing terms for their constructive resolu-
tion. When conflict does occur, reactive conflict management should focus on empathy,
problem-solving, and compromise. Professional development opportunities should be in
place to educate staff in the use of such communication techniques.
3.4 Procedural Fairness
Relying on trust may not always be feasible, as trust develops over time between mem-
bers of well-established science teams, and between friends, introducing a potential bias
in favor of “old boys networks”. With this in mind, it is important to note that trans-
parency can partly replace the need for trust (DeHart 2017; Breuer, Hüffmeier, and
Hertel 2016). Perceptions of “justice” and “fairness” depends not only on objective out-
comes, but also on a fair and transparent process (Zajac et al. 2021). This may partly
explain why the open science movement has been so effective in promoting team sci-
ence. Transparent collaboration can also ensure that results are checked and verified,
increasing their trustworthiness and reliability (Larson & Chang, 2016).
One way to ensure transparency and procedural fairness is to adopt a “Code of Conduct”
for team projects, which explicitly states how team members are expected to behave in
order to ensure social safety for all, how disagreements are resolved, and how contri-
butions are credited (Baumgartner et al. 2023; Favaro et al. 2016). One commonly
used code of conduct is the Contributor Covenant (Ehmke 2014), but note that there
has been some concern of overreach so science teams should assess to what extent their
needs are met by existing codes of conduct, and if necessary, develop a custom code of
conduct that is widely supported by team members.
3 What the Science of Team Science Says
Consideration: Ensure trust within team contexts to facilitate effective collaboration,
for example, through procedural fairness and transparency within science teams and the
broader organization, and through face-to-face interaction between team members.
Consideration: Consider adopting or developing a code of conduct that clearly outlines
expectations for how the team members will ensure social safety, resolve disagreements,
credit contributions, ensure ethical and responsible research practices, and provides re-
course in case anything goes wrong.
3.5 Team Composition
Research on team composition and team effectiveness has yielded conflicting results,
highlighting the complexity of this relationship. The importance of team composition
is likely related to the complexity of the task at hand, the degree of interdependence
among team members, and the duration of the project (Carter et al. 2019). The primary
factor to consider is what expertise is needed to address the team’s scientific goals, but
interpersonal and intrapersonal factors should not be neglected either (Twyman and
Contractor 2019). Another important consideration is whether team members have a
proven track record of (interdisciplinary) collaboration (Stokols 2014).
The literature suggests that diversity in team composition constitutes both a potential
benefit and challenge (see Section 1.3.2). On one hand, people tend to prefer being
around others that are similar to them (Montoya and Horton 2013). On the other hand,
variety and diversity can improve team effectiveness (Liu et al. 2020). Introducing new
members who are not prior acquaintances can enhance the effectiveness of science teams,
suggesting a benefit of fresh perspectives and expertise. At the same time, when teams
consist of (geographic) subgroups, this can increase conflict and distrust (Polzer et al.
2006; Bromham, Dinnage, and Hua 2016). Top-down requirements on team composition
imposed by science leaders or funding agencies, such as mandating the inclusion of certain
individuals, disciplines, or institutions, can backfire, creating internal goal conflict. This
highlights the delicate balance required in team composition to optimize effectiveness,
considering both the diversity of skills and perspectives and the potential for conflict
and misalignment of goals. Above all, it is crucial to implement diversity in a team
for the right reasons. For example, it can be beneficial for a team to have a diverse
membership when it comes to academic and professional backgrounds, in order to be
able to draw from a variety of knowledge and expertise. This so-called task-relevant
diversity positively impacts team effectiveness, fosters innovation and creativity, and
increases impact (Cooke, Hilton, and Council 2015; Nielsen et al. 2017).
The literature on team composition talks about its effect on team effectiveness in terms
of “the ABC’s of team work”; a shorthand for describing the team climate in terms of
affective states (a), behavioral processes (b), and cognitive (c) states (Bell et al. 2018).
Several individual team member characteristics can positively influence the ABCs, and
3 What the Science of Team Science Says
thus contribute to team effectiveness. Conscientious team members tend to be better at
self-regulation and oriented towards finding solutions. Agreeableness can contribute to
team cohesion and shared cognitions. Team members who are more collectivist and value
teamwork tend to be more effective and confident in team contexts. Each team member
can contribute to the ABC’s of a team, and establishing clear expectations about the
expected contributions helps maintain a positive team environment (Turner and Baker
2020).
Consideration: When composing a team, it is crucial to weigh the benefits of task
relevant diversity against the downsides of overcoming disciplinary, institutional, or de-
mographic differences.
Consideration: Starting at the undergraduate level, train young academics in interdis-
ciplinarity and collaborative skills. (Hall, 2020)
3.6 Permeable Team Boundaries
Teams can be independent entities with permeable boundaries, not characterized by a
fixed cast of members, but open to change (O’Rourke et al. 2023). Permeable boundaries
allow teams to reconfigure in response to evolving task demands (Mathieu et al. 2014).
This fluidity brings both challenges and opportunities (Tannenbaum et al. 2012; Zajac et
al. 2021). On the positive side, membership fluidity can facilitate the transfer of knowl-
edge across teams and organizational units, introducing fresh perspectives and ideas. It
benefits team flexibility and adaptability (Gorman and Cooke 2011), and contributes to
a richer pool of unique ideas (Gruenfeld, Martorana, and Fan 2000). On the downside,
however, such fluidity can potentially weaken team cohesion and stability. Adding or
removing just a single team member can change the entire team dynamic (Emich et
al. 2022). Permeability should also be viewed in the light of precarity among early
career researchers: If young scholars move in and out of teams, contributing knowledge
and effort without retaining ownership, the burden of team membership might outweigh
its rewards for them. Thus, care should be taken that young scholars are suﬀiciently
recognized and rewarded for team contributions (Craig 2018). On-boarding new team
members also involves additional effort, which can be substantially reduced by following
reproducible workflows (see Section 2.4), and maintaining collaborative agreements and
a code of conduct helps clarify expectations to new team members (Section 3.4).
Consideration: It is important to maintain a stable core membership in teams with
permeable boundaries to foster team cohesion and sustained performance.
Consideration: For all temporary team members, in particular early career academics
and those on temporary contracts, the balance between investments (in terms of time
and effort) and rewards should be explicit and fair.
3 What the Science of Team Science Says
3.7 Support staff
Support staff can bring specific professional expertise, skills, and perspectives to bear
on team science projects, enhancing the quality of work and enabling more eﬀicient di-
vision and delegation of tasks (Bosch et al. 2023). At present, however, support staff
are not always fully integrated and recognized within the academic ecosystem. To pro-
mote integration of support staff, Bennett and colleagues (2023) propose several changes:
Firstly, in line with the principles of Use (Y)our Talents, to reconsider recognition and
rewards from the perspective of support staff as well; valuing their contributions to
team science, irrespective of the outcomes. Secondly, to take a more modular approach
to research, where “intermediate output” can also be recognized and rewarded. For ex-
ample, support staff may be involved in the curation of a database, which could then
be made FAIRly available, allowing support staff to be recognized for the creation of
this resource. Thirdly, there should be an ongoing discussion about recognizing sup-
port staff contributions to academic publications. Support staff may often be eligible
for coauthorship according to discipline-specific criteria. For example, if support staff
perform tasks that fall within the CRediT authorship taxonomy (see Section 6.4). If
support staff are not eligible as coauthors, or do not want to take on the responsibilities
of coauthorship, then it is crucial that their contributions be otherwise acknowledged,
recognized, and rewarded (Craig 2018). Lastly, it is important to recognize that the tra-
ditional dichotomy of ‘academic’ versus ‘non-academic’ staff does not cover the broader
spectrum of functions that fall somewhere between the two. Dissolution of the hierarchy
implied by this distinction, and flexibility in terms of career paths and function descrip-
tions, would allow for greater involvement in team science, and concomitant recognition
and reward, of support staff.
Consideration: Recognition and rewards should affect support staff as well, ensuring
that support staff are incentivized to contribute to team science.
Building relationships between academic- and support staff is also important, if the goal
is to involve support staff more in team science. One way to do so is to include support
staff alongside academic staff in team science-related training activities [Hall, 2008]. In a
broader sense, ensuring that all staff feel welcome and included in TiU social events can
help increase integration. Some universities have altogether abolished the distinction
between scientific and support staff, clearly signaling a vision for further integration of
these roles (Agterberg 2023). TiU, at the same time, already integrates academic and
support staff in trainings and social events.
Consideration: Increase social and professional ties between all university staff (scien-
tific and support) by welcoming all staff at the same training- and social events.
Consideration: Decentralize support staff and locate them (physically) closer to the
researchers, at least temporarily - for example, by having consultation hours in different
buildings - thus enabling easier collaboration (see Section 4.6).
4 Institutional Policies and Support
According to research, organizations can create a climate conducive to team science
by providing incentives for collaboration, flexible hierarchies, a high degree of auton-
omy, a culture of transparency (open science), recognize and reward contributions to
team science, and provide inspiring team-oriented leadership (Stokols et al. 2008; Jacob
2015). Team members should enjoy autonomy to develop ideas and carry out research,
while experiencing a shared sense of responsibility (Müller, 2016; Zajac et al., 2021a).
Cognitive, methodological, conceptual, and financial barriers that currently impede (in-
terdisciplinary) team science must be mapped to ensure that the new policy adequately
overcomes them (MacLeod 2018). These principles should be guiding when designing
policy to promote the broader uptake of team science at TiU as well. Historically,
academic policy in the Netherlands at various levels has focused primarily on “excel-
lent individuals”; a focus that can impede collaboration and team science (Hinrichs et
al. 2017). If our University’s goals shift towards a greater emphasis on larger societal
challenges that can only be resolved through team science, then existing policies and
support structures should be re-examined with those goals in mind. Successful team
science in academia requires dedicated policies (Vogel et al. 2021), commitment across
departments, funding for team work, mentoring plans, assessment of operational needs,
and sustained evaluation of team science success (Surratt et al. 2023). The Strategy
Evaluation Protocol is a useful tool to help TiU evaluate to what extent its strategies
with respect to team science are successfully adopted into policy.
Consideration: Organizational policies should strive to create a climate conducive
to team science by incentivizing collaboration, making hierarchies flexible, supporting
autonomy, embracing open science, recognizing and rewarding team science, team spirit,
and inspiring team-oriented leadership.
Consideration: Redefine “excellence” to no longer exclusively refer to individual per-
formance, but also provide a concrete outline of what constitutes excellence in a team
context.
4.1 Flexible Hierarchies
Universities tend to be relatively hierarchical organizations, with clearly defined roles at
each level, and a high level of differentiation into functional departments (e.g., the schools,
library, etc). Although rigid hierarchy can be beneficial from a logistical perspective, and
4 Institutional Policies and Support
for screening and selecting the right candidates and ideas - it can also stand in the way of
innovation (Keum and See 2017). Flexible hierarchies with integration across levels and
departments are better suited to research-intensive fields, like academia - suggesting that
rigid hierarchies are at odds with the university’s core business (Burns and Stalker 1994).
Flexible, informal organizations with decentralized power structures encourage creativity
and innovation in team science (Sandhu and Kulik 2019). Shared leadership enhances
team performance more effectively than traditional hierarchical structures (D’Innocenzo,
Mathieu, and Kukenberger 2016).
Shared leadership boosts communication impact on team performance more than hier-
archical structures (Marlow et al. 2018). Aligning formal and distributed leadership
reduces cognitive dissonance and fosters integration across organizational boundaries, as
a shared vision and influence enhance team dynamics (Rycroft-Malone et al. 2016).
In order for team science efforts to flourish, universities will need to strike a balance
between hierarchy and specialization on the one hand, and collaboration and integration
on the other (Lawrence and Lorsch 1967).
Consideration: In order for team science to flourish, TiU must balance hierarchy and
specialization on the one hand with collaboration and integration on the other. Hierarchy
must be flexible: it must be possible to check, question, and even challenge authority.
4.2 Top down and Bottom Up
Ensuring a successful shift of the institutional culture towards greater team science re-
quires both top-down and bottom-up initiatives (Duhigg 2014). These two approaches
can work hand in hand for an effective transition (Verhulst & Lambrechts, 2015). Top-
down approaches might involve policy changes or even reorganization. For example,
consider Arizona State University (ASU), a pacesetter of team science in the United
States. ASU restructured their organization, creating new interdisciplinary schools and
research centers (Crow and Dabars 2014). For an example of bottom-up change, consider
the University of Southern California (USC). At USC, a seed fund was established to
fund interdisciplinary team science, and promotion and tenure policies were revised to ac-
knowledge team science (Cooke, Hilton, and Council 2015). These efforts empowered in-
dividual faculty members and teams, giving them the resources and recognition necessary
to pursue collaborative, interdisciplinary work. Combining top-down and bottom-up ap-
proaches is critical to ensure effective change of the organizational culture. Top-down
strategies ensure institutional support and alignment with the institute’s strategic goals,
while bottom-up initiatives ensure buy-in from staff.
Consideration: To enact a desired culture change towards more team science, a com-
bination of a top-down (through policy, funding opportunities, and recognition and
rewards) and bottom-up (through informal networks like the Open Science Community,
and social, academic, and networking events) approaches is necessary.
4 Institutional Policies and Support
4.3 Funding Team Science
Financial support plays a crucial role in nurturing and sustaining team science. Via the
allocation of public funds (“eerste geldstroom”), TiU can promote team science inter-
nally. There are good arguments in favor of using public funds to promote team science:
The same amount of money can affect more people’s careers in a more impactful way
(because larger projects can be addressed), all the while promoting cohesion within the or-
ganization. In order to do so effectively, however, a comprehensive and forward-thinking
approach is required. Funding is not an expenditure, but an investment in shaping the or-
ganization to become more team-oriented (Jeong and Choi 2015). The university should
work with its staff communities to foster the development of innovative collaborative
models like research networks and consortia. The needs of these networks and consortia
can help shape new funding instruments and incentives. If funds are made available via
calls for proposals, TiU should mandate that team-based research submissions include
detailed collaboration plans. This ensures that researchers are not only focused on the
scientific and technical merits of their proposals but also on the feasibility of effective
collaboration. Team size and collaboration plans should be well-substantiated and eval-
uated prior to funding allocation (Cummings 2018). Ideally, applicants should have a
proven track record of (interdisciplinary) collaboration (Stokols 2014). Providing guid-
ance on crafting proposals for team science, and setting criteria for their evaluation, can
enhance the quality and success rate of interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary research
projects.
Given the prevalence of collaboration with public partners at TiU (Section 2), private
funds (“derde geldstroom”) are another salient source of (partial) funding for team sci-
ence efforts. Collaborating with industry partners, as seen in the Regio Deal ‘Onderne-
men, innoveren en experimenteren met de mens centraal’ (“Tilburg University partner
in Regio Deal Midden-Brabant | Tilburg University” 2023), provides financial support,
while also providing real-world use cases, and enabling knowledge dissemination and
valorization. In our region, TU/e is a guiding example of public/private team science
efforts, which might provide guidance for such initiatives at TiU as well. A good starting
point is the Jheronimus Academy of Data Science, as this is an initiative where TiU and
TU/e meet.
Consideration: Using public funds (eerste geldstroom) to fund (interdisciplinary) team
science initiatives can affect more colleagues’ careers in a more impactful way, while
promoting cohesion within the organization. To do this fairly and transparently, the
target audience should be included in the development of funding calls.
Consideration: Applications for team science funding instruments should include a
collaboration plan as part of the evaluation criteria.
Consideration: Monitor and evaluate existing internal funding programs aimed at
stimulating collaboration across the schools.
4 Institutional Policies and Support
Consideration: Create new internal funding programs specifically designed to support
interdisciplinary research projects that connect the schools.
One effective approach to fostering innovative team science is through incubator grants.
Such grants are designed to support the developmental phases of team science, providing
crucial “incubator space” for the generation and advancement of new cross-disciplinary
ideas Council (2007). Additionally, project development or pilot funds offer flexible fi-
nancing for just-in-time innovations or integrative ideas that emerge during larger collab-
orative projects Vogel et al. (2014). Flexible funding (smaller sums that can be applied
for without too much administrative overhead) is key to accommodating the dynamic
nature of team science, where needs for funding may change as research progresses. An-
other approach is to give individual researchers access to professional development funds,
which can be used to fund collaborations, visit geographically dispersed collaborators,
or contribute to the funding of a joint team effort. TiU currently already offers some
seed funding grants, and these schemes could be further adapted to prioritize interdisci-
plinary team science projects. This would align university resources with research goals,
creating incentives for shared strategic directions.
Consideration: Create incubator grants, seed funding, and other flexible funding
schemes to incentivize team science at all levels of seniority.
4.4 Funding Pitfalls
A persistent challenge in this arena is the “rich get richer” phenomenon, where funding
often gravitates towards well-established scholars, potentially stifling innovation and the
exploration of uncharted scientific territories (Laudel 2006). Some researchers may be
so successful in obtaining funding that it becomes questionable whether they are able
to execute all of their funded projects. At the same time, there is much to be said for
awarding funding - as much as possible - on merit. The challenge is thus to assess which
projects have a high chance of success, without referring to applicants’ prior record of
funding to do so. Another way to counter this problem is to actively set new directions
and priorities for funding, to encourage different scholars to submit novel and potentially
groundbreaking research (Braun 1998). Finally, setting limits on the number of research
projects per researcher can limit internal competition and the Matthew effect as well
(Jeong & Choi, 2015).
Another potential pitfall occurs when science teams involve societal partners, as non-
profit organizations often have fewer means than companies. When funding instruments
require matching by societal partners, this introduces a bias against collaborating with
non-profits. Even in-kind contributions may be diﬀicult, since non-profits need to ac-
count for all of their expenses and have limited manpower. This is problematic because
some topics that are important for society have a smaller chance of being studied.
4 Institutional Policies and Support
Consideration: When reviewing funding applications, do not take prior funding success
into account to avoid the “Matthew effect”. Focus on merit and feasibility.
Another potential pitfall occurs in the reviewing of funding applications. Known limita-
tions of reviews are that they tend to be relatively conservative and biased against inter-
disciplinary research (Shapiro 2014). To counteract such biases, it is possible to recruit
reviewers with a broad range of disciplinary expertise. Diversity in review panels will
allow for a more balanced and open-minded assessment of novel and interdisciplinary pro-
posals. In addition, Tilburg University should prime reviewers with information about
the importance of novel research approaches, mitigating biases against highly innovative
proposals. Review criteria should be expanded to encompass not just the technical and
scientific merits but also the collaborative potential of the research team.
Consideration: When reviewing team science funding applications, ensure diverse pan-
els of reviewers, and prime them to value innovation and interdisciplinarity.
4.5 Technology and Infrastructure
Information Technology (IT) can facilitate effective collaboration, particularly when
teams are geographically distributed. There are several “classes” of IT tools that facili-
tate remote team work (Olson and Olson 2022). One important class of tools are those
that enable digitally mediated communication. At TiU, the Microsoft suite (Outlook,
Teams, et cetera) is used - but international collaborators often use different platforms,
like Zoom (common in the USA) or WebEx (common in Germany). This can lead to com-
patibility challenges, and it is important that staff have access to different platforms and
know how to use them, if they work with colleagues from different institutions. Dynamic
platforms, like Slack, provide space for ongoing in-depth discussion, brainstorming, and
idea sharing. Finally, visibility and findability through a well-maintained university web-
site is important for external representation of (interdisciplinary) team science projects
(Rentsch et al. 2014). This is especially important when such projects do or intend to
involve external (private and public) partners. A well-defined external presence indicates
organizational effectiveness, structure, and clear communication.
A second important class of IT services includes coordination tools, like shared calen-
dars and date pickers. These are essential for synchronizing activities and keeping team
members informed of each other’s schedules and progress. A third suite of tools are meet-
ing support technologies, including hybrid meeting rooms with large displays and smart
cameras. These are already in use at TiU and make hybrid meetings more engaging and
eﬀicient. A fourth suite of IT technologies are information repositories, such as databases
(e.g., Tilburg DataVerse), file sharing services (e.g., Surfdrive, Onedrive, Google Drive),
collaborative code repositories and digital laboratory notebooks (e.g., GitHub/GitLab),
facilitate seamless access and collaboration on scientific information.
4 Institutional Policies and Support
One important challenge in IT tools for team science is that team members may not
all have access to the same software and services. This challenge can be overcome by
making use of free open source software (FOSS) for essential tasks - like data analysis
(Martijn 2021). In general, effective team science benefits from FAIR and reproducible
workflows, where all scholarly output is, in principle, Findable on standardized reposi-
tories, Accessible at least to those involved in the science team, Interoperable so that
any team member can make use of the output without requiring e.g. licensed software,
and Reusable so that team members can build on each other’s efforts and are not doing
double the work. Van Lissa et al. (2021) presented a workflow for open reproducible
code in science (WORCS) which meets these needs. Using an open science workflow
greatly facilitates (distributed) collaboration, as all team members are operating on the
same files, and everyone’s contributions can be tracked and combined. Importantly, it
is not necessary to make a reproducible project open to just anyone; access permissions
can be controlled. A course is in development to teach the WORCS workflow at TiU by
the DCCs.
FAIR databases of in-house expertise, like Tilburg University Research Portal, help
staff identify which colleagues possess specific knowledge, which projects are relevant,
and how to connect or contribute to them. A robust system for data archiving and
management enables researchers to publish data in a FAIR manner, or to safely archive
private data, or collaborate on data, assign Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs) for citability,
manage access, and comply with (funders’) data management plan policies. The Tilburg
DataVerse meets some of those needs, and the Research Data Oﬀice can provide further
advice on the appropriate solution for specific datasets. Whilst fair data initiatives are
there for research at TiU, they are currently only a part of the guidelines on safe data-
management. Other universities use the FAIR principles in their campaign to promote
as much reusable and accessible data as possible for interdisciplinary research initiatives
and sourcing data.
Consideration: Technology and infrastructure should provide support and tools for
collaboration, without creating a rigid mold that science teams are expected to conform
to.
Consideration: As much as possible, use open source software for all task-critical
activities to ensure that all team members can participate and contribute, regardless of
institutional licenses for specific software and services.
Consideration: Use reproducible workflows and make all scholarly output FAIRly
shareable in order to ensure effortless (distributed) collaboration among team members,
make scholarly output FAIRly shareable, increase the reusability of scholarly output,
and safeguard against human error that might otherwise go undetected.
4 Institutional Policies and Support
4.6 Team Science and the Physical Environment
The relationship between the physical environment at a university and the facilitation of
team science is more nuanced than often assumed. In general, it is beneficial for science
teams to work in close proximity, as a shared environment promotes interactions, sparks
new connections between people, and builds trust and team spirit (Cooke, Hilton, and
Council 2015). Large teams may be composed of several smaller groups working closely
together, which benefit from being in close physical proximity. With these insights in
mind, it is tempting for policy makers to reverse the direction of causality and assume
that redesigning the physical space of the university to bring colleagues closer together
will also promote more collaborative research. Unfortunately, there is little evidence that
such redesigns enhance team science (Owen-Smith 2013). Quite the contrary, changes
towards open oﬀice plans and flexible workplaces have met with substantial pushback at
Dutch universities, as many academics value a constant, controlled, and quiet working
environment (Lambeets 2023). What does have evidence-based impact on collaboration
is altering the dynamics of physical proximity among researchers. For example, random
relocations of researchers were found to inspire new collaborations and breakthrough
ideas (Catalini 2018). Even brief periods of co-location can increase the likelihood of
collaboration (Boudreau et al. 2012). Anecdotally, one winter, the heating broke at the
Reitse Poort building, and the lead author of this report was relocated to the Devel-
opmental Psychology department (S building). Spending two days at this department
sparked two new collaborations. These findings suggest that while the physical structure
of a university environment may not be a significant factor, the strategic placement and
movement of people within existing environments can effectively foster inter-disciplinary
interactions and team science initiatives.
Consideration: Establish physical spaces that incentivize scholars from different disci-
plines and schools to mix. For example, Oxford-style “common rooms” with free (good)
coffee and cookies, where researchers from different disciplines can meet, exchange ideas,
and work on projects together.
Consideration: Create a university-wide calendar of colloquia, symposia, brown bag
lunches, et cetera, so (academic and support) staff is incentivized to attend events from
other departments. Consider incentivizing use of this shared calendar by making funds
for simple catering available to participating events.
5 Training and Professional Development
5.1 Training for Team Science
The ability to collaborate effectively in a team context is not a given; it is an important
soft skill that should be trained and developed. As any colleague involved in teaching can
attest: challenges always arise when students are asked to work in groups. When they ask
why we assign group work despite such challenges, the answer is often: because learning
to work together is an important skill for your professional life. With this in mind, it
is important to train staff for effective team science, too. According to research, science
teams often address coordination and communication challenges in an ad-hoc manner,
resorting to online resources or training (Stokols 2014). To properly prepare scholars
for complex scientific and societal challenges, however, requires fostering a culture of
continuous learning, a long-term strategy for training and professional development,
and consistent institutional support (J. T. Klein 2010). The long-term effectiveness
of training for teams hinges on the organization’s ability to sustain the desired training
outcomes, which means policies, recognition and rewards, and the organizational culture
must be aligned with the desired outcomes (Rosen et al. 2018).
5.1.1 Training for Team Members
With regard to individual team members, it is important to start early and educate
PhD candidates and early career researchers not only in scientific skills, but also in-
trapersonal skills (personal development), interpersonal skills (Vogel et al. 2012), and
interdisciplinary learning (Fiore et al. 2019). This entails developing the competencies
necessary to being able to think and work across disciplinary boundaries.
This approach can even be further extended to include (under)graduate education; mak-
ing a conscious choice to include group work and interdisciplinary assignments in the
curriculum to adequately prepare students for a more team-oriented future (Hoffmann
et al. 2022). Additional to this, a previously mentioned idea would be to implement this
structure into our diverse minor projects, drawing on the interdisciplinary background
of the consortia taking the courses. For an example of this approach, consider the minor
Digitale Gezondheid: een interdisciplinaire benadering, developed in collaboration with
TSHD, TSB, TLS, TiSEM, and the Academische Werkplaats Digital Health & Mental
Wellbeing, and in the minor Digital Sciences for Society, both of which are projected to
start in the summer of 2024. At present, there is substantial expertise among educational
5 Training and Professional Development
support staff on how to design and manage effective education for team science (Oakley
et al. 2004). However, this material is not FAIRly available, limiting its potential impact
on education across schools.
Consideration: Teach effective collaboration skills at all levels by creating a FAIR
resource page for teachers on how to effectively incorporate team work in education.
Consideration: Offer training and workshops on team science principles, collaboration
skills, and project management. These programs can help staff develop the skills needed
for successful interdisciplinary work.
5.1.2 Training for Teams
Aside from training individuals, there is also team training, defined as an intervention
to improve team performance by teaching necessary competencies. This is distinct from
team building, which focuses more on interpersonal connections and is generally less effec-
tive in comparison (Salas et al. 1999). Effective team training goes beyond fostering team
spirit, addressing specific skills essential for cross-disciplinary collaboration (Dyer, Dyer
Jr., and Dyer 2007). Section 3.1 suggests that team training aimed at developing shared
goals and transactive memory systems, as well as exposing teams to various interaction
styles, results in more adaptive and flexible teams, thereby improving problem-solving
and decision-making capabilities (Vogel et al. 2014). Additionally, methods like posi-
tional clarification (explicating each member’s role in the team) and modeling (trying
on each other’s roles) are useful for understanding team roles and tasks. Such training
strategies enhance communication, coordination, and knowledge integration in science
teams. Related to formative evaluation (Section 6.5), team reflexivity training may help
teams align with project goals during a project’s lifecycle: It involves having team mem-
bers reflect on past performance to improve future interaction (Gurtner et al. 2007).
Self-assessment tools, such as those made available at Utrecht University (2023), can
also be used for team reflexivity and guided self-correction; recognizing and overcoming
the common challenges of team science (see Section 1.3.2). Finally, online platforms like
<TeamScience.net> offer modules and resources to enhance skills in interdisciplinary and
transdisciplinary team science. The Toolbox Project is another innovative training in-
tervention designed to facilitate cross-disciplinary communication through philosophical
dialogue and probing statements about science.
At present, the TiU HR department offers two trainings for teams: Firstly, the workshop
‘Strength-based collaboration’/‘(samen)werken vanuit de sterke punten’, which involves
teams reflecting in how to bring out the best in themselves; increasing self-awareness;
team members identifying, valuating, and using their talents in relation to others; and
personal (leadership) development. Secondly, the workshop ‘Connected leading’ involves
getting to know team members’ communication styles in order to benefit effective com-
munication and team effectiveness. A key strength of these workshops is that they are
5 Training and Professional Development
targeted towards entire teams, including scientific- and support staff. A potential limi-
tation is that the concept of communication styles is not a focal topic in the scientific
literature on training for team effectiveness; specific problem-solving, conflict resolution,
and decision making skills are more salient concepts. Low-hanging fruit in terms of
additional training to develop is evidence-based training tailor-made to improve team
effectiveness (see Section 3.1), including trainings that focus on developing shared goals
and representations. One inspiring example is the set of simple and almost gamified
conversation guidelines that empower any team to engage in reflexivity and profession-
alization regarding team goals, recognition and rewards, and impact (Utrecht 2023).
While TiU currently employs team training in various areas, extending similar train-
ing to team dynamics and interpersonal communication can significantly enhance team
effectiveness.
Consideration: TiU should offer evidence-based, cross-disciplinary team trainings for
team science. This includes training individuals in skills required for effective teamwork,
and training teams as a whole to build shared goals and representations.
Consideration: TiU should develop simple guidelines, readily available to all staff, to
help teams engage in reflexivity and professionalization.
5.2 Leadership Training for Team Science
Training team leadership skills is essential for navigating the complexities of diverse and
interdisciplinary teams. Leadership training can help leaders identify and employ the
most effective leadership style for their team, given the team’s specific characteristics
and objectives. This includes learning when to employ participatory- versus directive
leadership styles (Rahmani, Roels, and Karmarkar 2018). In participatory leadership,
team members are free to decide their effort levels, while in directive leadership, the
leader demands specific contributions from members. A greater emphasis on directive
leadership is appropriate when team members have low incentives, which may be the
case in voluntary projects, those with a low probability of paying off, and larger teams.
Participatory leadership allows team members to set their effort levels, while directive
leadership involves the leader setting specific contribution demands, particularly effec-
tive in teams with low incentives. Other research identifies three leadership behaviors:
cognitive leadership (providing a guiding vision), structural leadership (building bridges
between individuals and disciplines), and processual leadership (fostering trust and com-
munication) (B. Gray 2008). In larger teams, it becomes diﬀicult for a single leader to
adopt all these behaviors, and delegation may be in order. So-called “transformative
leaders” embody humility, which fosters trust, and yet inspire a clear vision to inspire
and direct the team, while tapping into team members’ intrinsic motivation and bringing
out their best self (Stokols et al. 2008). Transformative leaders can foster team members’
self-eﬀicacy by empowering them to have goal-aligned mastery experiences. They pro-
vide socio-emotional support and facilitate learning (Kozlowski and Ilgen 2006). Formal
5 Training and Professional Development
leadership training provided by universities can support this, especially in relation to
societal partners. A good example of this is the module on personal leadership in Utrecht
University’s conversational guidelines (Utrecht 2023). This module helps team leaders
identify their current leadership style and relate it to the present needs of their team.
Leaders should articulate their expectations for the team through written charters or col-
laborative agreements, outlining tasks, communication, and handling of finances, data
sharing, and credit for publications and patents (L. M. Bennett et al. 2010). Alterna-
tively, team members can self-assemble such charters through workshops and consensus
(Goncharova et al. 2023).
Consideration: When training connected leadership skills, emphasize transformative
leadership for team science, that empowers team members to bring out their best. Rec-
ognize that, in team contexts, shared leadership can be more effective than hierarchical
leadership (Section 4.1).
6 Recognition and Rewards
6.1 Recognition and Rewards in Relation to Team Science
Recognition and rewards are a key driver of desired culture changes. Thus, to promote
a transition towards greater team science, TiU should establish clear criteria for the
recognition and reward of staff contributions to collaborative research efforts. The dom-
inant perspective in global academia is to perceive team science as the “cherry on top”
of individual achievement. Klein and colleagues (2013) summarize this as “Tenure first,
interdisciplinarity later,” and “Individual reputation first, collaboration later.” Such a
mindset can significantly hinder the adoption of a culture supportive of team science.
Instead, TiU should clearly communicate that team science is a major ingredient of the
“whole cake”, not just the cherry on top.
Recognizing and rewarding team science in hiring, promotion, and tenure decisions is
crucial across all levels of seniority (Meurer et al. 2023). When the goals of a de-
partment or school necessitate expertise in team science, it makes sense to prioritize
candidates with a track record of interdisciplinary research and a collaborative mind-
set. Early-career academics are likely to be reluctant to engage in (transdisciplinary)
team science unless clear incentives are established in terms of prospective employment
and advancement, output, and funding (DeHart 2017). According to the principle of
“doctoral socialization,” the academic trajectory of early career researchers is heavily in-
fluenced by their supervisors (Austin 2011). Typically, PhD candidates are expected to
collaborate only with their direct supervisors, a practice that misses the opportunity for
broader engagement in interdisciplinary work. Initiatives like TSB’s HSRI PhD grants,
which encourage collaboration between supervisors from multiple schools, represent a
progressive departure from this norm. There is room to expand this approach further
by integrating participation in team science projects as a standard element of PhD pro-
grams. Although this requires an investment of the PhD student’s time, it benefits
the candidates by better preparing them for the job market, expanding their network,
and resulting in additional (often higher impact) publications. This is particularly ad-
vantageous for early-career scholars. In essence, a systemic shift towards recognizing
and rewarding contributions to team science can cultivate a more collaborative, interdis-
ciplinary, and dynamic academic environment, aligning with the evolving demands of
contemporary research landscapes (Brody et al. 2019).
Consideration: Task a working group with developing and evaluating general princi-
ples and specific criteria for recognizing team science contributions, and transparently
6 Recognition and Rewards
incorporate these criteria in vacancies, PT&D conversations, and tenure and promotion
committees.
Consideration: Encourage engagement of PhD candidates in team science projects.
Create more opportunities for the involvement of PhD candidates in ongoing teams with
permeable boundaries, encourage supervisors to stimulate PhD candidates to become
involved in team science efforts, and ask graduate schools to encourage supervisors to
do so.
Consideration: Establish grants for collaborative PhD projects on thematic topics that
require interdisciplinary and inter-faculty team science.
Consideration: Create a profile for professorships that span departments or schools,
to promote interdisciplinary research and teaching.
6.2 What to Recognize and Reward?
How do we evaluate an individual in relation to the team(s) they are a part of? How do
team evaluations relate to the evaluation of the individuals it is composed of? Recogni-
tion and rewards determines what activities staff are incentivized to engage in, and if
the organization aspires to promote team science, then the way team work is recognized
and rewarded should be clearly defined. TiU was one of the first Dutch universities to
propose an innovative approach to recognition & rewards, by introducing the MERIT
system at TSB. MERIT was an ambitious and progressive approach to academic per-
formance assessment, encompassing five domains: Management, Education, Research,
Impact, and Team Spirit. While the MERIT system acknowledged contributions other
than only individual research excellence, there remained a need for a more nuanced ap-
proach, including specialization along some (but not all) dimensions of MERIT, more
individualized assessment, recognizing and valuing the unique strengths and contribu-
tions of each staff member (J. T. Klein and Falk-Krzesinski 2017). At other universities
(e.g., Utrecht, who developed the TRIPLE system based on TiU’s MERIT system),
there is room for employees to specialize along several - but not all - of the areas of
the model. Such flexibility is important in the light of persistent signals of high work
pressure, because it allows staff to focus their efforts in specific areas, like education
or research, at different times, thereby reducing the burden of juggling multiple tasks
simultaneously. This may benefit academic staff’s mental health, which is affected by
workloads, unattainable targets, pressure, and precarious contracts (Morrish, 2019).
An important question is how well the MERIT system is aligned with existing university-
wide hiring- and promotion policies. In 2023, all schools have been working on differenti-
ation of academic career paths, based on the four domains of academic work: Education,
Research, Impact, Leadership/Management. Team spirit is a mandatory componennt.
In 2024, implementation of these new career paths will follow. If properly implemented,
these new career paths could offer tenure and advancement opportunities to those who
6 Recognition and Rewards
contribute significantly to departmental and university objectives, beyond the traditional
research-focused pathways. From our interviews, we have learned that some staff have
high expectations for “Use (Y)our Talents” to deliver meaningful change. One anony-
mous employee said: “I am taking the SUTQ course to specialize more in education […]
If the university takes recognition & rewards seriously, I might still become ‘associate
professor of teaching’ some day”. Meeting these expectations will require adjustments at
various levels of the university’s hierarchy, however. The success of the implementation
of the new career paths should be evaluated. Additionally, it might be beneficial to
reassess the original MERIT system to determine whether it meets TiU’s evolving needs,
and consider developing MERIT 2.0 to align more closely with the newly developed
career paths.
Consideration: Preparations are in the works to adopt the MERIT system as oﬀicial
guiding principle for PT&D, hiring, and promotions at TiU. Evaluate the success of
this transition. Alongside the MERIT system, allow employees to specialize along its
key dimensions, and ask organizational bodies to create vacancies that require a specific
profile.
6.3 (Inter)national Developments
Global research assessment practices are evolving due to the influence of initiatives like
the Declaration on Research Assessment (DORA) and Coalition for Advancing Research
Assessment. These initiatives promote a more comprehensive approach to evaluating sci-
entific research, moving away from aggregate-level metrics like Journal Impact Factors,
which are not valid indicators of the quality of individual researchers’ output. They
recommend that institutions prioritize the scientific value of individual scholarly out-
put and consider a broader range of research output in evaluation, including datasets,
instruments, software, and practical applications, and considering a variety of impact
measures. Both NWO and ERC are signatories to DORA, and have adopted the “nar-
rative CV” format for grant applications, which allows for such diversity in output and
impact measures. Note that there are valid concerns about qualitative evaluation, as
it is prone to bias and gaming, and poorly suited for comparing candidates (Ioannidis
and Maniadis 2023). With this in mind, TiU should remain informed about the ongoing
development of reliable and valid individual-level quantitative evaluation criteria, and
open source databases on which to base them (Ioannidis and Maniadis 2023).
Consideration: Along with other Dutch universities, TiU has committed to develop
an action plan based on the international guidelines in CoARA and DORA to revise our
approach to research evaluation in 2024.
Consideration: To ensure that TiU staff remain competitive in (inter)national funding
calls from DORA signatories (e.g., NWO, ERC), TiU should abandon the irresponsible
use of metrics and the use of aggregate-level metrics which are not valid for assessing
6 Recognition and Rewards
individual researchers’ performance. Instead, TiU should require internal performance
reviews to focus on quality and individual-level quantitative metrics, and optionally, a
narrative resumé.
Consideration: In performance review and hiring decisions, TiU should consider the
impact of all research output, including datasets, instruments, software, and valoriza-
tion, alongside publications, and adopt a broad range of impact measures, including
qualitative indicators of research impact like policy influence.
6.4 Crediting Author Contributions
Standards for crediting author contributions to collaborative efforts differ widely across
disciplines. Often, authorship order plays a role, but there is no consensus about who
to add as a contributor, or what the order of authorship means. Journals increasingly
require author contribution statements that outline the scope of each team member’s
contribution (Cooke, Hilton, and Council 2015).
It is important to fairly and transparently acknowledge each team member’s contri-
bution in the creation of any type of research output, while allowing for diversity in
attribution, which varies across disciplines and outlets. To account for diversity in attri-
bution, authors can explicitly state what convention was followed to credit contributions
(Tscharntke et al. 2007).
While self-disclosure of contributions suﬀices for most projects, it is also possible to use
anonymous systems for crediting and approving team members’ contributions. Such
systems ensure fair attribution and maintain social safety in groups with large power
differentials, or a risk of nepotism, misreporting, and social loafing.
The CRediT contributor taxonomy aims to reduce the ambiguity surrounding authorship
(L. Allen et al. 2014). It recognizes 14 contributor roles, which - while they may not
fit all cases - cover a lot of ground. The CRediT contributor taxonomy may serve as
a sensible default for all projects, unless another convention for crediting contributions
takes precedence.
Another approach is to move from an authorship model towards a “contributorship”
model see 3.4. In a contributorship model, specific contributions are recognized, ensuring
fair credit, reducing authorship disputes, and encouraging collaboration, data, and code
sharing (Brand et al., 2015).
Consideration: Fairly and transparently credit each team member’s contribution in
the creation of research output.
Consideration: Explicitly state what convention was followed to credit contributions,
along with a reference.
6 Recognition and Rewards
Consideration: The CRediT contributor taxonomy is a sensible default system for
crediting contributions. Translating it into Dutch is low-hanging fruit and will make
the taxonomy more accessible to people outside academia (e.g. policy makers, public
partners and citizens/taxpayers).
6.5 Monitoring and Evaluating Team Science
Monitoring and evaluating team science projects is integral to their success. Importantly,
such evaluations should not rely solely on output in bibliometric terms, but also in terms
of team processes, coordination, and team goals (Hinrichs et al. 2017). There are two
relevant approaches to evaluation: formative and summative methods. Formative evalu-
ation focuses on providing ongoing feedback to improve the project in real-time (Vogel
et al. 2014; D. O. Gray 2008). This is instrumental in identifying areas for immedi-
ate improvement and making adjustments in goals, approaches, and team composition
throughout the project lifecycle. On the other hand, summative evaluation aims to glean
lessons from completed projects that can inform and enhance future programs (Liver-
man et al. 2013; Vogel et al. 2014). This type of evaluation provides a comprehensive
overview of a project’s outcomes and effectiveness, offering valuable insights for future
endeavors.
Consideration: All science teams should plan for formative assessments at given mile-
stones during the project lifecycle. TiU should require summative evaluation of team
science projects funded by the University (eerste geldstroom).
7 Considerations for Team Science at
Tilburg University
Defining Team Science (Section 1.2)
1. Team Science can be defined as collaboration with a larger number of partners than
is standard in a particular domain of study, addressing a goal that transcends what
could be achieved by a single scholar, capitalizing on team members’ strengths,
with attention to their diverse perspectives, and members from multiple branches of
the organization (including scientific and support staff), and/or other stakeholders.
Benefits and Challenges of Team Science (Section 1.3)
2. Team science benefits both individual team members, the organization, and society
at large, and allows scholars to provide complex solutions to large-scale public
challenges. It promotes collaboration, cohesion, and knowledge exchange within
organizations, increases impact, and may benefit research quality.
3. Any science team should be aware of, and reflect on how they relate to, the seven
challenges of team science: diversity, knowledge integration, team size, goals, per-
meable boundaries, geographic dispersion, and task interdependence.
Local Perspective (Section 2)
4. At present, only 3% of academic output involves authors from multiple Schools.
If connecting the schools is considered important, then promoting team science
initiatives that connect the schools is low-hanging fruit.
Open Science: Lessons Learned (Section 2.4)
5. The open science transition serves as a template for the transition towards more
team science, and the Open Science Community Tilburg is a natural ally in achiev-
ing this transition.
6. Open science practices facilitate team science, reduce onboarding efforts and im-
prove scalability, increase the reusability of materials, data, and code, increase
scientific rigor, and offer a greater potential payoff to team members.
Team Effectiveness (Section 3.1)
7 Considerations for Team Science at Tilburg University
7. Team effectiveness is enhanced by thoughtful team composition, team professional
development, building a shared understanding of goals, task requirements, and
team member competencies, and inspiring person-focused team leadership.
Communication and Team Success (Section 3.3)
8. Team members should be able to disagree constructively in a safe, supportive
context. When possible, preemptive conflict management strategies should be used;
anticipating disagreements and establishing terms for their constructive resolution.
When conflict does occur, reactive conflict management should focus on empathy,
problem-solving, and compromise. Professional development opportunities should
be in place to educate staff in the use of such communication techniques.
Procedural Fairness (Section 3.4)
9. Ensure trust within team contexts to facilitate effective collaboration, for example,
through procedural fairness and transparency within science teams and the broader
organization, and through face-to-face interaction between team members.
10. Consider adopting or developing a code of conduct that clearly outlines expecta-
tions for how the team members will ensure social safety, resolve disagreements,
credit contributions, ensure ethical and responsible research practices, and provides
recourse in case anything goes wrong.
Team Composition (Section 3.5)
11. When composing a team, it is crucial to weigh the benefits of task relevant diversity
against the downsides of overcoming disciplinary, institutional, or demographic
differences.
12. Starting at the undergraduate level, train young academics in interdisciplinarity
and collaborative skills.
Permeable Team Boundaries (Section 3.6)
13. It is important to maintain a stable core membership in teams with permeable
boundaries to foster team cohesion and sustained performance.
14. For all temporary team members, in particular early career academics and those
on temporary contracts, the balance between investments (in terms of time and
effort) and rewards should be explicit and fair.
Support staff (Section 3.7)
15. Recognition and rewards should affect support staff as well, ensuring that support
staff are incentivized to contribute to team science.
7 Considerations for Team Science at Tilburg University
16. Increase social and professional ties between all university staff (scientific and sup-
port) by welcoming all staff at the same training- and social events.
17. Decentralize support staff and locate them (physically) closer to the researchers, at
least temporarily - for example, by having consultation hours in different buildings
- thus enabling easier collaboration (see Section 4.6).
18. Organizational policies should strive to create a climate conducive to team science
by incentivizing collaboration, making hierarchies flexible, supporting autonomy,
embracing open science, recognizing and rewarding team science, team spirit, and
inspiring team-oriented leadership.
19. Redefine “excellence” to no longer exclusively refer to individual performance, but
also provide a concrete outline of what constitutes excellence in a team context.
Flexible Hierarchies (Section 4.1)
20. In order for team science to flourish, TiU must balance hierarchy and specialization
on the one hand with collaboration and integration on the other. Hierarchy must
be flexible: it must be possible to check, question, and even challenge authority.
Top down and Bottom Up (Section 4.2)
21. To enact a desired culture change towards more team science, a combination of
a top-down (through policy, funding opportunities, and recognition and rewards)
and bottom-up (through informal networks like the Open Science Community, and
social, academic, and networking events) approaches is necessary.
Funding Team Science (Section 4.3)
22. Using public funds (eerste geldstroom) to fund (interdisciplinary) team science
initiatives can affect more colleagues’ careers in a more impactful way, while pro-
moting cohesion within the organization. To do this fairly and transparently, the
target audience should be included in the development of funding calls.
23. Applications for team science funding instruments should include a collaboration
plan as part of the evaluation criteria.
24. Monitor and evaluate existing internal funding programs aimed at stimulating
collaboration across the schools.
25. Create new internal funding programs specifically designed to support interdisci-
plinary research projects that connect the schools.
26. Create incubator grants, seed funding, and other flexible funding schemes to incen-
tivize team science at all levels of seniority.
Funding Pitfalls (Section 4.4)
7 Considerations for Team Science at Tilburg University
27. When reviewing funding applications, do not take prior funding success into ac-
count to avoid the “Matthew effect”. Focus on merit and feasibility.
28. When reviewing team science funding applications, ensure diverse panels of review-
ers, and prime them to value innovation and interdisciplinarity.
Technology and Infrastructure (Section 4.5)
29. Technology and infrastructure should provide support and tools for collaboration,
without creating a rigid mold that science teams are expected to conform to.
30. As much as possible, use open source software for all task-critical activities to
ensure that all team members can participate and contribute, regardless of insti-
tutional licenses for specific software and services.
31. Use reproducible workflows and make all scholarly output FAIRly shareable in
order to ensure effortless (distributed) collaboration among team members, make
scholarly output FAIRly shareable, increase the reusability of scholarly output, and
safeguard against human error that might otherwise go undetected.
Team Science and the Physical Environment (Section 4.6)
32. Establish physical spaces that incentivize scholars from different disciplines and
schools to mix. For example, Oxford-style “common rooms” with free (good) coffee
and cookies, where researchers from different disciplines can meet, exchange ideas,
and work on projects together.
33. Create a university-wide calendar of colloquia, symposia, brown bag lunches, et
cetera, so (academic and support) staff is incentivized to attend events from other
departments. Consider incentivizing use of this shared calendar by making funds
for simple catering available to participating events.
Training for Team Science (Section 5.1)
34. Teach effective collaboration skills at all levels by creating a FAIR resource page
for teachers on how to effectively incorporate team work in education.
35. Offer training and workshops on team science principles, collaboration skills, and
project management. These programs can help staff develop the skills needed for
successful interdisciplinary work.
36. TiU should offer evidence-based, cross-disciplinary team trainings for team science.
This includes training individuals in skills required for effective teamwork, and
training teams as a whole to build shared goals and representations.
37. TiU should develop simple guidelines, readily available to all staff, to help teams
engage in reflexivity and professionalization.
Leadership Training for Team Science (Section 5.2)
7 Considerations for Team Science at Tilburg University
38. When training connected leadership skills, emphasize transformative leadership
for team science, that empowers team members to bring out their best. Recognize
that, in team contexts, shared leadership can be more effective than hierarchical
leadership (Section 4.1).
Recognition and Rewards in Relation to Team Science (Section 6.1)
39. Task a working group with developing and evaluating general principles and spe-
cific criteria for recognizing team science contributions, and transparently incorpo-
rate these criteria in vacancies, PT&D conversations, and tenure and promotion
committees.
40. Encourage engagement of PhD candidates in team science projects. Create more
opportunities for the involvement of PhD candidates in ongoing teams with per-
meable boundaries, encourage supervisors to stimulate PhD candidates to become
involved in team science efforts, and ask graduate schools to encourage supervisors
to do so.
41. Establish grants for collaborative PhD projects on thematic topics that require
interdisciplinary and inter-faculty team science.
42. Create a profile for professorships that span departments or schools, to promote
interdisciplinary research and teaching.
What to Recognize and Reward? (Section 6.2)
43. Preparations are in the works to adopt the MERIT system as oﬀicial guiding
principle for PT&D, hiring, and promotions at TiU. Evaluate the success of this
transition. Alongside the MERIT system, allow employees to specialize along its
key dimensions, and ask organizational bodies to create vacancies that require a
specific profile.
(Inter)national Developments (Section 6.3)
44. Along with other Dutch universities, TiU has committed to develop an action plan
based on the international guidelines in CoARA and DORA to revise our approach
to research evaluation in 2024.
45. To ensure that TiU staff remain competitive in (inter)national funding calls from
DORA signatories (e.g., NWO, ERC), TiU should abandon the irresponsible use
of metrics and the use of aggregate-level metrics which are not valid for assessing
individual researchers’ performance. Instead, TiU should require internal perfor-
mance reviews to focus on quality and individual-level quantitative metrics, and
optionally, a narrative resumé.
7 Considerations for Team Science at Tilburg University
46. In performance review and hiring decisions, TiU should consider the impact of
all research output, including datasets, instruments, software, and valorization,
alongside publications, and adopt a broad range of impact measures, including
qualitative indicators of research impact like policy influence.
Crediting Author Contributions (Section 6.4)
47. Fairly and transparently credit each team member’s contribution in the creation
of research output.
48. Explicitly state what convention was followed to credit contributions, along with
a reference.
49. The CRediT contributor taxonomy is a sensible default system for crediting contri-
butions. Translating it into Dutch is low-hanging fruit and will make the taxonomy
more accessible to people outside academia (e.g. policy makers, public partners and
citizens/taxpayers).
Monitoring and Evaluating Team Science (Section 6.5)
50. All science teams should plan for formative assessments at given milestones during
the project lifecycle. TiU should require summative evaluation of team science
projects funded by the University (eerste geldstroom).