Swanson et al.
RESEARCH
Cognitive networks and text analysis identify
anxiety as a key dimension of psychological
distress in suicide notes
1 2 1 5 4
Trevor James Swanson , Andreia Sofia Teixeira , Brianne N. Richson , Ying Li , Thomas T. Hills , Kelsie
1 6 7 7*
T. Forbush , David Watson , Luciana Ciringione and Massimo Stella
Correspondence:
Abstract
massimo.stella@inbox.com
CogNosco Lab, Department of
Understanding the mindset of people who end their lives by suicide remains a key
Psychology and Cognitive Science,
research challenge. To this aim, we reconstruct conceptual associations and emotional
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
Full list of author information is perceptions of 139 authors of genuine suicide notes, i.e., notes written moments before
available at the end of the article
ending one’s own life. Our methods are grounded in cognitive network science, text
analysis and psychometrics. We introduce a quantitative framework measuring to what
extent authors of suicide notes tend to associate emotional words in ways similar to how
200 individuals with high/low levels of depression, anxiety, and stress (on a DASS-21
scale) recall concepts together. In Study 1, we use text analysis to build one co-occurrence
network out of suicide notes’ texts and six fluency co-occurrence networks out of fluency
data from individuals high/low on anxiety/stress/depression levels. We find that emotional
word associations in suicide notes reflect mostly conceptual associations produced by
low-anxiety individuals. In Study 2, we perform residual emotional profiling, i.e. measuring
the emotional intensity of words remaining after removing from fluency networks those
words mentioned and connected in the suicide notes’ network. We find that only the
high-anxiety fluency network displays negligible emotional residuals, indicating the highest
overlap - in terms of emotions - between suicide notes’ content and the concepts recalled
by individuals with high anxiety levels. We discuss how these findings relate to existing
psychological literature, along with their potential implications for understanding and
quantifying suicidal behavior.
Keywords: complex networks; text analysis; emotional profiling; cognitive network science
Introduction
Approximately 800,000 people die by suicide every year—that is about one suicide every 40
seconds (World Health Organization, 2014). Suicide often arises from complex, distressed
emotional processing that includes distorted perceptions about the self and others, as well
the world in general (Oquendo et al., 2020; Rizk et al., 2019). Given the variety and complex-
ity of factors that may lead an individual to contemplate or complete suicide, it is important
to advance research into the psychological conditions surrounding such a tragic event. Sui-
cide notes—that is, letters written immediately prior to the author’s suicide—represent one
Swanson et al. Page 2 of 20
potential window into the mindset of individuals who complete suicide (McAdams, 2001;
Proulx & Heine, 2006). By analyzing the contents and language of suicide notes, we can gain
unique insights into the common features of individual experiences and obtain a greater un-
derstanding of the cognitive components that characterize suicidal ideation (Schneidman,
1981).
Previous research on suicide notes has focused on identifying their contents, as well as ex-
plicating what features differentiate them from other types of texts (Handelman & Lester,
2007; Pestian et al., 2012b). Al-Mosaiwi & Johnstone (2018) found that the vocabulary of
individuals at risk for suicide contained more absolutist words (e.g., “always”, “totally”,
“entire”) than what was observed among those diagnosed with depression or anxiety. Un-
derstanding the emotional contents of suicide notes has also been a prominent research goal,
wherein sentiment analysis has been employed to classify the emotions in such texts and
train learning algorithms to distinguish between genuine and simulated suicide notes (Pes-
tian et al., 2010; Schoene & Dethlefs, 2016). While these automated text-analytic techniques
can be powerful for identifying written signs of suicidal ideation, they can be difficult to inter-
pret and often use a “bag-of-words” approach that ignores the relationships between words
and how they are used. Cognitive networks, however, offer a more readily-interpretable
quantitative framework wherein the emotional contents of suicide notes can be analyzed
while taking into account their associative structure—that is, networks allow for the study
of both the contents and contexts of words used in suicide notes (Castro & Siew, 2020).
Recent applications of cognitive networks to the study of suicide notes have provided
unique insights into the structure of their emotional contents. For instance, Teixeira et al.
(2021) and Stella et al. (2022) found, with different methodologies, that suicide notes con-
sisted of an overwhelming majority of positively-valenced words that exhibited a compart-
mentalized structure, such that positively- versus negatively-valenced words were often con-
nected with one another (Showers, 1992). Moreover, Stella et al. (2022) found that suicide
notes contained a higher degree of emotional complexity than notes written by a non-suicidal
Swanson et al. Page 3 of 20
control group. Together, these findings reflect that suicide notes may contain a unique emo-
tional and lexical footprint.
However, an important unresolved issue is whether traces of that lexical footprint (Stella,
2022) can be observed in notes written by individuals who exhibit high levels of emotional
distress, such as stress, depression, and anxiety. Addressing this question represents the
primary goal of the present research. Comparing the emotional structure of suicide notes
with that of notes written by individuals reporting symptoms of internalizing disorders
(Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995) provides a step forward in using cognitive networks to identify
signs of suicidal ideation (and thereby, possible suicide risk) in written texts. Our motivation
for this work lies in the potential of these insights to have clinical implications for improving
prevention efforts. Specifically, by supplementing previous machine learning research (Fatima
et al., 2021; Pestian et al., 2012b; Schoene et al., 2021), we can create network models that
are more informative to clinicians and may be used to detect nuanced features of texts that
flag groups who are at risk for suicidal behavior.
Several studies have shown that higher levels of stress, depression, and anxiety can be risk
factors for suicidal ideation and behavior (Hawton et al., 2013; Naragon-Gainey & Watson,
2011; Sandin et al., 1998; Sareen et al., 2005). Research has shown that among adults who
reported a lifetime suicide attempt, up to 70% of them had an anxiety disorder (Nepon et al.,
2010). Similarly, approximately 60% of individuals who completed suicide were diagnosed
with major depressive disorder (Ng et al., 2017). Thus, to identify signs of suicidal ideation
among individuals who report symptoms of internalizing disorders, it is an important goal to
assess how the mindset of individuals who complete suicide might differ from the mindsets
of those who exhibit psychopathological symptoms but did not attempt suicide.
In this paper we employ a cognitive network science framework to investigate the emotional
contents and structure of suicide notes. Similar to past research that used networks to study
suicide notes (Stella et al., 2022; Teixeira et al., 2021), we construct co-occurrence networks
to map the associative structure of words used in such notes and analyze the organization
Swanson et al. Page 4 of 20
of their emotional contents. We create networks from a sample of recalls produced by indi-
viduals who reported high/low levels of internalizing symptoms (i.e., stress, depression, and
anxiety), and aim to assess the structural similarities and differences between suicide notes
and these other recalls.
To the best of our knowledge, this paper represents the first attempt to directly compare
networks created from suicide notes with those created from notes produced by individuals
experiencing high/low levels of emotional distress. The primary goal behind this research is
to compare and contrast the mindsets of individuals experiencing these negative psycholog-
ical conditions with those of individuals who completed suicide to inform future research on
suicide prevention.
Transparency and Openness
No studies within this paper were preregistered. The suicide note data were obtained via
personal communication with external researchers, and so are not made publicly available
by the current authors. Access to the de-identified ERT data collected by Li et al. (2020)
conduct the analyses described in this paper are also available at the following repository:
all manipulations, and all measures in the study. Our sample size of suicide notes was
determined by the preexisting data that were obtained by Schoene & Dethlefs (2016); the
same is true of the sample size for the ERT data obtained by Li et al. (2020). Ethical
approval was granted from the HSSREC IRB panel at the University of Warwick to work
with the suicide notes and the emotional recall data (HSSREC 63/21-22).
Methods
This section briefly outlines the datasets and network structures investigated in this study.
Swanson et al. Page 5 of 20
Genuine suicide notes and ERT data
This work used 139 genuine suicide notes curated by Schoene & Dethlefs (2016) and inves-
tigated also in previous works, through different methodologies Fatima et al. (2021); Stella
et al. (2022); Teixeira et al. (2021). These letters were written in English by individuals who
completed suicide. A suicide letter included an average of 120 words. No additional contex-
tual information (e.g., demographics) was available from the dataset. Notes were processed
with names and sensitive information anonymized by Schoene & Dethlefs (2016), thus fil-
tering out any sensitive information from the analysis. Text was tokenised (i.e., split into
words) and stemmed (e.g., regularize different forms to a common morphonological root)
through Mathematica 11.3. Punctuation was discarded and we considered only stemmed
words appearing in the Emotional Recall Task (ERT).
The Emotional Recall Task was introduced by Li et al. (2020). N = 200 individuals re-
cruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) recalled 10 emotional states while reporting
how they felt in their last month through a fluency task. The overall dataset included 475
different stems of emotional words (e.g., happy, sad, etc.) in English. We considered each
recall as a list of words and stemmed it with Mathematica 11.3. Each word list/recall was
relative to a numeric score from the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS; Lovibond
& Lovibond, 1995). We partitioned ERT recalls as produced by people with higher-than-
median and lower-than-median anxiety. We did the same for stress and depression, obtaining
6 different collections of ERT recalls.
To identify the structure of emotional co-occurrences across populations experiencing de-
pression, anxiety, stress and suicide ideation, we used a cognitive network science framework
(Gon˜i et al., 2011).
Emotional co-occurrence networks
We used the sequences of emotional words from suicide notes and ERT data to build networks
of emotion co-occurrence in the narratives and recollections of our target populations. As
in previous studies dealing with fluency data, we used the approach by Gon˜i et al. (2011)
Swanson et al. Page 6 of 20
for building co-occurrence networks out of word lists. We used an l = 2 window—i.e.,
we considered the two words that immediately preceded and followed each word in the
texts as co-occurring together. We applied this window to all words in all sentences, and
recorded all co-occurrences as connections between pairs of concepts. We then discarded
all idiosyncratic co-occurrences, that is, those appearing only once. We additionally selected
links by considering a Binomial filtering based on word frequency in the corpora. All corpora
featured a total of |D| = 475 unique stems. These nodes D were added to all networks, then
connections for every emotional network were added according to the procedure by Gon˜i
et al. (2011). This led to 7 emotional networks where nodes represent emotional states and
links indicate stronger-than-expected emotional co-occurrences in clinical populations, i.e.,
people experiencing suicidal ideation and low/high depression, anxiety and stress.
Emotional auras and Jaccard similarity
Words in each emotional network were enriched with valence/arousal labels from the
Valence-Arousal-Dominance dataset by Mohammad (2018). Labels for valence were “posi-
tive” (upper quartile), “negative” (lower quartile) or neutral (otherwise). Labels for arousal
were “exciting” (upper quartile), “inhibitive” (lower quartile) or neutral (otherwise). These
labels were used to detect the type of negative/positive or boring/exciting associations be-
tween emotional states. As in Stella et al. (2019), we used the metric of emotional auras
to combine valence/arousal labels and network connectivity. For each word, we detected its
neighborhood—i.e., the set of all words co-occurring with it. Example neighborhoods for
larities populating each neighborhood; this is the emotional aura attributed to a word and
depending on its neighborhood of associations. The aura of each word does not depend on its
valence-arousal labels, but rather on the affective labels of its neighbors/associates. For in-
stance, “happi” (stem for “happiness” and “happy”) is always labeled as a positive/arousing
concept. However, it inherits a positive aura in the network produced by people with low
depression, and a negative aura in the network produced by people with high depression,
Swanson et al. Page 7 of 20
ordered list of nodes {D , D , ..., D }, we represented each emotional network N as a
1 2 475
vector:
V (N ) = {A , A , ..., A }, (1)
a 1 2 475
of emotional auras for each corresponding node. By computing Jaccard similarity between
vectors, we measured how similar emotional networks were in associating concepts with
analogous emotional auras, mixing valence/arousal and emotion co-occurrence.
Emotional profiling
Emotional profiles were built by using the NRC Emotion Lexicon (Mohammad & Turney,
2013). The latter is a behavioral mapping between words and the emotions elicited by them
(Mohammad & Turney, 2013).
Counting how many emotions are present in a given set powered our “words not said”
analysis. We measured residual emotions present in the complement C of two lists of words
with degree k ≥ 1, one list coming from a network of low/high negative states and the other
list coming from suicide notes. For example, this procedure makes it possible to consider
the emotions persisting in words that were mentioned by people with high depression but
not mentioned/associated in suicide notes.
For any complement list C, we reconstructed its affective content as an emotional flower
(Semeraro et al., 2021; Stella, 2020), where petals indicate z -scores of eight different emo-
tional states based on how many words elicit a given state. The larger the petals, the more
concepts elicit that emotional state. Let us clarify this in quantitative terms. We measured
the fraction r = m/N of m words inspiring emotion i in a list with N entries. The collection
of observed values {r } constitutes the so-called emotional profile of a set C of words not
i i
said. For suicide notes, antonyms of words linked with meaning negations (e.g., “not”) were
Swanson et al. Page 8 of 20
added to the count (antonyms were defined via WordNet 3.0; Fellbaum, 2012). The observed
profile was matched against 1000 random emotional profiles built by sampling uniformly at
random from the NRC Emotion Lexicon as many words as those that elicited at least one
emotion in the {r } s. We computed 8 z -scores, one per emotional state, and plotted them in
i i
a sector bar chart inspired by Plutchik’s wheel of emotions (Plutchik, 1980). The rejection
area z < 1.96 was plotted as a semi-transparent area and concentric circles indicated units
of z -scores higher than 2.
Importantly, all of these analyses rely on network structural properties for their conclu-
sions. Emotional auras are determined by local patterns of connectivity within the networks,
tivity of the networks in order to focus only on the largest connected component (LCC) for
creating the network complement C. Further details about this analysis and our methodol-
ogy can be found in the Supplementary Information document.
Results
Suicide notes’ semantic frames most resemble positive and arousing associations expressed by
individuals with low anxiety
First, as described by Stella et al. (2022) and Teixeira et al. (2021), we observed that the
suicide notes contained an overwhelming majority of words with positive auras. Specifically,
only 3 words were observed to have negative auras. Given the paucity of words with negative
auras in the suicide notes as compared with the ERT data, we were not able to construct
appropriate comparisons for words with negative auras across the two datasets. Thus, we
limited the analysis of Jaccard similarity to words with positive auras. In addition to assess-
ing the similarity of words with positive auras, we also included exciting auras as a second
dimension for computing the Jaccard similarity of each ERT network against the suicide
notes network.
with positive auras plotted on the y-axis, and that for words with exciting auras plotted
Swanson et al. Page 9 of 20
on the x-axis. Each point on the plot represents the Jaccard similarity between each ERT
network and the suicide notes network on each of the two dimensions. The first pattern that
emerges is that low stress, anxiety, and depression networks have higher similarity values
for words with positive auras than the corresponding high stress, anxiety, and depression
networks. Notably, we see that the low anxiety network has the highest levels of Jaccard
similarity on both dimensions. This means that words with positive auras and exciting
auras in both the suicide notes and low anxiety networks show the most similar patterns of
connectivity with other words, as compared to what we observe for the other ERT networks.
Going beyond positivity: “Words not said”, suicide letters and high anxiety
Given that the ERT networks contained a variety of words with negative auras that were not
able to be included in the analysis (due to the dearth of words with negative auras in suicide
notes), this begs the question of what emotional contents exist in those networks that were
not expressed in the suicide notes. That is, our initial analysis was limited by restricting
the ERT networks to only evaluate words that were also included in suicide notes. Thus,
we wanted to evaluate the residual emotional contents expressed by the “words not said”
in suicide notes, but were said by the individuals who completed the ERT. To do this,
we constructed residual networks for the ERT data, wherein for each subsample (low/high
stress, anxiety, and depression) we removed all words that were present in suicide notes and
analyzed the emotional profiles for the remaining words in each network.
reflect the “words not said” in suicide notes. In each emotional flower the petals reflect
the prevalence, and statistical significance, of each individual emotion among the words in
the corresponding residual network. Petals that extend beyond the semi-transparent circles
indicate that the z -score for that emotion is greater than 2, or that it appeared with a
significantly greater frequency than chance, given an alpha level of .05. The only ERT
network that did not reveal any emotions occurring more frequently than chance was the
high anxiety network.
Swanson et al. Page 10 of 20
Closing remarks: Low and high anxiety are important constructs to understand emotions (not)
expressed in suicide notes
Our results reveal an interesting relationship between the emotional contents of suicide notes
and those from emotional-recall data provided from a sample of healthy individuals. Specifi-
cally, we observed that the patterns of connectivity among emotion words with positive and
exciting auras in suicide notes showed the greatest similarity with those in texts written
by relatively low-anxiety individuals. This alone does not tell the whole story. In fact, we
see that after removing words used in suicide notes from networks generated by individuals
high/low in stress, anxiety, and depression, all networks—except those representing written
texts from high-anxiety individuals—contained additional emotional contents not present in
suicide notes.
Discussion and Conclusions
The purpose of the current study was to compare the emotional content of words in 139
genuine suicide notes curated by Schoene & Dethlefs (2016) to those from 200 healthy
individuals who completed the Emotional Recall Task in which they recalled 10 emotional
states while reporting how they felt in their last month through a fluency task. Our secondary
goal was to identify how many emotions were present in a given set of “words not said” by
measuring residual emotions from a network of low/high emotion states and one list coming
from suicide notes. We observed that patterns of connectivity among emotional words in
suicide notes were most similar to those in texts written by low-anxiety individuals. At
the same time, after removing the bulk of positive associations, the remaining collection of
emotions in suicide notes was most similar to states expressed by high-anxiety individuals.
Our findings reveal that the mindset of individuals who complete suicide has a complex
association with the mindset of individuals experiencing anxiety. On first glance, it appears
that the organization of emotion words in suicide notes is most similar to that in notes
written by individuals with low levels of anxiety. But upon closer investigation, it seems
that individuals with low anxiety also frequently express other types of emotions within
Swanson et al. Page 11 of 20
their written texts, particularly a high level of joy and anticipation. However, heightened
levels of these additional emotions appear to be absent among individuals who reported
higher levels of anxiety, indicating that the collection of emotional contents they express
matches more closely to that observed in suicide notes. An interesting conclusion of this
research is that understanding how the emotional contents in suicide notes relate to those
expressed by individuals with different levels of internalizing symptoms may have less to do
with what is actually written, and more to do with the “words not said”.
It is important to emphasize that these results are direct products of analyzing the con-
nectivity of the networks studied in this paper. Where our study of emotional auras re-
lies on the networks’ local connectivity, and the “words not said” analysis relies on their
global connectivity. Moreover, upon further analysis of other structural properties of the
networks—including degree distribution, average clustering coefficient, and average network
distance—we see that they all have a similar global topology (i.e., heavy-tailed degree dis-
tribution with short average network distance and relatively high clustering coefficient),
highlighting that local connectivity is really the key feature driving the present results. See
the Supplementary Information for more details about these additional analyses.
Suicidal ideation (a suicide risk factor) is associated with several anxiety-spectrum disor-
ders and related disorders (e.g., post-traumatic stress disorder; Naragon-Gainey & Watson,
2011). One meta-analysis indicated that the presence of an anxiety disorder distinguishes
individuals who think about suicide from those who attempt suicide, whereas depression was
similarly prevalent in both groups (May & Klonsky, 2016). High-anxiety individuals may
have an external locus of control (i.e., feeling one’s life is controlled by external factors);
perceived lack of control may facilitate feelings of hopelessness that, in theory, exacerbate
suicidal ideation (Joiner, 2005). Indeed, having an external locus of control has been asso-
ciated with suicide attempts (Wiebenga et al., 2021). It is also possible that ‘high anxiety’
is a proxy for overarousal and/or sensitivity to the experience of anxiety, both of which
have been suggested as risk factors for suicide (Ribeiro et al., 2015; Stanley et al., 2018).
Swanson et al. Page 12 of 20
More generally, neuroticism (a personality construct strongly related to anxiety) is likely
negatively associated with positive affective experiences like joy (Ng, 2009).
The above provides some context to help explain why we observed a relationship between
the emotions expressed by high-anxiety individuals and those expressed in suicide notes.
However, the fact that patterns of connectivity among positively-valenced and exciting words
in the suicide notes were most similar to those observed in low-anxiety individuals indicates
that there is more to the story.
Multiple theories about suicide—e.g., the Interpersonal Theory of Suicide (Joiner et al.,
2021), the 3-Step Theory (Klonsky & May, 2015), and the Integrated Motivational-Volitional
Model (O’Connor, 2011)—posit that there are distinct processes that lead one to develop
suicidal ideation versus the capacity for acting on suicidal thoughts. In these theories, in-
terpersonal factors such as loneliness or feeling as though one does not belong with their
social group may lead to suicidal thoughts. However, the capacity for suicide appears to be
related to certain aspects of fearlessness or low anxiety. This includes experiences such as
low fear of bodily harm and a higher-than-average tolerance of physical pain (Joiner, 2005).
Thus, our quantitative analysis reflects the dual nature of these relationships between
anxiety and suicide, where there appears to be a contradictory association between both
high/low anxiety and suicidal ideation/behavior. However, these associations may poten-
tially be understood as reflecting what has been identified in past literature as a connection
between higher emotional anxiety and greater risk of suicidal ideation (Naragon-Gainey &
Watson, 2011), as well as lower physiological anxiety being a risk factor for acting on suicidal
thoughts (Joiner, 2005; Smith et al., 2010).
This distinction can be understood by looking closely at the items on the DASS “anxiety”
subscale. This scale, which we used to operationalize high/low anxiety in our sample, con-
tains mostly somatic and panic-related content (e.g., “I experienced difficulty breathing”; “I
was aware of dryness of my mouth”), and relatively fewer anxious affect items (e.g., “I felt
scared without any good reason”). This may account for why we observed the most simi-
Swanson et al. Page 13 of 20
larity between the emotional contexts of suicide texts and those written by individuals who
scored low on the DASS anxiety subscale, given that a low anxiety score on the DASS may
correspond more readily to low physiological anxiety than low emotional anxiety. Another
potential explanation for why we observe this similarity could be that the act of writing a
suicide note leads to an acute reduction in anxiety, which is then reflected in the note itself.
Indeed, research in narrative psychology and on expressive writing has suggested that writ-
ing about oneself and one’s life can reduce feelings of emotional distress (e.g., Pennebaker,
1997; Stephens, 2011). But while this would certainly be an interesting explanation, collect-
ing data to test this hypothesis would be extremely difficult and our current data are unable
to address such a possibility.
It is important to note some limitations of this study. First, there was no demographic
information available for the authors of the suicide notes we analyzed in this study. The
sample of individuals who completed the ERT was collected from MTurk (a population that
has been extensively studied in the social science literature; Huff & Tingley, 2015), but it
is unclear to what extent these individuals represented an appropriate comparison group
for the sample of suicide-note authors. Future research would also benefit from analyzing
a larger collection of suicide notes, such as the corpus of 1,319 suicide notes described by
Pestian et al. (2012a) which includes relevant demographic information such as gender, age,
and education level. This would likely help to address another limitation we encountered,
which was the dearth of negatively-valenced words in the suicide notes.
Some strengths of this study lie in its potential implications for informing research on
predicting suicidal behavior from written texts. Previous research has used machine learning
techniques to identify texts that may signal suicidal ideation (Pestian et al., 2012b; Schoene
et al., 2021), but such methods often produce results that are difficult to understand and thus
may not be very helpful to clinicians for identifying the underlying features of a text that
may signal risk for suicidal behavior (Rudin, 2019). Conversely, while qualitative methods for
analyzing texts lend themselves better to interpretation, these may have limited reliability
Swanson et al. Page 14 of 20
and be more difficult to apply on a broader scale (e.g., with larger corpora). Using cognitive
network science, our approach retains the value of quantitative analysis while preserving the
human dimension of the data. Network models (Stella, 2022; Stella et al., 2020) allow us
to analyze the patterns of associative knowledge that represent the mindsets of individuals
who may be at risk for suicide. This affords interpretable, automated emotion detection
(Stella et al., 2020) which may be used to enhance clinical psychological investigations of
an individual’s risk for suicide.
Future research should clarify if results similar to what we observed here emerge in studies
wherein depression, stress, and anxiety are modeled together, as we recognize that these
constructs are not mutually exclusive and are instead highly related (O’Driscoll et al., 2021).
It will be important to test networks of suicide notes from other samples of individuals
as well. For example, research is needed in clinical samples that are considered ‘at-risk’
for suicidal ideation and suicidal behavior, such as in individuals with depression, eating
disorders, and PTSD (Chesney et al., 2014; Fu et al., 2021). The methods described in this
paper could also be used to address other research questions relevant to mental health. For
instance, another important application of these methods could be to analyze texts written
by military service members diagnosed with PTSD, who are at a significantly elevated risk
for death by suicide due to numerous risk factors (Ramchand et al., 2015; Xue et al., 2015).
Given that the risk of developing PTSD is high among military personnel (Armed Forces
Health Surveillance Center, 2012; Martin et al., 2009), using cognitive networks to uncover
traces of its ‘lexical footprint’ in texts written by active military members could offer a
potential means of identifying those groups who may be most at-risk for death by suicide.
In this paper we have shown how cognitive networks can provide unique insights into
the mindsets of individuals who completed suicide, and how those insights can be used to
identify similarities between the emotional contents of suicide notes and those expressed
by individuals reporting high/low levels of emotional distress. Results preliminarily suggest
Swanson et al. Page 15 of 20
that text communication platforms could be monitored for textual-connectivity patterns, or
a lack of key positive emotional language, to inform suicide prevention.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization: TS, AT, LY, TTH, MS; Formal Analysis: MS; Methodology: MS, TS, AT, LY, TH; Investigation: All authors;
Data Curation: MS, LY, TTH; Writing - Original Draft Preparation: All authors.
Conflicts of Interest
The author(s) declare that there were no conflicts of interest with respect to the authorship or the publication of this article.
Acknowledgements
AST acknowledges support by the FCT through the LASIGE Research Unit, ref. UIDB/00408/2020 and ref. UIDP/00408/2020.
Author details
1 2
Department of Psychology, University of Kansas, 1415 Jayhawk Blvd., Lawrence, KS, 66045, USA. LASIGE, Departamento
de Inform´atica, Faculdade de Ciˆencias, Universidade de Lisboa, 1749-016 Lisboa, PT. Institute of Psychology, Chinese
4 5
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK. Center for Adaptive
Rationality, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, DE. Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame,
Notre Dame, USA. CogNosco Lab, Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science, University of Trento, Trento, Italy.