Suppression-Induced Forgetting of Complex
Aversive Scenes - A Replication and
Meta-Analysis
a a,b
ID Ann-Kristin Meyer and ID Roland G. Benoit
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences
University of Colorado Boulder
This paper has not been peer reviewed. Draft version 1.3, To achieve high internal validity, the majority of the early
07/05/24 studies used neutral and simple stimulus material (e.g., neu-
tral word pairs). As a corollary, these studies provide limited
An accumulating body of work indicates that suppression helps
insight into the complementary question of whether suppres-
to control intrusive memories. It keeps the unwanted memory
sion is also effective for controlling emotional real-life mem-
out of awareness and can eventually cause forgetting. The ma-
ories (cf. 5). Küpper et al. (8) addressed this gap in the lit-
terial used to study suppression, however, has largely been emo-
erature and developed a procedure that induces aversive and
tionally neutral and much simpler than memories that people
complex memories.
typically would want to avoid. Küpper et al. (2014) introduced
a procedure based on complex aversive memories that enhances
the ecological validity of this research while maintaining high We here seek to further establish the replicability of
internal validity. In a close replication study, we first confirm suppression-induced forgetting as obtained on this more eco-
that suppression impairs the recall of details and also of the
logicallyRvalid procedure. Specifically, we report a close
gist of aversive scenes. In a meta-analysis, we then synthesize
replication study as well as a mini meta-analysis based on
the evidence from the yet limited number of studies. Across all
the limited number of studies that have used this procedure.
variants of the procedure, this analysis yielded a small to mod-
erate overall effect for suppression-induced forgetting (hedge’s
Building on the original Think/No-Think procedure (for de-
g = 0.30, 95% CI = [0.08 0.53]), though with a rather wide pre-
tails, see 3, 9), Küpper et al. (8) had participants learn to
diction interval ([-0.24 0.84]). This effect remained significant
associate aversive scenes (e.g., a picture of a car accident)
following adjustment for publication bias. Notably, the sEize of
suppression-induced forgetting was larger when disregarding with neutral objects that were also contained in the respec-
studies that changed the procedure for neuroimaging purposes tive scene (e.g., a sneaker) (Fig. 1). After this learning phase,
in ways that arguably compromise their ability to observe the
the object then serves as a reminder that triggers the retrieval
behavioral effect. Together, these findings corroborate that the
of the scene. The stimuli are thus meant to mimic the na-
examined procedure is a viable option for the more naturalistic
ture of traumatic memories that often involuntarily intrude
study of memory suppression.
into awareness when people encounter an object that was an
incidental part of the original episode (10).
memory suppression | Think/No-Think | replication | meta-analysis
(cid:0)
annmeyer@cbs.mpg.de, roland.benoit@colorado.edu In the subsequent Think/No-Think phase, participants are re-
peatedly presented with reminder objects (e.g., the sneaker).
For a third of those, they try to recall the associated scene
Introduction
(i.e., the scene of the car accident) (recall condition). For
another third, they are asked to suppress the target memory
Some people are haunted by unpleasant intrusive memo-
from coming to mind (suppress condition). For the remaining
ries. One solution to controlling such memories is suppres-
third, the reminder is not shown during this phase (baseline
sion: An active process that prevents memories from entering
condition) to assess passive forgetting due to the passage of
awareness. It has been shown to not only lead to temporary
time. On a subsequent surprise recall test, participants are
relief from unwanted memories but to eventually cause their
prompted with all the reminders to provide a full verbal de-
forgetting (1, 2).
scription of the aversive scenes - irrespective of whether it
had been a baseline, recall, or a suppressed memory.
The scientific study of this phenomenon started with the in-
troduction of the Think/No-Think procedure by Anderson
and Green (3). Since then, a large body of work has demon- Using a standardized coding scheme, Küpper et al. (8)
strated that suppression effectively impairs the later recall of demonstrated that suppression leads to a reduced number of
avoided memories (e.g., 4–7). Specifically, suppressed mem- recalled details of the scene and of its gist. For some memo-
ories are more often forgotten than control memories, a phe- ries, it even led to an overall inability to conjure up the scene
nomenon called suppression-induced forgetting (SIF). (on a measure called identification).
Meyer & Benoit | May 7, 2024 | 1–8
In addition to providing greater ecological validity, the proce- tion recipe post-completion (17). This document as well as
dure also allows to study forgetting as a graded phenomenon. all data and analysis scripts can be found on the Open Sci-
in an all-or-none fashion (11). It is therefore important to only=c788f1e1157d475bb319d6fb669e52f7.
understand which components of a memory are primarily af-
fected by suppression (12) . Overall, Küpper et al. (8) have Power analysis. Before running the replication study, we
provided an important procedural advancement for tackling conducted a power analysis based on the effect sizes in the
such questions. original study. Aiming for a statistical power of 95%, the
analyses revealed a necessary sample size between 10 and
However, so far only a limited number of studies have
25 participants, depending on the outcome measure. As it is
adopted this procedure. Catarino et al. (13) examined
difficult to discern a true effect size from a single study, we
whether patients with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
conservatively aimed for a sample size of N = 30 to ensure
differ from healthy controls in memory suppression. They
a well-powered study. This sample size results in a statis-
replicated suppression-induced forgetting of details and gist
tical power between 97.5% and 99.99%, depending on the
for the healthy controls and showed reduced memory sup-
outcome measure.
pression effects for patients. Lin et al. (14) used the proce-
dure to investigate how suppression of individual memories
Participants. Thirty-one volunteers participated in the
unfolds over time using multivariate decoding methods on
study. They were all drawn from the participant database of
EEG data. They modified several minor aspects of the proce-
the Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sci-
dure and found suppression-induced forgetting for the iden-
ences, reported no history of psychiatric or neurological dis-
tification and details, but not for the gist of the scene. Meyer
order, gave written informed consent as approved by the lo-
and Benoit (15) adapted the procedure to track the neural af-
cal research ethics committee, and were reimbursed for their
tereffects of suppression in a behavioral and an fMRI study.
time. One participant was excluded due to non-compliance
They included additional retrieval phases before and after
with the instructions as assessed by a post-experimental ques-
the Think/No-Think phase. These potentially strengthened
tionnaire derived from Hertel and Calceterra (21), with a cut-
the memory and weakened suppression-induced forgetting.
off of 4 out of 12 possible points (22) (M = 0.97, SD = 1.13).
Overall, these studies reported consistent findings, though
We thus included data from 30 participants in the main analy-
they somewhat diverge for the different outcome measures.
sis (age: M = 23.83 years, SD = 2.07; 15 females, 15 males).
We here sought to determine the replicability, robustness, and
Materials. We obtained the original stimulus material from
magnitude of the effects reported by Küpper et al. (8). This
Küpper et al. (8). It comprised 60 object-scene pairs: 48 criti-
seems to be prudent both in the context of the replication
cal pairs plus 12 filler pairs. The scenes were photographs de-
crisis in psychological science (16) and as a foundation for
picting aversive scenes (e.g., accidents, injury, disaster) and
replication-extension studies (17). To achieve these objec-
were originally selected from the International Affective Pic-
tives, we took two complementary approaches (18, 19).
ture System (23) and online sources. We exchanged one of
the original pairs for one of the filler pairs, as that picture
On the one hand, we conducted a close replication study in
showed a widely recognized scene related to the terror at-
a German cohort in our lab. On the other hand, we ran a
tacks on 9/11.
mini meta-analysis on the evidence from the original study,
The objects were photographs of familiar, neutral objects
the studies mentioned above, and our replication. Though
taken from Brady et al. (24). Specifically, each object was
this analysis is based on only a limited number of studies, it
chosen to resemble an object that was also part of its paired
provides insights into the magnitude of the reported effects as
scene (but not essential to the gist of the scene). All images
well as the prediction interval of the effect size (20). We thus
were presented on a grey background. The 48 critical pairs
seek to establish suppression-induced forgetting of complex
were divided into three sets that were matched on the salience
aversive scenes and, at the same time, pave the way for the fu-
of the objects, as well as the emotional valence and arousal
ture use of this procedure - also in clinical and neuroimaging
of the scenes (8). Assignment of the three sets to the three
studies.
conditions was counterbalanced across participants.
Methods
Procedure. The procedure was identical to the procedure
Close replication. We aimed to run a replication as direct
described in Küpper et al. (8). We translated the instructions
as possible to Küpper et al. (8). Given that sample, place and
and coding schemes from English to German. Like the clas-
time differ, our study can be described as a close replication
sical Think/No-Think procedure, the experiment consisted of
(17). We obtained all study materials from the authors of the
a study, a Think/No-Think, and a surprise recall phase.
original study. We translated material, instructions, and cod-
ing schemes into German. Experimenters passed extensive During the initial phase, participants studied
Study phase.
training and were trained by one of the authors (RGB), who each object-scene pair and intentionally encoded the associa-
is also a co-author of the original report. After completion, tions and the scenes in as much detail as possible. Each pair
we registered the replication results according to the replica- was presented for 6 s followed by a 1 s inter-trial-interval
2 Meyer & Benoit | Suppression-Induced Forgetting of Complex Aversive Scenes
features in its paired scene.
(ITI). Following initial encoding, we presented each object and verbally described the respective associated scenes as de-
as a cue and asked participants to indicate within 5 s, via tailed as possible within 15 s. The reports were transcribed
button press, whether they could fully recall the associated and then scored on identification, details, and gist (for details,
scene. Once they had pressed the button, they could choose see Küpper et al. (8)). On the identification measure, we
the correct scene out of three different scenes (all of which scored a memory as correctly recalled, if it included enough
were drawn from the actual stimulus set) in a time window details to unambiguously identify the scene among all scenes.
of 5 s. The correct object-scene pair was then presented as For the detail measure, we parsed the reports into the smallest
feedback. This procedure was repeated up to two times un- units that independently conveyed information and counted
til participants had correctly identified at least 60% of the the number of correct information units. The gist measure ex-
scenes. Eighteen participants needed only one cycle to reach amined whether the reports entailed two to four pre-defined
the criterion, the remaining 12 participants completed two elements that could not be changed or excluded without los-
cycles. To facilitate learning, this phase was split into two ing the main theme of the scene.
parts, each with half of the object-scene associations. Finally,
Participants also completed some questionnaires. In addition
participants saw all objects and were asked once more to in-
to assessing compliance with the instructions (21, 22), these
dicate whether they could recall the complete scene (without
were designed to assess their strategy use and subjective rat-
any feedback).
ings on recall and suppression success. Moreover, they filled
in the Thought Control Ability Questionnaire (TCAQ, 27).
The Think/No-Think phase consisted
Think/No-Think phase.
of five blocks. Within each block, each object was presented
two times for 3 s. A green frame around an object indicated Confirmatory analysis. Statistical tests were done with R
(version 4.0.3) (28). We tested for suppression-induced for-
the recall condition. Here, participants were asked to covertly
getting with directed paired t-tests or ranked Wilcoxon-tests
recall the associated scene as vividly as possible. By contrast,
whenever the data was not normality distributed (tested by a
a red frame around an object indicated the suppress condition.
Shapiro-Wilk test). We report effect sizes as Cohen’s d. The
Here, participants were asked to engage a mechanism of re-
significance level was set to 0.05. Only pairs that were suc-
trieval suppression (4, 6, 25, 26). That is, they tried to prevent
cessfully recalled after learning entered the analysis. We cal-
the associated scene from coming to mind while focusing on
culated Spearman’s correlation between the TCAQ and the
the object on the screen. If the scene were to intrude into their
suppression-induced forgetting scores.
awareness, they had to actively push it out of their mind. Im-
portantly, a third of the objects were not shown during this
phase. These items served as baseline memories to assess
Meta-analysis. To compare our results to previous re-
forgetting as a function of the mere passage of time. The ITIs
ports and to estimate the magnitude of the effect, we
randomly varied between 1.4 –2.6 s. Participants received ex-
computed a mini meta-analysis in R (version 4.0.3)
tensive training and feedback on this procedure on the filler
(28) using the metafor 2.4-0 package (29). All data
memories. and analysis scripts can be found on the Open Sci-
As in the original procedure, participants com- only=c788f1e1157d475bb319d6fb669e52f7. We
Recall phase.
pleted a surprise recall test. Here, they saw all objects again included all studies that have used the procedure by Küpper
Meyer & Benoit | Suppression-Induced Forgetting of Complex Aversive Scenes 3
UK, Lin et al. conducted the study in Hongkong, Meyer & Benoit and our replication took place in Germany. Küpper et al., Lin et al., and Meyer & Benoit recruited cohorts of
university students, Catarino et al. included control participants that were matched to their patient group on age and the number of experienced traumatic life events.
Study Sample size Age in years (M) TCAQ Measure Baseline (M) Suppress (M)
#male/#female
/#diverse
Küpper et al. 24 22.25 81 Identification (%) 99 93
2014 18/8/0 Gist (%) 59 50
Details (#) 10.27 9.8
Catarino et al. 18 36.8 83.9 (14.6) Identification (%) 92 88.5
2015 11/7/0 Gist (%) 58 47.2
Details (#) 11.12 9.76
Lin et al. 40 19.57 - Identification (%) 72.82 67.37
2021 26/14/0 Gist (%) 60.57 57.39
Preprint Details (#) 6.56 6.23
Meyer & Benoit 30 23.83 85.41 (15.2) Identification (%) 97.55 96.16
2016 15/15/0 Gist (%) 57.97 53.86
Preprint Details (#) 10.41 9.86
Meyer & Benoit a 30 23.83 81.61 (15.11) Identification (%) 94.17 91.88
2022 15/15/0 Gist (%) 51.67 48.13
behavioral Details (#) 9.24 9.07
Meyer & Benoit b 33 24.85 87.94 (16.2) Identification (%) 97.73 96.42
2022 17/16/0 Gist (%) 54.55 53.6
FMRI Details (#) 9.77 9.66
et al. (8). Those were identified by screening all articles that the observed effect sizes (level 1), variance between effect
have cited the original publication until November 2023. We sizes within a study (level 2), and variance between stud-
thus included effect sizes from three publications (8, 13, 15), ies (level 3). The model parameters were estimated using
one unpublished preprint (14), and our replication study (18 restricted maximum likelihood estimation (29, 30) with the
effect sizes in total). Individual effect sizes for the compari- Knapp and Hartung (31) method for calculating regression
son of baseline and suppress conditions were entered as stan- coefficients and confidence intervals. Second, we estimated
dard mean change using raw score standardization (SMCR). robust confidence intervals for the effect sizes with the study
This measure requires an estimate of the correlation between as clustering variable (32).
baseline and suppressed items, which we took from our repli-
cation study.
We also ran two moderator analyses to explore the het-
erogeneity in the data. One examined potential differ-
Each study included three outcome measures. Those out-
ences between the outcome measures, and the other exam-
come measures were from the same group of participants and
ined whether the procedural changes adopted by Meyer and
were dependent on each other. For example, if a memory was
Benoit (15) indeed led to reduced SIF. However, null effects
not identified at all, it implied that neither any details nor the
in tests of moderation should be interpreted cautiously, as
gist had been recalled. We employed two methods to account
analyses usually need larger amounts of observations. We
for the dependencies.
further calculated 95% prediction intervals. The 95% predic-
First, we ran a three-level random effects model, given that tion interval describes the range of observed effect sizes and
the three outcome measures are not independent and nested can provide the range in which the point estimate of 95% of
within studies (30). This model accounts for the variance in future studies will fall if the included studies are not biased.
4 Meyer & Benoit | Suppression-Induced Forgetting of Complex Aversive Scenes
Meta-analyses are prone to publication bias, that is, selective We next ran a moderator analysis on the three outcome
publication of significant results (33, 34). The present mini- measures to explore whether suppression differently affected
meta-analysis also contains two unpublished studies. We identification, details, and gist. However, this analysis was
nonetheless explore evidence for publication bias and attempt not significant (F(2,3) = 1.56, p = .34). We then ran a mod-
to adjust for such a possible bias. Specifically, we employ erator analysis to test whether the original version of the task
Egger’s regression test to gauge asymmetry of the funnel plot yields larger effect sizes than the modified version by Meyer
and used the trim-and-fill procedure. These methods are not and Benoit (15). As expected, this was the case (F(1,4) =
applied to the three-level model as they require independence 10.44, p = .03; g = 0.31 vs. g = 0.1).
of effect sizes. Instead, we therefore based these analyses on
To assess publication bias, we considered several comple-
aggregated data from the three outcome measures per study
mentary measures, given that each has distinct disadvantages
and a simpler random-effects model.
(33). First, we plotted the aggregated effect sizes against their
standard errors in a funnel plot (Fig. 3b). This plot shows
Results a few effect sizes substantially smaller than the overall esti-
mate, but also an outlying, lower powered study on the right
Suppression leads to forgetting of details and of the
bottom. Second, we computed an Egger’s regression test,
gist of aversive memories. We tested for suppression-
which indeed indicated funnel plot asymmetry (t(4) = 0.03,
induced forgetting by comparing memories for baseline and
p = .03) and therefore suggests the presence of publication
suppressed memories on all three outcome measures. There
bias. Finally, we used the trim-and-fill procedure that did es-
was no suppression-induced forgetting for identification (W =
timate one missing study on the left side of the funnel plot.
68, p = .173, r = 0.13). However, the identification of scenes
However, the adjusted effect size remained significant at g =
0.21 (p = .005, SE = 0.08, 95% CI = [0.06 0.36]). In sum, the
descriptive statistics). By contrast, both memory for the gist
methods suggest some degree of publication bias. Critically,
of the scenes (t(29) = 1.93, p = 0.31, d = 0.32, 95% CI = [-
however, the effect remained statistically significant even af-
0.02 0.66]) as well as for fine-grained details (t(29) = 2.07,
ter attempting to adjust for such bias.
p = .024, d = 0.26, 95% CI = [0.005 0.51]) was lower for
suppressed than baseline memories. The latter was also the
Discussion
case when only considering correctly identified scenes (t(29)
= 1.81, p = .041, d = 0.22, 95% CI = [-0.23 0.47]).
Memory suppression may constitute an adaptive mechanism
that helps controlling intrusive thoughts. However, suppres-
sion has mainly been studied with simple, neutral material
No association between suppression-induced forget-
(but see 5, 25, 35, 36). Here, we aimed to further corroborate
ting and thought control. Küpper et al. (8) reported a pos-
the replicability of a particular approach that was designed
itive association between the TCAQ and the number of for-
to study memory suppression in a fine-grained and ecologi-
gotten suppressed memories. However, we did not obtain
cally more valid fashion (8). Our replication and mini meta-
evidence for such a correlation (all r < |0.19|, all p > .35,
analysis indicate that this modified Think/No-Think proce-
one-tailed). We further calculated the correlation between the
dure does lead to suppression-induced forgetting.
TCAQ score and the suppression-induced forgetting scores
(baseline - suppress). Again, we did not find a significant cor-
In the replication study, participants forgot not only more
relation with any of the measures (all r < |0.26|, all p > 0.19,
details of suppressed than of baseline memories – they also
one-tailed). One participant did not complete the TCAQ and
more frequently forgot their gist. However, we did not repli-
was therefore excluded from this particular analysis.
cate all results of the original study. As in Catarino et al.
(13), there was no impairment in people’s ability to provide
Moderate suppression-induced forgetting effect
sufficient information for us to identify the suppressed mem-
across studies. To assess the overall effect size of
ories. Performance on the identification measure was close to
suppression-induced forgetting, we conducted a three-level
ceiling in all conditions, indicating that memories were well
meta-analysis that included the 18 effect sizes from Küpper
encoded. They may thus have been too strong to be com-
et al. (8), Catarino et al. (13), Lin et al. (14), Meyer and
pletely forgotten over the course of the experiment.
Benoit (15), and our replication study. The robust meta-
analysis revealed a significant moderate effect of memory These results indicate that suppression-induced forgetting is
suppression (g = 0.30, p = .02, SE = 0.09, 95% CI = [0.08 not completely captured by outcome measures that focus on
95% prediction interval ranges from [-0.24 0.84] and thus sion can also cause more graded forgetting. Recent research
indicates that future studies may still obtain effect sizes has suggested that the degree of forgetting might depend on
close to zero. There was further a significant heterogeneity the coherence and hierarchical representation of a memory.
between studies (Q(17) = 39.07, p = .002). The total variance Whereas item memories fragment over time, higher-order
was distributed across the sampling (level 1), within-study event based representations may be forgotten in a more holis-
(level 2), and between-study (level 3) levels as 33.76%, tic, uniform manner (11, 37). The use of more fine-grained
0.004%, and 66.24%, respectively. measures, such as those provided by the current procedure,
Meyer & Benoit | Suppression-Induced Forgetting of Complex Aversive Scenes 5
Fig. 2. Recall performance in the final recall test for baseline and suppressed scenes on a identification (proportion correct), b gist (proportion correct), and c number of
details. We obtained significant suppression-induced forgetting of gist and details, though not on the identification score. Larger dots: mean plus standard error. * p < .05
Fig. 3. a Forest plot including effect sizes and 95% confidence intervals. Larger symbols indicate smaller sampling variance (i.e., larger sample sizes). b Funnel plot of effect
size estimates and standard errors. Contours represent 95% confidence intervals. Black dots show aggregated effect sizes included in the analysis, and the empty white dot
represents the effect size imputed via trim-and-fill. The black dashed line shows the model estimate, whereas the gray dashed line shows the trim-and-fill adjusted effect size.
The red line shows the regression line from Egger’s test.
are necessary to further inform our understanding of forget- tance of replication studies to gain a better estimate of the true
ting and its underlying processes. effect size, also for planning adequately powered future stud-
ies. Our meta-analysis estimated a significant suppression-
The effect sizes in our study are smaller than the ones re-
induced forgetting effect of g = 0.30 across all three outcome
ported in the initial two studies. For their healthy sample,
measures (g = 0.21 after trim-and-fill). This is in line with
Catarino et al. (13) specifically recruited participants who
the effects in our replication study (d = 0.32 for gist and d =
had been exposed to trauma but were resilient to posttrau-
0.26 for details). Though we caution that this estimate is only
matic stress disorder. Those resilient individuals might be
based on a limited number of studies, it provides the best evi-
particularly skilled in suppression (38). Accordingly, at least
dence in the absence of larger scale replication attempts (such
this sample may have yielded a larger effect than what one
as 39, 40).
would expect in the more general population. However, in
contrast to the two studies, we did not observe an association
However, we note that the estimated effect size had quite a
between the self-reported ability to control thoughts in real-
large prediction interval, and that there is quite some het-
life and the magnitude of suppression-induced forgetting on
erogeneity across studies. Though all studies were based on
our task.
Küpper et al. (8), they differed in various procedural and
The range of effect sizes across studies highlights the impor- analytical details that can affect the effect size (41). In par-
6 Meyer & Benoit | Suppression-Induced Forgetting of Complex Aversive Scenes
ticular, Meyer and Benoit (15) inserted additional retrieval
written informed consent to participate in the study and for group results to be pub-
lished in a scientific journal.
phases into the procedure to test a particular neural hypoth-
esis. As expected by the authors, this modification further
Data and code availability
strengthened the memories (42, 43) and made them less likely
All data and analysis scripts can be found on the Open Sci-
to be forgotten. Excluding those studies from the analysis ac-
c788f1e1157d475bb319d6fb669e52f7.
cordingly let to a greater meta-analytical effect size (g = 0.4).
Overall, the heterogeneity of the effect sizes highlights the
Funding
This research was funded by a Max Planck Research Group awarded to RGB. The
importance of procedural decisions, and the need for stan-
funder had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision
dardized procedures such as those recommended by Nardo
to submit the work for publication.
and Anderson (9).
Author contributions
A-KM and RGB planned the study. A-KM collected the data and wrote the analysis
Notably the effect size estimate in our meta-analysis was
code. A-KM and RGB analyzed the data and wrote the paper.
somewhat lower than the one obtained in a larger meta-
analysis by Stramaccia et al. (2). They reported an overall
Acknowledgements
We thank Roxanne Eisenbeis, Johanna Fiebig, Leonie Kanne, and Sarah-Lena
effect of 0.6 for retrieval suppression in healthy participants.
Schaefer for assistance in data acquisition, data transcription and scoring, Aroma
Most of their included studies were based on the forgetting
Dabas, and Philipp Paulus for comments on a draft of the manuscript.
of word pairs, suggesting that it may indeed be harder to sup-
press complex aversive scenes than simple stimulus material.