TEACHING QUALITY PERCEPTIONS SOCIAL NETWORKS
Seeing the teacher through my peers’ eyes?
A social network study on adolescents' teaching quality perceptions
1 2 1 1 1
Lisa Bardach , Zsofia Boda , Claudia Neuendorf , Wolfgang Wagner , Kyle Davison , &
Ulrich Trautwein
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Hector Research Institute of Education Sciences and
Psychology, Germany
University of Essex, Department of Sociology & Institute for Social and Economic
Research, Essex, United Kingdom
*Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Lisa Bardach, Hector
Research Institute of Education Sciences and Psychology, University of Tübingen, Walter-
Simon-Straße 12, 72072 Tübingen, Germany; Phone: +49070712976577; E-mail:
lisa.bardach@uni-tuebingen.de
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by a grant from the German research
foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG, grant number: BA 7386/1-1) awarded
to Lisa Bardach. Lisa Bardach is supported by a Jacobs Foundation Research Fellowship
and a Fellowship from the Elite-Program for Post-docs of the Baden-Württemberg
Foundation. This work was also supported by an Emerging Field Group Grant (European
Association of Research on Learning and Instruction and the Jacobs Foundation) awarded
to Lisa Bardach. Zsofia Boda is supported by the Economic and Social Research Council
(ES/S012486/1) and the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. The TRAIN-study was funded
by the Ministry of Education and Cultural Affairs Baden Württemberg, the Robert-Bosch
foundation and the Hertie foundation.
TEACHING QUALITY PERCEPTIONS SOCIAL NETWORKS
Abstract
Classrooms are social arenas, and during adolescence, the importance of peer relations
peaks. Prior research has documented the pervasive influence that peers can exert on many
aspects of adolescents’ lives, including their academic outcomes. However, knowledge on
whether adolescents’ perceptions of their teacher and the quality of the teacher’s instruction
are also prone to peer influences is lacking so far. The present longitudinal study with four
measurement points (N = 248 German adolescents) addressed this gap. We focused on
teaching quality in terms of the perceived level of teacher support in mathematics classes.
Longitudinal social network analysis (a Bayesian random-coefficient multilevel version of
Stochastic Actor-Oriented models, SAOMs) were employed to investigate whether (a)
friends become more similar in their teaching quality perceptions (influence effects) and/or
whether (b) students with initially more similar perceptions of teaching quality were more
likely to become friends (selection effects). In addition, we explored whether (c) students
with more positive teaching quality perceptions had a better (or worse) social standing in that
they were more (or less) likely to be nominated as friends by their classmates and/or were
more (or less) likely to nominate other classmates as friends. The results did not yield
support for influence effects or for selection effects. However, students who rated their
teacher’s instruction more positively were better integrated socially. This study adds to
research on the role of peers in adolescence and enhances our understanding of peer
influences on students’ perceptions of instruction.
Keywords: Teacher support, adolescence, student ratings, teaching quality, social network
TEACHING QUALITY PERCEPTIONS SOCIAL NETWORKS
Teachers and the quality of their instruction (teaching quality) play a role in promoting
students’ positive development and learning outcomes (e.g., Hamre et al., 2013; Wagner et
al., 2016). At the same time, classrooms are inherently social places and particularly during
adolescence the salience of peer relations increases substantially (e.g., Brown & Larson,
2009). Peers do not only affect students’ engagement in risk behavior (e.g., drinking,
substance abuse, e.g., Albert et al., 2013), but also their academic outcomes. For example,
peer influence effects have been observed for educational achievement and expectations
(e.g., Gemmen et al., 2017; Lorenz et al., 2020; Shin & Ryan, 2014). It seems reasonable to
assume that students’ perceptions of teaching quality could also be susceptible to peer
influences. For most adolescents, being accepted by one’s own peer group is of tremendous
importance, and in order to “fit in”, adhere to peer norms, and establish a sense of
belonging, individual students could adapt their perceptions accordingly (Boor-Klip et al.,
2017; McElhaney et al., 2008; Wright et al., 1987; for a general discussion on the
fundamental human need to share the same perceptions with others, see Echterhoff et al.,
2009). Moreover, social comparison processes (e.g., Festinger, 1954) can come into play as
students evaluate their own attitudes and perceptions—including those of the teacher and
the quality of the teacher’s instruction—in reference to their friends and their attitudes and
perceptions. Close friends may then become role models, resulting in assimilation processes
and thus respective increases or decreases in a students’ attitudes and (teaching quality)
perceptions. It has also been suggested that teachers may change their behavior towards a
specific student if the teacher perceives that this student befriended someone the teacher
thinks highly of (see research on teacher attunement and perceptual bias, e.g., De Laet et
al., 2014; Steglich & Knecht, 2014).
On the other hand, research also stresses that friendship ties are more likely to
develop between individuals who resemble each other (i.e., selection effects, e.g., Friemel,
2015; Wang et al., 2018); hence, similarity in teaching quality perceptions could drive
adolescents’ friendship formation. Importantly, influence effects (friends become more
similar in their characteristics or perceptions) and selection effects (individuals with more
similar characteristics or perceptions are more likely to be friends) are not mutually
exclusive. To illustrate, even though Lorenz and colleagues (2020) were able to demonstrate
the effect of peer influences on educational expectations, they also found that students
tended to select friends with similar educational expectations. Lastly, a relevant additional
question concerns the link between teaching quality perceptions and social integration, that
is, whether a student with more positive teaching quality perceptions is more likely to be
considered as a friend by others and is more likely to consider others as their friends. A
positive link between higher achievement and higher levels of social integration has
previously been established (e.g., Neuendorf & Jansen, 2023; for a meta-analysis, see
TEACHING QUALITY PERCEPTIONS SOCIAL NETWORKS
Wentzel et al., 2021), and a similar pattern may emerge for teaching quality perceptions. On
the other hand, as adolescence is a period in which students tend to become less engaged
in school and often devalue their academic experiences (e.g., Scherrer & Preckel, 2018;
Bardach et al., 2023), it may also be that those who perceive the teacher more positively are
not well integrated.
The aim of the present study was to shed light on the extent to which students’
teaching quality perceptions are entangled with social processes in terms of friendships
among classmates. Teaching takes place in a group (classroom) setting, therefore,
understanding students’ perceptions of teaching quality necessitates accounting for social
processes among students (see also Farmer et al., 2011). Further, student surveys to
capture students’ perceptions of teaching quality are frequently used both in research and
educational practice and policy (e.g., as part of teacher evaluation systems, Cantrell, &
Kane, 2013; Wagner et al., 2016). Hence, finding peer effects on students’ teaching quality
perceptions would have important implications for the design, interpretation, statistical
modelling, and validity of student survey data. For instance, it is standard practice in
educational psychology to apply multi-level models in which individual student perceptions
are aggregated to the class level to measure the “shared perceptions” of teaching quality
(i.e., the mean ratings of the students within each class). However, finding that specific sub-
groups (friends) within a class show substantial overlap in their teaching quality perceptions
could raise the question of whether the classroom is always the most appropriate (and
whether it should be the only) level of aggregation.
This study addressed three research questions. First, do friends become more
similar in their teaching quality perceptions (influence effects)? Second, do students with
initially more similar perceptions of teaching quality are more likely to become friends
(selection effects)? Based on theory and prior research on other educationally relevant
variables (e.g., achievement), we hypothesized to find evidence for both selection and,
importantly, influence effects. Third, we were interested in the interplay between teaching
quality perceptions and social integration and thus asked whether students with more
positive teaching quality perceptions are more (less) likely to be nominated as friends by
their classmates and/or are more (less) likely to nominate other classmates as friends. Our
work is based on a longitudinal study with four measurement points (yearly assessments
from fifth to eight grade) conducted in German secondary school mathematics classes of the
combined track (“Mittelschule”). We relied on data from 248 adolescents from 19 classes,
and focused on students’ perceptions of teachers’ social support, a key dimension of
teaching quality (e.g., Praetorius et al., 2018), in mathematics. Hence, students rated the
patience and the support for learning provided by their mathematics teacher as well as their
teacher’s appreciation of and personal interest in the students (see also Aldrup et al., 2018).
TEACHING QUALITY PERCEPTIONS SOCIAL NETWORKS
We focused on mathematics, as one of the most important school subjects. Poor
mathematics skills at school can have negative long-term consequences (e.g., with respect
to access to better-paying and more rewarding jobs, OECD, 2014; Peixoto et al., 2017) and
mathematics is also a subject that students tend to find most difficult and oftentimes dislike,
especially in adolescence (e.g., Bardach et al., 2022; Frenzel et al., 2010). We adopted
longitudinal social network analysis (Stochastic Actor-Oriented models, SAOMs; Snijders et
al., 2010) to analyze the data. In SAOMs, simulations are conducted to understand the
social mechanisms that may drive observed changes within a social network, and they thus
allow to disentangling selection (homophily) from influence processes. In addition to teaching
quality perceptions, the main interest of our work, the models also included variables that are
important to account for in research on adolescents’ social networks in classrooms.
Specifically, we included academic achievement in mathematics, gender, socio-economic
status, and students’ migration background. This is to take into account that students with
different individual backgrounds may perceive teaching quality differently, and also to control
for secondary selection effects. In addition to primary selection effects (friendships develop
among students with similar perceptions of teaching quality), so-called secondary selection
effects may occur as students’ homophily is not one-dimensional and also operates based
on other attributes (see also e.g., Lorenz et al., 2020; Shalizi & Thomas, 2011). The SAOMs
further considered basic network structure dependencies, such as reciprocity (the tendency
to reciprocate friendships) and transitivity effects (the tendency to become friends with
TEACHING QUALITY PERCEPTIONS SOCIAL NETWORKS
[Note for peer-review: Following the journal’s guidelines, the method section
can be found after the discussion]
Results
results of the longitudinal social network analysis. Part 1 focuses on social influence
processes, and part 2 on social selection processes, but these two parts come from the same
model. Estimates should be interpreted as similar to conditional log odds ratios in logistic
regression models.
In the influence part, friends’ average level of teaching quality perceptions did not
significantly influence students’ own perceptions of teaching quality (Est. = 1.579, p = .262).
Therefore, our first hypothesis assuming influence effects had to be rejected. We did not find
other variables having a significant effect on teaching quality perceptions, either.
In the selection part, similarity in teaching quality perceptions did not seem to be a
significant driver of friendships (Est. = -0.110, p = .348), meaning that our second hypothesis
on the existence of selection effects based on teaching quality perceptions was not confirmed.
With regard to social integration, the results showed that teaching quality perceptions seemed
to influence friendship formation, though. Those who perceived teaching quality as better were
more likely to nominate (“teaching perceptions of Ego”, Est. = 0.280, p = .001) and be
nominated by (“teaching perceptions of Alter”, Est. = 0.192, p = .006) others. In terms of other
attributes (gender, SES, migration background, achievement in mathematics), those who
shared the same gender were more likely to form and maintain friendships (Est. = 0.569, p <
.001). There were no effects for SES, migration background, and achievement. In terms of
structural characteristics, we obtained positive and significant effects for both reciprocity and
friends with the friends of their friends.
Discussion
The study of peer relations, and specifically, peer influence and selection effects, can
notably enhance current understandings of the social nature of teaching quality perceptions
and the role of peers as factors shaping students’ perceptions of the teacher. Here, we
report, to the best of our knowledge, the first social network study on students’ perceptions
of teaching quality. We focused on students’ perceptions of teacher support in mathematics
and the unfolding of their friendships over four years in secondary school. To summarize, we
did not find empirical support for influence effects on teaching quality perceptions, meaning
that friends in a class did not become more similar in their perceptions of the teacher over
time. The findings also did not reveal evidence for selection effects; hence students did not
form friendships with classmates who had similar teaching quality perceptions. Nonetheless,
TEACHING QUALITY PERCEPTIONS SOCIAL NETWORKS
we showed that students who rated their teacher’s instruction more positively had a better
social standing in their class: Students with higher teaching quality ratings were more often
nominated as friend by others and more often nominated others as friends. In accordance
with prior research on social networks, our results further demonstrated positive and
significant effects for both reciprocity (students tended to reciprocate friendships) and
transitivity (students befriended the friends of their friends). Students of the same gender
were more likely to form and maintain friendships, which confirms another common finding
about adolescent friendships (Gifford-Smith & Brownell, 2003).
We draw three major conclusions from our findings. First, the fact that no selection or
influence effects for teaching quality perceptions emerged in our study contributes to the
existing body of knowledge, and contrasts with prior research on other educationally relevant
constructs, such as achievement and educational expectations (e.g., Lorenz et al., 2019).
One major difference between teaching quality perceptions and previously investigated
constructs is that achievement or expectations reside within a student, whereas teaching
quality perceptions focus on another person (i.e., the teacher). Nonetheless, there is scarce
social network research documenting peer influence effects on students’ perceptions of
others. Specifically, a study by Boda et al., (2018) demonstrated that friends influenced each
other’s perceptions of their peers’ ethnicity. Our findings could also imply that other factors
(e.g., interactions between individual students and their teachers, e.g., Göllner et al., 2018)
are more critical in shaping students’ teaching quality perceptions than their friends in class.
For research on teaching quality and the validity of student ratings of teaching quality, the
lack of significant peer effects is positive, as it suggests that factors relating to the teacher
and the teacher’s behavior are more influential in shaping students’ perceptions of teaching
quality (in addition to individual student characteristics and their interactions with teacher
behavior, and student-teacher relationship quality, see e.g., Fauth et al., 2019; Nurmi &
Kiuru, 2015). On a related note, as typical network features (e.g., reciprocity) and well-
documented gender effects were present in our data, we are reasonably confident that the
lack of significant selection and influence effects was not due to problems with the social
networks. Nevertheless, of course, the present study’s findings need to be replicated before
definite conclusions on the absence of peer effects on teaching quality perceptions can be
reached.
Second, we found that having more positive ratings of teaching quality was linked to
better social integration in class. It has been presumed that in adolescence, it may not be
perceived as “cool” to show interest in school matters and like a teacher, and that
consequently, those who appreciate the teacher and view the teacher’s instruction positively
may be derogatorily labelled as “nerds”, and could even become excluded and victimized
(e.g., Strindberg et al., 2020; Bardach et al., 2022). Our results contradict this assumption
TEACHING QUALITY PERCEPTIONS SOCIAL NETWORKS
and are in line with prior research revealing positive relationships between higher
achievement and different indicators of social integration (among those, friendships,
Neuendorf and Jansen, 2023; Wentzel et al., 2021). From a developmental perspective, our
findings highlight a “double social advantage” as students with positive teaching quality
perceptions did not only seem to like the teacher and the teacher’s instruction, but they also
liked their classmates and were liked by them. Cumulatively, our study’s results regarding
social integration, along with the results of related work (e.g., Neuendorf and Jansen, 2023)
underline the importance of re-thinking and empirically testing common assumptions (e.g.,
the stereotype of the not well integrated “nerd”). Third, our study underlines the potential of
social network analysis in research on teaching and learning processes. As studying
influence and selection effects is not possible when applying standard (multi-level)
regression models, social network techniques have to be adopted to address such questions
(e.g., Snijders et al., 2017). Moreover, selection and influence effects may lead to the same
cross-sectional outcome (the similarity of friends in certain attributes); therefore, a
longitudinal social network approach is needed to separate the two effects. Our study
contained data from four years, spanning adolescents’ lower secondary school career and
employed advanced and well-suited longitudinal social network methods (Bayesian random-
coefficient multilevel version of SAOMs, Koskinen & Snijders, 2023), which represent
considerable strengths.
Finally, limitations and directions for future research should be mentioned. Although
the current sample was selected to be representative, the students all came from one
German federal state and all of them attended one secondary school type, which limits the
generalizability of the findings. Also, we focused on mathematics and on one dimension of
teaching quality; hence, future studies should expand the scope of our study to include more
subjects and different teaching quality dimensions. Moreover, very few students in that state
had a migration background when the data was collected, and future network studies should
thus rely on more diverse samples. Overall, we hope that our study encourages replications
and inspires researchers to conduct social network studies to continue unravelling the “social
side” of students’ teaching quality perceptions.
Method
Sample
This study relied on data from a large-scale longitudinal German study (TRAIN) with
four measurement points, which is hosted by the Hector Research Institute of Education
Sciences and Psychology at the University of Tübingen in Germany. The TRAIN study was
conducted with students from two federal states, Baden-Württemberg and Saxony. However,
TEACHING QUALITY PERCEPTIONS SOCIAL NETWORKS
as social network data was only collected in Saxony, we restricted our analyses to students
from Saxony. We only included classes with homeroom teachers who taught mathematics
(see also “Measures” below) and classes which stayed with the same teacher for at least two
consecutive measurement waves. Further, not all students from the TRAIN-study in Saxony
had parental consent for the social network part of the study and we could only consider those
with consent. We also excluded classrooms with too much missing data (more than 25% in
either wave). The sample analyzed in our study contained data of 248 secondary school
students from 19 classes. Across all measurement points, 48.7 % of the students identified as
females and they were, on average, 14.19 years old (SD = 0.57) at the fourth measurement
point. All students attended a combined secondary school track (“Mittelschule”). The
assessments took place in grade 5, grade 6, grade 7, and grade 8, when students were, on
average, 11, 12, 13, and 14 years of age. The study was approved by the state authorities of
Saxony, who, at this time, were responsible for approving studies like this one. Parental
consent was required for study participation and for the participation in the social network part
of the study.
Measures
Students’ perceptions of teacher social support were measured using eight items
adopted from Baumert et al. (2008, sample items: “Our homeroom teacher provides
additional support when we need help”; “Our homeroom teacher tries to understand us.”).
The items were rated on a 4-point scale (1 = completely disagree to 4 = completely agree)
and all items referred to students’ “homeroom teacher”. In the Germany school systems,
students typically spend the entire day with the same group of students, and each class is
assigned a homeroom teacher. The home room teacher teaches at least one subject, but
also has social responsibilities for the class (e.g., the homeroom teacher goes on school
trips with the class, provides counseling to students and parents, Aldrup et al., 2018). In our
study, only classes in which the home room teacher taught mathematics were included;
hence the teacher social support items referred to social support provided by the
mathematics teacher. All eight items are displayed in the Online Supplement S1.
Reliability coefficients (Cronbach’s Alpha) for the four waves were .92, .91, .93, and .94,
respectively. Note that for our social network analyses, categorical dependent variables were
needed, and we thus split the range into six categories that were used in the subsequent
analyses. We decided to use six categories to retain as much information as possible.
Mathematics achievement was assessed using standardized achievement test
scores. The tests covered standard content from the federal states’ mathematics curricula,
such as arithmetic rules and linear equations. Different response formats (open ended,
closed ended, and multiple-choice) were used. Item and person parameters for students’
TEACHING QUALITY PERCEPTIONS SOCIAL NETWORKS
mathematics and German achievement have previously been estimated with longitudinal,
multidimensional, two-parameter item response theory models (Rose et al., 2013), and we
relied on weighted likelihood estimators (WLEs, Warm, 1989) of students’ mathematics
achievement. Students’ migration background was measured relying on student reports and
coded as 0 = no migration background, and 1 = with migration background. Family socio-
economic status was gauged using parent reports of the highest socio-economic index of
occupational status of the parents (HISEI, Ganzeboom et al., 1992). The HISEI integrates
information on income and education, ranging range from 16 [cleaner] to 90 [judge]). The
information on students’ gender (0 = female, 1 = male) was assessed using both student and
teacher ratings, which were combined in one variable. Hence, in the presence of missing
data on gender from students, information from teacher reports could be used.
As a measure of friendships, we used peer nominations. For each classmate, a
student had to indicate whether the student liked this classmate (“I like this student a lot”) on
a scale ranging from 1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree. For our analyses, a
dichotomous friendship variable was needed. Hence, ratings ranging from 5-7 were coded
as “friends”, whereas all ratings below 5 were coded as “not friends”. As a robustness check,
we also estimated models with a different cut-off, only considering nominations of 7 as
friendship and 1 to 6 as non-friendship. Using this way of coding, our results were replicated.
Statistical Analyses
We applied Stochastic Actor-Oriented models (SAOMs; Snijders et al., 2010). These
can be used to model the co-evolution of social networks and individual attributes based on
panel data. We opted for SAOMs because we were interested in the effect of friends’
perception of teaching quality on students’ own perception of teaching quality but we need to
take into account that not only friendships can influence perceptions, but also perceptions can
influence friendships (e.g., those who have similar perceptions of teaching quality may be
more likely to become and stay friends). By applying SAOMs, we could estimate parameters
for changes in both networks (friendships) and in individual attributes (perceptions of teaching
quality), allowing the joint investigation of friendship selection and friend influence processes.
In the SAOM framework, changes in friendships and perceptions between two
observed data waves are modeled as a result of actors’ choices about their outgoing friendship
ties and about the level of their perceptions. The former observed data wave serves as a
starting point of this process, and the latter wave serves as a target. Changes are represented
as parallel sequences of stepwise changes, in which one actor at a time gets a chance to
change either a friendship tie or their perception value. In a “network step”, an actor is
randomly selected and is allowed to create or terminate one of their outgoing friendship ties,
and in an “attribute step”, an actor may increase or decrease their teaching perception value.
TEACHING QUALITY PERCEPTIONS SOCIAL NETWORKS
Friendship choices and perceptions are explained by a set one independent variables
each. For friendships, these may be based on various characteristics of Ego (the decision-
making actor), Alter (the actor towards whom Ego considers creating, maintaining, or
terminating a tie), and similarities between Ego and Alter, as well as network structure
dependencies that are independent of individual attributes (such as reciprocity, the tendency
to form mutual ties). Perception changes are modeled based on independent variables
including characteristics of Ego, and characteristics of Ego’s friends.
We were primarily interested in the effect of friends’ perceptions on Ego’s perceptions,
so we started with describing the model specification for the social influence part of the model.
According to standard practices of SAOM modelling, we included two forms of intercept (linear
and quadratic shape) to explain linear and quadratic baseline tendencies in the evolution of
teaching quality perceptions. In terms of friend characteristics, we included our main variable
of interest, the average teaching perceptions of friends. In terms of own characteristics, we
included own achievement, gender, ethnicity, and socio-economic background (HISEI).
For social selection, we included the teaching perceptions and academic achievement
of both Ego and Alter (to account for the fact that those with more positive perceptions/higher
achievement may be more likely to nominate or be nominated by others as friends). In terms
of similarities between Ego and Alter, we included similarity in teaching perceptions and
academic achievement, as well as same gender, same ethnicity, and similarity in parental
occupational status (to account for the fact that students who are more similar along these
dimensions are more likely to name each other as friends more frequently. To capture network
structure dependencies, we included a set of variables in line with Ripley et al (2023).
Reciprocity captures individuals’ tendency to form and maintain mutual ties. Transitive triplets
models captures their tendency to choose friends of friends as friends. Transitive reciprocated
triplets is the interaction of these two variables. Indegree and outdegree of Alter express,
respectively, the tendency of those who name more friends or named more as friends to
receive additional friendship nominations. Outdegree of Ego expresses the tendency of those
who already name more friends to name additional people.
To be able to analyze all classrooms together in a joint model, we applied the Bayesian
random-coefficient multilevel version of SAOMs (Koskinen and Snijders, 2023). We set
intercepts and structural processes (which are typically different between classroom-level
networks) to randomly varying following a normal distribution and the rest to fixed across
groups. For choosing prior distributions and assessing convergence, we rely on Ripley et al.
(2023). Handling of missing data by SAOMs is also described in Ripley et al (2023). All
analyses were performed using RSienaTest R package, the sienaBayes function. Our units of
analysis were classrooms/periods; a period was defined as two consecutive measurement
points (i.e., wave 1 and wave 2; wave 2 and wave 3; wave 3 and wave 4). To illustrate, one
TEACHING QUALITY PERCEPTIONS SOCIAL NETWORKS
unit was one classroom during the first period (wave 1 to 2), one unit the same classroom
during the second period (waves 2 to 3), another unit was another classroom during the first
period (wave 1 to 2) etc. The same applied to students within these classes. This approach
was chosen to increase the sample size and power. Note that even with the current approach
which combines as much data as possible, we did not obtain significant selection and influence
effects (see “Results” for details) and preliminary robustness checks where we included time-
period-dummies in the analysis revealed the same pattern.
Data Availability: The data are currently not publicly available due to data privacy/ethical
restrictions. Data used for this submission may be made available upon request to
collaborators of the TRAIN study research team at the Hector Research Institute, University
of Tübingen.
Code Availability: The analysis code can be obtained from the second author via request.
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing financial or nonfinancial interests.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization: LB, ZB, CN, RG, WW, BN, UT; Methodology: ZB,
Formal Analysis: ZB; Writing – Original Draft: LB, ZB; Writing – Review & Editing: All authors;
Funding Acquisition: UT