Naturalistic use of psychedelics does not modulate processing of self-related stimuli (but it
might modulate attentional mechanisms): an event-related potentials study
Paweł Orłowski 1,2, Justyna Hobot 3 (dojustynyhobot@gmail.com), Anastasia Ruban 4
(aruban@st.swps.edu.pl), Jan Szczypiński 5 (jan.szczypinski@gmail.com), Michał Bola 1
(michal.bola@uj.edu.pl)
1 Centre for Brain Research, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland
2 Doctoral School in the Social Sciences, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland
3 Consciousness Lab, Psychology Institute, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland
4 Department of Psychology, SWPS University of Social Sciences and Humanities, Warsaw,
Poland
5 Department of Psychiatry, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
Correspondence:
Paweł Orłowski
Email: p.orlowski@doctoral.uj.edu.pl
Centre for Brain Research
Jagiellonian University
50 Kopernika Street
31-501 Krakow, Poland
Declarations of interest: Authors have nothing to disclose. No conflict of interest.
Funding: This study was funded by a National Science Center Poland grant
(2020/39/O/HS6/01545). Jan Szczypiński was supported by a Foundation for Polish Science
START scholarship and an NCN ETIUDA grant (2020/36/T/HS6/00092).
Acknowledgments: We thank Stanisław Adamczyk, Agata Chrobak, Amanda Hajska, Małgorzata
Paczyńska and Barbara Zając for assistance in data collection.
Author contributions: PO: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, investigation,
methodology, visualization, writing - original draft, writing - review & editing. JH:
conceptualization, investigation, methodology, writing - review & editing. AR: conceptualization,
investigation, methodology, writing - review & editing. JS: methodology, validation, writing -
review & editing. MB: conceptualization, supervision, methodology, writing - original draft,
writing - review & editing.
Abstract
Classic psychedelics are able to profoundly alter the state of consciousness and lead to acute
experiences of ego dissolution – the blurring of the distinction between representations of self and
the external world. However, whether repeated use of psychedelics is associated with more
prolonged and permanent modifications to the concept of self remains to be investigated.
Therefore, we conducted a preregistered, cross-sectional study in which experienced psychedelics
users (15 or more lifetime experiences with psychedelics; N = 56) were compared to non-users (N
= 57) in terms of neural reactivity to a Self-name (i.e., each participant’s own name) stimulus,
which is known to robustly activate a representation of self. Two control stimuli were additionally
used: an Other-name stimulus, as a passive control condition in which no reaction was required;
and a Target-name stimulus, to which participants provided a manual response and which thus
constituted an active control condition. Analysis of the amplitude of the P300 ERP component
evoked by the Self- or Target-names revealed no difference between the psychedelics users and
non-users. However, psychedelic users exhibited increased P300 amplitude during perception of
Other-names. Additionally, in comparison to non-users, psychedelics users exhibited a smaller
increase in P300 amplitude when processing the task-relevant Target-names (in relation to both
Self- and Other-names). Therefore, our data suggests that regular naturalistic use of psychedelics
may not be related to long-term changes in the representation of self, but it might potentially affect
allocation of attentional resources to task-relevant stimuli.
Keywords: Psychedelics, Self-perception, Electroencephalography (EEG), P300, Naturalistic use
of psychedelics
1. Introduction
Classic psychedelics, encompassing substances, such as psilocybin, lysergic acid diethylamide
(LSD), mescaline, and N,N-Dimethyltryptamine (DMT), are a category of psychoactive
compounds that have the ability to profoundly alter perception and state of consciousness
(Nichols, 2016; Preller & Vollenweider, 2018; Vollenweider & Preller, 2020). Research on the
psychological and neural effects of psychedelic substances has gained significant momentum over
the past decade. The majority of conducted studies have investigated the effects – both acute and
long-term – of a single dose of a psychoactive substance administered to carefully selected
samples of participants under strictly controlled experimental conditions (reviews: Bogenschutz &
Johnson, 2016; Aday et al., 2020; Kangaslampi, 2023). In stark contrast, naturalistic use of
psychedelics is typically associated with repetitive intake of substances in unregulated contexts
with only moderate control over the substance quality and dose. Nevertheless, cross-sectional
studies provide preliminary evidence that psychological effects related to such naturalistic use of
psychedelics might be comparable to the effects of research-based use (Johnson et al., 2017;
Nayak et al., 2023; Orłowski et al., 2022, 2023). Thus, investigating naturalistic use of
psychedelics can complement laboratory-based research, thus providing a more comprehensive
understanding of these substances’ multifaceted impacts on human cognition and behavior.
Psychedelic experiences are typically rich, diverse, and highly dependent on both the user’s
mindset and the surrounding environment, a concept referred to as ‘set and setting’ (Hartogsohn,
2016, 2017; Carhart-Harris et al., 2018). Despite their purely subjective nature and remarkable
complexity, states induced by psychedelics intake typically share some common aspects (Dittrich,
1998; Studerus et al., 2010). One of these is ego dissolution: a profound disruption of the self
boundaries that leads to a blurring of the distinction between representations of the self and the
external world (Nour et al., 2016; Millière, 2017; Letheby & Gerrans, 2017). Recent studies
employing neuroimaging techniques have demonstrated that ego dissolution is related to the
acutely reduced activation and weakening of functional connectivity between regions within the
default mode network (DMN), which is a large functional brain network whose activity is
associated with narrative aspects of self-consciousness (Lebedev et al., 2015; Letheby & Gerrans,
2017; Stoliker et al., 2022). Further, ego-dissolution has also been linked to disruption of salience
network activity (SLN; Lebedev et al., 2015), which is known to be associated with a minimal or
embodied sense of self (Letheby & Gerrans, 2017). Regarding long-term psychological and
clinical effects, ego dissolution is often considered one of the critical elements of the psychedelic
experience that may underlie the therapeutic potential of psychedelics (Stoliker et al., 2022;
Kałużna et al., 2022). Specifically, experiencing ego-dissolution has been linked with
subsequently diminished end-of-life depression (Griffiths et al. 2016; Ross et al. 2016), reduced
severity of substance abuse (Ross, 2012; Bogenschutz & Johnson, 2016), and increased empathy
(Mason et al., 2019; Kiraga et al., 2021), openness (MacLean et al., 2011; Nour et al., 2017;
Madsen et al., 2020), and life satisfaction (Schmid & Liechti, 2018; Mason et al., 2019; Kiraga et
al., 2021). However, ego-dissolution experiences might also lead to challenging long-term effects,
particularly when the psychedelic experience was, in some sense, either traumatic (Johnstad,
2021; Bender & Hellerstein, 2022; Schlag et al., 2022) or not properly integrated (Greń et al.,
2023).
To gain deeper insights into the mechanisms and consequences of ego-dissolution, it is crucial
to explore how psychedelics affect the concept of self (Letheby & Gerrans, 2017; Millière et al.,
2018; Stoliker et al., 2022). Self can be investigated by means of a range of experimental
paradigms and methodologies, one of which involves using stimuli that represent (or are related
to) the self, such as the participant’s own name, an image of the participant's face, or a recording
of their voice. It is well established that, most likely due to their high relevance and adaptive
value, self-related stimuli are processed in a preferential way in comparison to stimuli that are not
related to the self, such as others’ names, faces, or voices (Cunningham et al., 2017; Northoff et
al., 2006). Specifically, self-related stimuli attract attention, as first shown in the form of the
cocktail-party effect (Cherry, 1953) and confirmed in subsequent studies using other paradigms
(Wood & Cowan, 1995; Bola et al., 2021); they also evoke faster manual reactions (Chen et al.,
2014) and cause greater brain activation, as assessed by both electroencephalography (EEG;
Berlad and Pratt, 1995; Tacikowski and Nowicka, 2010; Fan et al., 2013) and functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI; Morita et al., 2008, 2014; Tacikowski et al., 2011; Yaoi et al., 2015).
For the present study, it is particularly important that behavioral and neural responses to
self-related stimuli have been shown to constitute an interindividual predictor that reflects traits
such as self-esteem (Nowicka et al., 2018) or narcissism (Kramer et al., 2020), and even a cultural
background (Chiao et al., 2010). Additionally, greater self-preference effect and stronger activity
of frontal brain areas in response to one’s own face has been observed in social anxiety disorder,
which is characterized by increased rumination and self-reflection (Kim et al., 2016; Kawaguchi et
al., 2018). Conversely, in comparison to non-meditators, smaller differences between EEG
amplitudes related to processing of self and other faces have been found in experienced meditators
(Trautwein et al., 2016). This finding is particularly noteworthy in relation to research on
psychedelics, as meditation is often considered to have comparable psychological and neural
effects as psychedelics use (Millière et al., 2018; Scheidegger, 2021; Holas & Kamińska, 2023).
Despite the importance of the concept of self in psychedelic research, the only experimental
study to date that has investigated whether psychedelics influence processing of self-related
stimuli was conducted by Śmigielski and colleagues (2020). In a placebo-controlled,
within-subject design, event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded when participants were
asked to discriminate between recordings of their own and a stranger’s voice (with an additional
pitch modulation to increase the task’s difficulty). Administration of psilocybin acutely reduced
the participants’ ability to discriminate between their own and a stranger’s voice; this outcome
was accompanied by a reduction in the discriminability of the electrophysiological responses to
these two stimuli. Thus, Śmigielski and colleagues (2020) provided compelling evidence that
psychedelics can induce an acute blurring of the distinction between self and other, manifesting
both behaviorally and in brain activity.
Therefore, in the present study we employed self-related stimuli to explore the relation between
the concept of self and naturalistic use of psychedelics. Specifically, we assumed that repeatedly
experiencing ego dissolution would be associated with persistent blurring of the distinction
between self and other that would be reflected in weakened response to self-related stimuli.
Therefore, we hypothesized that regular users of classic psychedelics would exhibit lower
reactivity to self-related stimuli than non-users.
To test this hypothesis, we recorded EEG signals while participants were presented with
various names. Specifically, we used a Self-name (i.e., each participant’s own name) and two
control names: an Other-name, which did not require any behavioral response and thus constituted
a passive control condition; and a different Other-name (i.e., a Target-name), to which participants
were asked to provide a manual response, which thus constituted an active control condition
(because, similarly to self-related stimuli, target stimuli preferentially engage attention; Polich,
2007). We performed a pre-registered analysis of event-related potentials (ERPs), focusing
specifically on the P300 ERP component. P300 is a well-established index for processing of
self-related stimuli, with numerous prior studies demonstrating increased P300 amplitude in
response to self-related stimuli (in comparison to control stimuli), which most likely reflects
greater attentional engagement in their processing (Polich, 2007; Doradzińska et al., 2020).
Therefore, we hypothesized that we would observe a difference between users and non-users in
terms of P300 amplitude, specifically that the P300 amplitude evoked by the Self-name would be
lower in users. In contrast, we expected to find no significant between-group differences in the
P300 amplitude evoked by other and target names.
In addition to the P300 analysis, we also conducted an exploratory (i.e., non-pre registered)
analysis of the alpha-band power. Specifically, stimulus-induced desynchronization (decrease) of
alpha-band power is considered another neuronal index reflecting preferential processing of
self-related stimuli (with self-related stimuli causing greater desynchronization; Knyazev, 2013;
Alzueta et al., 2020). Interestingly, alpha-band desynchronization caused by processing of social
information has been shown to originate from the DMN (Knyazev et al., 2013), which provides an
important link with psychedelic research as psychedelics have been shown to attenuate DMN
activity (Carhart-Harris et al., 2014; Tagliazucchi et al., 2016; Letheby & Gerrans, 2017). In
comparison to non-users, we thus hypothesized that we would observe weaker alpha
desynchronization in the users group in response to the Self-name group, and no between-group
differences in the alpha desynchronization caused by other and Target-names (i.e., an analogous
hypothesis as in the case of the P300).
2. Experimental Procedures
2.1. Participant sample
The methodology and hypotheses for the current study were pre-registered on the Open Science
Helsinki. Ethical approval for the experimental protocol was granted by the Human Ethics
Committee of SWPS University of Social Sciences and Humanities (Warsaw, Poland; 13/2020).
All participants voluntarily provided informed consent and received monetary compensation of
100 PLN (approximately 20 EUR). The participants were exclusively native Polish speakers with
either normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Our aim was to maximize the sample size within the constraints of the available resources,
therefore it was not stringently predetermined. Experimental sessions were conducted in two
laboratories: at the Department of Psychology, SWPS University of Social Sciences and
Humanities (Warsaw, Poland), where data from 37 psychedelics users and 37 non-users were
collected; and at the Consciousness Lab, Psychology Institute, Jagiellonian University (Cracow,
Poland), where data from 22 psychedelics users and 22 non-users were collected. Four participants
(2 users and 2 non-users) were removed from the analysis due to technical difficulties with data
recordings. As detailed in the subsequent sections, we combined data from both laboratories in the
1 for an overview of both groups’ characteristics). The final sample size was close to the
pre-registered target of 58 participants per group.
2.2. Recruitment of participants
Participants were recruited through an online survey developed using LimeSurvey software, an
open-source tool created by Limesurvey GmbH. The survey was shared through the social media
profiles of several Polish organizations involved in harm reduction pertaining to psychoactive
substance use and drug policy, including politykanarkotykowa.pl, sin.org.pl, and psychodeliki.org.
Upon accessing the survey, participants were initially presented with an electronic informed
consent form and the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) clause. These documents were
to be read and accepted before proceeding further. Once consent was provided, participants were
requested to share detailed information concerning their history of psychoactive substance use,
encompassing patterns and frequency of both lifetime and past-year usage. Additionally, they were
asked to provide basic socio-demographic data, such as age, gender, education level, and place of
residence. Participants were also questioned about their meditation practices (number of hours
spent on meditation in their lifetime and in the last year), and they were asked to provide details
about any history of psychological, psychiatric, or neurological disorders. The survey also
included a short version of the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (items 1–4; Bush et al.,
1998). A programming error resulted in data on cannabis use being collected from only a subset of
participants (n = 83, 38 users). At the end of the survey, participants were asked to give consent to
future contact regarding the EEG study and to select their preferred location for the experimental
session (Warsaw or Cracow). Two versions of the recruitment survey were created: the first
encompassed several psychological questionnaires, taking about 30 minutes to complete (data
published in Orłowski et al., 2022); the second, approximately 10 minutes long, was used solely to
further recruit participants for the EEG study.
Data were collected from a sample of approximately 5,000 respondents. The screening process
for the EEG study involved applying several exclusion criteria, including lack of consent to
contact regarding the study, frequent or occasional use of empathogens, stimulants, or
dissociatives (exceeding 15 lifetime experiences or 5 experiences during the last year), occasional
use of benzodiazepines, synthetic cannabinoids, or opioids (exceeding 3 lifetime experiences),
scoring 4 or higher on any question of the AUDIT questionnaire, current diagnosis of psychiatric
or neurological disorder, medical diagnosis of addiction, or ongoing use of prescribed medications
with psychoactive effects (e.g., antidepressants or tranquilizers).
From the pool of respondents who did not meet any of the aforementioned exclusion criteria,
two subgroups were further selected. The users subgroup consisted of individuals who reported 15
or more lifetime experiences with classic psychedelic substances, including LSD, psilocybin
mushrooms, crystal DMT, changa, ayahuasca, mescaline, synthetic psilocybin, or their derivatives
such as 5-MeO-DMT or 4-AcO-DMT etc. Importantly, when reporting the number of lifetime
experiences with psychedelic substances participants were explicitly instructed not to include
cases of microdosing. The non-users subgroup included individuals who had not used psychedelic
substances in the past but expressed an intention to use them in the future. These subgroups were
further divided based on the participants’ preferred location for the experimental session (Warsaw
or Cracow). To ensure comparability between the user and non-user groups in each location,
participants were selected in a way that ensured matching in terms of gender, age, education, and
alcohol use. This matching procedure aimed to control for potential confounding factors and
enhance the validity of the study’s findings. Although we aimed to match the user and non-user
groups in terms of lifetime cannabinoid use and meditation practice, including these conditions
made it impossible to create sufficiently large experimental groups.
Selected participants received advance notice and, in order to prevent the possibility of acute or
post-acute effects of psychedelic intake influencing the study results, they were asked to refrain
from consuming psychedelic substances for at least 30 days prior to the EEG session.
Users (N = 56) Non-users (N = 57)
Male sex 35 (62.5 %) 33 (57.9 %)
M (SD) Age in years 28.5 (5.17) 28.1 (5.67)
Data collection site: Warsaw 35 (62.5 %) 36 (63.2 %)
Education
Below secondary 0% 1.8 %
Secondary 37.5% 29.8 %
Bachelor’s degree 26.8% 22.8 %
Master’s degree or higher 35.7% 45.6 %
M (SD) Task accuracy (d′)
4.29 (0.46) 4.27 (0.45)
M (SD) Reaction Times in ms 295.42 (61.43) 304.63 (53.17)
MED (IQR) Lifetime meditation in hours ** 55.0 (407) 10.0 (100)
MED (IQR) Alcohol use (selected AUDIT 2.0 (2) 3.0 (3)
items; max score = 16)
MED (IQR) Lifetime psychedelics use *** 20.5 (10) 0 (0)
MED (IQR) Lifetime cannabis use * 69.0 (270) 25.0 (120)
use, and behavioral results of the experiment. Groups were compared using the t-test or the χ2 test,
depending on the variable type. Statistics for Lifetime cannabis use were calculated for an incomplete
sample (Users N = 37; Non-users N = 43). Statistical significance is indicated as follows: * 0.01 < p < 0.05;
** 0.01 < p < 0.001; *** p < 0.001.
2.3. Apparatus
The experimental procedure was conducted using Presentation® software (Version 22.1,
Neurobehavioral Systems, Inc., Berkeley, CA). In the Warsaw laboratory, experiments were
carried out on a 24-inch DELL XL2411 monitor (refresh rate: 144 Hz; resolution: 1920 x 1080),
while in the Cracow laboratory a 23.8-inch HP EliteDisplay E243i monitor was used (refresh rate:
60 Hz; resolution: 1920 x 1080). Participants maintained a consistent viewing distance of
approximately 60 cm from the monitor throughout the entire experiment. Behavioral responses
were recorded using a Cedrus Button Box (RB-840; Cedrus Corporation, San Pedro, CA)
equipped with eight buttons. Data collection occurred in small isolated rooms, with the Cracow
room being sound-attenuated. Participants were comfortably seated in chairs for the duration of
the experiment.
2.4. Stimuli
In each experimental session, three names, each corresponding to a specific identity condition,
were used as stimuli. One name was always the participant’s own name (referred to as Self), while
the other two names were selected to match the participant’s own name in terms of both gender
and the character count. One of the other names was assigned to the Other condition, and one to
the Target .
2.5. EEG procedure
Each experimental session started with participants signing the necessary documents, receiving
verbal instructions, and undergoing EEG preparation, which took approximately 45 minutes.
Following this, there was a 10-minute recording of resting-state EEG data (not analyzed in this
study) and a 15-minute task related to the perception of emotional facial expressions (not analyzed
in this study, published in Orłowski et al., 2023). After these preliminary tasks, participants were
given a brief break, during which the experimenter described the subsequent procedure, as
described below.
The procedure included 300 trials, divided evenly across the three identity conditions. Names
were presented in a pseudo-random order, with the restriction that the same name would not
appear more than twice consecutively. Participants were instructed to maintain their gaze on the
fixation cross and press the designated button on the response pad with their right index finger
whenever the name defined as the Target appeared on the screen. No action was required from the
participant if a name corresponding to the Self or Other conditions was displayed. Instructions
emphasized completing the task both quickly and accurately.
pixels), which remained onscreen for 700 to 1200 ms (chosen randomly). This was followed by a
100 ms display of a name (font: Arial; size: 36), and the trial ended with a 1200 ms blank screen,
allowing time for a potential response. A uniform gray background was maintained throughout the
procedure.
Prior to the main part of the experiment, participants completed a brief training session
consisting of 8 trials. After the first 150 trials, a break was offered, whose duration participants
could control by pressing a button to continue with the task. In total, the entire procedure took
approximately 12 minutes.
2.6. EEG Recording
In the Warsaw laboratory, electroencephalography (EEG) data was recorded from 64 scalp
sites using the Brain Products ActiCap system and the Brain Vision Recorder software. These
active electrodes, constructed from Ag/AgCl, were aligned according to an extended 10-20
system, with EEG data sampled at a rate of 1000 Hz. In the Cracow laboratory, the BioSemi
ActiveTwo amplifier system (BioSemi, Amsterdam, NL) and the BioSemi ActiView software
were used to record EEG signals (also from 64 scalp sites). This set-up was similar to that of the
Warsaw laboratory, utilizing Ag/AgCl active electrodes positioned according to an extended
10-20 system, but with a higher sampling rate of 2048 Hz. In both laboratories, signals from both
earlobes and four electrooculograms (EOGs) were recorded. Two vertical EOGs (VEOG) were
obtained by positioning bipolar electrodes at the supra- and infra-orbit of the left eye, while two
horizontal EOGs (HEOG) were captured by positioning bipolar electrodes at the external canthi
of both eyes.
2.7. EEG preprocessing
For the preprocessing of both EEG and EOG data, custom-made Matlab scripts were
employed using EEGlab functions (Delorme & Makeig, 2004). The raw data underwent filtration
through a high-pass finite impulse response (FIR) filter with a cut-off frequency of 0.1 Hz (filter
order 33792) and a low-pass FIR filter with a cut-off frequency of 40 Hz (filter order 220). The
EEG signals were subsequently re-referenced to the mean value of all scalp electrodes and
down-sampled to a rate of 250 Hz. To isolate and remove noisy channels, the clean_channels()
function from the clean_rawdata plugin was used, resulting in the exclusion of an average of
2.40 ± 1.98 channels per participant. These removed channels were interpolated based on
neighboring channels’ activities.
The continuous EEG signal was segmented into epochs time-locked to the stimulus
presentation, ranging from -400 ms to 1200 ms relative to the stimulus onset. A total of 300
epochs were obtained (100 per condition). Epochs in which responses were required but not
provided (misses: 1.91 ± 2.29 per participant), epochs in which answers were not required but
incorrectly provided (false positives; 1.77 ± 2.09 per participant), and epochs with responses
faster than 100 ms after the stimulus onset were excluded from further analysis (0.11 ± 0.59 per
participant).
Automatic artifact detection was performed using the FASTER plugin, leading to the
removal of an average of 12.82 ± 5.72 epochs per participant. The number of epochs included in
the analysis did not differ between groups (users: 283.14 ± 6.07; non-users: 283.86 ± 6.59) or
conditions (Self: 94.10 ± 2.96; Other: 94.06 ± 3.15; Target: 95.34 ± 3.00).
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) was then implemented to remove residual
artifacts. ICA was performed on data filtered with a high-pass filter of 1 Hz, and 50 independent
components were obtained. The ICA decomposition was exported and used to identify artifactual
components in the main dataset, filtered with a high-pass filter of 0.1 Hz. The Multiple Artifact
Rejection Algorithm (MARA) facilitated the removal of an average of 40.32 ± 4.25 components
per participant.
As a final step, the signals from the scalp electrodes were re-referenced to the mean of the
earlobe electrodes.
2.8. P300 ERP Component Analysis
We performed a pre-registered analysis of the P300 ERP (Event-Related Potential) component.
In order to avoid inflation of the Type I error rate, the spatio-temporal windows were defined
independently of differences caused by experimental manipulations (i.e., in ERPs averaged over
conditions; Keil et al., 2014). First, topographic maps averaged over all participants and
conditions (Fig. 2b) were used to define a cluster of electrodes in which P300 reached its
maximum amplitude. The P300 component was identified in the centro-parietal cluster
(electrodes: CP1, CPz, CP2, P1, Pz, P2). Next, the time point at which the P300 ERP waveform
reached its maximum amplitude was identified, and then a 200 ms time window centered at this
time point was selected. This process was guided by visual inspection of waveforms that were
averaged within the selected cluster of electrodes (Fig. 2a) and resulted in a time window from
268 ms to 468 ms with respect to the stimulus onset. The mean amplitudes computed for each trial
within the defined spatio-temporal window (i.e., averaged over selected electrodes and
time-points) were used in further single-trial statistical analyses.
2.9. Alpha Band Desynchronization Analysis
An analysis of the alpha-band desynchronization was carried out in an exploratory manner (i.e.,
it was not pre-registered). The EEG signals were convolved with Morlet wavelets representing
frequencies within the range of 3 to 30 Hz (28 frequencies; EEGLab newtimef.m function). The
number of wavelet cycles (the ‘cycle’ parameter) was set to vary linearly from 1 at the lowest
frequency (3 Hz) to 3 at the highest frequency (30 Hz) to maintain temporal precision across the
spectrum. Spectral power estimates were derived from the magnitude of the resultant complex
wavelet coefficients. Further, for each individual trial and channel, the power values for each
frequency were adjusted by baseline, defined as the mean power value from the 200 ms window
preceding the stimulus onset.
Next, the time-frequency heatmap of EEG signal power averaged across all experimental
conditions and electrodes was inspected to identify the time-frequency window that exhibited the
window (252–500 ms; 8–18 Hz) were then plotted in the form of topographic plots; this led to
selection of 17 occipito-parietal electrodes (Pz, P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6, P7, P8, POz, PO3, PO4,
2d). The EEG signal power values derived from this spatio-temporal-frequency window were
used in the statistical analyses.
conditions, and selected electrodes (CP1, CPz, CP2, P1, Pz, P2). The analyzed time window is marked in
gray. b) Topographic map of EEG activity averaged within the selected time window over all participants
and conditions. Positions of selected electrodes are marked by white dots. c) Time-frequency heatmap
representing EEG signal power in dB, with values averaged over all experimental conditions and
electrodes. The selected time-frequency window corresponding to alpha band desynchronization is
delineated by a red rectangular overlay. d) Topographic map of EEG signal power averaged within the
selected time-frequency window over all participants and conditions. Positions of selected electrodes are
marked by red dots.
2.10. Statistical analysis
The statistical analyses were conducted using R software (R Core Team, 2022). Linear mixed
models were employed to analyze the effects of the Group (psychedelics users, non-users) and
Identity conditions (Self, Other, Target) on the amplitude of the P300 ERP component and, in a
separate model, on the strength of alpha desynchronization. The lmerTest package (Kuznetsova et
al., 2017) was utilized to fit the linear mixed models. Random effect of the participant was
included in the models. Additionally, models incorporating the fixed effect of the data collection
site (Warsaw or Cracow) were constructed.
To address the potential confounding influence of meditation practice and cannabis use, we
incorporated weights into our statistical models. The objective was to reduce the influence of
participants with extensive history of meditation practice or cannabis use. Initially, we generated
two weighting variables related to the number of lifetime meditation hours and number of lifetime
experiences with cannabis. These weights were generated by transforming the variables using the
Yeo-Johnson method (Weisberg, 2021), from bestNormalize package (Peterson, 2021), to decrease
dispersion. Then, transformed variables were centered around 5, thus ensuring all values were
positive. Following this, the inverse of these values was computed to obtain smaller weights for
participants who reported more lifetime mediation hours or more numbers of cannabis use.
Finally, we calculated a composite weighting variable by multiplying values of these two variables
for each participant. The results presented in the Results section were obtained using the weighted
models. The details of the weighting transformations are reported in the Supplementary Material.
Importantly, the results of the analyses conducted without weights, which are reported in the
Supplementary Material, were qualitatively similar.
In both the main analysis (weighted model) and the control analysis (unweighted model), the
models with and without the fixed effect of the data collection site were compared using the
Bayesian Information Criterion. The model with the best fit to the data was selected and reported
in the results. If there were no significant differences between models, the simpler model (without
data collection site) was chosen. Post-hoc tests for all significant effects were corrected for
multiple comparisons using the Holm method.
2.11. Data availability statement
The scripts employed for statistical analysis, the EEG data, as well as a CSV file containing the
ERP data in the format that entered statistical analysis are available for download from the OSF
3. Results
3.1. The P300 ERP component
We found a significant effect of Identity condition on P300 amplitude (F (2,31919) = 217.15; p <
0.001). Post hoc tests revealed that perception of the Self-name was associated with higher P300
amplitude compared to perception of the Other-name (z = 9.58, p < 0.001), but it was lower than
for perception of the Target-name (z = -11.21, p < 0.001); also, perception of the Other-name was
associated with lower P300 amplitude compared to the Target-name (z = -20.82, p < 0.001).
Moreover, we found a significant main effect of Group (F (1,111) = 5.26; p = 0.024), indicating
that the users group exhibited higher P300 amplitude, irrespective of the Identity condition.
Furthermore, a significant Identity x Group interaction (F (2,31919) = 10.51 ; p < 0.001) was
revealed, which prompted us to perform further within- and between-group post-hoc comparisons.
3.1.1. Within-group comparisons: The observed pattern of differences in the P300 amplitude
across Identity conditions was the same in both groups. Perception of the Self-name was related to
significantly higher P300 amplitude than perception of Other-name (users: z = 5.18, p < 0.001;
non-users: z = 8.63, p < 0.001), but lower P300 amplitude than perception of Target-name (users:
z = -5.60, p < 0.001; non-users: z = -10.62, p < 0.001). Perception of the Other-name was related
to lower P300 amplitudes than perception of the Target-name (users: z = -10.80, p < 0.001;
non-users: z = -19.27, p < 0.001).
3.1.2. Between-group comparisons: Comparing the users and non-users groups, significant
differences were observed in P300 amplitudes across specific Identity conditions. In the Self
condition, while higher mean amplitude was observed in the users group, the difference between
condition, the users group exhibited significantly higher amplitude compared to the non-users
conditions: a) Self-name, b) Other-name, and c) Target-name. The shaded regions represent the standard
error of the mean (SEM). Asterisks denote statistical significance in post-hoc comparisons of the
interaction effect: * indicates p < 0.05.
3.1.3. Between-condition differences across groups: As we observed the same pattern of
results in both the users and the non-users groups (other < self < target), we conducted further
comparisons to assess differences in the P300 amplitude between Identity conditions across the
two groups. The P300 amplitude difference between the Self and Other conditions did not
significantly differ across groups (z = 1.78, p = 0.151), but a greater difference between the Self
and Target conditions was observed in the non-users group (z = -2.76, p = 0.023). Similarly, the
difference between the Other and the Target conditions was significantly greater in the non-users
non-users exhibit greater neural variation of P300 amplitude when processing Other- vs
Target-names and Self- vs Target-names.
two groups: psychedelic users and non-users. The y-axis represents amplitude differences between pairs of
conditions in microvolts (μV); error bars represent standard error values. Asterisks denote statistical
significance in post-hoc comparisons: * indicates p < 0.05; *** indicates - p < 0.001.
3.2. Alpha desynchronization
We identified a significant effect of the Identity condition on the strength of alpha band
desynchronization (F (2,31919) = 94.51; p < 0.001). Post hoc analyses revealed that perception of
the Target-name was associated with greater alpha desynchronization compared to perception of
the Self-name (z = 11.57, p < 0.001) and the Other-name (z = 12.20, p < 0.001). However, no
differences were observed between the Self and the Other conditions (z = 0.63, p = 0.527), and our
analysis did not reveal a significant main effect of Group (F (1,111) = 0.02; p = 0.900), nor a
significant interaction between Identity and Group factors (F (2,31919) = 1.72; p = 0.180).
4. Discussion
The psychological concept of self is central to how we experience ourselves and the world
around us (Northoff et al., 2006; Sui & Humphreys, 2015). Several prior studies suggest that using
psychedelics in highly controlled clinical or therapeutic contexts does indeed have the potential to
transform – both acutely and in the long-term – different aspects of self-consciousness (Śmigielski
et al., 2020; reviews: Aday et al. 2020, Vollenweider & Preller, 2020). The present study aimed to
complement this line of research by investigating how regular use of psychedelics in naturalistic
contexts is related to processing of self-related information. To this end, we used names as stimuli,
including Self-name as this stimulus is robustly associated with the psychological concept of self
(Cherry, 1953; Northoff et al., 2006; Cunningham et al., 2017). We compared electrophysiological
responses to presented names between groups of experienced psychedelics users (N = 56) and
non-users (N = 57) and focused specifically on the P300 ERP component, which is a
well-established index that indicates preferential processing of self-related stimuli (Tacikowski
and Nowicka, 2010; Nowicka et al., 2018; Doradzińska et al., 2020). We indeed found that
perception of the Self-name in both groups’ elicited greater P300 amplitude than perception of the
Other-name; also, the Target-name, which served as an attention-engaging, active-control
stimulus, evoked P300 of higher amplitude than both the Self- and the Other-name. Thus, the
pattern of results we observed is in line with multiple previous studies and indicates that, in
principle, our procedure was sensitive and effective.
4.1. Lack of evidence for attenuated processing of Self-name in the users group
The primary finding of our study is that the users and the non-users groups did not differ in
terms of the P300 amplitude evoked by processing of the Self-name, neither when analyzing
between-group differences in the P300 amplitude evoked by the Self-name, nor when comparing
between-condition differences (i.e., Self – Other and Self – Target) between groups. Thus, our
hypothesis stating that regular users of classic psychedelics would exhibit persistent blurring of
boundaries between self and other that would be manifested by reduced P300 amplitude in
response to self-related stimuli was not supported by the collected data. Similarly, no evidence for
attenuated processing of the Self-name in the users group was found in the exploratory analysis of
the alpha-power desynchronization, which is another index of preferential processing of
self-related stimuli (Knyazev, 2013; Alzueta et al., 2020).
Therefore, our data indicate that regular use of psychedelic substances is not related to
persistent alterations in processing of self-related stimuli and, more broadly, in the concept of self.
While a growing body of evidence indicates that psychedelics are able to acutely disintegrate the
mechanism of self (Nour et al., 2016; Millière, 2017; Letheby & Gerrans, 2017; Śmigielski et al.,
2020), evidence supporting more persistent modifications is indeed limited on both the subjective
and the neural level. To our knowledge, our recent cross-sectional questionnaire study is the only
published work that has aimed to directly address this question. Specifically, we found that a
higher number of lifetime psychedelic experiences is associated with greater reported awareness
of one’s own internal state, and lower public self-consciousness, which is the awareness of being
an object of the observation of others in the social contexts (Orłowski et al., 2022). While the
present study did not confirm altered processing of self-related information in psychedelics users,
the results of both studies do not necessarily contradict each other, especially when considering
the substantial methodological differences between them. It is also important to consider that
psychedelics cause changes to different aspects of self-consciousness that last for days or weeks
after the experience (reviews: Majić et at., 2015; Evens et al., 2023), but they might not lead to the
long-term effects that we aimed to capture in the present study (by investigating participants who
had abstained from psychedelics for at least 30 days).
4.2. Differences in processing of task-relevant targets between users and non-users groups
When treating the passive processing of Self and Other-names as a baseline, the users
group exhibited a smaller increase of P300 amplitude in response to the task-relevant Target than
the non-users group (in which differences between Target and Self/Other were greater; Fig. 4).
Previous research has consistently shown that tasks demanding more attention are linked to higher
P300 amplitudes than tasks that are less demanding (Polich, 2007; Olofsson et al., 2008).
Relatedly, between-group differences in P300 amplitude are considered an index of attentional
capabilities, with lower P300 amplitudes interpreted as indicating reduced attentional and, more
generally, cognitive abilities (Demirayak et al., 2023). Given this, we consider two ways of
interpreting our result.
First, a smaller increase in P300 amplitude in response to task-relevant stimuli might indicate a
sustained impairment of attentional mechanisms in psychedelics users. While temporary
disturbance of attention has previously been demonstrated in the acute phase of psychedelic
experiences (Carter et al., 2005; Kometer et al., 2013; Madsen et al., 2020; Śmigielski et al.,
2020), no studies to date have provided data indicating any kind of attentional or cognitive deficits
in psychedelic users. In line with this, we did not find any between-group differences in task
performance accuracy or reaction times, but we did find that users exhibited generally higher P300
amplitudes (i.e., in absolute terms, regardless of the Identity condition). However, the observed
between-group difference in target-evoked activity highlights the need for future cross-sectional
studies to go beyond self-report questionnaire measures and include experimental paradigms
investigating cognitive capabilities and their neural mechanisms in individuals who regularly use
psychedelics.
Alternatively, the observation of a smaller P300 amplitude increase in response to the
task-relevant target might suggest that attention becomes more evenly distributed or is more
sustainable in the users group. Regular psychedelic use might lead to an “attention equalizing
effect” on the processing of various stimuli, where the difference in the amount of attentional
resources allocated to processing task-relevant and irrelevant relevant perceptual tasks becomes
less pronounced. This interpretation remains speculative at present, but if confirmed by further
studies, it could significantly impact our understanding of psychedelics’ influence on executive
functions. It might also have implications for the interpretation of studies on the acute effects of
psychedelics use, for which experienced users are often recruited and asked to perform certain
cognitive tasks.
Further, we observed that users exhibited greater P300 amplitudes compared to non-users
during perception of Other-names. While it is not possible to directly relate this result to other
studies, some parallels might be drawn from existing literature. A potential, albeit speculative,
explanation for this finding might be an increased attribution of significance among psychedelic
users to stimuli not directly related to the self, such as other people and the environment. This
hypothesis gains support from previous research, which has shown that psychedelic experiences
can enhance feelings of connection and altruism towards others (Griffiths et al., 2018; MacLean et
al., 2011) and promote pro-environmental attitudes (Nour et al., 2017; Lyons & Carhart-Harris,
2018; Kettner et al., 2019). More broadly, psychedelic experiences appear to facilitate shifts in
values extending beyond self-centric concerns, a notion reviewed by Kähönen et al. (2023). This
perspective is further supported by the subjective characteristics of psychedelics-induced
ego-dissolution, where individuals often report experiencing a profound sense of unity and
connectedness with the external world (Dittrich, 1998; Studerus et al., 2010; Preller &
Vollenweider, 2018).
4.3. Methodological aspects and limitations
Despite the pivotal role of the concept of self in psychedelic research, our study is only the
second experimental investigation to date (following the work of Śmigielski and colleagues, 2020)
that has examined whether psychedelics use is associated with altered responsiveness to
self-related stimuli. However, like all cross-sectional studies, our work is subject to certain
limitations, the most significant one being the inability to infer causality (i.e., that using
psychedelics caused the observed differences). Because temperament or personality were not
measured in our study we do not know to what extent between-group differences in such
non-specific traits can account for the observed effects. Nevertheless, to minimize the likelihood
of such a scenario, both the users and the non-users groups were recruited through the same social
media channels dedicated to psychedelics, did not excessively use other psychoactive substances,
and were matched in terms of demographic variables. Importantly, the non users group comprised
individuals who had no prior experiences with psychedelics yet expressed a willingness to use
these substances in the future. However, future cross-sections studies should include more
extensive measurements of personality, temperament and related traits to elucidate their
associations with observed between-group differences.
For our study we recruited individuals with at least 15 psychedelic experiences with doses
above microdosing. However, an important limitation, which might potentially account for the
observed null-effect, is the lack of data indicating whether all participants indeed had experienced
ego-dissolution, or regarding the doses of psychedelics they consumed. Collecting such data is
particularly challenging when investigating naturalistic use, when doses and quality of substances
are hard to accurately evaluate. Nevertheless, we think it is safe to assume that individuals
repeatedly using medium or high doses had experienced typical subjective effects of psychedelic
experiences, including ego-dissolution. Additionally, to exclude the possibility that the observed
effects might stem from acute or post-acute psychoactive effects, all participants from the users
group were asked to confirm their abstinence from all psychedelic substances during the 30 days
preceding the EEG session.
In order to increase the robustness and reliability of our findings, the present study was
conducted at two separate data collection sites, thus it was possible to test a substantial cohort of
participants (N = 113) that included a possibly varied sample of psychedelics users. However,
what limits the generalizability of our conclusions is that while the vast majority of psychedelic
users regularly engage in the consumption of other psychoactive substances (as also demonstrated
by data we collected in the recruitment survey; Winstock et al., 2021), such participants were
excluded from our sample. Furthermore, it is essential to acknowledge the potential impact of
self-selection bias as psychedelic users who have encountered negative or challenging experiences
with these substances may exhibit reduced motivation for continued usage and may also be less
inclined to participate in research studies related to psychedelics, resulting in an
overrepresentation of participants who have had predominantly positive experiences (Aday et al.,
2020; Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2021).
Experiences of ego dissolution are not solely a consequence of psychedelics intake but are also
associated with meditation practices (Millière et al., 2018; Scheidegger, 2021; Holas & Kamińska,
2023). In fact, our previous questionnaire-based study found that meditation and psychedelic
usage were similarly related to emotional reactivity and various aspects of self-perception
(Orłowski et al., 2022). In line with this, the study by Trautwein and colleagues (2016)
demonstrated that, compared to non-meditators, experienced meditators show reduced variation in
neural responses evoked by processing self- and other-related stimuli. In light of these results, an
important limitation of our study is that we were unable to create experimental groups of
psychedelics users and non-users that did not vary in terms of reported lifetime hours of
meditation practice (despite analyzing more than 5,000 applications to participate in our study).
This indicates a strong association between the two practices within the broader population,
highlighting the necessity for future cross-sectional research on psychedelics to account for
meditation practice (and vice versa). Further, we were also unable to match groups in terms of the
frequency of cannabis use. Cannabis and THC are known to induce robust altered states of
consciousness, including experiences of oceanic boundlessness, ego-dissolution, and
disembodiment (Zaytseva et al., 2019; Murray & Srinivasa-Desikan, 2022; Murray et al., 2024;
Wolinsky et al., 2023). Therefore, in order to control for the confounding effect of both meditation
practice and cannabis use, we employed a statistical weighting approach that reduced the impact
of data from participants with extensive meditation experience and history of cannabis use
(similarly to our previous study in the same cohort; Orłowski et al., 2023).
Due to the lack of available data from prior studies necessary for reliably estimating expected
effect sizes, power analysis was not conducted before data collection (while serious
methodological issues are related to post-hoc power analyses; Hoenig and Heisey, 2001; Zhang et
al., 2019). Therefore, in light of the null result regarding no between-group differences in EEG
activity evoked by the self-name, one might argue that our study was potentially underpowered.
However, the statistically significant between-group effects that we did observe suggest that our
sample size was in principle sufficient to detect such between-group differences. Moreover, our
analysis included EEG data from a total of 113 participants, comprising 56 participants in the
psychedelic users group and 57 participants in the non-users group, which represents a relatively
large sample size for an EEG study (Clayson et al., 2019). This mitigates concerns regarding lack
of statistical power in our study.
Alternatively, the observed null result - namely no between-group difference in activity evoked
by the Self-name - may be potentially related to the choice of analyzed measures. In the present
study we focused on the P300 ERP component, which is a well-established index of reactivity to
self-related stimuli (Gray et al., 2004; Polich, 2007). However, previous work on self-referential
processing using fMRI in both healthy participants (Platek et al., 2004; Seger et al., 2004; Morita
et al., 2008; Kaplan et al., 2008) and neurological patients (Keenan et al., 2001; Feinberg &
Keenan, 2005) has consistently found activity of the prefrontal cortex regions, particularly the
medial prefrontal cortex, as a correlate of self (reviews: Keenan et al., 2000, Uddin et al., 2007;
Northoff and Bermpohl, 2004; Lou et al., 2005). Activity of frontal regions was not directly
investigated in our study, but previous work provides evidence that the P300 component might in
fact be closely related to activation of the prefrontal cortex in response to self-related stimuli
(Perrin et al., 2005; Kampe et al., 2003; Staffen et al., 2006). It is also important to point out that
we do not interpret the P300 as representing a specific mechanism of self or ego, nor did we
consider it is reflective of the mechanism behind self-identity. Instead, greater P300 amplitude
most likely indicates a greater engagement of attentional resources in processing of
highly-relevant stimuli, like self-related ones or task-relevant targets (Polich, 2007; Olofsson et
al., 2008). Future research utilizing methods to localize sources of EEG activity, or simultaneous
EEG-fMRI recordings holds promise for providing more comprehensive insights into the neural
mechanism underlying self-referential processing and its modulation by psychedelics.
5. Conclusions
While acute psychedelic experiences are often associated with a robust effect of blurring of the
boundaries of self (Nour et al., 2016; Letheby & Gerrans, 2017; Śmigielski et al., 2020), our
results suggest that repeated use of psychedelic substances in naturalistic contexts may not result
in more permanent alterations in processing of self-related stimuli. However, our study provides
the first evidence for alterations in the attentional mechanisms that accompany processing of
task-relevant information in users of classic psychedelics. This finding was not expected a priori,
thus it is important to replicate and confirm it in future studies. Therefore, our work contributes to
a deeper understanding of the effects of psychedelics use in naturalistic contexts; however, it is
also subject to the inherent limitations of cross-sectional research, such as the inability to establish
causality and the potential effects of confounding variables.