Running head: SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE: COMPARING LYING HABITS AS REPORTED BY
CREDIBLE VS NON-CREDIBLE RESPONDERS
Henriquez, Natacha, Bošković, Irena, Kok, Rianne, & Van der Hallen, Ruth
Department of Psychology, Education & Child Studies, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam,
3062 PA, The Netherlands. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Ruth Van
der Hallen at vanderhallen@essb.eur.nl
Disclosure statement: The authors report no conflict of interest. Data availability statement: The data
that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable
request. Funding statement: National Program Education (“Nationaal Programma Onderwijs”; NPO)
Research funding, Erasmus University Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
Abstract
Researchers typically rely on self-report when inquiring about individuals’ behavior. Yet, when
measuring socially unacceptable behavior such as dishonesty, self-report is prone to bias, especially
underreporting (i.e., “positive response bias” or “faking good”). This study aimed to examine the impact
of supernormality, an extreme form of positive response bias, on self-reported lying behavior. A total
of 777 participants completed an online survey, which included assessments of lying behavior and
supernormality. Based on their supernormality scores, participants were categorized into a
"supernormal group" (n = 223, 28.7%) and a "credible group" (n = 554, 71.3%). Our results revealed
that the supernormal group reported a significantly lower lying frequency, higher unwillingness to lie
due to negative internal factors such as experiencing guilt (i.e., negativity), being less influenced by
external factors in their decisions to lie (i.e., lower contextuality), lower relational lying, and lower
antisocial lying, compared to the credible group. These group differences in lying behavior are
interpreted as a manifestation of the supernormal group’s heighted motivation to “fake good” and as
underreporting of their lying behavior. Furthermore, when controlling for supernormality levels, subtle
gender differences in lying behavior were revealed, with women reporting lower proficiency in lying,
being less influenced by contextual factors in their decisions to lie and engaging in less antisocial lying
than men. Overall, our results highlight the unreliability of self-report when investigating sensitive
topics, such as lying, and the importance of screening for response bias (i.e., underreporting).
Keywords: Lying; Self-report; Positive response bias; Supernormality; Gender
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
In psychology, one of the most common and efficient methods for gathering information about
people’s symptoms, attitudes, thoughts, and behaviors is by simply asking them. Data that is entirely
based on people’s own descriptions is referred to as “self-report” data. A substantial amount of
psychological research and assessments rely on self-report measures (Stone et al., 1999). Self-report
measures, such as interviews and questionnaires, offer several advantages: They are cost-effective,
efficient, and simpler to interpret compared to other types of data, such as heart rate and skin response
(Haeffel & Howard, 2010; Robins et al., 2009). However, self-report measures also come with certain
limitations. One particular concern is a phenomenon known as response bias, which refers to conditions
or factors that can diminish the validity of people’s responses (Lavrakas, 2008). Response bias can pose
a significant challenge because it can influence (or bias) the conclusions researchers and/or practitioners
eventually draw from their data. In addition, researchers might think that biased data is easily
recognizable, yet, previous studies have demonstrated that data affected by response bias can still appear
as reliable (Peer & Gamliel, 2011).
Researchers in psychology typically distinguish between negative response bias (i.e.,
overreporting) and positive response bias (i.e., underreporting). Overreporting or “faking bad” has been
defined as “the production of more pathological or deficient scores than would be expected on the basis
of the skill level of the person” (Franzen & Iverson, 2006, p. 103). Recent survey of the general public
showed that 45% of subjects faked symptoms at some point, and 34% reported knowing others who
had done the same (Dandachi-FitzGerald et al., 2020). On the other hand, positive response bias, or
“faking good”, refers to the tendency to present oneself favorably by exaggerating one’s desirable traits
and underreporting unfavorable ones (Cima et al., 2003). The exact prevalence of faking good is still
unclear, but it is believed to be more common and harder to detect compared to faking bad (Rogers &
Bender, 2018). A study examining the prevalence of faking good in job applicants found that up to 50%
of participants admitted to exaggerating their desirable characteristics, and 60% acknowledged
minimizing their negative traits (Donovan et al., 2003). Traditionally, research on positive response
bias has primarily centered on social desirability, which is the (un)conscious tendency to provide
responses that portray the self in a more positive light (Edwards, 1957; Krumpal, 2013). However,
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
recent attention from researchers has turned to another form of positive response bias known as
"supernormality" (Cima et al., 2003).
Supernormality has been defined as a tendency to deny the experience of common
psychological symptoms, including but not limited to depressive symptoms, intrusive thoughts, anger
or worry (Cima et al., 2003, 2008). It is assessed using the Supernormality Scale-Revised (SS-R; Cima
et al., 2008), which includes items that “intend to tap into tendencies to portray oneself as an individual
who is completely free of anything that is even remotely related to psychopathology” (Cima et al., 2003,
p. 3). Researchers have proposed that supernormality represents a more extreme form of positive
response bias compared to social desirability. This distinction arises from the observation that
individuals inclined to respond in socially desirable ways may not necessarily deny experiencing very
common psychological symptoms. Consequently, supernormality is believed to produce responses that
deviate more substantially from honest responses in contrast to social desirability. Moreover,
supernormality has primarily been investigated in forensic psychiatric settings since the motivation to
demonstrate one’s mental health might be more pronounced in such settings (e.g., parole or custody
hearings; (Cima et al., 2003; van Helvoort et al., 2022).
Research has established that certain topics tend to elicit higher levels of response bias among
responders. For instance, sensitive topics (i.e., topics involving behaviors and attitudes that are taboo,
illegal, or/and socially condemned) or topics that trigger a need for social approval and impression
management are especially susceptible to positive response bias (Krumpal, 2013). For example,
research has found that individuals who score higher on measures of social desirability tend to report
lying less frequently, being more unwilling to lie due to their moral values and being less influenced by
external factors in their decisions to lie (Buta et al., 2020; Hart et al., 2019; Makowski et al., 2021).
That is, individuals who may be inclined to engage in dishonesty to present themselves in a favorable
light may also be less likely to acknowledge and accurately report their own lying behaviors. Thus, it
becomes evident that positive response bias is an important factor to consider when investigating lying
through self-report.
People lie for many reasons, for example, to avoid conflict with their friends or to make a good
impression on a date. Generally, researchers make a distinction between self-oriented lies, which are
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
lies people tell to protect themselves from embarrassment, conflict, or punishment (e.g., “I didn’t do
it”) and other-oriented lies, which are lies people tell to protect others from embarrassment, conflict, or
punishment (e.g., "They didn't do it") (DePaulo et al., 1996). Some researchers also differentiate
between relational lies, which are lies told to avoid relational conflict or spare another person’s feelings
(e.g., “Of course I love your dress!”) and antisocial lies, which are lies told to harm others (e.g.,
vindictive rumors; Hart et al., 2020). Previous research on the prevalence of lying in everyday life
estimates that, on average, individuals tell at least one or two lies each day (Daiku et al., 2021; Serota
et al., 2010; Serota & Levine, 2015). However, this average can be misleading, as it does not account
for heterogeneity or individual variability in individuals’ tendency to lie. The vast majority of people
(89% - 94%) report telling few or no lies, while only a small percentage of people (6% - 11%) report
telling many lies daily, so-called “prolific liars” (Daiku et al., 2021; Serota et al., 2010; Serota & Levine,
2015).
Thus far, one’s tendency to lie has been linked to differences in personality, age, and gender.
For instance, lower levels of agreeableness and conscientiousness have been associated with a higher
tendency to lie (Hart et al., 2020; Horn et al., 2004), whereas, in terms of age, evidence suggests that as
adults grow older, they tend to lie less frequently (Buta et al., 2020; Jensen et al., 2004). Further,
research suggests that men may find lying more acceptable, engage in more deceitful behaviors, and
rate themselves as better liars compared to women (Butean et al., 2020; Elaad, 2018; Gerlach et al.,
2019).
In the realm of psychological research, there are various methods to study how and why people
lie. One approach involves controlled experiments, where researchers create specific situations to see
how external factors influence dishonesty. These investigations provide valuable insights into the
circumstances that can trigger dishonesty and the external factors influencing people's decision-making
(see; Faravelli et al., 2015; Gneezy, 2005; Gneezy et al., 2018; Hu & Ben-Ner, 2020). However, such
experiments fail to capture the role of internal factors, such as moral preferences, personality traits, or
contexts and interactions in which lying occurs. To address these limitations, researchers often turn to
self-report measures like questionnaires and interviews to study lying behavior in everyday situations.
For example, the Lying Profile Questionnaire (LIE-16; Makowski et al., 2021) allows researchers to
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
investigate inter-individual variability across several aspects of lying, and the Lying in Everyday
Situations Scale (LiES-14; Hart et al., 2019) allows researchers to examine people’s tendency to tell
different types of lies in their day-to-day lives. However, as previously discussed, while self-report
measures offer undeniable advantages, they are susceptible to the influence of response bias. Therefore,
it becomes imperative for researchers to thoroughly examine how response bias may permeate their
data and, subsequently, impact their conclusions (Larson, 2019). Moreover, research on positive
response bias has predominantly centered around the concept of social desirability, leaving limited
attention on the recently identified phenomenon of supernormality.
In light of these considerations, in this study, we investigated how positive response bias (i.e.,
supernormality), influences people’s self-reported lying behaviors. Additionally, considering the
existing body of evidence highlighting gender differences in lying, we tested gender differences across
several lying behaviors, while controlling for supernormality. Immediately after joining the study,
participants were screened for negative response bias (i.e., overreporting) and were then given the
Supernormality Scale-Revised (SS-R; Cima et al., 2003, see Method). Participants who exhibited
overreporting were excluded and the rest, based on their scores on the supernormality measure, were
allocated to either a “supernormal” group or to a “credible” group (see Procedure). We investigated the
extent to which supernormal and credible participants differed in their self-reported lying frequency,
ability to lie, unwillingness or reluctance to lie due to negative internal factors such as guilt (i.e.,
negativity), degree to which external factors influence their decisions to lie (i.e., contextuality), and
their tendency to tell lies to preserve relationships (i.e., relational lying) or to harm others (i.e., antisocial
lying). Based on previous research on lying and positive response bias and considering that
supernormality is characterized by extreme positive response bias, we hypothesized that individuals in
the supernormal group would be more inclined to distort their responses, that is to “fake good” when
asked about their lying behaviors. Consequently, differences between the supernormal and credible
group may manifest as the supernormal group report fewer/lower lying behavior, which could then be
interpreted as an indication that the supernormal group is underreporting their lying behaviors
(compared to “normal” levels as seen within credible group. To be specific, we expected supernormal
respondents to report a lower lying frequency, higher ability to lie, higher unwillingness to lie due to
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
negative internal factors (i.e., higher negativity), being less influenced by external factors in their
decisions to lie (i.e., lower contextuality), and a lower tendency to tell relational and antisocial lies, in
comparison to the credible group. Furthermore, based on previous research examining gender
differences in lying, we expected women to report: a lower lying frequency, a lower ability to lie, higher
negativity, lower contextuality, lower relational lying and lower antisocial lying, compared to men.
Method
Participants
A total of 1098 participants took part in the study. Outlier detection (n = 96, 8,7%), removal of
non-binary participants due to limited numbers (n = 12), an evaluation of negative response bias (n =
19) and a matching procedure to achieve groups matched based on key demographics (n = 194), resulted
in a final sample of 777 participants. Participants’ age ranged from 18 to 68 (M = 24.15, SD = 8.71),
with 72.5% identifying as female, and 27.5% identifying as male. Most participants were Dutch
(56.9%) university students (73.7%) at the time of participation. With a sample size of 777 and an alpha
level of .05, the current study had 95% power to detect medium-sized (η = .06) group differences in
lying behavior, which is deemed as sufficient (Faul et al., 2007). Based on participants’ responses on
the Supernormality Scale-Revised (SS-R; Cima et al., 2008; see Procedure), they were categorised into
two groups: a "supernormal" group (n = 223) and a "credible" group (n = 554), (see Data Analysis).
Initially, the credible group was significantly younger (t(990) = 9.138, p < .001), and had a
higher proportion of female participants (χ = 17.06, p < .001) compared to the supernormal group.
Specifically, the credible group had an average age of 22.17 (SD = 6.17) and comprised 149 (19.7%%)
males and 607 (80.3%%) females. In contrast, the supernormal group had an average age of 27.78 (SD
= 12.80) and consisted of 77 (32.6%) males and 159 (67.4%) females. Two measures were undertaken
in order to account for these group differences. Firstly, to address the age discrepancy between the
groups, age was included as a covariate in the main analysis. Secondly, in order to achieve more gender-
balanced groups, a matching procedure was employed in which female participants were randomly
selected and removed from the credible group (n = 194), in order to obtain two groups with a similar
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
Age and Gender across Groups After the Matching Procedure and the Exclusion Based on Negative
Response bias.
Age Gender Group size
Males Females
Group M SD n n n
Credible 23.10 6.88 146 (26.45%) 408 (73.65%) 554
Supernormal 26.76 11.72 68 (30.49%) 155 (69.51%) 223
Total 24.15 8.71 214 (27.54%) 563 (72.46%) 777
Procedure
The present study is part of a larger research project on the significance of supernormality for
psychological research. Participants were recruited through various channels, including the [removed
for review] lab portal, social media platforms, and word of mouth. University students were rewarded
test-subject hours (0.5) for their participation. Other participants did not receive any compensation.
Participants were required to be of legal age (18) and to provide their informed consent before taking
part in the study. All respondents completed the Lying Profile Questionnaire (LIE-16; Makowski et al.,
2021), the Lying in Everyday Situations Scale (LiES-14; Hart et al., 2019), the Supernormality Scale-
Revised (SS-R; Cima et al., 2008) and the Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI-18; Derogatis, 2001) with
the addition of four validity items to evaluate negative response bias (Merckelbach et al., 2014). All
participants received a debriefing form and were provided contact information of principle researchers.
Ethical approval of the Ethics Review Committee of the [removed for review] was obtained prior to the
start of the study.
Materials
The Lying Profile Questionnaire (LIE-16; Makowski et al., 2021). LIE-16 a 16-item scale
developed to investigate people’s lying patterns. The scale has four subscales, each consisting of four
items: Frequency (α = .89), Ability (α = .92), Negativity (α = .74), and Contextuality (α = .76).
Frequency refers to the self-reported lying frequency (e.g., “I lie frequently”). Ability refers to the self-
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
reported ability to fabricate and tell believable lies (e.g., “I am a good liar). Contextuality refers to the
self-reported willingness to lie depending on contextual and external factors such as stakes, necessity,
and alternative options (“I would lie if something important was at stake”). Lastly, Negativity refers to
the self-reported unwillingness to lie due to internal factors such as moral values and emotional
reactions associated with lying (e.g., “I feel guilty after lying”). All items were rated on a scale of 1,
“strongly disagree” to 5, “strongly agree”. The minimum obtainable score per subscale was 4, and the
maximum was 20. Furthermore, on all subscales, higher scores indicated a higher self-reported tendency
to engage in the behaviors each subscale refers to. For example, a higher score on Ability indicated a
higher self-reported ability to fabricate and tell believable lies.
The Lying in Everyday Situations Scale (LiES-14; Hart et al., 2019). LiES-14 is a 14-item scale
developed to assess the use of various types of lies in everyday life. The LiES-14 has two 7-item
subscales: Relational lying (α = .82) and Antisocial lying (α = .70). Relational lying refers to telling lies
to avoid conflict within relationships (e.g., “I lie to stay out of arguments with people”). Antisocial
lying refers to telling lies in a vindictive manner (e.g., “I use lies to attack people I don’t like”). Items
were rated on a scale of 1, “strongly disagree” to 5, “strongly agree”. For both subscales, the minimum
obtainable score was 7, and the maximum was 35. Higher scores indicated a higher self-reported
tendency to tell a particular type of lie.
The Supernormality Scale-Revised (SS-R; Cima et al., 2008). SS-R is a 50-item self-report
questionnaire developed to detect participants who deny experiencing common psychological
symptoms and exaggerate healthy qualities, coined “supernormality”. The SS-R includes 34 test items
and 16 bogus items included to disguise the true purpose of the scale. Each item is rated on a four-point
Likert scale, ranging from 1, “never” to 4, “always”. While the SS-R includes 7 distinct subscales, the
construct of supernormality is best measured by examining the total SS-R score. A total SS-R score is
calculated, ranging from 34 to 135. Important to note is that lower scores indicate higher levels of
supernormality, hence, scores below 60 considered indicative of a supernormality bias, here referred to
as “non-credible” or “supernormal” (Cima et al., 2008). Assignment of participants to the credible or
supernormal group was determined by adhering to the recommended cut-off score for the SS-R
questionnaire.
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
The Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI-18; Derogatis, 2001). Four items from the Wildman
Symptom Checklist (Wildman & Wildman, 1999) that address non-credible symptoms were
interspersed among the Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI-18), these items are used to identify symptom
overreporting or so-called negative response bias (Merckelbach et al., 2008, 2014). The BSI-18 is a
shortened version of the 53-item BSI, developed to assess the presence of psychological symptoms in
the general population. In this study, the items of the BSI-18 are discarded; instead, the non-credible
symptom items are rated on a five-point Likert scale, ranging from 0, “not at all” to 4, “all the time”. A
symptom overreporting total score is calculated, ranging from 0 to 16, with scores of above 4 considered
indicative of symptom overreporting. Scores above the cut-off of 4 reflect affirmative answers to at
least two non-credible items, a pattern that is unlikely to be the result of mere incidental report errors
(Merckelbach et al., 2008, 2014). Based on this score, 19 participants were removed from the dataset.
Data Analysis
All statistical analyses were conducted using IBM SPSS Statistics 28.0. To investigate the
extent to which self-reported lying is influenced by supernormality, a two-way MANCOVA was
conducted with two independent variables (Group, Gender), six dependent variables (Lying frequency,
Ability, Negativity, Contextuality, Relational lying, and Antisocial lying), and one covariate (Age).
Outliers were identified using two complementary methods: multivariate outliers were detected using
Mahalanobis distances (n = 19, 1.5%), while univariate outliers (n = 77, 7%) were identified using the
interquartile rule for extreme outliers. Notably, univariate outliers were mostly pronounced in the
domain of antisocial lying (n = 73, 6.6%), which was characterized by a right-skewed distribution (i.e.,
most respondents reported an extremely low tendency to tell antisocial lies).
Results
Descriptive Analysis
Regarding supernormality, using the total sample, the average score was 67.71 (SD = 11.41).
Using the recommended cutoff point of > 60, 28.7% of participants scored below the cut-off (i.e.,
“supernormal group”, n = 223), while 71.3% of participants were found to score above the cut-off (i.e.,
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
“credible group”, n = 554). While men seem to have somewhat lower scores (i.e., higher
supernormality) on the SS-R compared to women, this difference was not statistically significant, t(775)
= - 1.69, p = .091).
Regarding lying behavior, participants, on average, reported relatively low tendencies to lie (M
= 1.80, SD = 0.83), suggesting a general inclination towards honesty. In addition, the self-reported
ability to lie was at a moderate level, suggesting a moderate proficiency to fabricate and tell believable
lies (M = 3.11, SD = 1.13). Furthermore, participants reported moderate levels of negativity (M = 3.78,
SD = 0.83) and contextuality (M = 3.85, SD = 0.73), indicating a moderate reluctance to engage in lying
in day-to-day life due to feelings of guilt (i.e., negativity) and a relatively moderate degree of
susceptibility to external factors influencing their ultimate decision to lie or not (i.e., contextuality).
Furthermore, participants reported moderate levels of relational lying (M = 3.03, SD = 0.90), and low
levels of antisocial lying (M = 1.17, SD = 0.31). In other words, participants tended to moderately
engage in lying behaviors that were aimed at preserving relationships and interpersonal harmony
(relational lying) and were less prone to engage in lying behaviors with antisocial intent. Descriptive
Descriptive Statistics for Supernormality (SS-R) and both Lying Measures (LIE-16, LiES-14).
Credible group Supernormal Group
Males Females
(n = 554) (n = 223)
M SD M SD M SD a M SD a
SS-R
Supernormality 66.59 11.45 68.14 11.38 72.81 9.27 .71 55.05 3.86 .25
LIE-16
Lying frequency 1.91 0.90 1.75 0.81 1.87 0.85 .89 1.60 0.75 .87
Ability to lie 3.43 1.08 2.99 1.13 3.16 1.14 .92 2.99 1.12 .91
Negativity 3.64 0.92 3.83 0.79 3.74 0.83 .74 3.87 0.85 .77
Contextuality 3.97 0.77 3.81 0.71 3.92 0.71 .76 3.69 0.77 .73
LiES-14
Relational Lying 3.02 0.92 3.03 0.89 3.16 0.88 .82 2.69 0.86 .80
Antisocial Lying 1.26 0.34 1.14 0.29 1.20 0.32 .70 1.12 0.25 .74
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
Note. Scores on the supernormality scale (SS-R) range from 34 to 135, with higher scores
indicating lower levels of supernormality. While the scores on the lying scales (LIE-16, LiES-14) range
from 1 to 5.
The Effect of Supernormality on Self-Reported Lying
A two-way MANCOVA revealed a statistically significant main effect of Group on the
combined dependent variables, F(6, 767) = 8.851, p < .001, Wilks' Λ = .935, η = .065, while
accounting for Age. In addition, there was a statistically significant main effect of Gender on the
combined dependent variables, F(6, 767) = 8.625, p < .001, Wilks' Λ = .937, η = .063, while
accounting for Age. Lastly, there was a statistically significant interaction effect between Group and
Gender on the combined dependent variables, F(6, 767) = 2.208, p = .040, Wilks' Λ = .983, η = .017,
while accounting for Age.
Subsequent follow-up analyses consisted of six two-way ANCOVAs to examine the main
effects of Group and Gender as well as the interaction effect of Group and Gender on each of the
dependent variables individually. A Bonferroni adjustment was applied such that statistical significance
was determined at p < .008 (.05/6).
Regarding the main effect of Group, significant univariate effects were identified for five out
lower lying frequency, contextuality, relational lying, and antisocial lying, but higher negativity, in
comparison to the credible group, all while accounting for Age. No significant group difference was
observed concerning one’s self-reported ability to lie.
Regarding the main effect of Gender, significant univariate effects were observed for two out
of the six dependent variables, all while accounting for Age. More specifically, women reported a
significantly lower ability to lie and a lower tendency to engage in antisocial lying compared to men. A
marginally significant univariate effect was observed (p = .008) with regard to contextuality, with
women displaying marginally lower contextuality compared to men, again while accounting for Age.
No significant univariate effects were found for lying frequency, negativity, and relational lying.
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
Finally, regarding the interaction between Group and Gender, a small yet significant univariate
effect was observed for negativity, whilst no significant univariate effects were found for the remaining
dependent variables. More specifically, supernormal males reported significantly lower levels of
negativity compared to credible males, however, there was no significant difference in self-reported
negativity between supernormal and credible females.
The Effect of Group, Gender, and their Interaction on Lying Behavior.
Group Gender Group x Gender
F(1, 772) p η 2 F(1, 772) p η 2 F(1, 772) p η 2
p p p
LIE-16
Lying frequency 15.67 < .001* .020 4.09 .043 .005 0.99 .319 .001
Ability to lie 1.26 .263 .002 24.76 < .001* .031 .000 .987 .000
Negativity 9.28 .002* .012 2.53 .112 .003 8.77 .003* .011
Contextuality 12.95 < .001* .016 7.12 .008 .009 .429 .513 .001
LiES-14
Relational Lying 46.63 < .001* .057 .508 .476 .001 4.56 .033 .006
Antisocial Lying 9.60 .002* .012 18.92 < .001* .024 .009 .924 .000
Note. Statistical significance was accepted at the Bonferroni corrected alpha level, *p < .008.
Discussion
The primary aim of this study was to investigate the impact of supernormality, an extreme form of
positive response bias, on various self-reported lying behaviors. Additionally, we also investigated
potential gender differences in relation to different aspects of lying.
When reviewing the results of the descriptive analyses, a clear pattern emerged. Namely,
participants on average reported a general inclination towards honesty or a low frequency of lying, a
moderate proficiency in coming up with and telling lies, a moderate reluctance to engage in lying in
day-to-day life, as well as a relatively moderate degree of susceptibility to external factors influencing
their ultimate decision to lie. Moreover, they reported a moderate tendency to tell lies to maintain
harmonious relationships and avoid conflict and a notably low tendency to tell lies that harm others.
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
These findings align with previous research which has consistently shown that people typically report
low frequencies of lying (Daiku et al., 2021; Serota et al., 2010; Serota & Levine, 2015), although they
find lying acceptable in certain situations (Cartwright et al., 2021; Faravelli et al., 2015; Gneezy, 2005;
Gneezy et al., 2018), they have some degree of aversion to lying, often driven by feelings of guilt and
moral beliefs (López-Pérez & Spiegelman, 2013), especially considering lies that can harm others (Hart
et al., 2020).
When considering group differences in relation to lying behavior, it was revealed that the
supernormal group reported a lower lying frequency, a greater unwillingness to lie due to internal
factors (i.e., higher negativity), being less influenced by external factors in their decisions to lie (i.e.,
lower contextuality), and having a lower tendency to engage in both relational and antisocial lying,
compared to the credible group. These findings are consistent with both the social desirability and
supernormality construct, as well as previous findings (e.g., Buta et al., 2020). That is, previous research
has indicated that individuals who tend to respond in a socially desirable manner are also inclined to
underreport their lying behavior and claim to be less influenced by external factors when deciding to
lie (Buta et al., 2020; Hart et al., 2019; Makowski et al., 2021). Furthermore, previous research has also
found an association between being concerned with how others perceive them and reporting less lenient
attitudes towards lying (DePaulo et al., 1996; Makowski et al., 2021). Based on our data, this trend of
results may even be more pronounced among men compared to women.
Additionally, our results replicate those of previous studies indicating that, in general, participants
can be inclined to underreport behaviors that are considered undesirable when responding to a survey
(Krumpal, 2013; Randall & Fernandes, 1991). The results of this study provide evidence that lying is
one of those topics prone to underreporting, likely due to its predominantly negative perception.
Consequently, when individuals are asked about their lying behavior, it may trigger an (un)conscious
desire to present a positive image of themselves to others. Another possibility as to why individuals
might underreport lying, is that being asked about one’s lying behavior may trigger a need to protect
one's own self-image. Previous research suggests that people often find it easier to label others as liars
than to admit to their own deceitful actions, even when they engage in similar deceptive behaviors
(Curtis, 2021). This might suggest that certain individuals do not underreport lying with the intention
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
of projecting a positive image to others. Instead, their (un)conscious motive to underreport lying may
be to deceive and protect themselves against the cognitive dissonance that can arise when one
recognizes a misalignment between own’s actions and moral convictions (Festinger, 1962).
Additionally, these findings indicate a noteworthy connection between lying and supernormality.
Essentially, those who exhibit dishonesty in reporting information related to their emotional and mental
health are also likely to be dishonest when reporting about their own lying behavior. This suggests a
link between “lying” about one’s health and “lying” about lying itself, highlighting a pattern of
dishonesty across different aspects of self-reporting.
Regarding gender differences in lying behavior, the results revealed that women reported a lower
ability to lie, being less influenced by external factors in their decisions to lie (i.e., lower contextuality),
and a lower tendency to tell antisocial lies, compared to men. Contrary to our initial expectations, men
and women did not differ in their self-reported lying frequency, their unwillingness to lie due to internal
factors (i.e., negativity), or their tendency to tell relational lies. One possible explanation for these
partial findings might be that gender does not play a substantial role in people’s lying behavior when
examined in isolation from other relevant factors (e.g., personality traits or age). The fact that the
differences in self-reported lying between men and women were accompanied by small effect sizes
further supports this line of reasoning. In addition, previous research has, in fact, found that gender
differences in deceptive behavior can be partially mediated by individual differences in personality
traits, specifically the Dark Triad traits (Baughman et al., 2014). Furthermore, in terms of internal
factors, both men and women reported a moderate unwillingness to lie, influenced by factors such as
guilt or moral beliefs. However, when it came to external factors influencing their decision to lie,
women reported being less influenced by contextual factors or the stakes involved in their decisions to
lie, compared to men. These results suggests that men and women may generally have similar moral
views regarding lying, but in high-stakes situations, men may be more inclined to justify lying as
acceptable compared to women. This last finding should be interpreted with caution, however, as this
was revealed as only a marginally significantly gender difference. Nevertheless, these findings align
with Capraro’s (2018) meta-analysis, which found that gender differences in lying depend on the
consequences of lying versus telling the truth. Specifically, their results suggest that men and women
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
do not differ in their aversion to lying, however, men might lean towards more self-centred behaviour,
leading to a greater willingness to lie compared to women in situations in which lying benefits them
even at the expense of another person (e.g., high stakes situations). Overall, our findings replicate the
findings of previous research indicating that men tend to perceive themselves as better liars, are more
likely to justify lying as acceptable, and have a higher tendency to tell lies that might harm others
compared to women (Capraro, 2018; Hart et al., 2014; Makowski et al., 2021).
In addition to being among the few studies that considers positive response bias when investigating
lying behaviors through self-report, this study is also amongst the firsts to investigate supernormality
within a non-forensic sample. Our descriptive analyses revealed that most participants (71.3%) provided
credible responses, while over a quarter (28.7%) provided supernormal responses. This is an important
finding as it reveals that more than a quarter of participants within a non-forensic study tend to
spontaneously engage in supernormality when responding to a self-report questionnaire. Importantly,
within this study, there were no apparent incentives for participants to “fake good”, and participants’
anonymity was guaranteed, a factor known to reduce positive response bias in research (Harenberg et
al., 2022; Thielmann et al., 2016). Hence, these novel findings suggest that self-reported data, even in
low-stake contexts, can be susceptible to supernormality, raising questions about its reliability that
require further investigation.
Three limitations need to be considered when interpreting the findings of this study. Firstly, the
sample consisted mainly of young university students, which may limit the generalizability of the results
to the broader population. Previous research on the prevalence of lying has found that younger
individuals tend to lie more frequently than older individuals, suggesting that as individuals age and
mature, they engage in more adaptive methods of communication instead of lying (Buta et al., 2020;
Serota & Levine, 2015). Secondly, this study did not differentiate between frequent and infrequent liars.
Prior research has identified a small percentage of individuals who report lying very frequently (i.e.,
prolific liars). These individuals may exhibit different lying habits and characteristics and investigating
this subgroup separately could provide additional insights into lying behavior, albeit in relation to
supernormality (Daiku et al., 2021; Serota et al., 2010; Serota & Levine, 2015). Lastly, the interpretation
of our findings relies on the assumption that differences in self-reported lying behaviour between the
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING
credible and the supernormal group are suggestive of the latter engaging in deceitful self-presentation
and underreporting their lying behaviour. However, this assumption might be an oversimplification, as
there could be additional meaningful differences between these groups that could be influencing and
confounding our results. To mitigate this concern, efforts were made to maintain a balance between the
groups. Nevertheless, it remains an important factor to consider when interpreting our findings. Despite
these limitations, the current study is the first known research endeavor to consider positive response
bias while examining self-reported lying behaviors.
Conclusion
The current study investigated the influence of supernormality on self-reported lying. Our
findings indicate that 28.7% of our sample exhibited a tendency to present themselves as supernormal,
even when there were no incentives for doing so. Moreover, self-reported lying was found to be
influenced by supernormality, with individuals who exhibited such positive response bias consistently
reporting lower engagement in various lying behaviors, compared to more credible responders. We
interpreted these findings as suggestive of this particular group of supernormal individuals
underreporting their lying behavior. Additionally, a modest gender difference in lying behavior was
observed, with women tending to report a lower ability to lie, a decreased susceptibility to external
factors, and a reduced tendency to engage in antisocial lying compared to men. Taken together, our
study contributes to the growing body of research indicating that self-report measures are an efficient
tool for exploring lying behavior across diverse social contexts, yet can be significantly affected by
positive response bias, including supernormality. Our findings also provide novel insights about
supernormality in a non-forensic sample. Although the current findings pertain to lying behavior, it is
likely that supernormality impacts other self-reported phenomena, especially in cases in which
individuals feel compelled to minimize their faults or experience a need to be perceived positively (by
others and/or themselves). As such, our study underscores the importance of considering and addressing
positive response bias when investigating sensitive topics, like lying, when using self-report measures.
SUPERNORMALITY AND CONCEALMENT OF LYING