PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 1
This paper currently is in-press at Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment
© 2024, American Psychological Association. This paper is not the copy of record and may
not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article. Please do not copy or cite
without authors' permission. The final article will be available, upon publication, via its
DOI: 10.1037/per0000656
Understanding Broader Community Perspectives on the
Scientific Accuracy and Stigma of Personality Trait Labels
Kasey Stanton
University of Wyoming
Lindsay Gillikin
University of Wyoming
Liana Willis
University of California, Riverside
Ricardo Woods-Gonzalez
Arizona State University
Warner Myntti
Vanderbilt University
Caroline Paige
University of Notre Dame
Holly F. Levin-Aspenson
University of North Texas
Christina G. McDonnell
University of Wyoming
Noah N. Emery
Colorado State University
Author Note: This research received ethics board permission from the University of Wyoming
Institutional Review Board. Research procedures complied with American Psychological
Association ethical standards, and all participants provided their informed consent. The analyses
for this study were preregistered, and study data, materials, and preregistered analytic
be addressed to Kasey Stanton at kaseyjstanton@gmail.com.
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 1
Abstract
Many labels are used within and across subfields to describe personality disorder (PD) and
interpersonally-oriented trait dimensions. For example, “interpersonal disorders” is a suggested
alternative label to “personality disorders” in clinical research. Other “dark trait” terms, though
not proposed as formal labels for PDs, also are used in different research areas for describing
externalizing traits. Terminology changes have been proposed both due to concerns about
different descriptors’ validity and their usage potentially being stigmatizing. Improving
terminology consensus can also unify research and clinical assessment efforts, and we recruited
participants from a range of sources who provided their views on terminology used in PD
research towards this goal. This included data from 362 undergraduates, 408 adults recruited
online, and 161 adults recruited from the community, and we used targeted recruitment strategies
to ensure that individuals with a range of mental health histories were represented in our study.
All participants completed questionnaires assessing their personalities and symptoms, and a
subset of participants also completed structured clinical interviews. Results indicated that
traditional “personality disorders” terminology was viewed favorably compared to other terms
both in regard to scientific accuracy and stigma. Additionally, “interpersonal disorders”
terminology was also viewed more favorably overall than many other terms, whereas “dark trait”
terminology was viewed negatively. Participants’ characteristics (e.g., personality, age) were
mostly unrelated to their terminology views. These results provide insight into how various
descriptors are viewed by the broader community and provide a foundation for future research
investigating how different terms are perceived across contexts.
KEYWORDS: Personality disorders; dark triad; interpersonal; diagnosis; personality
assessment
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 2
Understanding Broader Community Perspectives on the
Scientific Accuracy and Stigma of Personality Trait Labels
There have been proposals to fundamentally change how personality disorders (PD) are
conceptualized, diagnosed, and labeled in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (currently 5 ed., text rev.; DSM–5-TR; American Psychiatric Association [APA],
th
2022; Monaghan & Bizumic, 2023). For example, alternative labels such as “interpersonal
disorders” have been proposed as potentially more valid and clinically useful than traditional
“personality disorders” terminology (Wright et al., 2022). Issues concerning terminology for
describing interpersonal difficulties and externalizing traits (e.g., disinhibition) are not limited to
the clinical literature, however. Recent debate centers on the utility of “dark triad” or “dark trait”
labels for describing dimensions such as narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism that are
studied across the social, personality, and industrial-organizational literatures (Kay & Arrow,
2022; cf. Andrews et al., 2023). Measures of PDs, the dark triad, and models such as the five-
factor model (FFM) and interpersonal circumplex, though not isomorphic, all include some
content assessing tendencies toward being empathetic and cooperative, or lack thereof (Rose et
al., 2023). Other commonalities across select models include disinhibited externalizing
tendencies that parallel (low) FFM conscientiousness being described as features of some PDs
and psychopathy (Koehn et al., 2019; Vize et al., 2021).
Working towards common terminology for labeling overlapping traits can facilitate more
direct comparison of findings and increase dialogue across subfields, as seen in studies
examining the correspondence of trait ratings across models with the goal of unifying research
efforts (e.g., Levin-Aspenson et al., 2023; Rose et al., 2023; Vize et al., 2021). However, in cases
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 3
involving clear trait parallels across models, which terminology is optimal for labeling trait
dimensions?
Integrating Broader Community Perspectives on Trait Terminology
One avenue for addressing these questions concerning terminology involves integrating
perspectives from the broader public and community. Assessing broader community perspectives
on the meaning of diagnostic terminology is important from a dissemination and implementation
perspective to assess the degree to which public perceptions of constructs align with definitions
used by researchers and clinicians. More specifically, assessing community members’
perspectives on the meaning of terminology can sharpen measurement approaches by providing
insight into sources of information that individuals draw upon when providing information about
themselves (e.g., how varying the title of a measure might influence responses; Mason et al.,
2023), in addition to assessing the clarity of administration instructions and item wording. For
example, assessment validity may be negatively impacted if individuals rely on different sources
of information than researchers and clinicians intend when reporting on their personalities and
mental health histories (Mason et al., 2023; Stanton et al., 2018).
Example studies integrating broader community perspectives find that community adults
generally agree with researchers and clinicians regarding which narcissistic PD features are
central versus peripheral (Miller et al., 2017), thereby informing narcissism conceptualizations
and assessment. Additionally, the dimensionally-based Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality
Disorders (AMPD) has been proposed as a system for addressing limitations of the categorical
DSM PD model (Monaghan & Bizumic, 2023). Cano and Sharp’s (2023) assessment of
diagnostic model perceptions across undergraduate and clinical/community samples identified
both potential benefits and challenges of using dimensionally-based models for communicating
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 4
clinical information with patients. Other research on clinical communication indicates that
individuals who have received a borderline PD diagnosis often describe that providers fail to
clearly communicate evidenced-based treatment options and the meaning of a PD diagnosis
(Lester et al., 2020; Tedesco et al., 2023). Furthermore, Masland et al. (2023) provide
recommendations for addressing borderline PD stigma, including guidelines for engaging lived-
experience perspectives that could be used to build upon the illustrative studies reviewed.
Given proposals to refine PD terminology and conceptualizations, we focus here on
understanding community members’ perspectives toward terminology when used to describe PD
traits specifically. Prior to describing our study goals, we review terms included in our study that
(a) have been proposed to replace traditional PDs labels and/or (b) are used in contemporary
research, even if they have not been proposed as formal diagnostic labels (e.g., “dark triad”
terminology, which has not been proposed for labeling PDs). As we discuss next, researchers
have suggested that some terms are more valid than others and that some terminology is
sensationalized and stigmatizing. However, questions concerning broader community
perceptions of terminology remain largely unanswered, which is surprising in some ways given
the widespread use of different terms and recent terminology proposals. Recognizing that lived
and personal experiences may also shape researchers’ viewpoints (Haywood et al., 2023;
Tedesco et al., 2023), assessing community members’ perspectives, including individuals with a
PD diagnosis, provides data toward refining construct description in PD research.
Review of Terminology Proposals and Terminology Used in Contemporary Research
First, Wright and colleagues (2022) proposed rebranding PDs as “interpersonal disorders”
as discussed. More explicit focus on interpersonal dynamics through this relabeling may sharpen
treatment planning by identifying interpersonal antecedents of affective, cognitive, and
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 5
behavioral responses (e.g., social reactivity characteristic of narcissistic PD). This rebranding
may also shift treatment focus from viewing the individual and their personality as problematic,
to focusing more collaboratively on issues an individual may be experiencing in specific contexts
(Wright et al., 2022). However, Widiger et al. (2023) describe potential issues with Wright et
al.’s (2022) “interpersonal disorders” proposal, including that interpersonal difficulties and
impairment may not sufficiently differentiate PDs from other disorders, among other issues (e.g.,
the degree to which interpersonally-focused models are comprehensive).
Second, other descriptors not proposed as formal terminology replacements also are used as
variants of standard PD terminology in contemporary research. This includes terminology such
as “personality pathology,” which is sometimes used to refer to PD traits dimensionally or in a
general sense rather than referring to one specific PD (e.g., Cano & Sharp, 2023; Rodriguez-
Seijas et al., 2023; Watson & Clark, 2023). Additionally, “characterological” terminology
features less prominently in contemporary than past research based on previous DSM versions
(Bliton et al., 2017), but is still used in some cases to describe relatively stable symptom
experiences (e.g., “characterological depression” Fjermestad-Noll et al., 2019).
Lastly, we also included “dark trait” terminology in our study, keeping in mind that (a)
dark triad terminology has not been proposed as a formal replacement for DSM diagnostic labels
and (b) “dark traits” (e.g., narcissism, psychopathy, Machiavellianism) often are conceptualized
as subclinical traits that are studied outside the clinical literature (Koehn et al., 2019).
Furthermore, although dark trait measures have been used in some research on narcissistic,
antisocial, and other “cluster B” PDs (e.g., di Giacomo et al., 2023; Stead et al., 2012; Vossen et
al., 2017), dark trait models and measures have little alignment with the criteria of other PDs
(e.g., schizotypal PD) that do not describe externalizing traits or features. Acknowledging these
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 6
considerations, descriptors such as “dark” have been criticized for potentially lacking precision
(Kay & Arrow, 2022), though others argue that the dark triad provides a valid framework for
guiding efficient externalizing trait assessment (Andrews et al., 2023). Dark trait terminology
(including terms such as “evil” and “nightmare” traits used in recent studies) also has been
criticized as being sensationalized and stigmatizing (Kay & Arrow, 2023; Miller et al., 2022).
In lieu of dark trait labels, alternatives such as “aversive” and “socially aversive” traits are
sometimes used (Kay & Arrow, 2022; Muris et al., 2017), though these terms have not been
proposed as formal PD labels either. One consideration with using terminology such as “socially
aversive” concerns its degree of applicability for describing specific traits and behaviors that
may not always be perceived as “aversive” or negatively by others across situations and contexts
(e.g., specific narcissistic traits may be associated with leadership emergence, though not
effectiveness; how others perceive these traits may vary over time and according to different
contextual factors; Grijalva et al., 2015; Johnson et al., 2012; Muris et al., 2017). Acknowledging
these issues, we included “socially aversive traits” terminology in our study to enable
comparison with other labels.
Current Study Goals
Our study provides insights into how different descriptors are perceived by community
members recruited from different sources, which provides data towards unifying research efforts
and construct description as reviewed. Specifically, we present results summarizing over 900
participants’ views on the degree to which they view terminology used in PD research to be
scientifically accurate, stigmatizing, and acceptable for use by researchers and clinicians. This
included recruiting (a) undergraduates, (b) adults recruited online, and (c) other adults from the
community recruited using methods to increase the likelihood that individuals with a PD
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 7
diagnosis and other mental health histories were represented. Given that participants were
recruited from a range of sources, we refer to participants collectively as “community members”
for brevity going forward when discussing the broader implications of findings.
Second, we also examined how ratings of community members’ own PD traits assessed
across self-report and interview methods were associated with their terminology views. In
addition to assessing PDs, we assessed other commonly-experienced internalizing symptoms and
substance use, as well as other variables often included in studies on mental health attitudes such
as age, gender, education level, and treatment history (e.g., Furnham et al., 2011; Koepernik et
al., 2021; Stanton et al., 2018). Including these other variables in addition to PD ratings enabled
us to determine the extent to which any notable associations were more specific versus
generalized. For example, it is possible that having a PD diagnosis and/or elevated PD trait levels
may alter individuals’ views of specific terms if terms are viewed as more personally relevant.
Including assessment of other symptoms and substance use allowed us to draw clearer
conclusions regarding the extent to which observed associations were nonspecifically associated
with a range of mental health variables versus PD ratings specifically.
Timestamped Analytic Information and General Predictions
Our study was not preregistered, but we timestamped several general predictions and our
Our analyses were largely exploratory with a focus on summarizing community members’
viewpoints and then quantifying observed differences and associations. Acknowledging this, our
first general prediction was that dark trait terms—particularly terms such as “evil” that may carry
a moral connotation—would be viewed as stigmatizing and rated unfavorably overall.
Predictions for other terms were harder to quantify a priori: For example, on the one hand,
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 8
traditional PD terminology may be viewed favorably if it is perceived as having scientific
legitimacy due to being the DSM’s descriptor; conversely, perhaps traditional PD terminology
may be viewed somewhat negatively due to the stigma often associated with PD diagnosis. Next,
self-ratings of personality, education level, and individuals’ own mental health treatment history
have been shown to associate with attitudes towards PDs and mental health literacy (e.g.,
Furnham et al., 2011; Koepernik et al., 2021). However, our scope differed by focusing on
terminology perceptions, and we did not have firm predictions for specific associations due to a
lack of prior research directly examining views of trait terms. As a general prediction, we
anticipated that various participant characteristics would associate moderately at most in
magnitude (i.e., .30) with their terminology ratings. Although prior research has not assessed
terminology views, we predicted this given that community members’ own characteristics tend
to associate weakly with general PD attitudes, even if these associations are statistically
significant at different p-value thresholds (Koepernik et al., 2021; Stanton et al., 2018).
Method
Transparency and Openness: Study Data, Materials, and Evaluation of Response Validity
Study data, analytic syntax, and materials are available on the OSF (Stanton, 2023):
were removed from datafiles shared on the OSF to ensure participant anonymity, and a datafile
with all study data linked is available upon request from the first author.
Participants and Procedure
All procedures complied with American Psychological Association ethical standards, and
all participants provided informed consent. Participants were required to be 18 years or older and
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 9
residing in the US. All participants completed questionnaires assessing their terminology views,
personalities, and symptoms, and select participants completed clinical interviews.
We combined data from undergraduates, adults recruited online using the Prolific platform,
and adults recruited from other locations into a combined sample (details of each subgroup are
described subsequently). Participant questionnaire data were screened prior to analysis for
response validity (e.g., participants failing to respond to nearly all items), and surveys
administered to all participants also included multiple validity attention check items (e.g., select
“disagree a little”). The undergraduate sample originally consisted of 488 participants. However,
126 undergraduates failed validity checks (n = 52) or failed to complete most questionnaires (n =
74), reducing the undergraduate sample size to 362 participants (74.2% of original participants).
Much smaller percentages of data were removed for samples of (a) participants recruited from
Prolific (original n = 441; n = 13 and 20 failed validity checks and failed to provide PD
terminology data, respectively; final n = 408; 92.5% of original) and (b) adults recruited from
other community sources (original n = 165; n = 4 failed validity checks; final n = 161; 97.6%).
Online Appendix S1 provides additional details concerning response validity assessment and
handling of remaining missing data, which was very minimal after removing invalid cases.
After removing problematic cases, our combined sample size was 931 participants.
Regarding the recruitment details of specific samples, undergraduate participants (n = 362) were
recruited from a Psychology Department subject pool at a university in the western US.
Undergraduates were recruited between September 2022-May 2023 and received course credit
for participation. Second, participants (n = 408) recruited online using Prolific, a crowdsourcing
data collection platform, participated during August 2022. We refer to this sample as the
“Prolific” sample going forward. Only participants who had previously responded “yes” to built-
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 10
in Prolific filter questions about having a current or previous mental health diagnosis were
eligible to participate. Prolific participants received $5 USD compensation, with median
completion time being approximately 20 minutes. Our third sample, referred to as the
“community sample” (n = 161) going forward, was recruited using advertisements posted at a
range of locations. These locations included online mental health resource websites (e.g., the
National Education Alliance for Borderline Personality Disorder; Depression and Bipolar
Support Alliance websites), local community mental health centers, a University-based
outpatient clinic, and other community and online locations. These participants’ total
involvement was expected to require approximately 1.5 hours total due to including both
questionnaires and a clinical interview, and compensation was $35 USD.
separately. Most participants in the combined sample were White or European American (88.6%
overall); 8.9% were Hispanic or Latine. Most participants were women, and average age was
29.1 years (SD =11.9; range = 18-76), though there was considerable variation in age in the
combined sample and in the Prolific and community samples. Over half of combined sample
participants reported currently accessing mental health treatment (psychotherapy and/or
medication) due to using the targeted recruitment strategies described. Across samples, 4.3% of
participants (n = 40) self-reported having a diagnosis of “borderline personality disorder or
another personality disorder” (n = 19, n = 17, and n = 4 for the number of participants self-
reporting a PD diagnosis in the community, Prolific, and undergraduate samples, respectively).
Self-Report Measures Administered Across Samples
1 For studies providing financial compensation, compensation rates varied slightly from those shown above for some
initial study participants during early study recruitment phases. Compensation rates were adjusted with ethics board
approval after obtaining more accurate estimates of participation completion times to ensure adequate compensation.
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 11
Terminology Ratings
The full set of instructions and questions participants used to rate their PD views are
provided in Online Appendix S2 and on the OSF. Prior to rating terms, participants viewed a
paragraph summarizing the DSM general PD criteria. They were also provided with example PD
labels in this opening descriptive material (e.g., narcissistic PD, borderline PD) and were
presented with material describing that viewpoints differ regarding which terminology is optimal
for describing PDs. Nine different PD terms (e.g., “interpersonal disorders”; “dark traits”) were
included across items administered. Participants both rank-ordered terms and provided graded
ratings of terms on a 1-6 scale.
For rank-ordered questions, participants ranked (a) how scientifically accurate they found
terms, (b) the degree to which they found terms stigmatizing, and (c) which terms they preferred
that researchers and clinicians use. Items using a rank-ordered format provided information
complementing items where participants rated each term separately on a 6-point scale. For
example, in cases where two terms had similar mean ratings of scientific accuracy, including
rank-ordered items enabled us to determine which of these two terms participants preferred when
asked to rank them. Questions used to obtain mean ratings involved participants rating terms on a
6-point scale as reviewed, with questions focusing on similar themes of (a) scientific accuracy,
(b) the extent to which each term was viewed as stigmatizing, and (c) overall acceptability for
use by mental health professionals (generally paralleling the “preferred use” rank-ordered
question, though wording was changed to fit a 1-6 response format).
Regarding our rationale for administering the specific items reviewed, we included an item
assessing stigma because some terms included in our study have been identified as potentially
sensationalized, in addition to PDs commonly being stigmatized more generally (Masland et al.,
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 12
2023). Scientific accuracy also was assessed because terms such as “interpersonal disorders”
have been proposed as potentially more valid empirically than traditional PD terminology
(Wright et al., 2022; cf., Widiger et al., 2023). Lastly, items assessing preferred use and
acceptability of use by mental health professionals were included to provide more
comprehensive assessment. Specifically, inclusion of these items enabled us to examine how
participants would view terms being used in research studies or treatment settings in a more
concrete sense, in addition to items assessing attitudes toward potentially more abstract aspects
of terms (e.g., their degree of scientific accuracy). For example, it is possible that participants
could view a term as scientifically accurate, but also view a term less favorably in other ways if
it were used to describe self-relevant traits or experiences. Across questions, the ordering of
terms was randomized so that no one term was systematically viewed before or after others.
Finally, after completing all other questions, participants had the opportunity to suggest any
alternative labels they thought would be optimal for PD description other than the terms they
already viewed.
Self-Ratings of Personality and Personality Functioning
All participants completed the 25-item Personality Inventory for DSM-5-Brief Form (PID-
5-BF; APA, 2013). The PID-5-BF assesses trait domains of Negative Affectivity, Detachment,
Antagonism, Disinhibition, and Psychoticism using 5 items for each domain. The PID-5-BF uses
a 4-point scale (0 = Very false or often false to 3 = Very true or often true). Prolific and
community sample participants also completed the 12-item Level of Personality Functioning
Scale-Brief Form 2.0 (LPFS-BF 2.0; Weekers et al., 2019). The LPFS-BF 2.0 uses a 4-point
scale (1 = completely untrue to 4 = completely true), and item scores were summed to create a
general personality functioning index (Weekers et al., 2019).
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 13
Self-Ratings of Other Symptoms and Substance Use
All participants completed the Dysphoria (10 items), Mania (5 items), and Euphoria scales
(5 items) from the Expanded Version of the Inventory of Depression and Anxiety Symptoms
(IDAS-II; Watson et al., 2012). The IDAS-II uses a 5-point scale (1 = not at all to 5 = extremely)
scale in reference to the past 2 weeks. Undergraduate and community participants also completed
the 10-item Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT; Saunders et al., 1993) and the 8-
item Cannabis Use Disorders Identification Test-Revised (CUDIT-R; Adamson et al., 2010) to
assess alcohol and cannabis use, respectively, and possible impacts of use. Both the AUDIT and
CUDIT-R provide assessment of the past 6 months, and all items were rated on a 0 to 4 scale.
Interview Measures Administered to Community Sample Participants
Approximately 90% (145/161) of community participants completed clinical interviews in
addition to self-report questionnaires, which were administered using HIPAA-secure Zoom
accounts. Interview assessment generally paralleled self-report assessment by targeting (a)
internalizing symptoms, (b) substance use often studied in relation to PDs (Trull et al., 2018), (c)
borderline PD traits studied widely in the clinical literature (Masland et al., 2023), and (d) other
externalizing traits studied across the clinical and other literatures (Watson & Clark, 2023).
Internalizing assessment included 13 items from Diagnostic Interview for Anxiety, Mood,
and OCD and Related Neuropsychiatric Disorders (DIAMOND; Tolin et al., 2018), a semi-
structured open-source interview. Of these items, 8 assessed major depressive symptoms (major
depressive symptoms other than thoughts of death/suicidal ideation ). Items assessing worry,
tension, irritability, feeling anxious in social situations, and fearing social judgment also were
2 This major depression item and two of the borderline PD items were not administered due to logistic and ethics
board restrictions related to the remote assessment of suicidality. Study interviewers were trained to follow
structured, evidence-based protocols for risk assessment if needed even though these questions were not included.
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 14
included to increase comprehensiveness of commonly experienced internalizing symptoms that
associate strongly with depressive symptoms (Conway et al., 2022). Next, select items from the
Structured Interview for DSM-IV Personality (SIDP-IV; Pfohl et al., 1997) were administered to
assess PD traits. This included (a) the 9 items used to assess narcissistic PD traits, (b) the 7 items
for assessing antisocial PD criterion A traits, and (c) 7 items assessing borderline PD traits. All
SIDP-IV items were rated on a 0 (not present), 1 (subthreshold), or 2 (present) scale. Ratings for
each PD were summed to create a composite for each diagnostic construct rather than combining
them into broader composites as was done for the DIAMOND internalizing items because they
constituted a larger, more heterogeneous set of items overall (i.e., 23 PD items versus 13
internalizing items). Additionally, interview versions of the AUDIT (10 items) and CUDIT-R (8
items total) mirroring their self-report versions were administered. All AUDIT and CUDIT-R
items were rated on a 0-4 scale. We considered combining AUDIT and CUDIT items into a
single substance use index, but opted against doing so because AUDIT and CUDIT-R total
scores correlated weakly in our data (r = .21; n = 140).
Interviewers were PhD-level clinical psychologists, graduate students in doctoral
psychology programs, postbaccalaureate researchers with a bachelor's degree in psychology, and
senior-year undergraduates, all of whom were supervised by a PhD-level psychologist while
conducting interviews (N = 8 total interviewers). Interviewers completed a detailed training
process including didactics on interviewing and symptom criteria, observing several or more
interviews, being observed for multiple interviews before conducting interviews independently,
and attending recurring training and review meetings. Interviews were audio recorded, and a
second independent rater recoded 25 of the initial interviews for computing inter-rater reliability
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 15
(IRR). Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) computed to quantify IRR indicated acceptable
to strong agreement for all ratings (ICC = .78 for narcissistic traits; all other ICCs > .85).
Results
Overview and Descriptive Statistics for Trait, Symptom, and Substance Use Ratings
Our presentation of results follows our timestamped analytic plan (again see
participants’ personality and mental health ratings were used in select analyses, as summarized in
coefficient omega estimates for self and interview ratings of personality and mental health (all
coefficient omegas > .70 for self-report measures; > .75 for interview ratings), and correlations
and reporting correlations in subsequent sections, we report statistical significance at a p < .001
level given the wide range of analyses conducted using a large sample.
Views of Terminology: Ranking Frequencies and Mean Ratings
Terminology Ranking Data
accuracy and (b) preferred use by researchers and clinicians by over half of participants (59%
and 57.6%, respectively). It also was most commonly ranked as the least stigmatizing term
(30.7%; lower ranks indicate being ranked as less stigmatizing). We conducted McNemar tests
for comparing proportions in the same sample for the most preferred term, which in this case,
involved comparing frequencies for “personality disorders” with the term that was rated as most
preferred the second most frequently. For both scientific accuracy and preferred use, “personality
pathology” was ranked as the preferred term the second most frequently (9%, 10.2%,
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 16
respectively) and “interpersonal disorders” the third most frequently (8%, 9.2%, respectively),
but these frequencies were significantly lower at p < .001 than those for “personality disorders.”
Next, “interpersonal pathology” was ranked as the least stigmatizing term by 15.4% of
participants, but this was significantly lower than the 30.7% for “personality disorders” (p value
< .001). Regarding other terms, “dark traits” was rated as the second least scientifically accurate
(77.7%), second least preferred (76.1%), and second most stigmatizing term (80.1%). Only the
term “evil traits” was ranked less favorably. “Socially-aversive traits” also received lower
scientific accuracy and preferred use rankings, as well as higher stigma rankings.
We then used chi-square tests to examine whether the frequency at which “personality
disorders” was ranked as the most preferred term varied as a function of the following
categorical variables across metrics examined (i.e., scientific accuracy, preferred use, least
stigmatizing): Sample, treatment status, gender , and self-reported PD diagnosis. Across all
comparisons, there were no differences at p < .001 in the frequency of “personality disorders”
being ranked as the most favorable term. Online Supplemental Tables S3 (undergraduate), S4
(Prolific), and S5 (community) provide breakdowns of this frequency rank information for each
sample. As these tables show, “personality disorders” was ranked as the most scientifically
accurate, most preferred, and least stigmatizing term in each sample (with chi-square tests failing
to indicate significant cross-sample differences at p < .001 as reviewed). Regarding other aspects
of cross-sample consistency, “dark traits” and “evil traits" were consistently ranked as second
We recognize different methods for creating comparison groups. For our comparisons, groups were defined as (a)
cisgender women; (b) cisgender men; and (c) individuals of any gender-diverse identity (e.g., nonbinary, agender;
respectively. Participants could select multiple response options in our demographic questionnaire, so these group
participants to groups.
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 17
and first most stigmatizing, least scientifically accurate, and least preferred, respectively
(frequencies > 70% for each rating across samples).
Mean Terminology Ratings
Correlations between all nine mean ratings across metrics are provided in Online
moderately to strongly correlated in some cases, though not so strongly as to be redundant.
Terms’ stigma ratings generally correlated weakly to moderately with their other ratings.
Mean values and SDs for terms rated using rating scales (rather than rankings) in both the
corresponded with their ranking data. For example, “personality disorders” tended to have higher
mean scores for scientific accuracy and acceptability and lower scores on stigma than other
terms. Terms such as “interpersonal disorders” again were viewed positively overall, with “dark
traits” and “evil traits” receiving high ratings for stigma (average response > 5.0/6 across
samples) and low mean ratings on other metrics. As Online Supplemental Tables S7 and S8
display, patterns of mean scores were similar when separating our sample by gender and current
treatment status in addition to being similar overall across sample type.
Per our timestamped analytic plan, we formally compared mean scores and examined
associations with other self-report and interview measures for the following four terms that have
been the focus of recent proposals and debate: “personality disorders”; “interpersonal disorders”;
One deviation from our timestamped analytic plan that is described in Online Appendix S1 includes not reporting a
sequence of two-way ANOVAs where sample, gender, treatment status, and whether participants self-reported
having a PD diagnosis were entered into models as between-person factors (e.g., a two-way ANOVA where term
ratings of scientific accuracy constituted a within-person factor and sample type was entered as a between-person
factor). Examination of these models indicated that interactions for between- and within-person factors were not
significant in some cases (e.g., for gender and stigma ratings) and in cases where significant interactions and
pairwise comparisons were observed, overall patterns of results did not change (e.g., “dark traits” always received a
mean rating well below other terms). Therefore, these results would have required significant detail to explain
without altering overall conclusions.
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 18
“socially aversive traits”; and “dark traits.” We also focused on quantifying mean differences and
associations for these theoretically key terms because it would have been unwieldy to compare
all terms, and these terms tended to receive high or low mean rankings and ratings anyway.
We quantified differences between these four terms using repeated measures analysis of
variance (rmANOVA). This approach is an extension of a paired samples t-test for comparing
more than two ratings in the same dataset, and differences between ratings are compared as
within-person differences. We conducted a rmANOVA for each metric (scientific accuracy,
acceptability, stigma). A Greenhouse-Geisser correction was used due to sphericity assumption
violations across models, and the overall model for within-person differences was significant at p
< .001 in all three cases (scientific accuracy F[2.81, 2600.56] = 1562.28; acceptability F[2.69,
2484.87] = 1837.32; stigma F[2.43, 2239.66] = 846.45). Pairwise comparisons for individual
term ratings also were significant at p < .001 for every comparison (e.g., when comparing the
scientific accuracy rating for “socially aversive” with scientific accuracy ratings for other terms).
The only exception was that the mean difference for stigma ratings for “interpersonal disorders”
and “personality disorders” was not significant at p < .001 (p = .04; mean difference = .12;
all pairwise comparisons, and means for “dark trait” ratings differed at an effect size > 1.0 from
ratings for all other terms for all comparisons across models.
Correlations for Term Ratings and Other Study Measures
Pearson correlations for other study self and interview ratings with terminology ratings are
|.15| (rs = .22 and .18 for IDAS-II Euphoria with “dark traits” ratings). Correlations for interview
ratings were slightly stronger in some cases (e.g., with scientific accuracy ratings of “dark
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 19
traits”), though only the correlation for antisocial PD traits with scientific accuracy ratings for
“dark traits” was significant at p < .001 due to the smaller sample size for these correlations (r =
.30, p < .001; n = 145). We also examined how self-reported PD diagnostic status correlated with
consistently very weak and nonsignificant (all rs < |.10|; correlation Ns = 926-930).
Summary of Participant Write-In Responses for Ideas for Terminology
Lastly, 7.2% of all participants (67/931) provided write-in responses for alternative PD
terminology ideas. Two study authors independently organized responses into groups for data
reduction. Data reduction rather than a more extensive coding approach was selected given the
nature of the responses collected (i.e., brief write-ins only) and the small number of total write-in
(1) “Personality differences” terminology (n =11); (2) general mental or behavioral health
language (n = 6; e.g., “behavior health disorders”); (3) neurodiversity or related terminology (n =
5; e.g., “neurodivergent traits”); (4) terminology emphasizing regulation (n = 4; e.g., “emotion
regulation disorders”); (5) terms including disability language (n = 2; e.g., “personality
disability”); and (6) “uncategorized” if not aligning with a previous grouping (n = 19). Raters
grouped 41/47 (87.2%) of terms into the same group (i.e., did each rater assign each term to the
same group; kappa coefficient quantifying grouping consistency = .82). Other responses (n = 20)
described broader viewpoints or repeated a term already listed in our questionnaire (e.g.,
“personality disorders”) and were not included in the groupings reviewed.
Discussion
Our study provides insight into how terminology used in PD and related research areas is
viewed by community members, including individuals currently accessing treatment
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 20
(representing a majority of our sample). On the whole, traditional PD terminology was viewed
more favorably than other terms, with “interpersonal disorder” terminology also being viewed
more positively than some terms. In contrast, dark trait terms were viewed unfavorably.
Community members’ mental health histories and other characteristics (e.g., age) tended to
correlate very weakly with their terminology ratings across examination of over 200 correlations.
Similarly, we did not observe marked differences in terminology views by categorical grouping
variables (e.g., current treatment status), suggesting strong consistency in results overall.
Personality Disorders Terminology
“Personality disorders” terminology was viewed favorably overall as reviewed. Similarly,
the variant term of “personality pathology” tended to receive higher ratings than many other
terms, even if it was not rated as highly as “personality disorders.” These findings are
encouraging given these terms’ widespread use, though it would be helpful to use different study
designs to examine the extent to which these results were due to “personality disorders” being
the current DSM terminology (which participants may reasonably assume is indicative of this
terminology having more than legitimacy than other terms due to being used in diagnostic
manuals). Furthermore, it is possible that other terms not included here would be viewed more
favorably than any of the terms included. Our assessment of community members’ viewpoints
was brief overall, and qualitative research assessing views of terminology in much more depth
than was done here would be useful going forward (see Mason et al., 2023 for an example
focused on personality assessment that used in-depth approaches with fewer participants).
Regarding other considerations related to use of standard PD language, it would have been
interesting to assess terminology views in relation to the AMPD, which may eventually supplant
current DSM PD descriptions as discussed (Monaghan & Bizumic, 2023). In addition to models
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 21
such as the AMPD that would alter PD conceptualizations specifically, more comprehensive
dimensional frameworks such as the Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology (HiTOP;
Conway et al., 2022) would reshape diagnostic classification even more broadly. Issues
concerning terminology precision and utility still would apply to models such as the HiTOP and
AMPD (see Masland et al., 2023), even if labels refer to dimensions rather than traditional
diagnostic categories.
Furthermore, efforts such as HiTOP illustrate the considerable heterogeneity within and
across PD diagnoses, which may have impacted our results. For example, community members’
views of specific terms could vary depending on the specific PD in question or even for some
features of a single disorder more than others. Open-ended write-in responses indicated that
some participants may have had specific diagnoses in mind, as two participants suggested the
label “emotion regulation disorders,” a label paralleling borderline PD. Other write-in responses
possibly related to dimensional, continuum conceptualizations focused on describing
“personality differences” and variation. Furthermore, write-ins related to neurodiversity may
have been used to indicate that PDs should be viewed as reflecting differences aligning with
neurodiversity perspectives, though we were not able to assess participants’ intended meaning of
write-in responses.
Interpersonal Terminology
The terminology “interpersonal disorders” (and also “interpersonal pathology”) was viewed
more favorably than other terms such as “dark traits” and “socially aversive traits,” though less
favorably than traditional PD terminology in some ways. When interpreting results, it is possible
that community members’ views may have been altered had they been provided with more
detailed descriptions of each term and the justification for using a term, which was not possible
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 22
to provide in this case due to time and resource constraints. For example, some participants’
rankings and ratings may have been altered had they been presented with explanations of the
possible benefits of “interpersonal” terminology, which may include it being less stigmatizing if
it shifts focus from individuals’ personalities to interpersonal difficulties they are experiencing.
Regardless, in summary, when considering results holistically for “interpersonal disorders,”
community members seemed to view this terminology at least somewhat favorably overall.
Dark Trait Terminology
There are no formal proposals to label the PDs using “dark trait” terminology, and dark
trait measures overlap with measures used to assess some PDs (e.g., narcissistic PD) much more
than others (e.g., schizotypal PD, schizoid PD). Still, dark trait terminology is used in some PD
research and in externalizing trait research more generally as discussed. As predicted, the term
“evil” was viewed the most negatively of any term, and the more general descriptor “dark” also
was viewed negatively overall. Notably, there was relatively little variation in how these terms
were ranked (e.g., over 90% of participants ranked “dark traits” and “evil traits” as one of the
three least scientifically accurate terms). We hope these specific results will provide useful
information for researchers to consider when selecting terms for PD research, as these findings
suggest that community members recruited from different sources consistently perceived these
terms negatively and as inaccurate.
Related to dark trait research, “socially aversive traits” is another term sometimes used in
place of dark trait terminology. Ratings for this term were more positive than those for dark trait
terms based on these results. However, “socially aversive traits” still was not viewed positively
overall, which is another important finding for researchers to consider given recent discussions
around terminology usage (Andrews et al., 2023; Kay & Arrow, 2022).
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 23
Other Terminology
“Characterological” terminology also was included for the sake of comprehensiveness.
These terms were rarely ranked or viewed as most preferred, but nor were they viewed
particularly negatively. These findings provide useful information in that they suggest none of
these terms represent a particularly compelling alternative to standard terminology. Had one of
these terms been viewed particularly favorably then perhaps such a term would warrant more
attention in future research, but that was not the case here.
Other Limitations, Future Directions, and Conclusion
In addition to the future directions already reviewed, although our study provides
descriptive information about community members’ views, we recognize that it does not address
questions concerning construct boundaries, the utility of specific models in different contexts, or
how terminology would be perceived in all situations (e.g., what constitutes a “dark” trait or the
predictive validity of the dark triad or other frameworks; see Andrews et al., 2023; Kay &
Arrow, 2022; Koehn et al., 2019; Muris et al., 2017 for theoretical reviews). We anticipate
ongoing dialogue about these issues, and it would be useful to extend our study by examining
perceptions of terms when they are used to refer to personality tendencies in social, personality,
and other research areas in addition to focusing on PDs as was done here.
Next, community members’ characteristics generally associated very weakly with their
terminology views, although there were a few exceptions such as antisocial PD ratings
correlating moderately with some dark trait terminology ratings. It would be interesting to
examine the replicability and meaning of these and other associations in other samples, as well as
to determine if other aspects of community members’ mental health histories not assessed here
might be related to their views of terminology (e.g., assessing other symptoms and traits;
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 24
assessing familiarity with PD diagnostic criteria). Our sample also included relatively few
individuals with a PD diagnosis (n = 40 self-reported diagnosis) even with use of targeted
recruitment strategies, such that assessing views in other samples and in more depth would be
useful as discussed. Other generalizability limits include our sample being homogenous in some
ways (e.g., regarding racial identity), even though our sample was large overall.
Regarding other future directions, concerningly, trainees may develop more negative
attitudes towards individuals with PDs as they progress in their training (Lindell-Innes et al.,
2023). This highlights a need for improving training in PD diagnosis and treatment, and research
could also extend our study by evaluating the extent to which mental health professionals’ views
of terminology align with those from the broader community (e.g., when comparing traditional
PD with “interpersonal” terminology). Going forward, it also will be important to connect issues
concerning terminology and stigma with efforts focused on improving the accessibility of
evidence-based PD treatment options, rather than studying each in isolation. Research guiding
treatment for some specific externalizing PD features also remains very limited overall (Nook et
al., 2022). We commend recent efforts to disseminate efficient new treatments (Sauer-Zavala et
al., 2023), as well as related efforts integrating treatment research with research focused on
improving construct description and measurement (Sauer-Zavala, 2022).
In summary, we hope future research will build from these findings to better understand
views of terminology, improve terminology precision, and sharpen construct definitions to unify
study design and assessment approaches. Acknowledging the limitations described, our study
represents one step toward this goal, and we hope these data provide useful information for
researchers to consider when studying terminology perceptions and describing constructs.
PERSONALITY DISORDER AND EXTERNALIZING TRAIT TERMINOLOGY 25