PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 1
Domain-Specific and Domain-General Skills as Predictors of
Arithmetic Fluency Development
Riikka Mononen a) b), Johan Korhonen c), Karoline Hægeland b), Matin Younesi b),
Silke M. Göbel d, b), and Markku Niemivirta e)
a) Special and Inclusive Education, University of Oulu, Finland
b) Department of Special Needs Education, University of Oslo, Norway
c) Faculty of Education and Welfare Studies, Åbo Akademi University, Finland
d) Department of Psychology, University of York, UK
e) School of Applied Educational Science and Teacher Education, University of Eastern
Finland, Finland
Abstract
We investigated Norwegian children’s (n = 262) development in arithmetic fluency from
first to third grade. Children’s arithmetic fluency was measured at four time points,
domain-specific (i.e., symbolic magnitude processing and number sequences) and
domain-general skills (i.e., working memory, rapid naming, non-verbal reasoning, and
sustained attention) once in the first grade. Based on a series of growth mixture models,
one developmental trajectory best described the data. Multigroup latent growth curve
models showed that girls and boys developed similarly in their arithmetic fluency over
time. Symbolic magnitude processing and number sequence skills predicted both initial
level and growth in arithmetic fluency, and working memory predicted only initial level,
similarly for boys and girls. Mother’s education level predicted the initial level of
arithmetic fluency for boys, and rapid naming predicted growth for girls. Our findings
highlight the role of domain-specific skills in the development of arithmetic fluency.
Keywords: arithmetic fluency, number sequence skills, gender, symbolic magnitude
processing, working memory
Corresponding concerning this article should be addressed to Riikka Mononen, Special
and Inclusive Education, P.O. Box 8000, 90140 University of Oulu, Finland. Email:
riikka.mononen@oulu.fi
Preprint version 3, under review, 13 September 2024
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 2
Domain-Specific and Domain-General Skills as Predictors of Arithmetic Fluency
Development
1 Introduction
Fluent arithmetic fact retrieval is one of the key areas in mathematics that
children need to learn during their first years in school, as this skill is the foundation for
later, more advanced mathematics learning (Xu et al., 2021). Knowing the answer by
heart for addition and subtraction facts, such as for 2 + 7 or 13–9, will free up cognitive
processing resources for other, more demanding parts of the math problem to be solved
(e.g., in multi-digit calculations or in word problem solving). There are large individual
differences in children’s mathematical skills at the beginning of schooling (Aunio &
Niemivirta, 2010), and arithmetic skills are not an exception (Vanbinst et al., 2015; Xu et
al., 2021). From a research methodological viewpoint, person-centered approaches
seem particularly well suited to capture individual differences in development
(Hickendorff et al., 2018), and these have started to emerge also in the research field of
mathematical cognition (Bakker et al., 2023; Scalise et al., 2021). The advantage of this
data-driven approach is that (1) not all students are assumed to follow a single
developmental trajectory, and (2) artificial cut-off points, such as performing below the
25th percentile, are not needed to group students. In this study, a person-centered
approach is used to explore what kind of developmental trajectories of arithmetic
fluency can be identified in children from first to third grade.
In many studies children’s mathematics performance and development have
been associated with certain domain-specific (e.g., non-symbolic and symbolic
magnitude processing, mathematical vocabulary) and domain-general (e.g., working
memory, language, fluid intelligence) factors (for an overview, see De Smedt, 2022).
Fewer studies, especially longitudinal ones, have included simultaneously several
domain-specific and domain-general factors as predictors (for some exceptions, see
Bakker et al., 2023; Banfi et al., 2024; Fuchs et al., 2010; Geary, 2011a; Träff et al., 2020,
2023; Zhang et al., 2017). Inclusion of different factors simultaneously would give a
more comprehensive and accurate picture of each predictor’s unique contribution to
mathematics development. In other words, using only a few factors as predictors, may
easily overestimate their effects when other important factors for development are not
considered. Further, rather few studies have simultaneously investigated how both
domain-specific and domain-general factors predict the profile membership in
mathematics achievement or development (Bakker et al., 2023; Scalise et al., 2021), and
to our knowledge, none concerning arithmetic fluency development.
Here, we expand prior research by investigating simultaneously several domain-
specific (i.e., symbolic magnitude processing and number sequence skills) and domain-
general factors (i.e., non-verbal reasoning, working memory, rapid automatized naming
[RAN], sustained attention), and together with demographics (i.e., age and mother’s
educational level), with the aim to find out how these predict arithmetic fluency
development. Although recent research indicates that there are minimal gender
differences in early mathematics performance (Hyde et al., 2008; Lachance & Mazzocco,
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 3
2006), less is known whether gender moderates arithmetic fluency development
(Martens et al., 2011), as well as the effects of these predictors on arithmetic fluency
development.
1.1 The Development of Arithmetic Fluency
Acquiring different calculation strategies characterize the development of
foundational addition and subtraction skills (Geary et al., 2004; Jordan et al., 2003).
Various counting procedures are initially used to solve basic arithmetic problems, such
as 3 + 5 (Koponen et al., 2007). In the beginning, the child counts both addends to find
the answer, before they steadily shift towards more advanced counting procedures,
such as counting on from the larger addend (Fuson, 1992). The counting-on procedure
requires that children identify the larger addend, and thus draws on their
understanding of numerical magnitude (De Smedt, Verschaffel, et al., 2009). Gradually,
by using these counting strategies multiple times, children start to build associations
between the problem and the answer, and arithmetic facts (e.g., 3 + 5 = 8) are finally
stored in long-term memory (Siegler & Shrager, 1984). The calculation strategies, which
the child uses, change over time, but both procedural strategies and fact retrieval
continue to exist throughout childhood and into adulthood (Geary et al., 2004; Jordan et
al., 2003).
Most of the children develop in their learning of addition and subtraction facts so
that by the age of nine, they can retrieve the addition and subtraction facts fluently (i.e.,
quickly and accurately) in the number range between 1–20 (Aunio & Räsänen, 2016).
However, some children struggle to retrieve the facts even after years of practice
(Jordan et al., 2003; Träff et al., 2020). They may find the correct answer for the
problem, but need more time, if still using procedural strategies as their main
calculation strategy. Difficulties in arithmetic fact retrieval have been found to
characterize children with mathematical learning difficulties (Geary, 2011b; Vanbinst et
al., 2014). Regardless of their performance level in arithmetic skills, children’s
development seems to be rather stable across the early grades (Sorvo et al., 2019; Xu et
al., 2021). In other words, those who start with a lower set of arithmetic skills tend to
remain performing lower over the years compared to their typically performing peers,
and this achievement gap may even widen over the years (Aunola et al., 2004).
1.2 The Role of Domain-Specific Skills in Arithmetic Fluency Development
Domain-specific factors in the context of mathematics learning typically refer to
mathematical skills (e.g., symbolic magnitude processing), but also other mathematics
related factors, such as mathematical home environment or mathematical vocabulary
(De Smedt, 2022). In this study, we focus on two mathematical skills relevant for this
age group, symbolic magnitude processing and number sequence skills. Both skills
involve using numbers at symbolic level either as numerals (e.g., 5) or number words
(e.g., five), respectively. Symbolic magnitude processing skills tap more the cardinal
aspect of number (i.e., a child needs to understand the magnitudes of numbers when
comparing two numbers) while number sequence skills the ordinal aspect of number
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 4
(i.e., a child needs to understand the relative position of numbers in a sequence when
reciting number words from various points in a number sequence) (Devlin et al., 2022).
Both skills have also been found in prior studies to be associated with arithmetic
fluency (Vanbinst et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017, 2020) or more generally with
mathematics achievement (Brankaer et al., 2017; Koponen et al., 2019; Xenidou-Dervou
et al., 2018), but rarely been investigated simultaneously as predictors for arithmetic
development (however, see Banfi et al., 2024). Recently, Finke et al. (2022) suggested
that there may be a shift during the first school years from symbolic magnitude
processing to order processing becoming a better predictor of arithmetic performance,
which makes inclusion of both symbolic magnitude processing and number sequence
skills as predictors of arithmetic fluency interesting.
Symbolic magnitude processing is considered as one of the key foundational
number processing skills, often considered to belong under a wider concept of number
sense (De Smedt et al., 2013). Symbolic magnitude processing is typically assessed with
tasks that involve Arabic digits, and children are asked to respond as quickly as
possible, which one of two numbers is the larger one (Brankaer et al., 2017). Good
symbolic magnitude processing skills are characterized by fast and accurate responses,
and it has been found to be a strong predictor of children’s mathematics achievement
across different grades in elementary school (Brankaer et al., 2017; Holloway & Ansari,
2009), and of approximate arithmetic performance (Wei, Deng, et al., 2018), as well as
arithmetic fluency (Banfi et al., 2024; Träff, 2013; Vanbinst et al., 2016). In their study,
Banfi et al. (2024) found magnitude processing skills, assessed with dots and digits
comparison tasks in grade 1, to predict arithmetic fluency in grades 2 and 3. In contrast,
Träff et al. (2020) did not find symbolic magnitude processing skills measured in early
grades (K–3) to predict math performance in grade 6, although the sixth graders with
low mathematics performance showed weaker symbolic magnitude processing skills
compared to their peers during all years from kindergarten to grade 3. The shared
mechanisms that link symbolic magnitude processing and arithmetic fluency together,
are still partly unclear. One explanation might be that in both tasks, as how those are
measured, the child needs first to quickly access the magnitudes and/or verbal
counterparts of two numbers (Habermann et al., 2020), before processing them further,
that is, comparing them or solving the answer for the arithmetic fact. Vanbinst et al.
(2014) found that students with persistent mathematical learning difficulties,
specifically, with a fact retrieval deficit, also showed weak symbolic magnitude
processing skills. In their later study (Vanbinst et al., 2016), its role was discovered to
be as important for arithmetic as phonological awareness is for reading.
Children’s counting skills start to emerge in their early childhood through play
and practice, and children gradually learn the numerical symbols of their culture. This
includes number words (e.g., one, two, three) and numerals (e.g., 1, 2, 3), which can be
compared to one another and ordered (Scalise & Ramani, 2021). It takes a surprisingly
long time for children to understand the meaning of number words, and even though
they can count from 1 to 10 accurately, they might spend a year or more to understand
the relative magnitudes of the numbers they count (Le Corre & Carey, 2007). Reciting
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 5
number sequences forwards and backwards has shown to be a strong predictor of
arithmetic performance (Gilmore & Batchelor, 2021; Träff et al., 2023) and development
(Koponen et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2017). This is a rather expected finding, as early
calculation strategies rely much on counting procedures (e.g., count all and count on
strategies) (Fuson, 1992). However, the findings may partly depend on the type of the
arithmetic measure used (e.g., 1- or 2-digit problems; verbal or written tasks), as well as
what other cognitive covariates are included in the study. For example, Träff et al.
(2023) found that counting skills were related to the initial arithmetic performance, but
they did not predict arithmetic development, while controlling for non-symbolic
magnitude processing, spatial processing, non-verbal and verbal reasoning, and
working memory. Furthermore, Banfi et al. (2024) found forward number sequence
skills (i.e., count up from 1) measured in grade 1 to predict only third grade arithmetic
fluency in quantile 16 (the lowest performing group), but not arithmetic fluency in
grades 1 and 2.
1.3 The Role of Domain-General Skills in Arithmetic Development
Domain-general skills are those that are important for learning in general. In this
study, we chose to include a set of domain-general skills that, in prior studies, were
found to be associated specifically with arithmetic performance: non-verbal reasoning,
working memory (i.e., central executive), rapid automatized naming (RAN), and
sustained attention.
Non-verbal reasoning skills, also referred to as fluid intelligence (Geary et al.,
2012), have been reported to predict mathematics performance (Fuchs et al., 2010;
Geary, 2011a; Kyttälä & Lehto, 2008; Pina et al., 2014; Träff et al., 2020; Xenidou-Dervou
et al., 2018), and arithmetic performance and development (Banfi et al., 2024; Cai et al.,
2018; Geary et al., 2012; Träff et al., 2023; Wei, Guo, et al., 2018) in different age groups.
Banfi et al. (2024) found nonverbal reasoning measured at grade 1 to predict arithmetic
fluency in grade 2 (at quantile levels 16 and 50, the lowest performing and average
performing group, respectively) and in grade 3 (at quantile 16). The type of the
arithmetic task, and the process of solving it, seems to play a role in this relation. In
their study, Wei, Guo et al. (2018) found that non-verbal IQ predicted intercept and
slope of arithmetic accuracy from second to fifth grade, but not arithmetic fluency.
Geary et al. (2012) did not find non-verbal reasoning affecting arithmetic fact retrieval
directly, but to contribute more to the development of using other calculation strategies,
such as decomposition, from first to fourth grade. This is a quite expected finding. When
directly retrieving a fact from long-term memory, the child does not need to pay much
attention to reasoning and making logical decisions while proceeding in the task, as
compared to, for example, in decomposing an arithmetic problem (e.g., 7 + 6 = 7 + 3 + 3)
or in mathematical problem solving (Engle, 2018). Träff et al. (2023), in contrast, found
that non-verbal reasoning was linked to arithmetic performance of six-year-olds, but
not to the development of arithmetic performance over one school year. However, in
their study, arithmetic performance measures included also non-timed, verbally
presented arithmetic problems (e.g., 17 + 44 or 85 – 28). In sum, concerning arithmetic
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 6
fact fluency, it seems likely that non-verbal reasoning has relatively little effect on this
skill, but it contributes more when a child uses other calculation strategies than fact
retrieval.
Working memory has extensively been studied and found to be associated with
mathematics and arithmetic performance (for meta-analyses, see Chen & Bailey, 2021;
Friso-van den Bos et al., 2013). The component of central executive (CE), involved in
controlling and processing of information, has been found to be concurrently linked to
(Allen et al., 2020; Banfi et al., 2024; Xenidou-Dervou et al., 2018; however, for
contrasting findings, see Fuchs et al., 2006) or to predict mathematics achievement (De
Smedt, Janssen, et al., 2009; Fuchs et al., 2010; Geary, 2011a), and specifically arithmetic
fluency (Andersson, 2008; Barrouillet & Lépine, 2005; Geary et al., 2012; Hoff et al.,
2023; Wei, Guo, et al., 2018). A higher CE capacity eases the learning of the associations
between the calculation problem and the answer and enables the activation of these
associations and inhibition of irrelevant information, when retrieving the facts from the
long-term memory (Barrouillet & Lépine, 2005). Studies by Barrouillet and Lépine
(2005) and Geary et al. (2012) showed that children in early grades with a higher CE
capacity were using fact retrieval in addition problems more frequently compared to
their peers with a lower CE capacity. However, in their longitudinal study Geary et al.
(2012) found that this finding was limited to the first grade only, and diminished from
first to fourth grade once intelligence and in-class attentive behavior were controlled
for. Further support for the relation between the CE and arithmetic skills comes from
Wei, Guo et al. (2018) and Andersson (2008). Following students from second to fifth
grade, Wei and colleagues (2018) found that CE (measured as inhibition and shifting)
predicted arithmetic fluency intercept, but not growth, while controlling for nonverbal
IQ, speed of processing, working memory, and number sense. Andersson (2008) found
that CE was uniquely linked to arithmetic fluency of third and fourth graders, while also
considering IQ, reading skills, and other working memory components. Furthermore,
Hoff et al. (2023) found that CE measured at pre-school, but not at the first grade,
predicted third grade arithmetic fluency, while accounting also for RAN, number
knowledge, and processing speed. These findings suggest that CE is a significant
contributor to arithmetic fact fluency, while its unique role at different ages seems to
still require further investigation, due to somewhat contradicting and a rather limited
number of longitudinal studies at present.
Rapid automatized naming (RAN), that is quickly naming of familiar colors or
objects (i.e., non-alphanumeric RAN) or letters and numbers (i.e., alphanumeric RAN),
has been linked to and found to predict arithmetic fluency in early grades (Hornung et
al., 2017; for a meta-analysis, see Koponen et al., 2017; L. Wang, 2020), while also
controlling for number knowledge, processing speed, and working memory (Hoff et al.,
2023). The reason for this relationship most likely stems from the need of accessing and
retrieving phonological presentations (e.g., “green” or “seven”) for a stimulus from the
long-term memory (Koponen et al., 2017). Further, Pulkkinen et al. (2022) showed that
those third graders, who were dysfluent in arithmetic, had lower RAN performance
during the early grades, compared to their peers who were fluent in arithmetic.
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 7
Sustained attention is one of the primary elements of attention, and it enables
the child to maintain vigilance, select, and focus attention over time (Cohen, 2011). Its
relation to mathematics and arithmetic performance and development is still rather
sparsely investigated (Orbach & Fritz, 2022). The few studies have found sustained
attention to be related to arithmetic skills both when sustained attention was measured
with performance-based tests (Orbach & Fritz, 2022) and as experimenter ratings
(West et al., 2021). However, Szűcs et al. (2014) found sustained attention to be related
to both non-symbolic and symbolic magnitude processing but not to mathematics
achievement.
1.4 Boys and Girls Are More Similar than Different in Cognitive Functions
Meta-analytical research has shown that boys and girls are more similar than
different in most cognitive functions (Hyde, 2016), and if any differences have been
found in individual studies, their effects are typically rather small. In early grades,
rather minimal or nonexistent gender differences have been found in overall
mathematics performance (Hyde et al., 2008; Lachance & Mazzocco, 2006). Regarding
arithmetic performance, Xu et al. (2021) found that boys slightly outperformed girls in
subtraction facts in the second grade, while Lachance and Mazzocco (2006), in contrast,
found girls to solve more accurately timed addition and subtraction facts. When
including a sample of students from grades 1–9, Martens et al. (2011) found that gender
differences in arithmetic performance, especially in addition and subtraction, started to
emerge from Grade 6 onward in favor of boys. These differences were evidenced to be
larger in higher than low-performing groups. Similarly, Räsänen et al. (2021) found a
small advantage for boys in arithmetic fluency in a large sample of Finnish students
from grades 3–9. Furthermore, boys were overrepresented in both ends of the ability
continuum.
Most previous studies have focused on mean level differences in arithmetic
performance. Studies on gender differences focusing on the relationship between
domain-general, domain-specific factors and arithmetic performance are scarce with
the exception of motivational research that has found some gendered pathways
between math interest, self-concept, educational aspirations and performance (e.g.,
Cvencek et al., 2021; Widlund et al., 2024). In one of the few studies to date, Carr et al.
(2008) found that the type of strategy used differentially predicted arithmetic
performance for girls and boys. Higher performance was related to cognitive strategy
use for boys while higher performance was related to manipulative strategy use for
girls. Rosselli et al. (2009) found similar cognitive correlates with math performance for
boys and girls, but they found that spatial ability could explain small gender differences
in favor of boys in arithmetic performance.
Regarding gender differences in non-verbal reasoning, the results are mixed,
partly depending on the measure utilized. A meta-analysis (Lynn & Irwing, 2004) for
studies using Raven’s Progressive Matrices as a measure for non-verbal reasoning found
no gender differences until after the age of 15, however, a small effect (d = .21) in favor
of boys was found in children aged 5–11 years old, when Raven’s Coloured Progressive
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 8
Matrices was used. Further, Xu et al. (2021) found that girls outperformed boys in non-
verbal reasoning in the second grade (d = .34), while Lachance and Mazzocco (2006)
and Toivainen et al. (2017) found no gender differences in early grades.
Regarding gender differences in children’s working memory, we must rely on
some independent research work, as there is a lack of a recent review or a meta-
analysis. The findings are contradicting. While Gray et al. (2015) found no gender
differences in working memory among 5–9-year-olds, Pelegrina et al. (2015) and
Vuontela et al. (2003), using n-back tasks as a measure of working memory, identified
girls to outperform boys in accuracy, while boys being faster responders. This finding is
suggested to reflect a larger degree of immaturity in boys than girls in childhood
(Vuontela et al., 2003).
Gender differences in RAN seem to partly differ depending on the type of RAN
test used. Among primary school students, Lachance and Mazzocco (2006) found girls
to outperform boys only on Colors subtest, but not on Object, Numbers, or Letters.
Current studies concerning RAN and mathematics performance miss reporting possible
gender differences (Hoff et al., 2023; Koponen et al., 2016, 2017; L. Wang, 2020).
Gender differences in sustained attention have been less studied in this age
group, although attentional issues have been in focus among the children with a
diagnosis of ADHD (for a meta-analysis, see Hasson & Fine, 2012). The findings from a
few studies are inconsistent but may partly be explained using different types of
measures (e.g., Continuous Performance Test vs. Psychomotor Vigilance Task). Sussman
and Tasso (2013) found that girls outperformed boys, both in making less errors and
being faster in completing the tasks. However, here, the within-gender differences in
performance far exceeded the between-gender variation. In contrast, Efrat and Orna
(2022) and Venker et al. (2007) found boys being faster in their responses, although
gender differences decreased with age, and disappeared around the age of 11 (Venker
et al., 2007). In our study, the measure of sustained attention is more similar to the
measure of Continuous Performance Test, which Sussman and Tasso (2013) used in
their study.
1.5 Current Study
As previous studies have mainly investigated the development of children's
arithmetic fluency from a variable-centered perspective (e.g., Aunola et al., 2004; Xu et
al., 2021), in this study we approach arithmetic development methodologically from the
person-centered approach. This means that we aim to find out if there is more than one
developmental trajectory, which may reveal different patterns and growths in children's
arithmetic development, giving us a more comprehensive view of development. Based
on previous research (e.g., Zhang et al., 2020), we can expect to find at least two to three
different trajectories. Furthermore, prior studies have examined and found how certain
domain-specific and domain-general factors are related to or predict the development
of arithmetic fluency, but the studies have varied widely in the factors they have
included simultaneously, and the results have also been somewhat mixed. Including
multiple domain-specific and domain-general factors allows us to see which of these
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 9
factors remain the strongest predictors while controlling for others, for example, do
domain-general factors lose their predictive power when considered alongside domain-
specific factors. In terms of domain-specific factors, both symbolic magnitude
processing (Banfi et al., 2024; Träff, 2013; Vanbinst et al., 2016) and number sequence
skills (Koponen et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2017) have been shown to be strong predictors
of the development of arithmetic fluency in the early grades. However, they have rarely
been treated simultaneously as predictors in the same study. Although all of the
domain-general factors chosen for this study, namely nonverbal reasoning, working
memory (CE), RAN, and sustained attention, have been shown to be related to or
predictive of arithmetic performance to varying degrees, CE and RAN in particular
appear to have a strong association with arithmetic performance and development,
even when controlling for domain-specific mathematical skills (e.g., Hoff et al., 2023).
Moreover, the influence of predictors seem to vary depending on the type of arithmetic
outcome measures used (e.g., accuracy or fluency measures) and whether the focus was
on performance level versus growth (e.g., Träff, 2013; Wei, Guo, et al., 2018).
In this longitudinal study, we trace children’s arithmetic fluency development
from first to third grade. We extend the current state of research by exploring if we can
identify distinct developmental trajectories using a person-centered approach. Further,
we aim to find out which domain-specific (i.e., symbolic magnitude processing and
number sequence skills), domain-general (i.e., non-verbal reasoning, working memory,
RAN, sustained attention), and demographic factors (i.e., age and mother’s educational
level), when investigated simultaneously, best predict the development. Further, we
look at whether gender moderates (1) the development of arithmetic fluency and (2)
the relations between the predictors and arithmetic fluency. We set the following
research questions (RQ) and hypotheses (H):
RQ1. What kind of developmental trajectories of arithmetic fluency can be identified in
children, and is this development moderated by gender?
Prior research has shown individual differences in children’s arithmetic skills
(Vanbinst et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020). Therefore, we expect (H1.1) to
find more than one developmental trajectory, such as groups of children showing
different levels of performance (e.g., low, average, and high) in the first grade. We expect
children to improve their skills from first to third grade, and those who start with
weaker skills, will remain performing weaker, and vice versa (Sorvo et al., 2019; Xu et
al., 2021). Further, we expect to confirm (H1.2) that gender has no effect on arithmetic
development at this age group, referring to rather non-existing gender differences in
prior findings in overall early mathematics performance (Hyde et al., 2008; Lachance &
Mazzocco, 2006).
RQ2. How do domain-specific, domain-general, and demographic factors (age and
mother's educational level) predict the development of arithmetic fluency, and does
gender moderate these predictions?
All the domain-specific and domain-general skills included in our study have
been shown in prior studies to influence arithmetic fluency. We expect (H2.1) to find
effects of all domain-specific and domain-general skills on the intercept of arithmetic
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 10
fluency. While longitudinal findings are still rather scarce and these factors are now
simultaneously investigated, we cannot explicitly hypothesize their expected effects on
arithmetic fluency development (i.e., slope). We expect these predictors to be similar
between the genders (Hyde, 2016) (H2.2), although some individual studies have
observed gender differences either in favor of boys or girls, for example girls
performing better than boys in RAN of colors (Lachance & Mazzocco, 2006) and in
sustained attention (Sussman & Tasso, 2013). Of demographic predictors, we do not
expect age and mother’s educational level to have a strong effect, given the fact that our
sample is from one grade, and further, from a Nordic country, where all children have
equal opportunities for schooling in public schools (Aunio & Niemivirta, 2010).
2 Method
2.1 Participants and Procedure
The study is part of the larger longitudinal research project [name removed for
peer review], and parts of the data have been used in prior studies (e.g., Authors, 2023),
however, the current results represent a substantial contribution on its own. The
participants were 262 Norwegian children (M = 6 y. 9 m., SD = 3.33 m., 46.1% girls in
age
the beginning of the study), from 12 classrooms in five schools in the capital region of
Norway. Prior to data collection, ethical approval was applied for and granted by the
Norwegian Centre for Research Data, and consent for participation was obtained from
the children’s parents and teachers.
The Covid-19 pandemic affected the data collection. Initially, there were five time
points planned for data collection, biannually in each grade (from first grade spring
term 2019 to third grade spring term 2021). Due to lockdown in spring 2020, the
initially planned third time point could not be carried out. Also, due to uncertain
pandemic times, the ways of collecting data needed to be adjusted. Data collections at t1
(first grade spring) and t2 (second grade autumn) were conducted at the data collection
site outside schools as “adventure days”. This 4-hour day included testing a variety of
math and cognitive skills individually and in small groups by trained research
assistants. At t3 (third grade autumn) tests were carried out in small groups at schools
by research assistants, also taking into account Covid-19 restrictions set by the
government and schools. At t4 (third grade spring) Covid-19 set more restrictions for
data collection, and research assistants were not allowed to visit schools. The research
assistants joined the assessments via Teams, with audio and video connection, while
classrooms were supervised by children’s teachers. Teachers were given information
about the testing situation, and the required testing materials were delivered to schools
a few days prior data collection. No technical issues were faced that would have
negatively affected the data collection.
There was some missing data, due to Covid-19 restrictions, children absent from
days of data collection, or moving away during the study. Regarding arithmetic
performance, the attrition was 2.3% at t1, 7.6% at t2, 15.6% at t3, and 20.6% at t4, and
for covariates ranging from 1.9% (number sequences and attention) to 9.9% (age and
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 11
mother’s educational level). Little’s MCAR test indicated that data was missing
completely at random, χ2 (365) = 408.756, p = .057. Due to the analytical approach in
this study (i.e., inclusion of conditional models), missing data was imputed a priori data
analyses using the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm in SPSS29 to be able to use
all available data in the main analyses.
2.2 Measures
Children’s arithmetic skills were measured at all timepoints (t1–t4) using the
same measure. Domain-specific and domain-general skills, which were used as
predictors, were measured only in the first grade (t1). Demographics of each child were
collected with a questionnaire from the parents, in which they reported the gender
(coded as girl = 0, boy = 1) and the age of their child, and mother’s highest educational
level (1 = comprehensive school, 2 = upper secondary school, 3 = Bachelor’s degree, 4 =
Master’s degree, 5 = PhD degree).
2.2.1 Arithmetic Fluency
Regnefaktaprøven (Klausen & Reikerås, 2016) is a standardized Norwegian test
measuring arithmetic fluency as arithmetic facts. In our study, subtests of addition and
subtraction within the number range between 1 and 20 (e.g., 8 + 4 or 11–2), were used
at each time point. Each subtest consisted of one page with 45 calculation problems per
page, which were either addition or subtraction facts. The child had 2 minutes to solve
as many calculations as possible in each subtest. For each correct answer one point was
given and for each incorrect answer zero points. A composite score for arithmetic
fluency was created (max. 90 points).
2.2.2 Domain-Specific Predictors
For domain-specific skills, symbolic magnitude processing skills were measured
using The SYmbolic Magnitude Processing (SYMP) Test (Brankaer et al., 2017). Here, we
use only the one-digit subtest with digits between 1 and 9. The test contains 60-digit
pairs that are presented in four columns of 15 pairs. The child was asked to cross out
the larger of the two digits (e.g., which is larger, 8 or 9), and was given 30 seconds to
solve as many items as possible. To ensure that the child understands the task, four
practice trials were included prior to the test items (see test and item description more
in detail: Brankaer et al., 2017). For each correct answer one point was given and for
incorrect answers zero points. The number of items that were correctly answered in 30
seconds was used as a sum score.
To measure children’s number sequence skills, we used the Number Sequences
task from a standardized LukiMat Mathematics test battery (Salminen & Koponen,
2011). The child was asked to recite orally different types of number sequences
(counting by 1s, 2s, 5s and 10s) forwards (13 tasks) and backwards (19 tasks) within
the number range between 1 and 100. For example, the child was asked to count up by
one starting from a given number (e.g., 4, 17, 20 or 74), and to stop once five numbers
were produced, or to count up by fives (from number five) until reaching 50. The
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 12
backward number sequence tasks were similar. One point was given for a correct
sequence and zero for an incorrect answer (max. 29 points).
2.2.3 Domain-General Predictors
For domain-general skills, non-verbal reasoning skills were measured with
Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices (Raven et al., 1990). The child needed to find a
piece out of six alternatives that fitted into the picture pattern. The tasks were given in a
booklet, one on each page, so that the child could proceed in the task at their own pace.
There were two practice items in the beginning to make sure that the child understood
the task. The maximum score for the whole task was 34 points.
Rapid automatized naming (RAN) was measured using a subtest of naming colors
Hurtig Benevning [Rapid naming] from the standardized test battery Clinical Evaluation
of Language Fundamentals – Fourth Edition (CELF-4), for 5–12 years old (Semel et al.,
2003). The child was asked to name as fast as possible 36 colored (i.e., yellow, red,
green, and blue) circles in a given order. The colored circles were presented on a sheet
in six rows of six circles in each. A composite score was calculated: the number of total
correct responses was divided by total naming time in seconds and multiplied by ten.
The higher this value was, the more items the child could name correctly per second,
thus displaying better RAN.
The component of central executive in working memory was measured using a
subtest of the Backwards Digit Span from the standardized Wechsler Intelligence Scale
for Children ages 6 through 16 (V Norwegian version) (Wechsler, 2017). In the
Backwards Digit Span test the child needed to recall orally 2–8 digits backwards. There
was a total of 9 blocks in the test, each including two items. Blocks 1 and 2 included two
digits to recall backwards, blocks 3 and 4 three digits, and thereafter the number of
digits increased by one so that in block 9 there were eight digits to recall. According to
the manual, the test was stopped if both items in the block were incorrect. One point
was given for a correct answer and zero for an incorrect answer. The total maximum
score was 18 points.
Sustained Attention was measured with the Attention Sustained subtest from the
standardized Leiter International Performance Scale – Third Edition (Roid et al., 2013).
The child completed four different tasks, each presented on a separate page. In each
task the child needed to cross out as many of the pictures as possible that looked like
the target picture presented at the top of the page (e.g., the target picture was a square
and there were also other figures than squares presented on the page). The child had 30
seconds time for two of the tasks and 60 seconds for another two tasks. A composite
score of four subtests was calculated by adding all correct responses and then
subtracting all incorrect responses.
2.3 Data Analysis
Imputation of missing data, descriptive statistics, and correlations of the
observed variables were conducted using SPSS29. Regarding identifying the number of
trajectory groups, we used MPlus8 version 8.8 (Muthén & Muthén, 1998), first, for the
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 13
analyses of latent growth curve modeling (LGCM), the one-class model, followed by
growth mixture modeling (GMM), iteratively adding classes up to five. For the model fit
indices, we used the criteria suggested by Hu and Bentler (1999) and Schermelleh-Engle
et al. (2003): the χ2 statistic p-value > .05, comparative fit index (CFI) value > 0.95, the
root mean square of error approximation (RMSEA) value < 0.05, and the standardized
root mean squared residual (SRMR) value < 0.05. When comparing each model against
the previous model, to make the decision on the number of classes, we followed
Ferguson (2020), and compared the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), Sample
Adjusted BIC, and Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC) with a lower value representing
a better fit; entropy (i.e., a higher value representing a better fit of profiles to the data),
Vuong-Lo-Mendell-Rubin Likelihood Ratio (VLMR) and Lo-Mendell-Rubin Adjusted
Likelihood Ratio Test (LMR) (i.e., statistically significant difference between the models
indicates more groups to be a more parsimonious model), as well as the number of
students in each group (i.e., not including groups with less than 5 % of the total sample),
and finally, having a meaningful relation to the theory.
Note, that the modeling procedure for examining RQ2 depends on the outcome of
RQ1. That is, if we identify multiple trajectory classes in the initial GMMs, gender is
added to the final GMM model as a covariate to determine the likelihood of each gender
being a member of the different developmental groups. If a single-profile solution best
describes the data, a multigroup latent growth model is estimated to investigate
whether the developmental trajectories (i.e., initial level and slope) and the predictions
of the background variables differ between boys and girls. The Wald chi-square test will
be used to test if significant growth parameters differ across genders (J. Wang & Wang,
2020). The detailed descriptions and steps regarding different analyses are given
together with the results.
3 Results
3.1 Descriptive Statistics and Correlations
The descriptive statistics, reliabilities as McDonald’s omega, and correlations
ω >.70 (Tavakol & Dennick, 2011). The values of kurtosis in arithmetic t1 and t2 were
fairly high, due to the fact that many children scored rather low and were not yet fluent
in their skills, however, the kurtosis value diminished over the time. The rank-order
stability of arithmetic fluency was rather high, with correlations between measurement
points ranging from .68 to .87. Both domain-specific skills had moderate positive
relations with arithmetic fluency; symbolic magnitude processing ranging between r =
.53 – .57 and number sequence skills between r = .55 – .65. For the domain-general
skills, the central executive and RAN correlated moderately with arithmetic fluency (r =
.37 – .48), while non-verbal reasoning and attention showed only small positive
associations with arithmetic fluency (r = .16 – .33). The correlations between all
covariates were statistically significant and small to moderate (r = .23 – .50), and thus
we did not expect any multicollinearity issues in later analyses.
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 14
Correlations and Descriptive Statistics
3.2 The Development of Arithmetic Fluency
As our measurement points were unevenly spaced (i.e., having a longer gap
between t2 and t3 because of missing one data collection due to Covid-19), we first ran
two separate univariate latent growth curve models (LGCM) for arithmetic fluency
performance over time. In the first model, following the actual gaps between
measurements, we fixed t1 and t2 at zero and one, and t3 and t4 at three and four
(Preacher et al., 2008). However, this model did not describe the data well, χ2 (5) =
67.486, p < .000; RMSEA = .218 (90% CI = .174–.266); CFI = .920; SRMR = 0.050.
Therefore, we ran a latent basis model by fixing t1 at zero and t4 at one, and with t2 and
t3 allowed to be freely estimated. This model showed a good fit to the data, χ2 (3) =
1.561, p = .668; RMSEA = .000 (90% CI =.000–.081); CFI = 1.000; SRMR = 0.008, and was
hence used in further analyses. There was a significant increase in the fluency
development over time (M slope = 25.71, p < .001), as well as individual differences (i.e.,
variance) shown in the initial level (s2 = 50.35, p < .001) and slope as well (s2 = 115.41, p
< .001).
As the results from the univariate LGCM showed individual differences in
arithmetic development, evidenced by statistically significant (p < .001) variances in
both the intercept and slope, we ran a series of growth mixture models (GMM) with 2–5
latent classes in order to identify possible distinct developmental trajectories. Based on
an overall evaluation of the competing models, we found the one group solution (i.e.,
one developmental trajectory) to be most appropriate. Although the statistical
unfeasible due to the small number of children in the additional groups. In the 2-group
model, the smaller group (n = 19) was a higher performing group, and in the 3-group
model, an additional group (n = 17) with steeper growth was included. In our view, the
model with an overall developmental trajectory (i.e., the 1-group solution) allowed for a
more coherent and reliable further investigation to answer our remaining research
1 Freeing within class variances and/or covariances did not improve the model fit.
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 15
questions. The descriptive statistics together with figures of the developmental
trajectories for the 2- and 3-group models are provided in the Supplementary materials.
Fit Indices for Distinct Arithmetic Trajectory Groups
Next, we estimated a multigroup model with gender as a grouping variable to
examine the similarity of change over time between boys and girls. The model showed a
good fit to the data, χ2 (8) = 8.218, p = .412; RMSEA = .014 (90% CI =.000–.104); CFI =
for boys and girls. Based on Wald’s test, the means of initial levels (M = 10.75; M =
boys girls
9.48; χ2 (1) = 1.823, p = .177) and slopes (M = 24.66; M = 27.04; χ2 (1) = 2.599, p =
boys girls
.107) were not statistically different, thus indicating gender invariant development in
arithmetic fluency.
The Development of Arithmetic Fluency from First to Third Grade by Gender
3.3 Predictors of Arithmetic Development by Gender
Next, we added predictors to the model. First, we specified the predictions to be
invariant across gender, and checked whether the modification indices suggested some
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 16
predictions to be different for boys and girls. The model fit to the data well, χ2 (56) =
69.086, p = .113; RMSEA = .042 (90% CI =.000–.072); CFI = 0.988; SRMR = 0.053.
However, modification indices suggested two effects from the covariates to be non-
invariant, mother’s educational level on the intercept and RAN on the slope. Thus, in the
next model, these two effects were estimated freely for boys and girls, with a slightly
improved fit to the data, χ2 (54) = 57.937, p = .332; RMSEA = .024 (90% CI =.000–.061);
CFI = 0.996; SRMR = 0.043. Based on the Wald test, both the prediction of mother’s
educational level on the initial level, χ2 (1) = 4.84, p = .028, and the prediction of RAN on
the rate of change, χ2 (1) = 7.50, p = .006, were indeed different for boys and girls. The
effect of mother’s education on the onset of arithmetic development was significant for
boys (β = .17, p = .001) but not for girls (β = .01, p = .920), while the effect of RAN on the
slope of arithmetic development was significant for girls (β = .33, p = < .001) but not for
boys (β = .02, p = .870).
number sequence skills, and working memory were found to predict the initial level of
arithmetic fluency, whereas symbolic magnitude processing and number sequence skills
were found to be predictors of growth in arithmetic fluency. On this basis, the domain-
specific skills were found to be better predictors of arithmetic fluency development
than domain-general skills, except for working memory, which also predicted the initial
level.
Unstandardized Effects on the Initial Level and Change in Arithmetic Fluency by Gender
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 17
4 Discussion
We aimed to extend current knowledge about children's development of
arithmetic fluency from first to third grade, to identify possible distinct trajectories in
this development, and to determine which domain-specific, domain-general, and
demographic factors predict this development. Furthermore, we were interested in
whether gender moderates the development of arithmetic fluency or the relations
between the predictors and arithmetic fluency. Contrary to our hypothesis H1.1, we
found that one trajectory group best described the development of arithmetic fluency.
Girls and boys developed similarly in their arithmetic fluency over time, hence
confirming H1.2. However, gender differences were observed in the predictors of
arithmetic fluency development. While symbolic magnitude processing, number
sequence skills and working memory predicted the first-grade arithmetic performance
similarly for boys and girls, mother’s educational level predicted the first-grade
arithmetic performance only for boys. Regarding growth, symbolic magnitude
processing and number sequence skills were significant predictors regardless of gender,
whereas RAN predicted girls’ arithmetic improvement over time.
As expected, children’s arithmetic fluency improved over time from first to third
grade. At the end of first grade, many children use counting-based procedural strategies,
rather than retrieval to produce the answers (Koponen et al., 2007). Gradually, with
practice, they begin to be able to retrieve the facts quickly from long-term memory,
which shows up as improved fluency. Until recently, many prior studies have used
artificial cut-off criteria for grouping of children into different performance groups.
Here, we applied a data-driven, person-centered approach to find trajectories of
arithmetic fluency that differ in initial level and/or growth. One trajectory group was
found to best describe the data when the criteria used to determine the number of
classes were followed, even though individual differences were observed in both the
children's initial level and growth. The 2-group and 3-group solutions included rather
small groups in addition to the mainstream group, and surprisingly, only one higher
performing group (in a 2-group solution) or one group with steeper growth (in a 3-
group solution). A few other studies using a person-centered approach have found
different profiles (Bakker et al., 2023; Scalise et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020). However,
Bakker et al. (2023) and Scalise et al. (2021) used a more comprehensive mathematics
test as a measure of performance, which may have captured bigger variance in
performance than the arithmetic fluency measure used in this study. Zhang et al. (2020)
used a similar measure of arithmetic fluency and found distinct developmental
trajectories from first to fourth grade. These trajectories showed rather similar
development and differed mainly in fourth grade performance, which may partly
explain the different results from our study, as we only measured arithmetic skills up to
third grade. In addition, their sample size was larger, which may make it easier to find
subgroups.
In this age group, gender differences in mathematics performance seem to be
rather non-existent (Hyde et al., 2008; Lachance & Mazzocco, 2006), as our study also
showed. Boys and girls did not differ in either their initial level or growth in arithmetic
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 18
fluency. Apart from a few studies in this age group that have focused on arithmetic skills
and found either boys (Xu et al., 2021) or girls (Lachance & Mazzocco, 2006) performing
better, gender differences seem to emerge only in later grades (Martens et al., 2011;
Räsänen et al., 2021). Therefore, it would be interesting to conduct a similar study in
later grades of primary school, and even including all four different arithmetic
operations. While gender should not be a guiding principle in mathematics education, it
is important to be aware of possible gender differences. In particular, concerns have
been raised about how to motivate girls to pursue STEM studies and careers in which
they are underrepresented (The World Economic Forum, 2023). Making the learning of
mathematics interesting, appreciated and useful for all, using a variety of teaching
methods, should start at the beginning of school and continue throughout the school
years.
This study is one of the first to simultaneously include both symbolic magnitude
processing and number sequence skills as domain-specific predictors of arithmetic
fluency. We found that they predicted both initial performance and growth, regardless
of gender. Both skills tap number processing, but in symbolic comparison, the focus is
on cardinal (magnitude) information, whereas in number sequence performance, the
focus is on ordinal (order) information (Devlin et al., 2022). A previous study (Vanbinst
et al., 2016) suggested that the role of symbolic magnitude processing is as important
for arithmetic as phonological awareness is for reading. Our results support this,
especially since symbolic magnitude processing was a predictor of growth in arithmetic
fluency. Research investigating the link and common mechanisms between symbolic
magnitude processing and arithmetic fluency is still in its infancy, and more longitudinal
studies are needed. Further, reliable and brief tests are available to assess children's
symbolic magnitude processing skills, but whether and how teaching could take into
account individual differences in symbolic magnitude processing skills is still an open
question, and thus intervention studies are also urgently needed in the future.
Previously, Banfi et al. (2024) found magnitude processing skills (assessed as
dots and digit comparison tasks in grade 1) to be a better predictor of arithmetic fluency
in grade 3 than number sequence skills (assessed only as counting forwards from 1 for
1 minute in grade 1). In their study, the measures of magnitude processing and number
sequences differed slightly from ours, and only predictions at different time points
(grades 1-3) were examined, not growth. Our findings also support the role of number
sequence skills as a unique predictor of arithmetic fluency (Koponen et al., 2019; Träff
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2017). In contrast to Träff et al. (2023), we found that number
sequence skills predicted not only initial performance but also development. This
finding underscores that number sequence skills are critical skills to practice and
master early in school. Children with fluent number sequence skills, such as being able
to start counting from different points in the number sequence (e.g., starting at 8 or 27,
counting forward or backward) and being able to recite the number sequence correctly,
may be better able to use their accurate and efficient counting strategy to solve
arithmetic problems. This, in turn, could lead to a faster development of arithmetic facts
compared to children whose number sequencing skills are weaker (Gilmore &
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 19
Batchelor, 2021). The mathematics curricula and teaching materials for pre-primary
education and early grades include a variety of counting tasks, both number sequence
and object counting tasks, to guide teachers in implementing counting activities in their
classrooms, taking into account individual differences in children's development.
Working memory, more specifically CE, was found to be associated with
arithmetic fluency in first grade, but not with the growth of arithmetic fluency over
time. This finding is similar to Wei, Guo et al. (2018), but contrasts with the results of
some previous studies, which found that CE also predicted the development of
arithmetic fluency (Hoff et al., 2023). Furthermore, our results are consistent with those
of Barrouillet and Lépine (2005) and Geary et al. (2012), who showed that the children
in the early grades with higher CE capacity used fact retrieval in addition problems
more frequently than their peers with lower CE capacity. In other words, as CE capacity
increases, the child will be more likely to retrieve facts from long-term memory and
thus show better fluency. According to our results, CE ability in first grade does not
seem to affect fact learning (i.e., growth) in the early school years, a finding similar to
Hoff et al.'s (2023) first graders. The role of CE needs further investigation, especially
from a longitudinal perspective.
Overall, we found that boys and girls were more similar than different in
cognitive functions (Hyde, 2016). However, gender moderated the relations between
RAN and growth in arithmetic fluency and between mother’s educational level and
intercept of arithmetic fluency. RAN predicted the growth in arithmetic fluency for girls
but not for boys. In prior research, Lachance and Mazzocco (2006) found girls to
outperform boys on the Colors subtest of RAN, but they had a cross-sectional design.
Unfortunately, other previous studies that have included a mathematics component
have not reported on the role of gender in RAN (Hoff et al., 2023; Koponen et al., 2016,
2017; Zhang et al., 2020). Thus, RAN and its relation to numeracy skills, accompanied by
a gender perspective, needs to be further explored in future studies. Since the RAN test
requires children to express their answers verbally, it would be interesting to see if
expressive language skills interact here and could possibly explain the gender difference
we found (e.g., Eriksson et al., 2012).
Mother’s educational level predicted the initial level of boys’ arithmetic fluency.
In prior studies conducted in Nordic countries, parents’ educational level has had little
impact on children’s early mathematics learning (Aunio & Niemivirta, 2010). Since we
did not find an influence of the mother's educational level on the growth in arithmetic
skills, other factors, in this case domain-specific mathematical skills, seem to override
this effect. To better capture and understand why mother’s educational level was
connected to boys’ arithmetic performance in the beginning of schooling, future studies
could further explore the role of parents as part of children's home numeracy
environment and its relationship to the development of arithmetic fluency skills
(Khanolainen et al., 2023; Mutaf-Yıldız et al., 2020).
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 20
4.1 Limitations and Future Directions
Our study has some limitations that should be addressed when interpreting the
results and in future studies. First, due to our study design, that is, the predictor
variables were measured only once, it is obvious that definite conclusions about
causality cannot be drawn. For example, it is possible that improved arithmetic fluency
would also affect the development of number sequence and symbolic magnitude
processing skills. Second, our sample size, although sufficient for a longitudinal study
and for chosen analyses, may have restricted finding big enough distinct trajectory
groups (Ferguson et al., 2020).
In our study, we focused on arithmetic fluency, which is one of the fundamental
skills to be learnt in primary school. Other similar studies could be conducted in the
future, focusing on overall mathematics achievement or profiling a range of other
mathematical subskills (Bakker et al., 2023). The domain-specific and domain-general
factors in our study were selected based on prior literature. Most of the skills have
proven to be associated with mathematics performance, while some have been less
studied, such as sustained attention. We recognize that our study did not measure some
important predictors that have been shown to be related to mathematics performance,
such as various language skills (Bakker et al., 2023) or the role of home environment
(DePascale et al., 2023). In our study, we did not separate arithmetic skills into addition
and subtraction, nor did we separate number sequences into forward and backward
sequences. In future studies, it may be interesting to examine these constructs
separately to see if, for example, forward number sequence skills are more strongly
related to addition fluency than subtraction fluency. With a larger sample, it would be
possible to include even more predictors to get a more comprehensive view of the
simultaneous effects of both domain-specific and domain-general skills, as well as
different background characteristics of children, on arithmetic development.
4.2 Conclusions
As expected, children's arithmetic skills improved over time from first to third
grade, and there were individual differences in both initial levels in first grade and in
growth. Contrary to our expectations, we captured only one trajectory group that best
described children's development of arithmetic fluency. Symbolic magnitude
processing, number sequence skills, and working memory predicted first-grade
arithmetic performance for both boys and girls, whereas mother’s education level was
associated with initial arithmetic fluency performance only for boys. Looking at growth
in arithmetic fluency, symbolic magnitude processing and number sequence skills were
significant predictors regardless of gender, whereas RAN predicted only girls'
improvement over time. To conclude, the domain-specific factors, symbolic magnitude
processing and number sequence skills, were related to growth in arithmetic fluency
(while the domain-general factors were not), and appear to be promising skills to focus
on when teaching mathematics at the beginning of schooling.
PREDICTORS OF ARITHMETIC DEVELOPMENT 21