Running Head: GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 1
Disparities in healthcare, STI testing, and PrEP access among newcomer sexual minority men in
Canada’s three largest urban centers
Authors:
Paolo A. Palma [1], Shayna Skakoon-Sparling [1,2], Jessie Dawson [1], Reza Zandi [1], Terri Zhang
[1], Evan Campbell [1], Darrell H. S. Tan [3,4], Nathan J. Lachowsky [5, 6], Joseph Cox [7, 8], Gilles
Lambert [9, 10], Milada Dvorakova [11], Allan Lal[6], Jody Jollimore [12], Daniel Grace [3] & Trevor
A. Hart [1, 3]
Corresponding Author: Paolo A. Palma (paolo.palma@torontomu.ca)
Word count: 7496 (main text, minus author biographies, references, tables, and figures)
Tables: 3
Figures: 2
*********************************************************************************************
This document represents the accepted manuscript published in the Analyses of Social Issues and Public Policy, and
Please cite the version of record:
Palma, P. A., Skakoon-Sparling, S., Dawson, J., Zandi, R., Zhang, T., Campbell, E., Tan, D. H. S., Lachowsky, N.
J., Cox, J., Lambert, G., Dvorakova, M., Lal, A., Jollimore, J., Grace, D., & Hart, T. A. (2025). Disparities
in healthcare, STI testing, and PrEP access among newcomer sexual minority men in Canada's three largest
*********************************************************************************************
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 2
Author Notes
Affiliations:
[1] Toronto Metropolitan University, Toronto, ON, Canada; [2] University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada; [3]
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; [4] St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON; [5] School of Public Health and
Social Policy, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC; [6] British Columbia Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS,
Vancouver, BC; [7] McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; [8] Direction régionale de santé publique - Montréal,
Montréal, QC, Canada; [9] Institut national de santé publique du Québec, Montréal, QC, Canada; [10] Direction
régionale de santé publique de Montréal, QC; [11] Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre,
Montréal, QC, Canada; [12] CATIE, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Primary Funding:
Engage/Momentum II is funded by the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR, #TE2-138299;
#FDN=143342; #PJT-153139), the Canadian Foundation for AIDS Research (CANFAR), the Ontario HIV
Treatment Network (OHTN, #1051), the Public Health Agency of Canada (#4500345082), and Toronto
Metropolitan University. TAH was supported by an Endgame Leader Chair Award in Gay and Bisexual Men’s
Health from the Ontario HIV Treatment Network. NJL was supported by a Scholar Award from the Michael Smith
Foundation for Health Research (#16863). SSS was supported by a CIHR postdoctoral fellowship award. DG is
supported by a Tier 2 Canada Research Chair in Sexual and Gender Minority Health. DHST is supported by a Tier 2
Canada Research Chair in HIV Prevention and STI Research.
Pre-registration:
We pre-registered our analysis on the open science framework. There were deviations from the initial analytic plan
rather than STI acquisition, to complement findings on PrEP access for this publication. We also opted to not
conduct follow-up analyses examining the interaction between time since migration and Global Acceptance Index
scores on outness to primary healthcare providers, due to the limited sample size of GBM immigrants who had (1) a
primary healthcare provider and (2) a HIRI-MSM score ≥ 10.
Conflicts of Interest Disclosure
The lead author reports no conflict of interest. TAH reports being an Advisory Committee member for the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)’s Institute of Infection and Immunity and funds for community engagement
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 3
events from ViiV Healthcare and Gilead Sciences Canada. DHST’s institution has received investigator-initiated
grants from Abbvie and Gilead, and support for participation in clinical trials sponsored by Glaxo Smith Kline. No
other authors report any conflict of interest.
Data Access
Deidentified participant data used in this analysis are stored at Toronto Metropolitan University and the British
Columbia Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS. For information regarding these databases, and related access, please
Acknowledgments:
The Engage Cohort Study is led by Principal Investigators in Toronto: Trevor A. Hart, Daniel Grace and Jody
Jollimore; in Montreal: Joseph Cox and Gilles Lambert; and in Vancouver: Nathan Lachowsky, and David Moore.
The authors would like to thank the Engage/Momentum II study participants, office staff, and community
engagement committee members, as well as our community partner agencies.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 4
Abstract
Gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men (GBM) are more likely to be
diagnosed with HIV and other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) compared with the general
population. Although newcomers generally experience a health advantage in Canada compared
with non-immigrants and more established immigrants (i.e., healthy immigrant effect), they also
experience disparities in access to healthcare services. These disparities in turn may lead to
unique vulnerabilities for the sexual health of GBM immigrants. We examined disparities in
healthcare access, STI testing, and HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) use among immigrant
and non-immigrant GBM. Using baseline data (collected between February 2017 and August
2019) from a multisite cohort study of GBM in Toronto, Vancouver, and Montreal (n=2449), we
found that newcomer GBM (migrated ≤ 5 years prior) were less likely to report having a primary
healthcare provider than non-immigrants. This had a weak indirect effect in mediating both
access to STI testing and use of HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis. These disparities dissipated after
controlling for migration precarity (e.g., refugees and those without permanent residency),
suggesting that disparities in newcomer GBM healthcare access may, in part, be driven by the
large number of newcomers with precarious migration statuses.
Public Significance Statement
New immigrants tend to be less likely to have a primary healthcare provider or use other sexual
health clinics, which can have adverse consequences for sexual health. This disparity appears to
be largely concentrated among temporary foreign workers, international students, and refugees.
Interventions should target policies that increase the number of primary healthcare providers, and
address immigration policies that lead to fear of deportation due to one’s health.
Keywords: Immigration; PrEP; Healthcare Access; Sexual Minority Men
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 5
Disparities in Healthcare, STI Testing, and PrEP Access Among Newcomer Sexual
Minority Men in Canada
Canada is home to over 1.3 million 2S/LGBTQ+ individuals (Statistics Canada, 2024a),
with an estimated 16.1% being immigrants (Statistics Canada, 2024b). Despite the increasing
number of 2S/LGBTQ+ immigrants in Canada, there are few large public datasets on the
experiences of 2S/LGBTQ+ individuals, let alone the unique experiences of 2S/LGBTQ+
immigrants (Waite & Denier, 2019). In this study, we take an intersectional approach in
examining sexual health disparities among immigrants who identify as gay, bisexual, or other
men who have sex with men (GBM). Specifically, we examine how disparities in healthcare
access among immigrants may impede in engaging with preventative sexual health behaviors,
such as testing for STIs or use of preventative HIV medications.
Sexual Identity and Immigration Trends in Canada
Immigration has played an important role in shaping both Canada’s economic landscape
and cultural diversity. Until the mid-1960s, Canada’s immigration policy had favored
immigrants from predominantly white nations (Li, 2000). However, changes in immigration
policy in 1967 has led to an increase in the ethnocultural and geographic diversity of Canada’s
immigrants. Specifically, the Government of Canada reoriented its focus towards economic
growth, resulting in the adoption of a point-based system, independent of country of origin or
racial background (Li, 2000; Statistics Canada, 2016). As such, by 2011 over half of the
country’s immigrants originated from regions outside the United States and Europe (Statistics
Canada, 2016).
With marriage equality legally recognized in Canada since 2005 (Civil Marriage Act,
2005) and relatively progressive policies regarding sexual orientation (A. R. Flores, 2021),
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 6
Canada may be an attractive destination for sexual minority immigrants. Unfortunately, there is a
dearth of administrative data and large population surveys that collect information on sexual
identity (Waite & Denier, 2019), making estimates of population change at the intersection of
sexual orientation and immigration difficult. However, there is evidence to suggest that the
sexual minority immigrant population is growing in Canada. For example, the Government of
Canada has created various programs to increase the number of privately- and government-
sponsored refugees accepted into Canada who are seeking asylum based on sexual orientation
and gender identity (Government of Canada, 2023a; IRCC, 2019). In terms of administrative
data, analysis of the Longitudinal Immigration Database has found that the proportion of
immigrants in same-sex relationships increased from 0.1% in 2000 to 0.7% in 2020 (Stick et al.,
2024). Although these policies and data cannot speak directly to the number of newcomer sexual
minority immigrants per year, it is suggestive that this a growing population, highlighting the
importance of work focusing on the health and social disparities faced by sexual minority
immigrants.
Theoretical Framework
We conceptualize this study within the broad framework of intersectionality. Within
social psychology, intersectionality is used to describe the treatment and experiences of
individuals at the intersection of multiple group identities (Hudson et al., 2024). However, rather
than focusing on multiple group identities as a statistical interaction between groups, as is
commonly done with social psychology (Hudson et al., 2024), we focus on understanding how
multiple systems of oppression and marginalization interact together. For example, Crenshaw’s
legal analysis of Black women examined how the category ‘Black’ is implicitly associated with
‘Black men’, and the category ‘women’ with ‘white women’, and analyzed the unique
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 7
experiences of Black women in the legal system (Crenshaw, 1991). Similarly, Beale’s double
jeopardy highlights how structures of racism and sexism compounded to produce the unique
experiences of marginalization of Black women (Beale, 1970).
In the context of public health, there are many theories that grapple with the experiences
of multiply marginalized individuals. Several of these theories are in line with the central thesis
of the double jeopardy hypothesis––that individuals who experience multiple forms of
marginalization would experience worse outcomes than those who experience fewer (Beale,
1970; Hudson et al., 2024). For example, the minority stress theory (Meyer, 2003) posits that
health disparities can be explain by disparities in experiences of discrimination, and that those
who experience more axes of discrimination (e.g., racialized sexual minority individuals) would
experience worse outcomes (Balsam et al., 2011; Bränström, 2017; Lick et al., 2013; Mongelli et
al., 2019; Schwartz et al., 2016). Similarly, syndemic theory was developed from ethnographic
work on the lived realities of the HIV epidemic (Mendenhall & Singer, 2020; Singer & Clair,
2003). This theory argues that health ‘risk’ is not an individual feature; rather health ‘risk’ and
disparities stem from and are exacerbated by a combination of social, economic, and political
factors in which individuals exist (Mendenhall & Singer, 2020; Singer & Clair, 2003).
This paper attends to two specific contexts within the realm of GBM immigrant health.
First is the general epidemiological trend showing that GBM are overrepresented among new
diagnoses of HIV and other sexually transmitted and bloodborne infections (STBBI) in Canada
(Hart et al., 2021; Public Health Agency of Canada [PHAC], 2023). These disparities, which can
be traced back to the homophobic policies and structural inequities that lead to the HIV and
AIDS crisis (HIV.gov, 2024), are disproportionately experienced among GBM who experience
other forms of marginalization, such as racism. In line with double jeopardy, the minority stress
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 8
model, and syndemic theory, we would expect that GBM immigrants would also face greater
structural barriers in terms of their sexual health.
The second context that we attend to is the immigration process and how Canada’s
immigration policies create both advantages and disparities in immigrant health. For example,
selection factors, both in terms of who is able to migrate and who the Government of Canada
grants permanent residency to, leads to the healthy immigrant effect (Lu & Ng, 2019; Vang et al.,
2017). This effect refers to the general trend that newcomer immigrants tend to have better health
outcomes compared to more established immigrants and non-immigrant residents. However,
while selection factors may initially lead to better health outcomes, newcomer immigrants often
experience disparities in healthcare access (Ravichandiran et al., 2022; Setia et al., 2011). Given
the lack of data on sexual minority individuals in Canada in general (Waite & Denier, 2019), it is
important to examine how migration processes may influence the health of immigrant GBM.
In the following sections, we review both the healthy immigrant effect and immigrant
healthcare access in greater depth. We contextualize the healthy immigrant effect within the
processes of immigration and immigration policy and argue that these policies may not lead to
advantages in terms of sexual healthcare. We discuss the importance of healthcare access in
terms of engaging in preventative health behaviors among GBM immigrants. Specifically, we
attend to additional barriers faced by immigrants from particularly marginalized backgrounds,
such as immigrants who are racialized or who have a precarious migration status (e.g., those who
do not have permanent residency and the associated benefits thereof) in terms of barriers to
healthcare access.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 9
The Healthy Immigrant Effect and GBM Sexual Health
Immigration policies shape the health outcomes of immigrants. Since the 1960’s, the
Government of Canada has shifted its policies to focus on recruiting ‘skilled’ immigrants, often
using a point-based system (Li, 2000). While this shift is generally attributed to increasing the
ethnoracial diversity of new immigrants entering Canada (Li, 2000; Statistics Canada, 2016), it
has also created a selection filter for the most privileged immigrants to enter the country. In
addition to this focus on economic migration, those who seek permanent residency can be
deemed inadmissible due to pre-existing health conditions during the immigration medical exam
(IRCC, 2020). Together, these selection factors lead to the healthy immigrant effect (Ng et al.,
2005; Vang et al., 2017).
There is strong evidence for the role of immigration policy on contributing to the healthy
immigrant effect. For example, countries that are more selective in terms of admitting
immigrants based on health-related criteria tend to exhibit a stronger healthy immigrant effect
(e.g., Constant et al., 2017; Moullan & Jusot, 2014). Similarly, changes in immigration policy are
also associated with changes in the healthy immigrant effect over time. For example, refugees
and family class immigrants were no longer deemed inadmissible due to health-related reasons
after the 2002 Immigration and Refugee Protection act was passed. These changes in policies
lead to the healthy immigrant effect being stronger among economic immigrants1––who could
become inadmissible due to health concerns––and weaker among refugees and family class
immigrants, who are exempt from these requirements (Lu & Ng, 2019).
1 Immigrants in Canada typically receive permanent residency through one of three admissions categories.
Economic immigrants are admitted based on their “ability to contribute to Canada’s economy”. Family class
immigrants, also referred as Immigrants sponsored by family or family reunification immigrants, are sponsored by a
Canadian citizen or permanent resident and granted permanent residency based on their familial relationship with
their sponsor. Refugees refer to immigrants granted permanent residency based on a “well-founded fear of
persecution” if they return to their home country (Statistics Canada, 2023).
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 10
In the context of sexual health, these policies may not necessarily lead to a long-term
health advantage for Canada’s immigrant GBM population. Canada’s Immigration Medical
Exam requires that all applicants aged 15+ years old undergo serology tests for syphilis and HIV
(Immigration, Refugee, and Citizenship Canada [IRCC], 2013, 2020). Testing positive, however,
does not necessarily lead to medical inadmissibility; rather, applicants are required to undergo
contact tracing and treatment before moving forward with their application (IRCC, 2013, 2020).
Importantly, the healthy immigrant effect dissipates over time, as immigrants experience
acculturative stress and habituate to their new social context (Constant et al., 2017; Vang et al.,
2017). As such, while the immigrant medical exam may flag issues related to sexual health and
help connect applicants for permanent residency to healthcare providers, it is unlikely that these
initial tests will confer a long-term “health advantage” for GBM immigrants post-migration,
especially among those who are sexually active. Instead, it is important for sexually active GBM
immigrants to continue to have regular access to healthcare services that screen for HIV and
other STBBIs.
Immigrant Healthcare Access and GBM Sexual Health
While the Immigration Medical Exam may alert immigrants of potential health issues
during the application process, it does not guarantee continued care post-migration. For example,
while immigrants living with HIV are referred to healthcare specialists for treatment, many of
these immigrants, especially those from more precarious backgrounds, such as refugees, continue
to face delays in healthcare access, despite government intervention (Kronfli et al., 2019;
Odhiambo et al., 2022). Similarly, research using data from the Canadian Community Health
Survey (CCHS) has found that newcomer immigrants were less likely to have a primary
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 11
healthcare provider compared to non-immigrants and immigrants who have lived in Canada
longer (Ravichandiran et al., 2022; Setia et al., 2011).
For GBM immigrants, the disparities in healthcare access that they face as immigrants
may be compounded with the specific health risks they face as sexual minority men. Specifically,
access to primary healthcare providers may be an important avenue of intervention for sexual
minority men in order to maintain their sexual health. For sexually active GBM, STBBI testing is
recommended annually at minimum, or every 3-6 months for those with multiple or anonymous
sexual partners (PHAC, 2024) to mitigate the adverse effects of STBBIs on the individual and
limit community spread. Left undetected and untreated, these infections may, in some cases,
have severe health consequences, ranging from infertility (e.g., gonorrhea and chlamydia;
Dombrowski, 2021) to brain damage (e.g., syphilis; Almeida & Lautenschlager, 2005), and
increases one’s risk of contracting HIV (Dombrowski, 2021; Wu et al., 2021).
In addition to treatment, primary healthcare providers also play an important role in
promoting preventative health behaviors in their patients (Hostetter et al., 2020). In the context
of GBM sexual health, primary healthcare providers can assess their patient’s risk of HIV
acquisition, and recommend use of HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis. Adoption of PrEP has been
an important tool for mitigating the transmission of HIV among GBM, reducing the risk by up to
95-99% when taken as prescribed (Beyrer et al., 2022; Zablotska, 2017). Given the potential
importance of having a primary healthcare provider for GBM sexual health, disparities in
healthcare access may lead to disparities in both STBBI testing and PrEP use among GBM
immigrants.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 12
Healthcare Coverage Across Canada
Provincial governments are in charge of administering healthcare services in Canada,
leading to regional differences in care. While testing for STIs is generally covered regardless of
health insurance coverage (BC Centre for Disease Control, 2024; Gouvernement du Québec,
2023; Government of Ontario, 2024), coverage for PrEP varies greatly across provinces. For
example, since 2018, British Columbia has fully funded PrEP for eligible individuals (British
Columbia Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS [BCCfE], 2020), which has promoted general
awareness and uptake in the province (Sang et al., 2022). In contrast, Quebec offers a tiered plan
where individuals are fully funded for PrEP if they are under 18 years of age, or are full-time
students under 25 years old who are not living with a spouse or parents (Yoong, 2019). In
Ontario, PrEP is covered for people under 25 through OHIP or through the Ontario Drug Benefit
for seniors who qualify through the Ontario Disability Support Program or Ontario Works
(Yoong, 2019). As such, the province of residence may influence disparities in access to sexual
health services among immigrants, especially for immigrants who may not have the same access
as permanent residents.
Racism and Immigration Precarity as Structural Barriers
Other structural barriers that co-occur with being a newcomer, such as coming from an
racial or ethnic minority background or having a more precarious immigration status, may also
affect healthcare access. First, immigrants in Canada are becoming increasingly diverse with
over half of the country’s immigrants coming from regions outside the United States and Europe
(Statistics Canada, 2016). At the same time, structural racism contributes to health inequities
between racialized and non-racialized Canadians (Nickel et al., 2018). As such, disparities in
newcomer access may reflect broader disparities due to structural racism.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 13
A second barrier that can co-occur with newcomer status is precarious migration2.
Because immigrants with a precarious immigration status are largely defined by their lack of
permanent residency status, many of these individuals, such as temporary foreign workers,
international students, refugees, and asylum seekers, are also likely newcomers to Canada. These
individuals tend to face differences in healthcare access compared to permanent residents. For
example, international student’s access to provincial healthcare coverage varies by province of
residence, with some provinces requiring a ‘residency period’ while others negotiate deals with
the student’s country of origin to provide coverage3. Similarly, while temporary foreign workers
have access to provincial healthcare programs and private insurance through their employers,
fears of losing their job may impede seeking healthcare when necessary (Orkin et al., 2014;
Sikka et al., 2011). Similarly, access to healthcare and social support can differ among refugees
depending on whether they were government-assisted or privately sponsored (Oda et al., 2019).
Importantly, barriers due to precarious migration status and systemic racism often
compound each other. For example, qualitative interviews of Black immigrants living with HIV
and healthcare workers in Toronto, Canada, found that Black immigrants experiencing migration
precarity were particularly susceptible to policies that restrict access to healthcare (Odhiambo et
al., 2022). Overall, these findings suggest that precarious migrants appear to experience greater
disparities in healthcare access compared to other types of immigrants (Chowdhury et al., 2021;
Morassaei et al., 2022; Sikka et al., 2011), especially as many of these immigrants come from
racialized backgrounds.
2 We define having a ‘precarious migration status’ as either being a refugee or a long-term immigrant lacking
permanent residency status, such as temporary foreign workers, international students, undocumented individuals,
and asylum seekers.
See supplementary materials for a comparison of international student healthcare coverage across study sites.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 14
Present Study
In the present study, we investigated disparities in primary healthcare access between
immigrant (inclusive of those who may be in Canada on a temporary basis) and non-immigrant
GBM in Canada. In particular, we focus on the relationship between primary healthcare access
and engaging in bacterial STBBI testing and PrEP use.
Consistent with past research (e.g., Ravichandiran et al., 2022; Setia et al., 2011), we
hypothesized that newcomer GBM immigrants would be less likely to have a primary healthcare
provider, relative to non-immigrant GBM––an effect that should dissipate for immigrants who
have lived in Canada longer. Additionally, we hypothesized that having a primary healthcare
provider would be associated with engaging in specific health behaviors, including STI testing
(HIV-negative GBM and GBM living with HIV) and PrEP use (HIV-negative GBM). While we
do not have an a priori hypothesis on the mechanisms for these disparities, we investigate the
possibility that structural barriers due to racism and precarious immigration may play a role. As
such, we analyze our models with and without precarious migration and racialization as control
variables to investigate their effects on the full model.
We also model the relationship between immigration and use of other sexual healthcare
clinics. While newcomer immigrants were less likely to have a primary healthcare provider
(Ravichandiran et al., 2022; Setia et al., 2011), research using the Canadian Community Health
Survey suggests that immigrants who do not have a primary healthcare provider may seek
healthcare through other avenues such as walk-in clinics (Ravichandiran et al., 2022). While we
do not have an a priori hypothesis, although GBM newcomers may have less access to primary
healthcare providers, they may compensate by using walk-in clinics.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 15
Methods
Participants
We examined the responses of N = 2,449 participants from the baseline data of the
be 16+ years old; living in the Montreal, Toronto, or Vancouver metropolitan areas; comfortable
with completing a computer-assisted survey in English (all cities) or French (Montreal); and
sexually active with another man in the past 6 months. Other than the requirement of being
sexually active with another man, sexual activity was not defined to be inclusive of the many
ways sexual behavior manifests.
Participants were recruited between February 2017 and August 2019 using respondent-
driven sampling (RDS), allowing researchers to adjust for sampling bias and approximate a
probabilistic sample (RDS-II; see Volz & Heckathorn, 2008). ‘Seed’ participants were recruited
in collaboration with community stakeholders to ensure diverse sampling along various
sociodemographic and behavioral characteristics (for details, see Sang et al., 2023). Participants
were compensated $50 CAD for their participation at baseline and an additional $15 CAD for
each eligible participant they recruited.
Materials & Procedure
Participants completed a computer-assisted survey in-person at their local study site.
After providing signed consent, they answered a series of questions about their demographic
background, experiences with healthcare providers, sexual history, and questions about their
experiences and attitudes.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 16
Immigration Group
Participants were asked whether they were (i) born in Canada, and (ii) their year of
arrival if born abroad. Participants born in Canada were categorized into the “non-immigrant”
reference group. Following definitions from Statistics Canada (Yssaad & FIelds, 2018),
participants born outside Canada were categorized as either newcomers (i.e., arrived in Canada
within the last five years), recent immigrants (i.e., arrived between 6 - 10 years), and established
immigrants (i.e., arrived over 10 years ago) based on their arrival year and interview date.
Because our interest was disparities in access compared to non-immigrant individuals, non-
immigrant participants were treated as the reference group for our model, and the variable treated
as categorical, because non-immigrants do not have a year of arrival.
Healthcare Service Access and Use
Healthcare access and service usage were assessed with self-report questionnaires asking
participants if they (i) have access to a primary healthcare provider4 (yes, no), (ii) had used
sexual health clinics for STI testing or treatment (yes, no), (iii) if they had ever been tested for
any STI, other than HIV, in the past 6 months (yes, no), (iv) if they were currently using PrEP
(yes, no) or the last time (mm/yyyy) they used PrEP.
HIV Incidence Risk Index (HIRI)
Participant suitability for PrEP was assessed using the seven-item HIV Incidence Risk
Index for Men who have Sex with Men (HIRI-MSM; Smith et al., 2012). This index provides an
estimate of one’s risk of contracting HIV based on reported sexual behavior and substance use in
4 Defined to participants as “someone you can go to for routine medical check-ups or for specific health concerns?”
which can include a family doctor, nurse practitioner, walk-in clinic, or interdisciplinary health center.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 17
the preceding six months. Participants scoring ≥ 10 on this index have a higher risk of
seroconversion, and are typically considered candidates for PrEP initiation (Smith et al., 2012).5
Racialization
We were interested in whether being racialized in Canada affected immigrant GBM’s
experiences with the healthcare system. To examine this, we asked participants whether they
identified as a person of color (1 = yes, 0 = no). Because newcomer immigrants may not have
been familiar with the term ‘person of color’, we also coded participants based on whether they
identified their ethnic origin or ancestry as non-European (vs. from Europe). The patterns of
responses were similar for both coding schemes, so for brevity, we only report the findings based
on self-identification as a person of color (see Supplementary Materials).
Precarious Migration Status
Immigrants without permanent residency or citizenship status (i.e., undocumented
immigrants, refugees and refugee applicants, and those who are on temporary work permits and
study permits) were considered to have a precarious migration status. Due to small sample sizes,
we aggregated these groups into a single precarious migration status group.
Ethics Approval and Informed Consent
The Engage Cohort Study received approval from the following Research Ethics Boards:
Toronto Metropolitan University (REB #2016-113), the University of Toronto (protocol
#00033527), St. Michael’s Hospital (REB #17-043), the University of Windsor (REB #33443),
the University of British Columbia (H16-01226), Providence Health Care (H16-01226), the
5 While we use the HIRI-MSM ≥ 10 as a cut-off for inclusion in our analysis, this index tends to underestimate risks
for individuals from ethnoracial minority groups and those who use substances other than amphetamines. In clinical
practice, the HIRI-MSM should be used as part of a comprehensive assessment which includes consideration of
local epidemiological trends (British Columbia Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS, 2020; Jones et al., 2017).
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 18
University of Victoria (H16-01226), Simon Fraser University (H16-01226) and the McGill
University Health Centre (15-632-MUHC).
Prior to the study, all participants received a physical copy of the informed consent form
and a research assistant verbally guided participants through the form. Participants 16 – 18 years
of age underwent the same consent procedure. We did not seek parental consent for participants
16 – 18 years of age, because individuals in this age range are legally empowered to consent to
medical procedures such as STI screening without parental consent. Additionally, we opted not
to seek parental consent because it could compromise the safety and privacy of adolescent GBM
by potentially outing them to their parents (see D. Flores et al., 2018 and Taylor, 2008 for
discussion)6.
Analytic Strategy
We used the sem() function in the lavaan package for R (Rosseel, 2012) to examine the
associations among immigration, healthcare access, STI testing in the past 6 months (P6M), and
PrEP use (P6M) among HIV-negative participants. The association between primary healthcare
provider access and use of other clinics is modeled as both a parallel and serial mediation for two
reasons. First, we examine parallel paths to account for participants who may have a primary
healthcare provider but opt to visit specialized sexual health clinics (e.g., due to a lack of comfort
with primary healthcare providers or primary healthcare provider’s lack of familiarity with GBM
sexual health; Nowaskie & Sowinski, 2019; Qiao et al., 2018). Second, a serial path was
examined leading from primary healthcare use to other sexual clinic use to account for the
6 Only n = 2 participants below the age of 18 participated in this study. Additionally, past research of this magnitude
conducted by members of this team has found that those who participate in these types of studies between 16 – 17
years of age tend to either be college students or are individuals who are living independently and therefore are
considered ‘emancipated’ minors, and thus have the capacity to provide consent.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 19
possibility that those who do not have a primary healthcare provider may instead use specialized
clinics for their sexual health needs.
We ran separate models for STI testing and PrEP use. We used the full sample for
estimating STI testing as all were recently sexually active (as per study eligibility). We did not
restrict our sample to only those who engaged in condomless anal sex as the oropharyngeal
transmission and detection of gonorrhea and chlamydia is an important health issue among GBM
(Chow & Fairley, 2019; Harvey-Lavoie et al., 2021; Hui et al., 2015). Because PrEP guidelines
in Canada (Tan et al., 2017) recommend PrEP for individuals at elevated risk for HIV
acquisition, we limited our PrEP use analysis to HIV-negative/status unknown GBM who were
categorized at an elevated risk of acquiring HIV (HIRI-MSM ≥ 10).
All model estimates were adjusted using RDS-II weights to account for sampling bias
and to approximate a probabilistic sample (Heckathorn, 2002), controlling for city of
recruitment, age, relationship status (single, partnered with open agreement, and partnered with
monogamy agreement), and HIV status (for bacterial STBBI testing path analysis). In addition to
the base model (model 1), we also added additional covariates to examine potential explanations
for the proposed associations. To do this, we partialed out the effects of racialization (model 2)
and precarious migration status (model 3) on healthcare outcomes.
Results
Demographics
Full Sample (STI Access)
with 83.4% reporting having some postsecondary education. Additionally, over 90% of our
participants report being single (55.7%) or have no monogamy agreement if they are in a
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 20
relationship (35.4%). Compared to the full sample (n = 2449), 15.3% of individuals were
newcomers, 5.7% were recent immigrants, and 12.2% were established immigrants. Further, of
the 811 immigrants, 267 had a precarious immigration status (10.8% of the full sample).
Additionally, 17.3% identified that they are currently living with HIV, and 18.3% identified as a
person of color. In terms of healthcare access, most of our participants reported that they had a
primary healthcare provider (71.2%), with nearly half using other sexual health clinics as well
(47.2%). Of this sample, more than half reported having accessed STI testing in the past 6
months prior to the study visit (55.9%).
HIRI score ≥ 10
the characteristics of this subsample are similar to the full sample. These participants were highly
educated, reporting having at least some postsecondary education (85.7%). Similarly, nearly
90% of participants report having no main partner (53.0%) or no monogamy agreement if they
are in a relationship (37.4%). This sample also had a similar composition of immigrants, with
17.8% being newcomers, 6.0% being recent immigrants, and 12.2% being established
immigrants. Of the 489 immigrants in this subsample, 175 (12.9%) have a precarious migration
status. Because this sample consists of individuals who would be eligible for PrEP, there are no
participants living with HIV. There was a similar proportion of individuals who identified as a
person of color (19.62%). Compared to the full sample, slightly fewer participants reported
having a primary healthcare provider (65.0%), though more used other sexual health clinics
(54.8%). Only one quarter of these participants (24.3%) report having been on PrEP in the past 6
months.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 21
STI Testing (Past 6 Months)
both primary healthcare access and use of STI clinics on STI testing six months prior to the
study. Specifically, there was a moderate effect of primary healthcare access such that
participants who had a primary healthcare provider were more likely to have had an STI test, c =
.035 [0.21, 0.48]. In contrast, reporting having used a sexual health clinic in the past was only
weakly associated with reporting having an STI test, d = 0.13 [0.01, 0.26]. However, not having
a primary healthcare provider did not lead to using other sexual health clinics, e = –0.06 [–0.26,
0.14]. This suggests that having a primary healthcare provider may be associated with consistent
screenings for STIs among sexually active GBM.
In terms of immigrant healthcare access, we find significant associations between
newcomer status primary healthcare access and use of sexual health clinics. Specifically,
newcomers were less likely to have both a primary healthcare provider, a = –0.24 [–0.33, –0.14]
and report using a sexual health clinic, b = –0.15 [–0.25, –0.04], compared to non-immigrant
residents—albeit weak associations. There was no total effect of time since migration and STI
testing access (f ); however, there was a weak, but significant conditional indirect association
1-3
through primary healthcare access, a c = –0.08 [–0.13, –0.04], but not use of other clinics, b d =
1 1
–0.02 [–0.04, 0.01]. That is, newcomer immigrants, relative to non-immigrants, were less likely
to have access to a primary healthcare provider, which, in turn, led to a reduction in access to
STI testing. After accounting for disparities in primary healthcare access, the direct effect of
newcomer status on STI test access became significant, f ’ = 0.16 [0.05, 0.26], compared to the
total effect f = 0.06 [–0.04, 0.15]. This suggests that without disparities in primary healthcare
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 22
access, newcomer immigrants may be more likely to get tested for STIs, compared to non-
immigrants.
To investigate potential mechanisms and confounds, we additionally controlled for self-
reported racialization (Model 2) and precarious migration status (Model 3). The direct
associations between newcomer status on healthcare access, and indirect effects on STI testing,
were non-significant after controlling for precarious migration status, but not racialization (see
be due to newcomers in our sample being more likely to have a precarious immigrant status.
Finally, we conducted additional exploratory sensitivity analyses to account for
differences in sexual behaviors that may affect risk of STBBI transmission, and therefore
differences in seeking treatment. We investigated different models (i) controlling for engagement
in condomless anal sex, (ii) the number of anal sex partners, and (iii) restricting the sample to
only individuals who reported engaging in condomless anal sex. The patterns of results, both in
terms of direction and magnitude largely stayed the same (see Supplementary Materials for
no longer predicted STI testing in the past 6 months. This may be because sexual minority men
who engage in condomless anal sex are more likely to be on HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis, and
therefore more likely to have a primary healthcare provider.
PrEP Use (Past 6 Months)
Analyses were limited to participants who met clinical indications for PrEP, based on
The associations between immigration status and healthcare access were similar between this
model and the STI testing model. Specifically, newcomers, relative to non-immigrants, were less
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 23
likely to have access to both a primary healthcare provider, a = –0.25 [–0.38, –0.12], and to
report having used other sexual health clinics, b = –0.17 [–0.32,–0.18], though these
associations were weak. In contrast to the full sample, there was a weak conditional association
between recent immigrant status and health and primary healthcare access among those who
meet clinical indications for PrEP. Relative to non-immigrants, recent immigrants were more
likely to have access to a primary healthcare provider, a = 0.13 [0.02, 0.24] in this subsample.
Compared to STI testing access, we found differences in the association between having
a primary healthcare provider, use of other sexual health clinics, and PrEP use among those who
meet clinical indications for PrEP. Specifically, having a primary healthcare provider was
moderately associated with PrEP use in the past 6 months, c = 0.31 [0.14, 0.48], an effect not
found with sexual health clinics, d = 0.04 [–0.12, 0.19]. Similar to the full sample, having a
primary healthcare provider did not predict use of other sexual health clinics, e = –0.06 [–0.26,
0.14].
There were no total effects of immigration status and PrEP use in the past 6 months (f ).
1-3
There was a significant, albeit weak, indirect conditional association of primary healthcare
access, such that newcomers were less likely to have access to a primary healthcare provider, and
thus less likely to have used PrEP in the past 6 months, relative to non-immigrants, a c = –0.08
[–0.14, –0.01]. The conditional direct association of newcomer status on PrEP use, f ’ = 0.03 [–
0.12, 0.18], remained non-significant compared to the total effect, f = –0.05 [–0.18, 0.08].
We controlled for self-reported racialization (Model 2) and precarious migration status
full sample, the direct conditional association between newcomer status and primary healthcare
access, and the indirect association with PrEP use, became non-significant after controlling for
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 24
precarious migration status, but not racialization. The direct conditional association between
recent immigrant status and primary healthcare access, however, remained significant across all
three models.
Discussion
GBM Immigrant Healthcare Access
The goal of this study was to examine disparities in healthcare access among newcomer,
recent, and established GBM immigrants, compared with non-immigrant GBM. We found that
GBM newcomers were less likely to have a primary healthcare provider and less likely to use
other sexual health clinics, compared with non-immigrant GBM. However, among HIV-negative
GBM who scored ≥ 10 on the HIRI-MSM, immigrant GBM who had lived in Canada for 6-10
years were more likely to have a primary healthcare provider, compared with non-immigrants.
Taken together, this resulted in a weak indirect effect such that newcomers were less likely to
report having recently tested for STBBIs or using PrEP, because of disparities in primary
healthcare access.
We controlled for racialization and precarious migration status to investigate the potential
contribution of systemic racism and structural barriers faced by GBM with precarious migration
statuses. We found that racialization was not associated with healthcare access, nor did our
results significantly change after controlling for racialization. This is consistent with existing
research that suggests healthcare disparities due to racism tend to be smaller in countries with
universal healthcare (Siddiqi et al., 2016).
While we did not find that racialization affected our model estimates, this does not,
however, mean that racism is not a structural determinant of health. Due to sample size restraints,
we collapsed our sample to compare GBM of color and white GBM, homogenizing differences
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 25
between racial and ethnic groups. Past research using the Canadian Community Health Survey
found that East Asian newcomers and established South Asian immigrants had greater healthcare
access compared to other groups (Setia et al., 2011). As such, aggregating between ethnic and
racial groups in our study may have masked these effects.
After controlling for precarious migration status, we found that the association between
being a newcomer immigrant and primary healthcare access dissipated. This suggests that, at
least for GBM immigrants, disparities in newcomer access to primary healthcare is largely
accounted for by disparities that immigrants from precarious backgrounds, such as temporary
foreign workers, international students, and refugees, experience. Although these three groups
may have access to health insurance through a combination of their employers, their university,
or the government, past research has found that they continue to face barriers in healthcare
access compared to non-immigrants and immigrants with less precarious legal statuses
(Chowdhury et al., 2021; Morassaei et al., 2022; Sikka et al., 2011). These findings highlight the
importance of in-depth research on the experiences of GBM immigrants with precarious
migration statuses, to better understand the general barriers they face in accessing healthcare, and
the specific barriers for sexual health.
Primary Healthcare and Sexual Health
In addition to examining GBM immigrant access to primary healthcare, this work also
provides important insights into the roles of primary healthcare providers and sexual health
clinics. While past research has found that immigrants who do not have a primary healthcare
provider may seek out other clinics for their healthcare needs (Ravichandiran et al., 2022), we
did not find this effect. That is, GBM immigrants who did not have a primary healthcare provider
were not more likely to report having used other sexual health clinics.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 26
Importantly, our findings provide further support for the unique role of primary
healthcare providers in promoting sexual health. We found that having a primary healthcare
provider was associated with engaging in preventative sexual health behaviors, such as STI
testing and enrolling in PrEP for HIV. Interestingly, while having a history of using other sexual
health clinics was associated with STI testing 6 months prior to the study, this history did not
translate to PrEP use. These findings are consistent with past research showing that having a
primary healthcare provider was associated with engaging in preventative health behaviors
(Hostetter et al., 2020) and better health outcomes in general (Rose et al., 2019).
Limitations
The present study examines disparities in primary healthcare access and its subsequent
effect on STI testing and PrEP use among GBM immigrants and non-immigrants. While we
found that there were disparities in primary healthcare access, and that these disparities are likely
due to barriers faced by precarious immigrants, our results do not speak to the decision-making
processes of prescribers. When assessing risk for STIs or eligibility for PrEP, prescribers take
into account a variety of behavioral information, such as engagement in condomless anal sex and
number of sexual partners. Although our model examined the relationship between having a
primary healthcare provider and STI testing and PrEP use, this relationship is estimated for all
participants. As such, it does not speak to whether there are behavioral differences across
immigration status or ethnicity, nor does it speak to whether medical doctors differ in their
application or collection of such information across groups.
Additionally, while the Engage Cohort Study sought to recruit a representative sample of
GBM across Vancouver, Toronto, and Montreal, this recruitment criteria may also pose a
limitation to our ability to generalize our results. In order to participate in this study, GBM had to
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 27
be comfortable with signing up for a study about their sexual health, and to meet with our onsite
staff and nurses to participate. Past research has found that GBM who conceal their sexual
identity are less likely to engage in health-seeking behaviors related to their sexual health (Le
Forestier et al., 2024). Given that some immigrant GBM may come from countries that are less
welcoming of sexual diversity, and therefore may be more likely to conceal their identity due to
sexual stigma (Lee et al., 2020), our study may underestimate disparities in engaging in sexual
health behaviors compared to the general population of GBM.
Finally, while the Engage Cohort Study represents a large sample of sexual minority men
in three of Canada’s most populous, immigrant-receiving cities, sample size calculations focused
on estimating HIV prevalence. The present study consists of secondary data analysis outside of
the main goal of the study, and as such sample size calculations did not take into account the
sample sizes for newcomer, recent, and established immigrant population. Thus, while the
overall sample size exceeds recommended sample sizes for structural equation models of this
design (e.g., the 20 participants per parameter heuristic by Kline, 2016), our analysis may not
have an adequate sample size for these particular subgroups. For example, survey methodologists
often suggest oversampling underrepresented populations when making estimates for these
groups (Mercer, 2016), and it may be better to design studies with equal sample sizes for each
comparison group. As such, there is a need for future studies that purposefully samples
immigrant populations, including immigrants who have a precarious migration status, to
investigate these models in a pre-registered analysis.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 28
Policy Implications
Shortage of Primary Healthcare Providers
Our research suggests that primary healthcare providers play an important role for uptake
of preventative sexual health behaviors. We found having a primary healthcare provider was
moderately associated with both having used PrEP and receiving recent STI testing. In contrast,
reporting having used a sexual health clinic was weakly associated with STI testing and not
associated with PrEP uptake. This may, in part, be because a primary healthcare provider can be
more attentive to a need for regular STI testing, whereas having gone to a sexual health clinic in
the past does not necessarily mean that people are appropriately/regularly seeking STI testing.
Additionally, sexual health clinics may not be equipped to provide the continued care required
for patients on PrEP. For oral PrEP, patients need to be screened for HIV and other STIs every
three months, and periodically assessed for adverse effects and contraindications (Tan et al.,
2017).
In Canada, these issues can be further exacerbated by the ongoing shortage of primary
healthcare providers. On average, there are 140 primary care providers per 100,000 residents in
Canada, a number that represents both family physicians, registered nurses, and nurse
practitioners (Flood et al., 2023). The cause of this shortage is multifaceted, ranging from an
increasing number of retiring primary healthcare providers, to fewer new doctors going into
family medicine because of relatively lower pay (Flood et al., 2023).
One solution that may be particularly relevant in the context of sexual health, is shifting
primary healthcare access to a team-based care model Flood et al. (2023). In this model, rather
than a single physician working in isolation, the work is distributed to a broader range of staff. In
the context of sexual health, nurses focus on the routine check-ups required for PrEP, and
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 29
doctors become involved when more complicated issues arise (Flood et al., 2023). In the context
of sexual minority men’s health, this may allow clinics to take on more patients for the purposes
of providing PrEP, distributing the work of follow-up screenings to their broader team.
Additionally, government funding directed towards increasing the capacity of sexual health
clinics would allow for more walk-in patient care, as well as being able to provide the routine
care required for individuals who wish to enroll in PrEP.
Structural Barriers and Stigma
While disparities in primary healthcare access exist, our research also finds that
newcomer immigrants were less likely to report using other sexual health clinics. Other research
has found that the health-seeking behaviors of immigrants differ based on immigration status. A
qualitative interview investigating immigrant healthcare access found that refugee claimants and
undocumented immigrants are treated inequitably compared in Canada’s healthcare system
(Campbell et al., 2014). For undocumented immigrants, they avoid walk-in clinics and only seek
care when situations are dire, because they fear that they will be reported for their lack of
documentation (Campbell et al., 2014).
Campbell et al.'s (2014) work highlights how fear of deportation may affect people’s
willingness to seek medical care. While immigrants testing positive for HIV or other STBBIs
does not make an individual automatically inadmissible, these decisions are made at the
discretion of the immigration officer. While the Government of Canada has eased their definition
of ‘excessive demand’ on the country’s healthcare system and social services (Government of
Canada, 2023b), immigrants continue to be denied entry due to their HIV status (e.g., Keung,
2024). Given these decisions, GBM immigrants seeking permanent residency, especially those
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 30
who have more precarious migration statuses, may avoid testing for HIV and STBBIs to not
compromise their applications.
While an immediate intervention would be to ensure immigration officers are informed
on medical inadmissibility laws and advancements in HIV treatment, it is important to push for
more structural changes. For example, different immigration officers can deem the same
individual as medically admissible or inadmissible based on the same medical history (Keung,
2024). While officers can be trained and informed on the current medical advancements of HIV
treatment and its effects on the healthcare system, structural changes are often more effective
than informational interventions (Albarracín et al., 2024). Changing medical inadmissibility laws
can play an important role in reducing inter-officer variability in their decisions for medical
inadmissibility. Further, these laws have already been challenged as both discriminatory and in
violation of Canada’s Charter of Rights and Freedoms (Keung, 2017).
Conclusions
Though the healthy immigrant effect suggests that newcomer immigrants experience
better health outcomes than their non-immigrant counterparts, we found that GBM newcomers
were less likely to have a primary healthcare provider or to have had access to other sexual
health clinics. Given that consistent access to a primary healthcare provider is associated with
better health outcomes and the adoption of preventative health behaviors (Constant et al., 2017;
Taglione & Brown, 2023), the current work also shows that these disparities in access seem to
translate into disparities in sexual health as well. Importantly, these disparities in newcomer
access are largely accounted for by the number of newcomer immigrants with precarious
migration statuses. These findings highlight the importance of attending to the differential access
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 31
to healthcare that immigrants experience due to legal barriers and other structural barriers
associated with their admission category.
Author Biographies
Paolo A. Palma is a postdoctoral researcher at Toronto Metropolitan University, and received
his PhD in Social Psychology from the University of Western Ontario. His research focuses on
prejudice, stigma, and social inequities among immigrants and sexual minority men.
Shayna Skakoon-Sparling is an Assistant Professor at the University of Guelph. Her areas of
research expertise include loneliness, social connection/support, minority stress, sexual health,
and community-engaged research.
Jessie Dawson is a Research Nurse studying mental health, sexual health, and substance use
with a focus on marginalized communities. She holds a Master’s degree in Nursing and has
professional experience in social psychology, oncology, public health, and sexual and
reproductive health.
Reza Zandi is a Research Coordinator at Laurentian University, specializing in public health
research and data analysis with marginalized communities. He holds a Master's degree in Critical
Sociology from Brock University and focuses on program evaluation, ethics in research, and
social determinants of health.
Terri Zhang is the Research Coordinator for Engage Toronto at Toronto Metropolitan
University, whose research interests include gender expansive identities and resilience processes.
Evan Campbell was a Research Nurse working with the Toronto Engage Study Team, and has
been a Registered Nurse in Toronto for the past seven years. Currently they are pursuing their
Master’s of Public Health at the University of Toronto.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 32
Darrell H. S. Tan is an infectious diseases physician and clinician-scientist at St. Michael’s
Hospital and Associate Professor of Medicine at the University of Toronto, with research
interests in HIV prevention and STIs. He is a Co-PI for the Engage Cohort Study and medical
monitor for the Toronto site.
Nathan J. Lachowsky is a social epidemiologist and Professor at the University of Victoria
School of Public Health & Social Policy. He is an expert in community-based research on sexual
health and HIV/AIDS with sexual minority men across Canada and New Zealand.
Joseph Cox is a public health physician researcher and Professor in the Department of
Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Occupational Health, McGill University. He is a Co-Principal
Investigator for the Engage Cohort Study. He has more than 20 years’ experience undertaking
biobehavioural surveillance and research to inform STBBI prevention and care for key
populations.
Gilles Lambert was a medical consultant at the Surveillance Office of the Ministry of Health
and Social Services of Quebec, the National Institute of Public Health of Quebec, and the
Direction de santé publique of Montreal.
Milada Dvorakova is the Research Coordinator for Engage Montreal, and holds a Bachelor of
Science in Anatomy and Cell Biology from McGill University and a Master of Science in Global
Health from Vrije Universiteit.
Allan Lal is the Research Coordinator for Engage Vancouver at the British Columbia Centre for
Excellence in HIV/AIDS, and received a degree in Anthropology at the University of British
Columbia.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 33
Jody Jollimore is the executive director of the Canadian AIDS Treatment Information Exchange
(CATIE) and has over two decades of experience in community-based research, program
planning, and service delivery.
Daniel Grace is an Associate Professor at the Dalla Lana School of Public Health at the
University of Toronto, and Tier 2 Canada Research Chair in Sexual and Gender Minority Health.
He is an internationally recognized medical sociologist who leads a mixed methods program of
community-engaged research to advance the social, mental, physical, and sexual health of
2S/LGBTQ+ communities.
Trevor A. Hart is a Full Professor in the Department of Psychology at Toronto Metropolitan
University and Co-PI of the Engage Cohort Study. Dr. Hart’s research examines factors
associated with transmission of HIV and other sexually transmitted and blood-borne infections,
and clinical trials to prevent these infections and to promote sexual and mental health.
GBM NEWCOMER HEALTH ACCESS 34