THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 1
The Social Iowa Gambling Task (S-IGT):
A Novel Paradigm for Investigating Social Learning and Decision Making
*Eliany Perez1, Alayna Shoenfelt1, Nichole R. Lighthall2, Ian Frazier1, Dalia El-Shafie1, Tian
Lin1, & *Natalie C. Ebner1,3,4
1Department of Psychology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
2Department of Psychology, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA
3Institute on Aging, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA
4Center for Cognitive Aging and Memory, Department of Clinical and Health Psychology,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
Author Note
This study was supported by the Jacquelin Goldman Research Grant; the University of
Florida College of Liberal Arts and Sciences Dissertation Fellowship; NIH T32 AA 28254;
NIH/NIA R01AG057764; NIH/NIA R01AG072658; and FL DOH 22A10. The authors have no
conflicts to disclose.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to *Eliany Perez
(elianyperez@ufl.edu) and *Natalie C. Ebner (natalie.ebner@ufl.edu), Department of
Psychology, University of Florida, 945 Center Dr, Gainesville, FL 32603, United States.
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 2
Abstract
The unique distinctions between non-social and social learning and decision making are
largely unknown. Facial cues, critical in forming first impressions of trustworthiness, may
influence maladaptive social learning, such as prioritizing appearances over actions and settling
for satisfactory outcomes. To test this, we augmented a well-established measure of learning
and decision making, the Iowa Gambling Task, to examine the role of social (face) cues in
learning. Our newly developed Social Iowa Gambling Task (S-IGT) includes: 1) the
experimental manipulation of facial cues of trustworthiness; 2) the incorporation of two
conditions in which the dis/advantageous decks are represented by un/trustworthy faces (i.e.,
congruent condition; CS-IGT) and vice versa (i.e., incongruent condition; IS-IGT); and (3) a non-
social control condition. With these features, the new S-IGT goes beyond widely used multi-
round trust games and expands on their ability to model the influence of social context during
decision making. Across three studies, 558 participants were randomly assigned to complete
either the IGT or one of the two conditions of the S-IGT (i.e., in/congruent). Participants showed
the best initial performance in the CS-IGT, but also evidenced the least improvement over time
in this condition and most disadvantageous decision making after learning (i.e., during the last
block). Results from this novel task support the notion that congruence between facial cues of
trustworthiness and behavior can inhibit learning and result in inadequate/suboptimal decision
making, perhaps because they promote satisficing.
Keywords: Trustworthiness, Learning, Social Decision Making, Iowa Gambling Task, Faces
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 3
Introduction
Adaptive social decision making requires the ability to accurately distinguish
“cooperators” from “cheaters” (Cosmides & Tooby, 1989; Suzuki et al., 2019). This distinction
has been investigated in laboratory settings using behavioral economic approaches, most
commonly through paradigms such as the Trust Game and the Ultimatum Game (Von
Neumann & Morgenstern, 1947). These paradigms help elucidate how decisions are shaped
by a context's "social frame", reflecting expectations of fairness and reciprocity (Blount, 1995;
Frazier et al., 2021).
While traditional versions of economic decision games are widely used, variations of
these tasks and alternative paradigms have been proposed to capture the nuances of complex
social choice (Rilling & Sanfey, 2011). Because making decisions in the real world is
dependent on multiple interactions with social partners, researchers have increasingly utilized
multi-round economic games rather than “one-shot” designs. Multi-round games demonstrate
that behavior and judgements evolve with ongoing partner interactions, offering a robust
framework for observing the evolution of trust and decision-making strategies over time
(Axelrod & Hamilton, 1981; Rilling & Sanfey, 2011).
Implicit learning plays a significant role in how we navigate and interpret our social
world. This form of learning, particularly relevant when considering the influence of external
factors such as facial features, as opposed to explicit behavior, is crucial in understanding the
unspoken, often unconscious, elements of social exchange. Studies have shown that non-
verbal cues like facial expressions and body language can greatly influence trust decisions in
repeated interactions, albeit their exact impact is not fully understood yet (Eckel & Wilson, 2003;
Morris et al., 1998; Willis & Todorov, 2006). This brings to light the concept of schemas—mental
frameworks shaped by past experiences (i.e., based on “schemata”; Bartlett, 1932)—and how
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 4
they can lead to biases in information processing and decision making (Ebner et al., 2009;
Lempert et al., 2022; Mather & Johnson, 2003; Owens et al., 1979).
The literature points to an intriguing pattern: congruent facial cues, whether emotional or
non-emotional, tend to amplify trust or distrust judgments based on the outcomes of interactions
(Campellone & Kring, 2013; Chang et al., 2010). This pattern indicates that consistent facial
cues and interaction outcomes lead to more optimal investment patterns, while incongruent
cues initially impact decisions but are overridden by repeated, conflicting outcomes. However, it
remains unclear how facial cues of trustworthiness impact behavior in contexts where social
interaction outcomes involve both costs and benefits (e.g., gains/losses) and when the
likelihood of reciprocity is more difficult to remember explicitly. One possibility is that congruent
facial cues lead to more optimal decision making over time, and incongruent facial cues lead to
initial biases (e.g., favoring trustworthy-looking partners) that are increasingly ignored as
participants with conflicting interaction outcomes have an expectation for reciprocity.
Expanding on these insights, our study delves into the intricacies of “satisficing” behavior
in social decision making, particularly when explicit memory of interactions is challenged.
Satisficing, refers to a decision-making strategy that aims for a satisfactory or adequate result,
rather than the optimal solution (Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999). This concept is particularly relevant
in complex social interactions, where weighing every possible outcome is impractical.
Individuals employing satisficing will accept choices that meet minimum requirements, thereby
reducing the cognitive effort involved in decision making. In the context of our study, we explore
how this behavior manifests in social decision making, especially when individuals are faced
with facial cues that either align or conflict with their expectations or past experiences. The
novel Social Iowa Gambling Task (S-IGT), introduced in this paper, allows for differentiation
between these cognitive processes, advancing understanding of decision making in social
contexts.
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 5
Social Iowa Gambling Task (S-IGT)
To assess the influence of facial cues on social learning and decision making, we
developed the Social Iowa Gambling Task (S-IGT), an adaptation of the well-established Iowa
Gambling Task (IGT; Bechara et al., 1994). In this novel social variant of the IGT, participants
are presented with social (face) stimuli, wherein the trustworthiness of these facial cues is
experimentally manipulated to examine its impact on decision making. The S-IGT comprises
two distinct conditions: (1) congruent (CS-IGT): trustworthy- and untrustworthy-looking facial
cues align with advantageous and disadvantageous decks, respectively; and (2) incongruent
(IS-IGT): trustworthy- and untrustworthy-looking facial cues are associated with
disadvantageous and advantageous decks, respectively. In addition to the two social conditions,
a non-social control condition using the standard IGT without facial stimuli was used here to
establish a baseline for comparison.
The standard IGT was originally developed to measure integrative emotional-cognitive
decision making, specifically exploring the somatic marker hypothesis in individuals with
prefrontal neurological damage. This hypothesis states that as decision-making complexity
increases, emotions and feelings become essential decision signals (Denburg & Hedgcock,
2015). These emotions and feelings, theorized as “somatic markers,” are then integrated into
the process through the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (Bechara et al., 2005).
Our adaptation of the IGT to examine social learning and decision making served
several purposes. While trust learning studies traditionally utilize neuroeconomic tasks such as
the Trust Game, Prisoner’s Dilemma, or Ultimatum Game (Rilling & Sanfey, 2011), the S-IGT
uniquely captures the complexity and reliance on non-declarative memory present in real-world
social learning across multiple interactions. Furthermore, the IGT’s well-established ecological
validity has been used to investigate decision making in various populations with social
decision-making impairments (Bauer et al., 2013; Bechara et al., 1994; Maurage et al., 2018;
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 6
Rupp et al., 2016). The psychometric properties of the IGT have allowed researchers to not only
probe emotional learning and decision-making processes (i.e., somatic marker hypothesis;
Denburg & Hedgcock, 2015), but also to examine learning and decision making under
conditions of uncertainty (i.e., analyzing performance in the first 40 trials during contingency
learning; Bechara & Martin, 2004; Brand et al., 2006; Maurage et al., 2018) and conditions of
experience (i.e., analyzing performance in the last block, after contingencies are presumably
learned).
Previous work has successfully adapted the IGT to study learning and decision making
in individuals with anxiety disorders by representing the IGT choice options with pictures of
spiders/butterflies as well as pictures of angry/happy faces (Pittig et al., 2014, 2015). Our newly-
developed S-IGT: 1) uses facial stimuli with neutral emotional expressions and subtle cues of
un/trustworthiness that are less likely to trigger experimenter demand effects, 2) the inclusion of
a task condition in which advantageous decks are paired with non-aversive stimuli to examine
the impact of congruent trustworthy-advantageous stimuli on social decisions to trust, and 3) the
inclusion of, and thus direct comparison with, a standard, non-social condition of the IGT to
determine whether visual social cues generally impact learning. Thus, our S-IGT represents a
novel paradigm to study social learning and decision making that provides important
comparison conditions that give a better accounting of social influences on learning and
decision making; and its social stimuli allow for isolating effects of facial cues of trustworthiness.
Purpose of the Current Study
To summarize, here we used the S-IGT to test competing hypotheses about congruence
and incongruence of social facial cues with advantageous and disadvantageous choice options.
We expected increased satisficing to occur when participants were presented with schema-
congruent stimuli versus when they were presented with schema-incongruent information over
multiple interactions. This study allowed us to test the extent to which social cues affect
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 7
decisions to dis/trust in an implicit trust paradigm incorporating real-world features of repeated
interactions and interactions that yield a mixture of costs and benefits.
We predicted that participants would perform better over the course of the task in the
congruent-social (CS-IGT) than in the incongruent-social (IS-IGT) condition, while worst in the
(non-social) IGT. This directional prediction was based on the notion that facial cues of
trustworthiness would be a large factor in participants’ card selection strategy, aiding in the
congruent and hindering in the incongruent condition; while the relative lack of information in the
IGT therefore may result in relatively worse performance overall than in any of the social
conditions. Also, previous research on using a variant of the IGT (i.e., the Spider Gambling
Task; Pittig et al., 2014) partially support differential predictions for the congruent-social vs.
incongruent-social conditions, in that spider-fearful participants performed better in the non-
conflict (i.e., when the advantageous decks were represented by butterflies) than in the conflict
(i.e., when the advantageous decks were represented by spiders) condition.
Method
This study tested the unique distinctions between social and non-social learning and
decision making, with a particular focus on the role of facial cues in shaping social decisions. In
particular, we investigated the extent to which reliance on facial cues of trustworthiness
influenced adaptive and maladaptive social learning.
Participants
Data and materials for this study are available in the Open Science Framework
study protocol, all participants provided written informed consent. Participants were recruited
from the university undergraduate psychology participant pool (SONA), fliers posted in the
community, and word-of-mouth. Phone screenings were conducted to confirm participants were
aged 18-35 years and English speaking. A total of 558 participants were randomly assigned to
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 8
one of three task conditions: non-social (IGT), congruent-social (CS-IGT), or incongruent-social
results from a sensitivity analysis for sample size justification.
Procedure
Data for this analysis were harmonized across three data collections: The first two were
conducted in an in-person setting lasting approximately 60 minutes, with participants receiving
monetary compensation (plus a task bonus) and the tasks using images of middle-aged male
faces. The third was an online data collection using the Pavlovia platform, with participants
receiving SONA credits (no task bonus) and the tasks using images of middle-aged female
faces (see Supplement Materials for details)1.
After written informed consent, participants completed a short demographics
questionnaire, followed by their assigned task condition (see details below) and socioemotional
questionnaires (data not presented here). The session closed with participant debriefing and
compensation.
Standard and Social Iowa Gambling Task Conditions
To mitigate potential practice effects observed in previous IGT studies (Bauer et al.,
2013; Halfmann et al., 2014; Xiao et al., 2013), we adopted a between-subjects design, with
each participant assigned to only one of the three task conditions (IGT, CS-IGT, or IS-IGT).
IGT
The task was programmed in PsychoPy (v3.0.6; Peirce et al., 2019). In all conditions,
participants were given 2,000 points to begin the task and were instructed to make selections
from four decks. Each deck of cards was represented by standard Bicycle brand card backs.
Consistent with the literature, participants were not aware of the number of times they could
draw from the decks or the payout amounts. Participants were told that every draw from a deck
would yield some points, but some draws would result in a penalty. Unbeknownst to them, two
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 9
of the decks were designed to be “disadvantageous” (i.e., resulted in a net loss of 250 points
over 10 selections) and the other two to be “advantageous” (i.e., resulted in a net gain of 250
points over 10 selections). That is, cards drawn from disadvantageous decks could result in
large rewards but could also result in large punishments. Cards selected from advantageous
decks, in contrast, could result in small rewards but could also result in small punishments.
their previous turn’s total points at the top of the computer screen as well as the total number of
points they accumulated up to that point in the task. As in the original IGT, both
disadvantageous card decks were always located on the left side of the screen and both
advantageous card decks always on the right side of the screen (Bechara et al., 1994). All three
the Supplemental Materials for details).
CS-IGT and IS-IGT
In the S-IGT conditions, the instructions from the IGT were modified to frame the task in
a social context (see the Supplemental Materials for complete instructions for all three task
conditions). The S-IGT paired faces with each deck and participants were told that previous
study participants built the four decks with which they were to play. The face images used to
represent each social deck were taken from the FACES database (Ebner et al., 2010). We used
faces of middle-aged adults to avoid own-age biases (Rhodes & Anastasi, 2012; Slessor et al.,
2014). Also, as race effects were not targeted in this study, race-associated facial features were
not manipulated. All facial expressions were neutral (non-emotional). The four selected face
images were the two most and the two least trustworthy-looking faces based on trustworthiness
ratings on a scale from 0 (i.e., not trustworthy at all) to 100 (i.e., very trustworthy) obtained from
Materials for descriptive statistics of the trustworthiness ratings of the face stimuli. In the
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 10
congruent-social condition (CS-IGT), advantageous decks were paired with the two most
trustworthy faces and disadvantageous decks with the two least trustworthy faces. In the
incongruent-social condition (IS-IGT), this pairing was reversed. We administered two versions
of the CS-IGT and two versions of the IS-IGT that switched the face-deck associations within
advantageous and disadvantageous decks. For example, in Version 1 of the congruent
condition Face 1 was paired with Deck C and Face 2 was paired with Deck D and in version 2
the faces switched between the two decks. The same was true for the incongruent condition,
resulting in five possible conditions – IGT, CS-IGT1, CSIGT2, IS-IGT1, and IS-IGT2.
Assignment to these conditions was counterbalanced.
Statistical Analyses
First, to determine if participants were more likely to make their initial selection from a
deck represented by a trustworthy compared to an untrustworthy face, a single sample Chi-
Square analysis on participants’ first selection was conducted for the S-IGT conditions. Our
main analyses examined task performance by 20-trial blocks. Consistent with prior studies
(Bauer et al., 2013; Halfmann et al., 2014; Xiao et al., 2013), task performance was determined
per block by calculating the total number of draws from advantageous decks minus the total
number of draws from disadvantageous decks.
Given the hierarchical data structure (trials nested within participants), we used
multilevel modeling (MLM) in Stata 15.1 (StataCorp. 2017. Stata Statistical Software: Release
15. College Station, TX: StataCorp LLC). The outcome variable was task performance with
Task Condition (IGT, CS-IGT, IS-IGT) as a between-subject independent variable and Block
(four 20-trial blocks) as a within-subject independent variable. This analysis allowed us to test
for a significant two-way interaction between these two factors and to then decompose the
predicted interaction using Bonferroni correction for pairwise comparisons. Note, as in the
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 11
original experiment (Bechara et al., 1994), decks included only 40 non-replenishing cards,
similar to playing the game with physical playing cards.1
Results
selections from each deck by Task Condition and Block2.
Initial Deck Selection
Consistent with findings from other social decision-making paradigms using facial stimuli
(Castle et al., 2012; Chang et al., 2010; Todorov et al., 2009; van ’t Wout & Sanfey, 2008;
Winston et al., 2002), the single sample Chi-Square for first deck selection in the two S-IGT
conditions was significant χ2(1, 380) = 169.78, p < .001. First selections were more likely to be
from a deck represented by a trustworthy compared to a non-trustworthy face (317 vs. 63
choices, respectively). Thus, as expected, facial trustworthiness cues biased initial decision
making (toward trustworthy-looking/away from untrustworthy-looking faces) in the absence of
additional information about choice outcomes.
Choice Performance Over Time
The Task Condition x Block interaction was significant, Wald χ2(6) = 24.84, p =
.0004. Decomposition of this significant two-way interaction showed that performance over the
course of the task was better in the IGT than the CS-IGT, Wald χ2(3) = 10.95, p = .01, as well
as the IGT than the IS-IGT, Wald χ2(3) = 9.65, p = .02; and performance was better in the CS-
IGT than the IS-IGT, Wald χ2(3) = 14.87, p = .002. As expected, performance in Block 1 was the
1 Because some participants ran out of cards to choose from in Block 5, we did not include the fifth task block in our
2 The reported results represent the analysis for all harmonized data. See the Supplemental Materials Tables 4S – 6S
for convergent results of each of the three data collections and when adding data collection as a covariate in the
analyses.
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 12
lowest in the IS-IGT relative to both the CS-IGT (z = -7.57, p < .001) and the IGT (z = -4.76, p <
.001), with comparable performance between the CS-IGT and the IGT (z = 1.47, p = 1.00). By
Block 4, however, participants in the IGT outperformed those in the IS-IGT (z = 3.98, p = .001),
while performance in the CS-IGT did not significantly differ from that in the IGT (z = -2.15, p =
.254) nor the IS-IGT (z = 2.38, p = .14). That is, participants improved the least in the CS-IGT
and the most in the IGT and the IS-IGT – with the latter two task conditions showing overall
similar trajectories of improvement by block.
cues of trustworthiness on initial choice selections as well as subsequent learning trajectories.
Notably, participants in the CS-IGT initially benefited from facial cues of trustworthiness, as they
made somewhat more advantageous than disadvantageous choices early in the task. However,
individuals in this condition showed less improvements in their performance with experience
than individuals in either of the other two conditions (IS-IGT and IGT). In contrast, participants in
the IS-IGT were initially more hindered by facial cues of trustworthiness but exhibited steep
learning trajectories after the initial blocks. Unexpectedly, participants in the IGT, with neither
congruent nor incongruent facial cues of trustworthiness, evidenced greater learning than
participants in the CS-IGT and the IS-IGT
Discussion
The current study introduces a novel paradigm, the Social Iowa Gambling Task
(S-IGT), designed to systematically investigate domain general (non-social) and trust (social)
learning and to examine decision making under contexts of in/congruent trustworthy
appearance and behavior. Our findings reveal significant differences in initial choice
performance across task conditions, aligning with predictions regarding learning and decision-
making disparities in non-social and social contexts. Namely, the pairing of trustworthiness
social cues from faces with advantageous decks led to better initial performance, suggesting
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 13
schema effects due to intrinsic biases. However, participants displayed the least improvement
over the course of the task in the CS-IGT relative to the IGT and the IS-IGT. Furthermore,
exploratory analyses revealed that participants in the CS-IGT did not demonstrate a significant
learning advantage over those in the standard (non-social) IGT.
Our findings support the conclusion that the presence of incongruent facial cues of
trustworthiness impaired initial choice options during the first block of the task. More specifically,
our results suggest that when the initial valence of the facial cues was generally consistent with
the expected values of the choice options, participants may have deferred to facial cues and
directed less cognitive resources to processing choice outcomes (i.e., satisficing). Additionally,
schema reliance on social facial cues in both the CS-IGT and the IS-IGT impaired learning
overall when compared to the IGT.
Satisficing Behavior in the CS-IGT
Results of the present study indicated that the CS-IGT was the only task condition in
which participants, on average, performed better in the first block (i.e., more advantageous
choices) than in the following blocks. This initial performance difference appeared to be due to a
reliance on facial cues to make initial decisions on who to trust. This finding is consistent with a
wealth of evidence that facial trustworthiness affects social decisions (Castle et al., 2012;
Chang et al., 2010; Todorov et al., 2009; van ’t Wout & Sanfey, 2008; Winston et al., 2002) and
generally supports the notion of schema reliance (Ebner et al., 2009; Lempert et al., 2022;
Mather & Johnson, 2003). Choosing a trustworthy-looking face in the congruent condition of the
S-IGT always resulted in profits and little to no losses since the trustworthy face was paired with
an advantageous deck. This provided motivation for participants to choose a trustworthy face
over an untrustworthy face in this condition.
Our results showed that participants in the CS-IGT appeared to more frequently select
cards from the advantageous decks (paired with trustworthy faces) and occasionally – but not
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 14
frequently – explored disadvantageous decks (paired with untrustworthy faces). This strategy is
consistent with the phenomenon of satisficing (Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999), which requires fewer
cognitive resources than integrating choice outcomes over trials and uses evolving estimates of
choice values to make decisions. In our context, satisficing would mean participants rely on
trustworthy faces as a quick heuristic to guide their choices, thereby conserving cognitive
resources that would otherwise be expended in meticulously analyzing the outcomes
associated with each deck over multiple trials.
However, the presence of this satisficing behavior does not entirely preclude other
decision-making dynamics. An alternative hypothesis we must consider is that the congruence
of trustworthy faces with advantageous decks could disrupt the learning process. This disruption
could occur if participants, influenced by their initial strong associations with trustworthy faces,
do not encode feedback from their choices as effectively, or if they experiment less, believing
the congruent cues to be reliable indicators of positive outcomes. Such a mechanism could
explain why, despite initially favoring decks associated with trustworthy faces, participants in the
congruent condition displayed a slower adjustment in their strategies over time. This is evident
in our data showing that participants did engage with disadvantageous decks, albeit at a
reduced rate compared to other conditions. The slower rate of strategy adjustment in the CS-
IGT suggests that while participants start with a satisficing approach, relying on the heuristic of
trustworthy faces, they gradually begin to integrate feedback from their choices, although less
efficiently than in conditions without such congruent cues.
The observed pattern of behavior in our study is similar to that of Pittig et al. (2014)’s
adaptation of the IGT, where participants faced with pictures of butterflies on advantageous
decks and pictures of spiders on disadvantageous decks (“no-conflict” condition) were the only
group to exhibit advantageous performance in the first block but did not show significant
improvement over the rest of the task. While our study parallels Pittig et al. (2014) in terms of
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 15
initial advantageous performance in the no-conflict condition, a notable divergence arises in the
progression of task performance. Unlike in Pittig et al., our study introduces an essential
comparison with the no-cue condition (the standard IGT). This comparison provides valuable
insights into the decision-making process. Specifically, it highlights that in the absence of any
visual cues, as in the standard IGT, participants' choices are guided by different dynamics
compared to when they are influenced by incongruent visual cues. The initial influence of
incongruent visual cues in our task, and the subsequent need for considerable experience to
override these initial biases, contrasts with the more stable performance observed in the no-cue
IGT condition. This difference underscores the significant impact of visual cues on initial
decision making and the learning curve required to adjust in complex decision-making
environments.
Divergence between our findings and other work may also be attributable to the nature
of the stimuli and task complexity used. For example, the Trust Game in Chang et al.'s (2010)
study, involving simpler sequential interactions and outcomes, may have facilitated learning
processes differently than our more complex IGT environment with multiple choices and mixed
gains and losses. This could explain why congruent facial cues had a more pronounced effect
in our study compared to Chang et al.
While there is an overlap between positive/negative valence and trustworthiness cues,
they are not entirely synonymous. Trustworthiness cues, in our study, appear to have played a
distinct role in the decision-making, especially in how individuals adapted their strategies over
time. Therefore, our findings contribute a unique perspective to the understanding of
trustworthiness in social decision making, distinct from the broader framework of
positive/negative valence. They highlight the complex relationship between initial impressions
based on trustworthiness and the evolution of decision-making strategies, underscoring the
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 16
need for further research to disentangle these effects and explore their implications in social
cognition.
Individual differences among participants and variations in experimental design could
have further contributed to differences in results. Given the established construct validity of the
IGT among clinical populations with decision-making impairments (Buelow & Suhr, 2009), we
suggest that in certain contexts (e.g., among individuals with autism spectrum disorders or
frontal lobe damage), congruent facial cues of trustworthiness trigger satisficing during the
evaluation and integration of social interaction outcomes. Future research is needed to more
directly examine boundary conditions that determine when congruent visual social cues benefit
vs. impair learning about social partners over time.
The S-IGT As a Novel Paradigm to Study Social Learning and Decision Making
This study introduces the S-IGT as a means of measuring differences in social learning
and decision making. Our findings align with previous evidence of differences in social (i.e.,
trust) vs. non-social (i.e., domain general) learning (Baumgartner et al., 2008; Frazier et al.,
2021; Stanley, 2016), providing further evidence of a distinction between social-cognitive
processes and general cognition. In this context, the S-IGT could be adopted for administration
as an fMRI and/or ERP paradigm (Halfmann et al., 2014) with the aim to systematically
disentangling neural signals of non-social and social learning/decision making. The task
furthermore lends itself for application in diverse populations for whom social decision-making
processes are currently understudied (e.g., individuals with alcohol use disorder or
posttraumatic stress disorder; Le Berre et al., 2017; Saraiya et al., 2019).
Limitations and Future Research Directions
This study broadens our understanding of the intricacies involved in decision making
across varied contexts, extending beyond the non-social sphere and into the domain of complex
social interactions. It positions the S-IGT as an instrumental tool for delving into the multifaceted
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 17
nature of social cognition, including trust. It also invites a more comprehensive exploration into a
myriad of cognitive and emotional factors that influence how we engage with and interpret
social cues. However, the design of the current study comes with certain limitations that offer
fertile ground for future inquiry.
While the IGT is a widely used task, some studies have challenged the original theories
on the implicit psychological processes involved in the task (Brevers et al., 2013; Dunn et al.,
2006; Schiebener et al., 2011). This traditional view has since been replaced by new ideas on
IGT performance suggesting the involvement of more emotional processes. Future studies
using the S-IGT should examine additional factors influencing decision making. For example,
using pictures of people from diverse backgrounds would provide a more representative capture
of real-world trust interactions people encounter in their everyday life.
Our study used facial stimuli of middle-aged adults. The purpose of selecting these
specific face stimuli was to avoid potential age biases in judgments of trustworthiness (Rhodes
& Anastasi, 2012; Slessor et al., 2014). However, this necessarily means that none of our faces
were matched to the participants’ ages. It is unknown how this may have affected initial
judgements of trustworthiness and/or trust-learning rates. Building on this, there is a significant
opportunity for future research to systematically investigate how various dimensions of facial
features, including age matching, could influence trust learning and decision-making processes.
Finally, one aspect to consider in our findings is the possibility that participants may have
perceived the faces not merely as elements within the task but also as cues from the
experimenter. In the S-IGT, participants' initial preference for decks with trustworthy faces could
be interpreted as a response to perceived experimenter cues, suggesting 'correct' choices. Over
time, especially in the CS-IGT, participants may have questioned and adjusted this strategy, as
these cues did not consistently indicate deck quality. This potential interpretation of
experimenter-driven cues, aligning with concepts of schema reliance and satisficing, adds a
THE SOCIAL IOWA GAMBLING TASK (S-IGT) 18
significant layer of complexity to our results and underscores the importance of considering
participant perceptions in experimental design and analysis moving forward.
Conclusions
The present study introduces the S-IGT as a new paradigm for investigating unique
distinctions between non-social (i.e., domain general) and social (e.g., trust) learning and
decision making. Our findings suggest that congruence between a social partner’s appearance
and behavior initially leads to more accurate impressions (perhaps due to schema reliance), but
ultimately triggers satisficing with negative effects on learning and performance with experience.
Participants performed better overall in the IGT, suggesting that social cues do not aid in IGT
performance. It may be the case that relying on social schemas increases the demand on
mental load and impairs performance when having to make decisions about social interactions.
Interestingly, participants in the CS-IGT, despite initially benefiting from congruent
trustworthy cues, demonstrated less improvement with experience compared to those in the
other conditions. Conversely, those in the IS-IGT, initially hindered by incongruent cues,
exhibited significant learning over time. This divergence in learning trajectories highlights the
complex role of trustworthiness cues in decision making, suggesting that their influence extends
beyond initial impressions and requires adaptive cognitive strategies over time.
Moving forward, investigations will need to test the replicability of these findings and may
utilize advanced computational modeling with neuroimaging data to determine distinguishing
neurocognitive processes between non-social and social learning and decision making (e.g.,
neural networks subserving social cognition). The S-IGT can also be launched into clinical
populations with potential deficits in trust-related learning and social decision making such as
Parkinson’s disease (Javor et al., 2015) in addition to studies in healthy aging (Horta et al.,
2023) to more precisely identify the mechanisms underlying learning and decision making in
these populations.