TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 1
Keywords: Representations, Representational Change, Category Learning, Memory
Task Imprinting: Another Mechanism of Representational Change?
Mirko Thalmann , Theo A. J. Schäfer , Stephanie Theves , Christian F. Doeller , and Eric
1 2 2 2
Schulz
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
Max-Planck-Ring 8
72076 Tübingen - Germany
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences
Stephanstrasse 1
04303 Leipzig - Germany
Author Note
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Mirko Thalmann,
Research Group Computational Principles of Intelligence, Max Planck Institute for
Biological Cybernetics, Max-Planck-Ring 8, 72076 Tübingen, Baden-Württemberg,
Germany. E-mail: mirkothalmann@hotmail.com
Experimental scripts, modeling scripts, and analysis scripts are available on the
Pre-registrations of Experiments 2-4 are available on the following osf webpage:
Task Imprinting: Another Mechanism of Representational Change?
Research from several areas suggests that mental representations adapt to the
specific tasks we carry out in our environment. In this study, we propose a mechanism of
adaptive representational change, . Thereby, we introduce a computational
task imprinting
model, which portrays task imprinting as an adaptation to specific task goals via selective
storage of helpful representations in long-term memory. We test the main qualitative
prediction of the model in four behavioral experiments using healthy young adults as
participants. In each experiment, we assess participants’ baseline representations in the
beginning of the experiment, then expose participants to one of two tasks intended to
shape representations differently according to our model, and finally assess any potential
change in representations. Crucially, the tasks used to measure representations differ in the
amount that strategic, judgmental processes play a role. The results of Experiments 1 and
2 allow us to exclude the option that representations used in more perceptual tasks become
biased categorically. The results of Experiment 4 make it likely that people strategically
decide given the specific task context whether they use categorical information or not. One
signature of representational change was however observed: category learning practice
increased the perceptual sensitivity over and above mere exposure to the same stimuli.
1 Introduction
How does our cognitive system react when we learn to perform a task, for example
to categorize a flavor as belonging to a fruit. A simple solution is to rely on a strategy that
we already know. For example, an allergic reaction against the specific fruit may tell us
that it is a Kiwi. A harder solution is to learn a strategy, which maps fruit taste profiles to
fruit identities, from the ground. This could be achieved, for example, by using the rule
that a highly acidic fruit is a grapefruit (Ashby & Gott, 1988), by using individually stored
episodes of fruits previously eaten to generalize to the current fruit (Nosofsky, 1986), by
using representations of prototypical fruits and go with the closest prototype (Homa et al.,
1982; Minda & Smith, 2001), or by using a combination of the latter two (Vanpaemel &
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 3
Navarro, 2007). The speed of the involved basic cognitive processes may even increase when
we use the same strategy over extended periods (Case et al., 1982). A different, intriguing
idea is that the representations of the individual fruits themselves change with learning.
The idea of representation learning has gained a lot of traction in the field of
machine learning in the last decades. The reason for that is that the performance of
machine learning algorithms in terms of predictive accuracy heavily depends on the
representation of the data (i.e., the features Bengio et al., 2014). For example, the success
of speech recognition models depended to a large degree on learning good representations
of speech signals. By analogy, it could be assumed that achieving high performance on a
given task by humans also depends on learning good mental representations. A main
question to be tackled then is how representations become more favorable to carry out a
task. Or in other words, how do representations change? Research targeted to
understanding mental representations and their change broadly comes from three fields:
neuroscience, cognitive science and cognitive psychology. Despite continued research in
these areas and findings interpreted in favor of the idea that representations of individual
objects change (Dubova & Goldstone, 2021; Goldstone et al., 2001; Karagoz et al., 2022) it
is currently not clear what - if anything - changes with representational change.
We start this article with a literature review summarizing different lines of previous
research targeting the topic of representational change. This allows us to situate a new
suggested mechanism of representational change, referred to as , within the
task imprinting
landscape of existing empirical and theoretical work. We then implement the mechanism as
a computational model, which portrays representational change as a response to
task-specific practice. We further develop a behavioral paradigm to test whether the
proposed mechanism of representational change can be measured behaviorally. We
eventually test the qualitative predictions of the model in a series of four controlled online
experiments, three of them pre-registered.
The results are mostly in disagreement with the model’s predictions. They show
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 4
that representations of individual objects do not become biased as expected according to
practice in a category learning task. Practice in a category learning task, however, tended
to increase the precision of the individual object representations, over and above the
increase in precision in a control task. Over the progression of the four experiments we
varied the task intended to measure representations. When the task was designed to
measure predominantly perceptual details about objects, participants’ responses did not
change as predicted by the task imprinting model. However, when the task highlighted
higher-level information about the stimulus, such as category membership, participants’
responses changed accordingly. The results are consistent with the idea that participants
strategically incorporate learned categorical representations in addition to individual object
representations when a task context is sufficiently similar to the category learning task.
2 Background
The majority of scientific results about representational change comes from three
areas. In the area of perceptual learning, researchers are interested in uncovering the
factors that determine how entire stimuli or individual feature dimensions are mentally
represented. A major question in the area of category learning and concept learning is
when people use abstracted representations, such as rules or prototypes, and when they use
individually stored instances to represent categories and concepts. Furthermore, research
about reinforcement learning in humans is interested in understanding how repeated
exposure to reward signals shapes the construction of cognitive maps. To locate our
proposed mechanism of task imprinting, we are summarizing the main conclusions of these
areas aligned with empirical evidence in the following.
Goldstone (1998) discriminates between four mechanisms of perceptual learning:
attentional weighting, stimulus imprinting, unitization, and differentiation.
Attentional
refers to the fact that people learn to attend to stimulus dimensions, which are
weighting
relevant for a given task at hand, with a higher weight. For example, the generalized
context model for categorization tasks (Nosofsky, 1986) assumes that selective attention
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 5
can be distributed across the feature dimensions of a stimulus to be classified. When
people learn to pay more attention to a particular dimension, they zoom into that
dimension and represent it in a more fine-grained way. Kruschke (2005) showed that
selective attention is a necessary ingredient for connectionist cognitive models to be able to
mimic learning difficulties in three classical learning paradigms. A similar explanation of
attentional weighting is offered by rate-distortion accounts of perception (e.g., Bates &
Jacobs, 2020; Sims, 2016). They posit that limited cognitive resources are optimally
distributed to minimize the cost of a categorization error. Therefore categorization relevant
dimensions should be represented more precisely. In models, which assume trial-by-trial
variability in the perceptual information obtained from every object (e.g., Ashby & Lee,
1993), attention towards a dimension reduces the perceptual variability on that dimension
(see for example Braida & Durlach, 1972; Durlach & Braida, 1969; Luce et al., 1976; Luce
et al., 1982). There is also evidence from neuroscience that hippocampal object
representations during categorization are modulated by attention to the currently
decision-relevant feature (Mack et al., 2016, 2018). Furthermore, Theves and colleagues
show that the hippocampus specifically integrates categorization relevant feature
dimensions in a common representational space, thereby mapping distances between
exemplars and category boundaries (Theves et al., 2019; Theves et al., 2020).
Attentional weighting is tightly linked to the phenomenon of categorical perception.
It describes the observation that two stimuli separated by a fixed distance in feature space
are harder to discriminate when they come from the same category than when they come
from different categories. It was first observed in the domain of speech perception.
Liberman et al. (1957) found that discrimination between auditorily presented phonemes is
more difficult when they come from the same phoneme category (e.g.two b’s) than when
they come from different phoneme categories (e.g. b vs. d). While the emergence of
categorical perception for natural speech might be targeted from a developmental
perspective, several studies examined it experimentally in the visual domain. Goldstone
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 6
(1994) showed that perceptual sensitivity to discriminate between visually presented
squares varying in size and brightness increases after category learning for stimuli assigned
to different categories. The sensitivity increased for the category-relevant dimension but
did not decrease for the irrelevant one, which is halfway consistent with the idea of
categorical perception. Goldstone et al. (2001) showed that within-category items were not
rated as more similar after category learning than before, but surprisingly
between-category items were. Consistent with their categorical perception account was the
observation, though, that the difference of similarity ratings from two stimuli to a neutral
stimulus became smaller, when the two stimuli came from the same category, but not,
when they came from different categories.
Theoretically, categorical perception can be explained by disproportionate attention
and perceptual sensitivity close to the category boundaries (Goldstone, 1998) or an
attractor state in a hidden layer of a connectionist model (Harnad, 1995), which
deemphasizes differences between representations of stimuli from the same category.
Categorical perception can also be explained within a Bayesian framework. In that case,
categorization responses are considered to be a mixture of the prior probability of the
category and the likelihood of the stimulus. Bayesian models typically predict an attraction
of representations towards category prototypes and therefore decrease distances between
representations within the same category, but increase distances between representations
between categories (e.g., in the Category Adjustment Model Huttenlocher et al., 2000).
Evidence for the prediction of attraction to prototypes has been shown in several
studies. For example, Huttenlocher et al. (1991) presented participants with a location on
a circle to remember for immediate recall. An important finding was that participants’
responses were biased towards certain stereotypical angles (45 degrees, 135 degrees and so
on) and towards locations halfway between the center of the circle and its circumference.
In a similar vein, Hasantash and Afraz (2020) presented participants with one target color
patch in one of two experimental conditions. In the simultaneous matching condition,
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 7
participants adjusted a variable color patch to match the simultaneously presented target
color patch. In the sequential matching condition, they adjusted the variable color patch
after the target patch had disappeared for a ten second retention interval. At the end of
the experiment participants were given a color naming task. The authors found that the
precision of participants’ responses in the sequential matching task but not in the
simultaneous matching task correlated with the size of the color vocabulary. Moreover,
precision was higher in regions of the color space where the average density of the color
vocabulary was higher.
refers to the process by which repeated exposures (and possibly
Stimulus imprinting
responses) to the same stimulus lead to more accurate and faster perception of that
stimulus. On the theoretical level, it can be explained by referring to memory storage of
exemplars (Nosofsky, 1986) or instances (Logan, 1989) or by the adaptation of sensory
processes to the repeated exposure to the same stimulus (Goldstone, 1998). For example,
participants categorize stimuli, which have been presented to them more often, with higher
accuracy (Nosofsky, 1991). According to Shiffrin and Schneider (1977), at least a part of
that effect may be due to a reduced demand of controlled attention, which is assumed to be
capacity limited. In their studies, they showed that less controlled attention is required to
respond to a consistent mapping of a stimulus set to a response than to a varied mapping.
In that series of experiments, more automatic processing, which is assumed to be the flip
side of controlled attention, also led to more accurate and faster responses.
Similarly, describes the process by which stimuli initially perceived
unitization
separately become perceived together as one unit. For example, Blaha et al. (2009) asked
participants to categorize complex stimuli consisting of five different "squiggly" line
segments, which were sampled from a pool of 16 line segments. Participants initially
processed these line segments sequentially, but learned to process them in parallel after
extensive training. That is, the authors showed that a measure of workload capacity,
reflecting the amount of information integrated in a fixed time window, substantially
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 8
increased after a seven-day training. Moreover, chess experts perceive mid-game positions
as familiar sub-configurations of pieces (i.e., chunks), whereas novices perceive these
positions on the level of individual pieces (Chase & Simon, 1973). Thalmann et al. (2019)
showed that well learned chunks require less working-memory capacity and therefore allow
people to focus on more relevant information at the same time. A related study about the
construction of cognitive maps in humans (Karagoz et al., 2022) showed that people
perceive stimuli as more similar when they share an associated reward, but not when they
are merely presented simultaneously. The latter study suggests that a shared reward may
render the representations of two stimuli more similar, possibly to effectively collect
rewards in an environment.
Finally, describes the observation that stimuli or feature dimensions,
differentiation
which are initially perceived as the same, become represented separately over time. For
example, training to discriminate between different types of wine led to a 14%
improvement in a same-different task (Owen & Machamer, 1979). Similarly, Lively et al.
(1993) showed that Japanese speakers can be trained to differentiate between the
phonemes /r/ and /l/, which are not present in Japanese. Goldstone and Steyvers (2001)
showed that participants learned to differentiate integral dimensions given training
conditions that emphasize the orthogonality of the dimensions.
The four mechanisms of perceptual learning suggest that perception and
categorization are closely related. While the previously presented studies focused on
perceptual learning of individual stimuli, there is also evidence for representational change
on the level of the representations of categories. Theories of category learning can be
roughly characterized by the extent that they rely on representations of individually
presented stimuli (e.g., Nosofsky, 1986), on representations of rules (e.g., Ashby & Gott,
1988), or on representations of category prototypes (e.g., Posner & Keele, 1968). Several
authors suggested that there are shifts in the level of abstraction of representations people
use to categorize objects in their environment. For example, Smith and Minda (1998)
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 9
argued that there is a shift from an initial prototype-based process to a later process
relying on individually stored exemplars when participants are exposed to an extended
period of category learning. Johansen and Palmeri (2002) argued that the shift may be
described better as a shift from a hypothesis-driven rule-based categorization process
towards the exemplar process.
Even though we framed this initial literature review around mechanisms of
perceptual learning, we have to mention here that locating the cause of changed responding
at the perceptual level is hardly ever possible. For example, increased precision of
perceptual representations on a categorization-relevant dimension can be explained in at
least two ways. First, the effect is consistent with an account of changed perceptual
representations (i.e., increased precision of perceptual representations). Second, the effect
is also consistent with an account of dimensional attention with the perceptual
representations remaining unchanged. Similar considerations apply to the other presented
mechanisms. Here, we want to acknowledge that making clear-cut statements about the
location of representational change are not possible with the current experimental and
modeling setups. We will come back to this issue in the modeling section.
To summarize, research about perceptual learning, category learning, and human
reinforcement learning can be considered as evidence that there are representational shifts
of whole stimuli, parts of feature dimensions or entire feature dimensions, categories, and
the perceived similarity between stimuli. There is also evidence of systematic
representational biases when people reconstruct information from memory as compared to
perceiving it. One possibility is that the underlying force of representational change is
adaptivity to the environment (Anderson, 1991; Simon, 1996). For example, focusing on a
categorization-relevant dimension is favorable, because it improves performance. In the
current paper, we add to the growing body of research about representational change by
proposing an additional mechanism of representational change: . The basic
task imprinting
idea is that our cognitive system preferentially stores representations in memory, which are
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 10
favorable for a given task. In the following, we introduce a controlled setup, which allows
us to observe such a representational change in an experimental behavioral setting. We
then introduce a computational model, which makes specific predictions for that setup. We
then explain how we test the model predictions in a series of four experiments.
3 A Model of Task Imprinting
In the following, we introduce a computational model that portrays task imprinting
as an adaptive response to task-specific practice. In order to explain the model and
simulation results of the model we first give a brief sketch of the experimental setup.
Knowledge about the latter should help to understand the decisions we took in our
modeling approach.
3.1 Experimental Setup
An important point to show in our approach is that representations change
differently according to different tasks. We chose two tasks that differed in their respective
goals. One task was a category learning task, in which biased representations are
particularly helpful. With biased representations we refer to representations that
systematically deviate in their mean as opposed to the ground truth. For example, a
helpful bias in the category learning task would be to represent any stimulus with the
category prototype. This would massively improve categorization accuracy, given any type
of categorization model. The other task was a sequential comparison task. Biased
representations are not helpful in the latter, because representing certain pairs of objects
with means closer to each other than other pairs does not improve performance in the
sequential comparison task. In both tasks, participants were confronted with the same 100
two-dimensional stimuli. The two dimensions of the stimuli were represented as the
100 stimuli according to equally-spaced locations in the two-dimensional feature space (see
stimuli into two categories (Experiment 1, category structure similar as in Milton &
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 11
Pothos, 2011; Nosofsky et al., 2005) or into four categories (Experiments 2-4, similar as in
Nosofsky et al., 2005). In the sequential comparison task, participants were required to
judge how similar two consecutively presented stimuli were to one another.
Left: Stimulus with minimum values on both feature dimensions. Right: Stimulus with
maximum values on both feature dimensions.
All experiments followed the same sequential logic. Before and after practice in one
of those tasks we measured representations. Measuring representations before and after
task practice with the same stimuli but different goals allowed us to get an estimate of
representational change by the logic of subtraction. Any task-specific differences can be
attributed to representational change due to the different goals.
The way we measured representations varied across experiments, though. In
Experiments 1 and 2, we used a continuous reproduction task (Pertzov et al., 2013; Souza
et al., 2014). In Experiment 3, we used a simultaneous comparison task, in which
participants were required to rate how similar two stimuli were to each other. In
Experiment 4, we used a simultaneous comparison task, in which participants were
required to rate how likely two stimuli were to come from the same category. We chose
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 12
20 40 60 80
Spikiness of Head
ylleB
fo
lliF
20 40 60 80
Spikiness of Head
Bukil
Category
Venak
ylleB
fo
lliF
Bukil Venak
Category
Monus Ladiv
0 2 4 6
Spikiness of Head
ylleB
fo
lliF
0 2 4 6
Spikiness of Head
Bukil
Category
Venak
ylleB
fo
lliF
Bukil Venak
Category
Monus Ladiv
Two-dimensional category structures in Experiment 1 (left) and Experiments 2-4 (right).
Top row refers to object space, bottom row refers to psychological space.
these different tasks, because they differ in the amount that strategic, judgmental processes
play a role (Firestone & Scholl, 2016). Whereas the influence of these processes in the
continuous reproduction task is present, but small (Goldstone, 1994), the influence tends to
be non-negligible when participants are asked to say how similar two simultaneously
presented stimuli are they have already encountered during category learning (Experiment
3 Goldstone et al., 2001). Finally, the judgmental influence is largest for the task used in
Experiment 4, in which participants were asked to rate how likely two stimuli are to come
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 13
from the same category.
3.2 Model Specification
We make the assumption that there is a difference between a perceptual
representation and a memory-based representation. The perceptual representation and its
associated variability are assumed to be driven by the stimulus in the environment and the
signal transmission to early sensory areas (e.g., Ashby & Lee, 1993; Ashby & Townsend,
1986; Bays, 2014; Pouget et al., 2000). The memory-based stimulus representation is
similar to memory for individually stored exemplars or instances (Logan, 1989; Nosofsky,
1986), but we assume there is some task-based gate, which decides whether an exemplar or
instance is finally stored in memory. The computational modeling is targeted to the tasks,
which are assumed to shape memory representations. We therefore focus on modeling the
representational change caused by the category learning task and the sequential
comparison task. The result of that process is that some representations are preferentially
stored in long-term memory. And a key assumption of the model is that these
preferentially stored long-term memory representations are also behaviorally relevant in the
task aimed at measuring representations (i.e., after the category learning task or the
sequential comparison task; e.g., Souza et al., 2021). The computational model consists of
three sequential stages we refer to as the perceptual representation, the task mapping, and
the long-term memory gate.
3.2.1 Perceptual Representation
In the first stage, one stimulus out of the set of 100 stimuli is presented. The
objective means in the artificial feature space were created by crossing 10 equally-spaced
values in each dimension:
= [ ] = 1 : 10 = 1 : 10 (1)
µ i, j , with i and j
We derived the subjective, psychological means of the perceptual distribution in a
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 14
psychophysical scaling experiment, the methods and results of which are reported in the
Appendix. On average, the two dimensions were resolved with an about equal perceptual
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Stimulus
eulaV
lautpecreP
Dimension Belly Head
Average psychological representations for the 14 linearly spaced objective stimulus values
derived from the psychophysical experiment. Note. Error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.
We then modeled the trial-wise perceptual representation via a sample from a
multivariate normal with uncorrelated variances
 
i1
  = ( 2 ) = 0 99 (2)
x ∼ N µ , σ I , i , . . . ,
 
i 2
 
i2
The univariate means of the 10 shown stimuli in the subjective feature space were
inferred by linearly interpolating the respective mean values from the psychophysical
experiment. The 10 univariate means on each dimension were then fully crossed to obtain
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 15
The variance refers to variability of the perceptual distribution . It has to be
σ sd
perceptual
noted, that we make the explicit assumption that the perception of the objects is
probabilistic. This assumption is in the tradition of population coding models (e.g., Bays,
2014; Pouget et al., 2000) and consistent with previous theories of perceptual variability
(Ashby & Townsend, 1986). However, whether perception eventually is probabilistic or not
is an unresolved question (e.g., Rahnev et al., 2021; Rahnev & Denison, 2018).
3.2.2 Task Mapping
In the second stage, perceptual representations are mapped to responses in the
category learning task and in the sequential comparison task. For the category learning
task, we used three different models of category learning: an exemplar model, a prototype
model, and a rule-based model. We used the generalized context model as a representative
exemplar model (Nosofsky, 1986), a naïvely Bayesian classifier (e.g., John & Langley, 2013)
for Experiment 1, the multiplicative prototype model from Nosofsky and Zaki (2002) for
Experiments 2-4 as prototype models, and a rule-based categorization model inspired by
the general recognition theory (Ashby & Townsend, 1986) with the implementation similar
as in the study by Maddox et al. (2004). Each model takes the feature values of the
perceptual representation of stimulus on trial i on the two dimensions as an input and
returns category probabilities ( ) for every category k out of m categories.
p cat | x
k i
3.2.2.1 Exemplar Model
The exemplar model arrives at those probabilities by dividing the summed similarity from
the current stimulus i to all stimuli categorized into the same category by the summed
similarity from the current stimulus to all observed stimuli.
The similarity between the representations of two stimuli is an exponentially
decaying function of the distance d between the two stimuli
= exp−d (3)
η .
ij
ij
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 16
Let be the number of stimuli that fall under the category and be the number
n k m
of categories, then
Pn exp( )
k −d
( ) = j=1 ij (4)
p c |x ,
e k i Pm Pn exp( )
l −d
l=1 j=1 ij
where = ( ) + (1 )( ) s.t. = [0; 1].
d c · w x − x 2 − w x − x 2 w
ij 1 i1 j1 1 i2 j2 1
The individual values represent the attention weight put on each of the two
feature dimensions. is a sensitivity/generalization parameter, which controls the slope of
the negatively decaying exponential function. Because the same number of stimuli was
presented in all categories, and for simplicity, we omitted a response bias parameter.
3.2.2.2 Prototype Models
The prototype model arrives at the probability that stimulus is categorized
naïve Bayes x
into category k by calculating
( ) ( )
p x |c p c
( ) = i k k (5)
p c |x ,
pn k i Pm ( ) ( )
p x |c p c
i l l
l=1
   
m σ
k1
where the likelihood ( ) =    k1 .
p x |c N ,
   
i k
   
m σ
k2
k2
Thereby, ( ) represents the prior probability of a stimulus to belong to category k.
p c
Similarly as above, we omitted any category response bias, and set this parameter to the
proportion of stimuli from category k in the training set. Every category is represented by
independent normal distributions on both feature dimensions; their means and variances
are fit as parameters to maximize the likelihood of the stimuli in each category. The
conditional probability ( ) is then calculated by multiplying the probability densities
p x | c
i k
of two independent normal distributions:
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 17
( ) = ( ) (6)
p x | c N µ , σ
i k d d
d=1
As the exemplar model, the model operates on the level of
multiplicative prototype
similarity representations. It uses a mixture between random guessing and the similarity of
a presented stimulus with the stored prototypes of all categories to select one of the
response options:
exp ( )
g −cd
( ) = + (1 ) ik (7)
p c |x − g ,
pm k i Pm exp ( )
m −cd
il
l=1
where = ( ) + (1 )( ) s.t. = [0; 1] and = [0; 1].
d c · w x − P 2 − w x − P 2 w g
ik 1 i1 k1 1 i2 k2 1
Note that reflects the feature value on dimension 1 for the prototype of category
k1
k.
3.2.2.3 Rule-Based Model
We applied the rule-based model only for the square category structure in Experiments 2-4.
It arrives at the probability that a presented stimulus belongs to category j by
calculating
Z b(k)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
( ) = 2 d (8)
p c |x N x , σ I x ,
r k i i 2 i
a(k)
where the vectors and define the lower and upper limit in each dimension (i.e.,
a(k) b(k)
is a vector containing the lower limits of both dimensions), respectively, as follows:
a(k)
the average objective values in each dimension were transformed to subjective space and
served as the lower or upper limits for a given category. For example, for the lower right
a(k) µ −Inf b(k) Inf
x1
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 18
]. reflected variability in the perceptual distribution. That is, we make the
µ σ
x2
assumption under this model that participants have a good understanding of the
uncertainty (i.e., the variance-covariance matrix) of the perceptual representation. They
use the noisily perceived value , which is used to calculate the cumulative probability
that the observed stimulus belongs to any of the m categories.
3.2.3 Long-Term Memory Gate
After feedback has been provided, a gate decides in the third stage whether the
perceptual representation is advantageous for performance and stored as a memory
representation or not. An important feature of the model is that representations are more
likely to be stored in memory when they are helpful in the given task.
We varied the definition of helpfulness across two sampling algorithms. The first
algorithm accepted every perceptual representation if it improved the probability of the
currently presented stimulus to be classified correctly:
( ) ( ) (9)
if p cat | x > p cat | x
k i t k i t−1
, with k being the index of the true category and t indexing the time point within
the experiment. The second algorithm used a Metropolis-Hastings acceptance mechanism.
A uniformly sampled value s between 0 and 1 was compared to the ratio of the category
probability after feedback had been provided to the category probability before feedback
has been provided. Whenever a sampled representation improves the probability of a
stimulus to be classified correctly, it is accepted (i.e., the ratio is > 1). When a sample
decreases this probability, it may still be accepted if s is smaller than the ratio. That is,
(0 1) (10)
s ∼ unif orm ,
( )
p cat | x
s k i t (11)
if <
( )
p cat | x
k i t−1
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 19
The Metropolis-Hastings acceptance scheme was therefore more liberal in storing
perceptual representations in memory than the acceptance scheme. For example, if a
perceptual representation decreases the probability of a stimulus to be classified correctly, it
may still be accepted with high probability. The bias due to storing helpful representations
in memory is therefore smaller with Metropolis-Hastings than with acceptance sampling.
Accepting or rejecting samples in the sequential similarity task works similarly. We
make the assumption that people use an internal representation of all stimuli to determine
the identity of every presented stimulus. The internal representation is modeled as a
normal distribution with the average mean values in subjective feature space and a
standard deviation of .5. A perceived stimulus is represented as the cumulative density of
the perceived value under all possible stimulus representations. The model accepts every
perceptual representation if it is most likely under the true stimulus representation
(improvement sampling). For the Metropolis-Hastings scheme, the model first calculates a
normalized cumulative distribution of the likelihoods of the perceived stimulus given all
true stimulus priors. It then again uniformly samples a value between 0 and 1, which lands
on one stimulus portion of the cumulative distribution. The model then accepts the current
representation under that stimulus prior. In essence, the model learns a more precise
representation of every stimulus over time.
3.3 Model Simulations
We conducted simulation studies with different model implementations in order to
get qualitative predictions for representational change in the three different tasks. Two of
the tasks were the category learning tasks with different category structures (i.e., ellipse or
squared). The third task was the sequential comparison task. For the two category
learning tasks, we varied the category learning model, the sampling scheme, and whether
perceptual representations with values outside of the borders of the stimulus space exist.
The latter was intended to explore potential effects that arise solely due to the edges of the
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 20
feature space. For example, perceptual representations of stimuli close to the edges are
more likely to be rejected solely due to the fact that a larger portion of their probability
density is located outside of the feature space. For the sequential comparison task, we
varied the sampling scheme and again whether samples outside of the feature space could
be accepted or not. The standard deviation of the perceptual distribution was fixed to .5
for all simulations. We ran every simulation for 5000 trials.
A crucial question with regards to the task task mapping part is what
categorization strategy people actually use. The predictions of the task imprinting model
model for every strategy and every setting introduced in the previous paragraph. We then
computed the weighted sum of the predictions from all strategies. To arrive at the model
weights, we separately fit each category learning model to the categorization trials of every
participant in all experiments using maximum likelihood parameter estimation (the
modeling code is available on the OSF page). More specifically, we used the last 300
categorization trials to exclude initial learning from the model fitting. For Experiment 1,
we used the naïvely Bayesian model as a prototype model, for Experiments 2-4, we used
the multiplicative prototype model. In addition, we did not fit a rule-based model to the
data of Experiment 1. The model comparison across all four experiments is displayed in
agreement with each other. This yielded model weights of .824 and .176 for exemplar and
prototype models in Experiment 1, respectively, and model weights of .706, .235, and .059
for exemplar, prototype, and rule-based models in Experiments 2-4, respectively.
We assume that participants have unbiased long-term memory representations of
the stimuli after carrying out the initial task aimed at measuring representations, because
their goal is to reproduce/estimate the identity of the stimulus as precisely as possible and
because they do not receive feedback about their responses. As baseline models reflecting
no or unbiased influence from long-term memory representations on perceptual
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 21
30 30
20 20
10 10
GCM PT GCM PT
50 50
40 40
30 30
20 20
10 10
GCM RB PT GCM RB PT
50 50
40 40
30 30
20 20
10 10
GCM RB PT GCM RB PT
40 40
30 30
20 20
10 10
GCM RB PT GCM RB PT
Winner BIC GCM PT RB Winner AIC GCM PT
Left and right columns compares the three models using BIC and AIC for model
comparison, respectively. For a given subject (i.e., one row in one of the subplots), the
color represents the winning model. The intensity of the colors represents the absolute value
in ascending order (i.e., brighter means lower value and vice versa).
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 22
trained the three category learning models to predict the true category labels using the
average perceptual stimulus representations as input. We then ran a simulation and
compared the stored memory representations after the 5000 trials with the average
unbiased representations before the simulation. The mechanics of the model are visualized
0 2 4 6 8
Spikiness of Head
ylleB
fo
lliF
Perceptual Representation
0 2 4 6 8
Spikiness of Head
ylleB
fo
lliF
Category Structure
Improvement Sampling Metropolis−Hastings
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
Baseline 1 2 Baseline 1 2
Stimulus Sample
ytilibaborP
ecnatpeccA
Acceptance Algorithms
Visualizes how different random samples, from the perceptual distribution of the same
physical stimulus lead to different probabilities of storing the stimulus in memory. In the
hypothetical example, the model starts with unbiased representations of the stimuli and
decides whether two samples (on two different trials) should be stored in memory according
to the two sampling schemes. Left: In two different trials, two different values are
randomly sampled from the perceptual distribution of the same stimulus. Middle: The
stimuli vary in how much they are representative of the respective category. Right: The
perceptual representations are stored in memory either when they increase the probability of
a stimulus being categorized correctly (Improvement Sampling) or according to a storage
probability (Metropolis-Hastings), which is calculated as the ratio of the probability of a
stimulus being categorized correctly when the sample under consideration is added to the
training data divided by the baseline probability without adding that sample.
The main prediction of the model is that unbiased responding changes into biased
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 23
Before Training After Training
7.4
5.5
3.6
1.7
−0.2
−0.1 1.6 3.3 5.1 6.8 −0.1 1.6 3.3 5.1 6.8
Spikiness of Head
ylleB
fo
lliF
Before Training After Training
7.4
5.5
3.6
1.7
−0.2
−0.1 1.6 3.3 5.1 6.8 −0.1 1.6 3.3 5.1 6.8
Spikiness of Head
ylleB
fo
lliF
Bukil Venak
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Before After Before After
Time Point
)retneC
.ssA(
ecnatsiD
Any Category
1.0
0.5
0.0
Before After
Time Point
)retneC
.ssA(
ecnatsiD
Bukil Venak
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Before After Before After
Time Point
)yradnuoB
.lC(
ecnatsiD
Any Category
1.0
0.5
0.0
Before After
Time Point
Category Learning Sequential Comparison
)yradnuoB
.lC(
ecnatsiD
Category Learning Sequential Comparison
Top row: Long-term memory representations of the stimuli in the two-dimensional feature
space before and after category learning for the ellipse category structure (left) and the
square category structure (right). Middle row: Average distance to the associated category
center before and after the category learning task or the sequential comparison task, again
plotted separately for the two categories. Bottom row: Same as middle row, but for the
distance to the closest category boundary. Because representational change is predicted to be
similar for all four square categories, they are collapsed in the middle and lower right plot.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 24
responding after category learning, but not after sequentially comparing stimuli. As can be
change more due to categorization practice than representations of stimuli further away
from the boundaries. That is, the former representations are pushed away from the
decision boundaries, which leads to representations from all categories but the residual
category in Experiment 1 being assembled more closely to each other. The change is
qualitatively similar across the two category learning structures. When translated to the
average distance of representations to the associated category center, category learning
decreases that distance for all but the residual category in Experiment 1 (i.e., Venak
category in ellipse structure and any category in squared structure), but slightly increases
that distance for the residual category in the ellipse setup (i.e., Bukil category). These
distance to the associated category center, we also calculated the average distance to the
closest category boundary. A movement away from the closest boundary has previously
been observed (Dubova & Goldstone, 2021) and is referred to as boundary aversion. The
predictions with regards to boundary aversion essentially mirror those using distance to the
associated category center. That is, distances for all but the residual category in
Experiment 1 grow larger.
A second point to be mentioned is that the qualitative predictions of the model are
relatively stable across different model implementations. The predictions do not depend on
the used category learning model. That is, whether people use rules, prototypes, or
exemplars to categorize stimuli affected the predictions of the model only marginally.
Neither did the simulation results vary qualitatively as a function of the sampling
algorithm. In general, though, the predicted effects were quantitatively larger for
improvement sampling than for Metropolis-Hastings sampling.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 25
3.4 Locating The Representational Change
A general assumption we make here is that representations used to respond are a
mixture of perceptual representations and memory representations [e.g., ][](Hasantash &
Afraz, 2020; Souza et al., 2021). Therefore, responses should be biased towards the
memory representations. However, at this point we have to mention that other
interpretations of the task imprinting model are possible. While we refer to the
accumulated representations as stored long-term memory representations, it could equally
well be argued that what changes over time is the perceptual representation itself. That is,
the stored samples reflect a change in the perceptual representation itself over time and the
predicted bias in responding is due to actual changes in the perceptual representation.
Given the used tasks, it is hardly possible to differentiate between these different
interpretations. Results from several decades of studies examining cognitive influences on
perception cannot unambiguously be interpreted as evidence whether changed responses
are due to changed perceptual representations, due to changed long-term memory
representations, or due to judgmental processes (e.g., Firestone & Scholl, 2016). Our
current study does not present an exception with regards to that.
However, a main contribution of the current study is that we use tasks, which are
more or less affected by judgmental processes. For example, the task to measure
visual-perceptual short-term memory representations used in Experiments 1 and 2, is less
affected by judgmental processes. Goldstone (1994) refers to these tasks as perceptual. In
his definition, the tasks we use in Experiments 3 and 4 are associative. While associative
tasks are affected by judgmental processes including task demands, perceptual tasks are
affected by memory, but less or only marginally by judgmental processes. Therefore,
observing evidence for task imprinting in Experiments 1 and 2 would be evidence for
changed representations (perceptual or memorial, which of the two cannot be pinned
down), changed responses in line with the predictions of the task imprinting model only in
Experiments 3 and 4 would point towards judgmental processes.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 26
4 Experiments
All four experiments were designed to test the qualitative prediction of the
computational model that representations change differently according to task practice in
the category learning task and in the sequential comparison task. The main difference
across experiments was that we used tasks to measure representations that differ in the
amount that strategic, judgmental processes play a role. In Experiments 1 and 2, we
started by measuring predominantly visual-perceptual representations in a short-term
memory task. In Experiment 3, we measured representations via similarity judgments of
simultaneously presented stimulus pairs. In Experiment 4, participants were required to
say how likely they thought two simultaneously presented stimuli belonged to the same
category.
4.1 General Method
All experiments used a two-groups between-subjects design. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of two groups. Each group went through a set of three sequential
stages. In the first stage, we attempted to get a baseline measurement of the
representations of the full stimulus set. In the second stage, participants carried out the
secondary task. One group carried out the category learning task as a secondary task, the
other group carried out the sequential comparison task. In the third stage, we again
measured representations of the full stimulus set. Essentially, task imprinting should be
reflected in a detectable performance difference between stage three and stage one.
Whereas the secondary tasks stayed the same across all four experiments (with one
modification in the category structure, though), we varied the task to measure
representations across the four experiments. Details are explained in the
experiment-specific methods sections.
Participants for all experiments were recruited using the prolific platform
(prolific.co). Fluent speakers of English aged between 18 and 35 with minimum approval
rates of .9 and 1 for Experiments 1 and 2-4, respectively, and a minimal number of
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 27
previous submissions of 5 and 20 for Experiments 1 and 2-4, respectively, were eligible to
participate. By not further restricting participation in our experiments (e.g., to certain
countries), we expect the results to generalize to young healthy adults in general. All
participants agreed to take part in the study and were informed about the general purpose
of the experiment. Experiments were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines
and regulations approved by the ethics committee of the University of Tuebingen (protocol
nr. 701/2020BO, study title: Experimente zum Sequenz- und Belohnungslernen).
Experiments were presented to participants using a combination of HTML, javaScript, and
CSS with custom code. After a presentation of the instructions, participants were required
to complete a comprehension questionnaire. Only upon responding correctly to all
questions, they could proceed to the main part of an experiment.
The stimuli were the same monsters in all four experiments, which differed from
each other according to two continuous dimensions: the fill of their belly and the spikiness
circle inside the body, which resulted in a blue area of varying size. Head spikiness was
defined as the radial distance between ten inner and ten outer vertices. These vertices were
located between ten equally spaced segments of two concentric circles with different radii.
In conjunction, they formed the ten spikes of the head when they were connected by a line.
Values in both dimensions could be parametrically varied according to 100 steps (e.g., from
an almost empty belly to a full belly). Participants were only exposed to a subset of 100
combinations in the two-dimensional feature space. We created these 100 stimuli in the
following way: in each dimension we cut 9 steps from both ends. Then, we cut the
remaining values from 10 to 91 into 9 equally sized segments of 9 steps. The 10 values from
10 to 91 were fully crossed across the two dimensions yielding 100 stimuli in the feature
space.
We used Bayesian statistics for data analysis to overcome some of the shortcomings
associated with frequentist statistics (Wagenmakers, 2007). In particular, we rely on the
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 28
Bayes factor (BF) to quantify the evidence in favor of an effect of interest. The BF reflects
the posterior odds of two models if their prior odds are .5. Kass and Raftery (1995) provide
rough guidelines on how to interpret the strength of evidence of BFs: BFs ranging from
1-3.2 are not worth more than a bare mention, BFs between 3.2-10 provide substantial
evidence, BFs between 10-100 are regarded as strong evidence, and BFs larger than 100 as
decisive. To arrive at BFs for individual model parameters, we used the Savage-Dickey
density ratio (e.g., Wetzels et al., 2009). This method provides BFs for nested models. In
particular, it compares a model allowing the parameter of interest to vary freely to a model
fixing the parameter to the null model.
We report the structure of all used hierarchical regression models in the Appendix.
Where necessary and possible (considering model convergence and run time), we first
compared models varying in their random effects structure using the LOO method
implemented in the loo R package (see Vehtari et al., 2017). We then used the winning
model for inference about individual parameters (Matuschek et al., 2017). All Bayesian
models were run in STAN (Carpenter et al., 2022) and accessed via the R programming
language (R Core Team, 2022). The number of samples from the posterior was determined
given ad-hoc considerations for every model to balance stability of the Bayes factor over
several model runs and model run time. We additionally checked that all Rhat values were
below 1.01. Details on the number of stored samples, burn-in samples, etc. can be found in
the online accompanying material on the OSF page (see below). Note that we
mean-centered all continuous predictors and simple-coded all categorical predictors (i.e.,
simple effect coding) before entering them into the models. These measures allow us (a) to
interpret the fixed intercept as the grand mean, (b) to directly interpret parameters of
categorical predictors as the effect of changing the predictor from the reference category (if
there are more than two categories) to the category in question, and (c) to interpret all
interactions entered into the model as cross-over interactions (Loftus, 1978).
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 29
4.1.0.1 Transparency and openness
All experimental scripts, raw data, and analysis scripts, as well as scripts for simulations
with the computational model of representational change, are available on the following
predictions, exclusion criteria, experimental designs, and more of Experiments 2-4 on the
4.2 Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we measured representations using a continuous reproduction task
(Pertzov et al., 2013; Souza et al., 2014) intended to measure predominantly
visual-perceptual representations of the stimuli.
Categorization
Schaefer et al. Continuous Simultaneous
(2021) 500
Comparison
Reproduction
ms
On screen
500 ms
Retention
until response
500 ms Head: Your response was 8
Interval
Confirmation 500
Belly: Inter-Trial
5000 ms of response W m el s l Done: Time
Interval
Response: Bukil
Inter-Trial 500 ms Inter-Trial
Rating from 1-8 using
Interval Response Interval
Time Time
number keys; 1 = not similar
Deadline:
500 ms 500 ms
at all; 8 = extremely similar
3000 ms
Left: Procedure for the continuous reproduction task used in Experiments 1 and 2. The
timing parameters were modified from Experiment 1. See text for details. Middle:
Procedure for the simultaneous comparison task used in experiments 3 and 4. Right:
Procedure for the category learning task used in all experiments. Note. The procedure for
the sequential comparison task was the same as for the category learning task.
4.2.1 Method
4.2.1.1 Participants
84 participants (10 unknown, 45 women, 29 men) completed one session lasting
approximately 90 minutes. They received a base payment of 9.80 GBP and an additional
performance-dependent bonus of up to 5.20 GBP. 12 participants quit the experiment in
between or provided incomplete data. We excluded 1 participant because their average
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 30
distance from the true stimulus in the continuous reproduction task was larger than three
times the standard deviation above the mean. We excluded 6 participants because their
number of correct categorization responses (excluding the initial 40 trials, see below) was
below the 99.9% percentile of a binomial distribution with probability .5. We excluded 3
additional participants because they restarted the experiment after they had already
progressed through a substantial portion of the experiment. Thus, 62 participants
remained in the experiment, 33 in the experimental group, 29 in the control group.
4.2.1.2 Materials and procedure
All 100 stimuli were presented once in the first session of the continuous reproduction task
and once in the second session. Presentation order of the stimuli was randomized. For the
whole duration of the continuous reproduction task, the background color of the window
was white with the exception of an upward-facing rectangle in the center of the screen filled
in black color. That setup was intended to increase the contrast between background and
stimuli. A trial started by the presentation of a fixation cross in white color in front of the
black rectangle for 500 ms. After that, a stimulus replaced the fixation cross and was
displayed for 750 ms followed by a 2000 ms blank retention interval. Then, an average
stimulus with a value of 50 on both feature dimensions was displayed on the screen.
Participants could change the values in each dimension quasi-continuously (i.e., according
to 100 steps) with two sliders that were presented below the stimulus. Once participants
were satisfied with their response, they pressed a button to submit their response. The
next trial started after an inter-trial interval of 500 ms. In the beginning of the experiment,
participants completed two practice trials to get used to the procedure.
We used this type of information-integration category structure because it assures that
participants have to pay attention to both dimensions to categorize stimuli accurately
(Ashby & Gott, 1988). The background coloring of the screen was the same in the category
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 31
learning task as in the continuous reproduction task. A trial started with presentation of a
fixation cross for 500 ms followed by presentation of a stimulus. Participants were given a
response window of 3000 ms to respond. When they responded within that period, a green
message told them “Well done: Category X!” when they responded correctly, and a red
message told them “Category would have been: Category X” when they responded
incorrectly. When they responded after 3000 ms, a message appeared on screen, which
indicated that they should respond faster. Responses were still collected, though. After
participants had responded, the next stimulus was presented after an inter-trial interval of
500 ms. Responses were given by pressing digits 1 and 2 on the keyboard. Procedures of
The category learning task lasted for 640 trials. The first 40 trials consisted only of
examples from the ellipse category. In the instructions displayed to participants, we labeled
the ellipse category as the target category called “Venak” and the residual category as the
non-target category called “Bukil” . We presented 40 trials only from the target category
to initially familiarize them with the more specific category. We created the set of 40
stimuli by first shuffling the stimuli from the ellipse category randomly, appending two sets
of them and selecting the first 40 stimuli from that sequence. The remaining 600 stimuli
were created in the same way, though, by appending several randomly shuffled sets of each
category and selecting the first 300 stimuli from both resulting sequences. Participants
were informed that the first 40 trials contained only examples from the Venak category,
and they were informed after the 40 trials accordingly that "The initial block with target
category examples is now over. In the following, your task is to categorize monsters from
all categories [...]".
The procedure in the sequential comparison task was the same as in the category
In all current experiments, we did not randomize the labels across categories. Thus, there is a minor
possibility that certain categories were learned better because participants memorized one label better than
the other label.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 32
learning task. The 640 stimuli were created in the same way as above, though, without the
constraint of having the same number of stimuli from different categories. Participants
responded with digits 1-4 reflecting similarity judgments from not similar to very similar.
The response window was the same as in the category learning task. Instead of a
correct/incorrect feedback participants’ responses were shadowed on the screen (e.g., "Your
response was: 4") after every response. In both secondary tasks, stimuli were presented in
four blocks with an equal number of trials. In between blocks, participants could recover
for one minute or skip the break and continue immediately.
For every reported model in Experiment 1, we stored 5000 posterior samples from
each of three chains after discarding 1000 warm-up samples.
4.2.2 Results
4.2.2.1 Category learning
Our main goal is to show that participants learned to discriminate between the categories
from the ellipse category led to a head start for this category compared to the residual
category. We binned the remaining 600 trials into blocks of 20 trials and analyzed the data
with a hierarchical logistic regression. Category was added as a categorical predictor, trial
block was entered as a linear predictor into the model. The head start in the ellipse
category was reflected in decisive evidence for the main effect of category (BF > 100).
However, accuracy in the residual category approached accuracy in the ellipse category
over the course of the experiment, which was reflected in strong evidence for the category
times trial interaction (BF = 28). The evidence for the main effect of trial was ambiguous
(BF = 1.8). A potential point of concern is that participants were not able to discriminate
between the categories sufficiently well on average, even after 640 trials of practice. Even
though categorization accuracy was well above chance level, it plateaued at .73 for the
residual category and at .76 for the ellipse category in the last block of 20 trials.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 33
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
5 10 15
Block of 20 Trials
ycaruccA
noitazirogetaC
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
2 4 6 8
Euclidean Distance (Binned)
Category Bukil Venak
ytiralimiS
egarevA
Similarity
Bukil Venak
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Before After Before After
Time Point
)retneC
.lC(
ecnatsiD
Bukil Venak
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
Before After Before After
Time Point
Group 2 Categories Similarity
)yradnuoB
.lC(
ecnatsiD
Group 2 Categories Similarity
Top left: Average categorization accuracy plotted per block of 20 trials separately for the
two categories in Experiment 1. Note that the first 40 trials only including examples from
the Venak category (i.e., from the ellipse category) are not presented. Top right: Average
similarity rating plotted against Euclidean distance of subsequent stimuli in the sequential
comparison task. Bottom left: Average distance to the category center only for stimuli of
the ellipse category (i.e., using the same stimuli for both groups) in the continuous
reproduction task before and after the secondary task. Bottom right: Same as bottom left,
but with distance to the closest boundary plotted on the y axis. Note: Error bars represent
95% within-subjects confidence intervals.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 34
Bukil Venak
Category
Learning
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
−0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
Movement Towards Center
puorG
rep
stnapicitraP
.porP
Bukil Venak
1.0
0.5
0.0
−0.5
−0.2−0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 −0.2−0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
Delta Categorization Accuracy
Category Learning
Group
retneC
sdrawoT
tnemevoM
Bukil Venak
1.0
0.5
0.0
−0.5
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Categorization Accuracy Last Block
Bukil
Category
Venak
retneC
sdrawoT
tnemevoM
Bukil
Category
Venak
Left: Histograms of by-participant averages of movements towards the category center
plotted separately for the two categories (columns) and the two groups (rows) in Experiment
1. Middle: By-participant average movements towards the category center plotted against
the average improvement in the category learning task . Right: By-participant average
movements towards the category center plotted against the average final categorization
accuracy in the category learning task.
4.2.2.2 Sequential comparison
The main idea of the control condition was to expose participants to the same stimuli as in
the experimental condition. If participants carried the task out as instructed, we would
expect their similarity judgments to be predicted by the Euclidean distance between
subsequently presented stimuli. To test that, we regressed participants’ similarity ratings
onto Euclidean distance as a linear predictor in a hierarchical model (see middle panel of
the two-dimensional feature space was smaller and vice versa, which was reflected in strong
evidence for the main effect of distance (BF = 18).
4.2.2.3 Continuous reproduction
Our model predicted that distances to the category center should decrease for the ellipse
category and increase for the residual category in the experimental group, but stay the
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 35
same in the control group. That pattern is reflected in a three-way interaction between
time point, category, and group on the distance measure. We broke it down to a two-way
interaction on differences between distances after the secondary task and distances before
the secondary task. Differences should become smaller for the ellipse category and larger
for the residual category in the experimental group, but stay the same in the control group.
The pattern is then reflected in the interaction between category and group. We tested the
prediction in a hierarchical regression predicting difference scores using group and category
as categorical predictors. The BF in favor of the interaction was .025 providing strong
evidence against the hypothesis (i.e., a BF of 40 for the Null). There was also strong
evidence against the main effects of category and group, respectively (BFs were .016 and
.025, respectively). Together, the results suggest that representations did not become
biased. The absence of bias is visible when inspecting the distribution of by-participant
average movements towards the category center, which are scattered around zero in both
variability in category learning success, we explored whether it was positively related to
movements toward category centers in the continuous reproduction task. We measured
categorization success using two different approaches: once as final accuracy in the last
block and once as the amount of learning calculated via the difference between final
accuracy in the last block and initial accuracy in the first block. The models were
implemented as fixed-effects linear regressions. Movements away from the category
boundary would be reflected in an interaction between categorization success (linear
predictor) and category (categorical predictor). That is, representations from the ellipse
category should be pulled towards the category center more for successful learners than for
less successful learners, whereas representations from the residual category should be
pushed away from that center more for successful learners than for less successful learners.
However, posterior distributions of the interaction in both models (using final
categorization accuracy and the amount of learning) were centered close to zero and the
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 36
respective BFs provided substantial evidence for the Null hypothesis (.30 and .27 for final
accuracy and the amount of learning, respectively). The absence of these effects can also be
slope of zero are well within the shaded region of 95% frequentist confidence intervals.
In a similar analysis, we tested whether responses got pushed away from the
decision boundary in the category learning group, but not in the sequential comparison
group, reflecting boundary aversion. We tested boundary aversion as in the analysis above
examining attraction to the prototype but replaced the dependent variable accordingly. It
is reflected in the two-way interaction between category and group. The evidence, however,
was strongly for the Null (BF = .02 in favor of the effect, hence a BF = 50 for the Null).
4.2.3 Discussion
Experiment 1 tested the idea that object representations, as measured in a
continuous reproduction task previously used in the working-memory literature, become
biased according to practice in a category learning task. Previous research showed that
working-memory representations are affected by categorical knowledge (Donkin et al., 2015;
Hasantash & Afraz, 2020; Huttenlocher et al., 1991; Souza & Skóra, 2017). The results
provided, however, initial evidence against the idea of task imprinting. Representations did
not change as a function of the secondary task at the group level. We additionally tested
the idea that the amount of representational change is affected by the amount of learning
in the categorization task. The results also provided evidence against that idea. Even
participants who learned the categories well did not respond according to representations
as predicted from the model.
One observation when analyzing individual differences in the amount of category
learning was that a substantial proportion of the participants did not improve
categorization performance at all over the course of approx. 550 trials (see middle panel of
stopped relatively early for many participants. In addition, they may have learned
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 37
relatively imprecise representations of the categories.
4.3 Conceptual Changes in Experiments 2-4
A prerequisite for representational change in our model is that the category
structure is learned sufficiently well. One possible reason for the absence of representational
change in Experiment 1, therefore, is that participants did not learn to discriminate the
two categories well enough from each other. Categorization accuracy plateaued at roughly
.75 on average. We, therefore, applied two changes to the category learning task. First, we
replaced the ellipse category structure with a potentially simpler squared category
in the category learning task with two measures. Participants could only proceed to the
third part of the experiment (i.e., the second measurement of representations) when they
performed above one of two predefined performance thresholds. Additionally, they received
a monetary reward when they surpassed one of the two thresholds. The calculation of the
rewards is explained in the Appendix. We also pre-registered the study designs,
hypotheses, model predictions, analyses, exclusion criteria, and more in individual OSF
4.4 Experiment 2
4.4.1 Method
4.4.1.1 Participants
192 participants (23 unknown, 69 women, 100 men) completed one session lasting
approximately 80 minutes. They received a base payment of 9 GBP and an additional
performance-dependent bonus of up to 6.50 GBP. 71 participants did not reach the
predefined performance criterion for their secondary task. We further excluded 2
participants because their average distance from the true stimulus in the continuous
reproduction task was larger than three standard deviations above the mean. Thus, 118
participants remained in the experiment, 58 in the experimental group, 60 in the control
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 38
group.
4.4.1.2 Materials and procedure
Materials and procedure of the continuous reproduction task were the same as in
Experiment 1 with the following procedural changes: We reduced stimulus presentation
duration to 500 ms and increased the duration of the retention interval to 5000 ms. We
assumed that a potential influence from category knowledge on visual-perceptual
representations is more likely with a shorter presentation duration and a longer retention
interval (Donkin et al., 2015). We also changed the initial locations of the two sliders to
reproduce the two feature values after stimulus presentation to random locations.
Additionally, we applied several changes to the category learning task. Instead of two, there
were now four categories defined as the four quadrants of the feature space (see the right
learning and sequential comparison) to 400. Selection of the stimuli for the secondary task
happened in the same way as in Experiment 1. Again, in both secondary tasks, stimuli
were presented in four equally-sized blocks with the option of having a one-minute break.
The initial 40 trials with only stimuli from the target category were dropped. Participants
in both groups again were provided with immediate feedback about the correctness
(category learning) or the identity (sequential comparison) of their just given response.
4.4.2 Results
For the category learning task, we dropped category and the category times trial
interaction as predictors from the model. For the sequential comparison task, we used the
same hierarchical model as in Experiment 1. Note that we used these two models for the
same analyses in the remaining two experiments. Performance in the category learning
task improved over blocks of 20 trials (BF > 100 for the main effect of block). The
additional measures to increase performance in the category learning task also paid off.
Final accuracy was at approximately .82 averaged over the four categories (see left panel of
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 39
the control group engaged well in the sequential comparison task. The effect of Euclidean
distance on similarity ratings was decisive (BF > 100).
We analyzed the representational change in the continuous reproduction task with a
hierarchical model predicting distances (square-root transformed) to the associated
category center using group and time point as predictors (both entered as categorical
predictors). The computational model predicts an interaction between time and group
because the distances should become smaller for the category learning group, but not for
the sequential comparison group. The results, however, provided strong evidence against
that interaction (BF = .014) reiterating the null findings from Experiment 1. Visual
qualitatively as predicted by the model. Therefore, we explored individual differences in
the expected pattern in two further analyses.
We also tested the predicted representational change using distance to the closest
boundary as the dependent variable. However, similarly as above, the evidence for the
interaction between time point and group was strongly in favor of the Null (BF = .08).
The first analysis again tested whether success in the category learning task was
positively related to movements toward the associated category center in the continuous
reproduction task. Because movements are predicted to be qualitatively similar across
categories, success in the category learning task should be positively related to movements
towards the associated category center in the continuous reproduction task. The analyses
showed again no evidence for that idea (BF = .84 and BF = .81 for final accuracy and the
amount of learning, respectively).
The second analysis asked the question of whether continuous reproduction
responses are the result of a mixture of stable responses and changed responses. We
computed the before - after difference on the distance of the reproduction responses to the
associated category center for every participant and every stimulus. The absence of a move
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 40
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
1 2 3 4 5
Block of 20 Trials
ycaruccA
noitazirogetaC
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
2 4 6 8
Euclidean Distance (Binned)
Bukil Venak
Category
Monus Ladiv
ytiralimiS
egarevA
Similarity
Group
1.0
0.5
0.0
Before After
Time Point
)retneC
.lC(
ecnatsiD
0.9
0.6
0.3
0.0
Before After
Time Point
4 Categories
Group
Similarity
)yradnuoB
.lC(
ecnatsiD
4 Categories
Group
Similarity
Top left: Average categorization accuracy plotted per block of 20 trials separately for the
four categories in Experiment 2. Top right: Average similarity rating plotted against
Euclidean distance of subsequent stimuli in the sequential comparison task. Bottom left:
Average distance to the associated category center in the continuous reproduction task
before and after the secondary task. Bottom right: Same as bottom left, but with distance to
the closest boundary plotted on the y axis. Note: Error bars represent 95% within-subjects
confidence intervals. Distances in psychological space are suare-root transformed in the
lower two panels.
towards the prototype would be reflected in a Gaussian distribution centered at zero. An
average shift towards the prototype would be reflected in a shift of the mean of the
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 41
Any Category
Sequential
Comparison
Category
Learning
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Movement Towards Center
puorG
rep
stnapicitraP
.porP
Any Category
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Delta Categorization Accuracy
Sequential Comparison
Group
Category Learning
retneC
sdrawoT
tnemevoM
Any Category
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Categorization Accuracy Last Block
Any Category
Category
retneC
sdrawoT
tnemevoM
Any Category
Category
Left: Histograms of by-participant averages of movements towards the category center
plotted separately for the two groups (rows) in Experiment 2. Middle: By-participant
average movements towards the category center plotted against the average improvement in
the category learning task. Right: By-participant average movements towards the category
center plotted against the average final categorization accuracy in the category learning task.
Gaussian. We implemented this idea in a hierarchical model with a normal likelihood, in
which the group means of the normal were allowed to vary across groups. Note that this
model is similar to the one above predicting an interaction between group and time point
on the raw differences. When only some responses were shifted, but not all, the shift would
be reflected in a longer tail on the positive side of the distribution. We implemented the
latter idea in a model, in which the likelihood of the data comes from an exGaussian
distribution with the mean of the Gaussian component fixed at zero. For each group, we
estimated a mean tau parameter (i.e., the exponential part), reflecting the average shift
towards the category center for that group, with by-participant tau parameters
hierarchically drawn from this group mean parameter. We freely estimated the sigma
parameters (i.e., the standard deviation of the Gaussian part) for every participant (details
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 42
about the model are available on the accompanying OSF page). The mean of the normal
distribution centered at zero represents responses coming from unchanged representations.
We formally compared the two introduced models, again with the LOO method (Vehtari
et al., 2017), and the exGaussian model was slightly preferred over the shifted normal
responses towards the category centers. The shift did however not differ between groups, as
the 95% HDI of the difference between the group effects shows (see lower panel of that
towards the category centers surrounded by the two marginal histograms. It is visible that
the pull towards category centers was driven by only a few participants in each group.
BF = Decisive
mu(Sim.J.)
BF = Decisive
mu(Cat.L.)
BF = 0.04
mu Diff.
−0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
Posterior Value
retemaraP
ExGaussian
Posterior MAPs, 95% HDIs, and BFs for the tau parameters on the group level in the
exGaussian model.
4.4.3 Combined Analyses
4.4.3.1 Precision Analysis
In a combined analysis of Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 we tested the idea that category
learning affects perceptual representations of stimuli (e.g., Goldstone, 1994) over and above
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 43
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
−0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Mean Move (Empirical)
)roiretsoP(
uaT
PAM
Sequential Comparison
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
−0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Mean Move (Empirical)
)roiretsoP(
uaT
PAM
Category Learning
By-participant MAPs of the tau parameter plotted against mean empirical moves towards
the category centers.
mere pre-exposure or pre-differentiation (e.g., Gibson and Walk, 1957). For example,
Goldstone (1994) found that participants became more sensitized to dimensions that were
categorization relevant. That finding was not restricted to comparisons between categories
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 44
(i.e., acquired distinctiveness), but was also observed for comparisons within categories,
providing evidence against the idea of acquired equivalence. The upshot of the current
analysis is that we can contrast any potential performance increases only due to exposure
to the stimuli in the sequential comparison task to any potential performance increases due
to category learning.
For that reason, we coded responses in the continuous-reproduction task as
differences from the true stimulus values on both feature dimensions. Note that for this
analysis, we used the objective feature values to test whether responses became preciser.
resulting distributions before and after secondary task practice are plotted in blue and red,
differences in the standard deviations (after secondary task - before secondary task) for the
two groups and and the two dimensions against distance to the closest boundary. It is
visible that all differences were below 0, reflecting decreased standard deviations after the
secondary task. We modeled the data as coming from a bivariate normal distribution with
means of zero. We placed independent hierarchical regression models with random
intercepts on the standard deviations. As predictors we used group, time point (both
entered as categorical predictors), distance to the closest category boundary (entered as
linear predictor), and all higher-order interactions between them. We also added
experiment as a categorical predictor. Distance to the closest center was binned such that
only stimuli immediately surrounding a category boundary were included in the first bin.
Intermediate and large distances from the boundary were classified into the second and
third bin, respectively. Pre-exposure to the stimuli predicts negative main effects of time
point. If category learning increased perceptual sensitivity over and above pre-exposure, we
would expect interactions between time point and group. Furthermore, if the standard
deviation decreases more the further away from the category boundary, we would expect a
negative three-way interaction between time point, group, and distance to the closest
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 45
boundary.
The results show that standard deviations on both dimensions decreased over time
(BF > 100). We additionally observed evidence for the time point times group interaction
on the belly dimension (BF = 664), but indecisive evidence in the head dimension (BF =
.46). The means of the posterior distributions of the interaction terms were negative in
both two dimensions, though, with the 95% HDI excluding 0. That analysis is therefore
consistent with the idea that learning to categorize stimuli affects perceptual sensitivity
over and above exposure to these stimuli alone, particularly in the belly dimension. In
addition, the analysis showed strong evidence that the standard deviation on the belly
dimension, especially of stimuli further away from a decision boundary, decreased more due
to category learning than due to sequential comparison (i.e., the three-way interaction).
For completeness, we show the MAP estimates, 95% HDIs, and Bayes factors for all effects
Secondary Task Timepoint Mean Std. Dev. Correlation
Head Belly Head Belly
Seq. Comparison Before -0.46 1.04 17.13 15.61 0.04
Seq. Comparison After -0.26 1.59 15.12 13.84 0.00
Category Learning Before -0.33 1.39 16.04 15.51 0.03
Category Learning After -0.12 0.88 13.42 12.34 0.02
Descriptive statistics of all responses in the continuous reproduction task.
4.4.3.2 Movement Towards The Global Average?
Previous one-time-point designs showed that responses of participants tend to be shifted
towards the global average of the feature space (Dubova & Goldstone, 2021). In an
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 46
Sequential Comparison Category Learning
0.04
sd = 17.1 sd = 16.5
0.03
sd = 15.2 sd = 13.6
0.02
0.01
0.00
−36 −18 0 18 36 −36 −18 0 18 36
ytisneD
ytilibaborP
Precision: Spikiness of Head
Sequential Comparison Category Learning
0.04
sd = 15.7 sd = 15.6
0.03
sd = 14 sd = 12.4
0.02
0.01
0.00
−36 −18 0 18 36 −36 −18 0 18 36
Reproduction Error
ytisneD
ytilibaborP
Fill of Belly Spikiness of Head
Precision: Fill of Belly
Session a Before a After
E1:
Ellipse
E2:
Squares
−5
−5
1 2 3 1 2 3
Dist. To Closest Boundary (Binned)
)erofeB(
DS
)retfA(
DS
Changes in Precision
Sequential Comparison Category Learning
Left panel: Marginal probability densities of the responses on the Head Spikiness dimension
(upper row) and on the Belly Size dimension (lower row) in the continuous reproduction
task before the secondary task (blue) and after the secondary task (red). The empirical
standard deviations across all data points are shown as text labels within the respective
panels. Right panel: Differences of the standard deviations (after) - standard deviations
(before) plotted against distance to the closest boundary separately for the two groups. All
descriptive statistics of the responses in the continuous reproduction task are shown in
additional analysis, we tested whether this shift towards the global average changes after
carrying out the secondary tasks. This analysis bears similarities with the attraction to the
prototype analysis in Experiment 1. The main difference between the two was that we
ignored category membership in this analysis. The results replicate the general pattern of
responses being attracted towards the global average (all means are clearly above zero in
out the secondary task using a Bayesian ANOVA implemented in the BayesFactor package
(Morey et al., 2024) in R with the anovaBF function specifying stimulus id as a random
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 47
BF = Decisive
Time (Belly)
BF = Decisive
Time (Head)
BF = 0.01
Boundary (Belly)
BF = Decisive
Boundary (Head)
BF = 0.77
Exp. (Belly)
BF = 0.15
Exp. (Head)
BF = 0.22
Group (Belly)
BF = 0.28
Group (Head)
BF = 5.35
Group x Boundary (Belly)
BF = 0.13
Group x Boundary (Head)
BF = 664.10
Group x Time (Belly)
BF = 0.46
Group x Time (Head)
BF = 45'868.11
Time x Boundary (Belly)
BF = 0.10
Time x Boundary (Head)
BF = 93.16
Group x Boundary x Time (Belly)
BF = 0.34
Group x Boundary x Time (Head)
−1 0 1 2
Posterior Value
retemaraP
MAP, 95% HDIs, & BFs
Maximum a posteriori estimates (MAP), 95% highest density intervals (HDIs) and Bayes
factors shown for all effects entered into the regression predicting standard deviations of the
reproduction responses. Note. The intercept parameters are not displayed.
became less strong (i.e., all difference scores are below 0), particularly for the category
learning group (BF > 100) and in Experiment 2 (BF > 100). The evidence was ambiguous,
whether the reduction in bias was larger for the category learning group than the
sequential comparison group in Experiment 2 compared to Experiment 1 (BF = .80 for the
interaction).
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 48
Exp. 1 Exp. 2
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Before After Before After
Session
egarevA
labolG
oT
evoM
Delta Move To Global Average
0.0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
Seq. Comparison Cat. Learning
Group
Seq. Comparison Cat. Learning
)erofeB(
atleD
)retfA(
atleD
Experiment Exp. 1 Exp. 2
Left panels: Movements towards the global average. Data points were obtained by first
averaging across all responses for a given stimulus and then averaging across stimuli. Right
panel: Same data as in the left panel, but differences after - before were calculated. Note.
Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
4.4.4 Discussion
The main goal of Experiment 2 was to increase learning in the categorization task
to better test our main hypothesis. To achieve that, we made an effort to render category
learning easier by replacing the ellipse category structure with the squared category
structure and by additionally motivating participants with a monetary reward. Compared
to Experiment 1, categorization accuracy in the last block increased by approx. .05 even
though chance level was halved compared to Experiment 1 and participants had about 200
fewer trials to practice. We conclude, therefore, that the additional measures were
successful. With regards to the main hypothesis of task imprinting, the pattern was
qualitatively in agreement with the predictions on an average level (see right panel of
In an attempt to quantify representational shifts and to evaluate individual differences
therein, we fit a Bayesian exGaussian model to the data. The analysis showed that both
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 49
groups only minimally tended to move responses closer to category centers, without any
between-group differences. Most people showed none or a very small amount of response
shifts towards category centers. Why would a subset of participants shift their responses to
the category centers, even if they have not learned the categories in the first place? At this
point, we can only speculate. If we assume that participants strategically tended to
partition the feature dimensions into five distinct values (i.e., lo, lo-med, ...) over the time
of category learning, for example because of being annoyed to respond very precisely,
responding accordingly would show similar signs as attraction to the prototypes.
A combined analysis of the data from Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 asked the
question of whether improved perceptual sensitivity is only an effect of being exposed to a
set of stimuli or whether learning to categorize these stimuli additionally increases it. The
results partially supported the latter idea. Even though both groups responded more
precisely in the continuous reproduction task after the secondary task than before, the
increase in precision was larger for the category learning group than for the control group
in the belly dimension. The results were inconclusive in the head dimension, but the MAP
and the 95% HDI of the group effect were at least consistent with this prediction. The
pattern is consistent with an account of increased perceptual precision due to category
learning. The pattern is also consistent with an account postulating the storage of preciser
exemplars in long-term memory during category learning, which eventually assist to
reproduce stimuli from degraded working-memory representations, for example via
redintegration (Lewandowsky, 1999).
In an additional analysis we tested whether bias towards the global average
increased after carrying out the secondary tasks. The results are not in line with Bayesian
models of perception or rate-distortion theory (Sims, 2016), which predict that this bias
should increase, especially for the sequential comparison group. The basic idea is that the
estimate for the average stimulus (i.e., the stimulus prior) becomes preciser after more
exposure to the stimulus set. The results, however, are in line with the finding that
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 50
responses generally become preciser with more exposure and category learning. This
increased precision alleviates the general tendency of shifting responses towards the global
average.
Two patterns do not align with previously reported results. First, the absence of a
movement towards category centers or away from category boundaries does not
conceptually replicate Hasantash and Afraz (2020)’s finding that continuous reproductions
of colors tended to be pulled towards idiosyncratic color categories. Whereas these authors
used pre-existing, idiosyncratic categories, we let participants learn the categories during
the experiment. Therefore, it could be that the bias arises when categories are highly
over-learned, such as colors, and does not reflect an adaptation to task-specific goals as
suggested by the task imprinting model. It could also be that such a bias only arises for
even lower level stimuli than used in the current experiment (i.e., colors, orientations).
Second, the reduced standard deviation of reproduction responses, particularly in the
category learning group, correlated negatively with distance from the category boundary.
This does not replicate Goldstone (1994), who observed the opposite pattern of an
increased precision of categorization-relevant separable dimensions especially close to the
boundaries. Because we presented 100 different items with 10 feature values on each
dimension as compared to four feature values in Goldstone (1994)’s study, the category
boundary might have been less salient in our study. That is, whereas 75% of the items were
adjacent to a boundary in the latter study, in our study only 34% in Experiment 1 and
36% in Experiments 2-4 were adjacent to a category boundary.
To summarize, in combination with Experiment 1, we interpret the set of results as
in disagreement with the main qualitative prediction from the task imprinting model that
responses become biased after category learning but not after sequential comparisons. A
result in line with representational change, though, was that the precision of continuous
reproduction responses increased, particularly after category learning. Whether this change
was on the level of perceptual representations or on the level of preciser long-term memory
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 51
representations, can however not be answered with the current data.
4.5 Experiment 3
In Experiment 3, we tested the idea that task imprinting reflects a judgmental
process (Goldstone et al., 2001). It could be that people preferentially store certain
representations in the category-learning task in long-term memory, but then are unaffected
by them in the continuous reproduction task. Why would this be the case? This pattern
could emerge if the stored representations are only used as conceptual representations. So a
participant may decide not to use them in the reproduction task, because they are not
helpful. We therefore replaced the reproduction task, which measures predominantly
perceptual representations, even though conceptual influences have been shown (Donkin
et al., 2015; Souza & Skóra, 2017), with a simultaneous comparison task. While it is
assumed that similarity ratings in a simultaneous comparison task measure a perceptual
component to some degree (Medin et al., 1993), Barsalou (1982) and Medin et al. (1993)
argued that the information used in pairwise similarity judgments is affected by the
context, in which a pair of stimuli appears. Similarly, Holt et al. (2014) showed that there
is a substantial conceptual component in these ratings over and above the mere perceptual
component. Hebart et al. (2020) argued that representations can only be measured in a
context-free manner in an odd-one out task if the same pair of stimuli is presented over a
large number of trials in the contexts of many different other stimuli. The learned category
of an object may therefore serve as additional information in the simultaneous comparison
task being used strategically via potentially activated representations stored in long-term
memory.
The predictions from the computational model, therefore, do not differ from the
previous two experiments on the level of individual stimuli. However, they were
transformed into distances between pairs of stimuli before and after the secondary task.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 52
distances between stimuli. We further classified the pairs into those coming from the same
quadrant in the feature space and those coming from different quadrants (side-by-side
17. Differences between model variants were again minor with the main expected pattern
being distances between representations from the same category becoming smaller and
distances between representations from different categories becoming larger. Whereas these
representations were directly used to respond in the continuous reproduction task in
Experiments 1 and 2, here, they are used as the input for the similarity judgments between
two stimuli in the simultaneous comparison task.
4.5.1 Method
4.5.1.1 Participants
160 participants (11 unknown, 77 women, 72 men) took part in one session lasting
approximately 45 minutes. They received a base payment of 5 GBP and an additional
performance-dependent bonus of up to 2.50 GBP. 57 participants did not reach the
predefined performance criterion for their secondary task. We re-coded the responses of 8
participants, because they rated stimuli as more similar in the simultaneous comparison
task when the distance between the stimuli increased. Then, based on this correlation
between similarity judgments and Euclidean distance we excluded 2 further participants
because their correlation was larger than three standard deviations above the mean
correlation. We excluded 3 additional participants because they restarted the experiment
after they had already progressed through a substantial portion of the experiment. Thus,
98 participants remained in the experiment, 52 in the experimental group, 46 in the control
group.
4.5.1.2 Materials and procedure
We changed the task to measure representations from a continuous reproduction task to a
pairwise simultaneous comparison task. In every trial, participants observed two monsters
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 53
0.1
0.0
Between Within
Category Comparison
)erofeB
retfA
ecnatsiD(−
Category Learning Sequential Comparison
0.9
0.6
0.3
0.0
Between Within Between Within
Comparison
Sequential Comparison
Group
Category Learning
secnatsiD
esiwriaP
fo
egnahC
.porP
Exemplar None
Category Learning Model
Prototype Rule
Model predictions for the two secondary tasks. The qualitative pattern looked similar for the
different model instantiations. Here, we present exemplary predictions for the model also
accepting samples outside the pre-defined feature space using an acceptance sampling
scheme. In the left panel, we grouped pairwise comparisons between two stimuli into pairs
coming from the same category ("Within") and pairs coming from different categories
("Between"). We then plotted the difference between the distance after carrying out the
simulation and the distance using the initial settings before running the simulation. To
relate to similarities, we plot the negative value of this difference. In the right panel, we
plot the the proportion of change of the pairwise differences. That is, values below 1 reflect
smaller distances after running the simulation, values avove 1 reflect larger distances after
running the simulation.
presented side by side and were instructed to “rate the monsters by how much you think
they look similar to each other” using digits 1-8 (1: not similar at all, 8: very similar) on
the keyboard. Stimuli were presented on screen until participants gave a response, which
was followed by a message indicating their given response within a 500 ms inter-trial
interval. Presentation of the next pair followed immediately. Similar to Experiments 1-2,
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 54
the two stimuli were presented on black backgrounds on a white screen. We adapted the
response scale in the sequential comparison task of the control group to match the scale in
the simultaneous comparison task in order to avoid response confusions between the two
conceptually similar tasks. Otherwise, the procedure of the sequential comparison task and
the procedure of the category learning task were exactly the same as the ones in
Experiment 2.
In order to avoid ceiling and floor effects in similarity ratings, we strategically
sampled pairs for every participant according to the following procedure: First, we binned
Euclidean distances of stimulus pairs into five buckets with thresholds 0, 30, 50, 70, 90, and
. We then assured that the distances of pairs to be rated for comparisons within and
between quadrants of the feature space were on average not too small and too large,
respectively. We did so by assuring that pairs sampled for every participant satisfied the
following distributions over distance bins: [.5, .5, 0, 0, 0], [.1, .4, .3, .2, 0], and [0, .2, .3, .4,
.1] for comparisons within the same quadrant (x4), between quadrants touching side by
side (x4) and between quadrants touching only with their corners (x2), respectively. We
randomly sampled 10 pairs for every quadrant comparison for every participant. The same
participant saw the same 100 pairs twice, once before the secondary task, and once after
the secondary task.
4.6 Results
The evidence was again decisive that participants in the experimental group
improved in the category learning task over blocks (BF for main effect of block > 100).
Similarly, those in the control group performed as expected in the sequential similarity task
and rated more distant stimuli as more dissimilar and vice versa (BF for main effect of
binned distance > 100).
We then tested whether the similarity judgments changed due to category learning.
comparison (i.e., stimuli from the same category or stimuli from different categories) and
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 55
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
1 2 3 4 5
Block of 20 Trials
ycaruccA
noitazirogetaC
2 4 6 8
Euclidean Distance (Binned)
Bukil Venak
Category
Monus Ladiv
ytiralimiS
egarevA
0.2
0.1
0.0
Same Different
Category Comparison
Similarity
Group
erofeB
retfA
gnitaR
4 Categories
Group
Similarity
Left: Average categorization accuracy plotted per block of 20 trials separately for the two
categories in Experiment 3. Middle: Average similarity rating plotted against Euclidean
distance of subsequent stimuli in the sequential comparison task. Right: Difference between
the similarity ratings given to the same pairs of stimuli after vs. before. Note: Error bars
represent 95% within-subjects confidence intervals.
group. Pairwise distances of stimuli within the same category should decrease and pairwise
distances of stimuli from different categories should increase for the experimental group,
but not for the control group. That pattern would be reflected in an interaction between
group and category comparison on difference scores. Because people responded on a
similarity scale, the direction of the effect should be mirrored. We tested this prediction in
a hierarchical model predicting differences in similarity judgments using group and
category comparison as categorical predictors. The BF in favor of the group times category
comparison interaction was .05, therefore providing strong evidence for the absence of the
effect.
In an attempt to account for individual differences in the mapping of psychological
distance to similarity ratings, we related psychological distance to similarity ratings with a
negatively accelerated exponential function. Note that this model is not the full GCM
model, but approximates the similarity judgments using only the exponential function from
the GCM. Individual attention weights for the two dimensions were drawn from a group
distribution. Additionally, we placed a hierarchical regression model with random
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 56
Seq. Comparison Cat. Learning
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
Before After Before After
Time Point
Category
Comparison
Same
Different
Estimated c parameters for the model relating physical distance to psychological similarity
for the two groups in Experiment 3.
by-participant intercepts on the c parameter in a stan model. Besides the random
intercept, there were fixed main effects for group, category comparison, and time point (all
entered as categorical predictors). We also added all higher-order interactions of these
variables into the model. Task imprinting would be reflected in an increased c parameter
for comparisons between categories (i.e., less generalization) and a decreased c parameter
for comparisons within categories (i.e., more generalization) for the experimental group,
but not for the control group. This prediction would be reflected in evidence in favor of the
absence of such an effect (BF = 0.02, i.e., BF = 50 for the Null). There was also decisive
evidence for the group times category comparison interaction, likely driven by the higher
baseline in the c parameter in the category learning group for the comparison of items from
different categories. There is a possibility that the sampled pairs from different categories
for the category learning group were on average closer to each other in the feature space
than in the sequential comparison group. However, as we were only interested in the
change after carrying out the secondary task, we do not further interpret that effect.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 57
4.7 Discussion
In Experiment 3, we tested the idea that task imprinting reflects a strategic,
judgmental process. We therefore measured representations with a simultaneous
comparison task. It has been argued that pairwise similarity ratings are affected by context
(Barsalou, 1982; Hebart et al., 2020; Medin et al., 1993). We therefore hypothesized that
preferentially stored representations during the category learning task may be used as
additional information to respond in that task. The results were clear-cut. Even though
participants learned to categorize stimuli well and responded as expected in the sequential
comparison task, their responses did not change as a function of the secondary task. The
conclusion stayed the same when we accounted for individual differences in the mapping
from stimulus space to psychological space with a cognitive model.
4.8 Experiment 4
Whereas the previous experiments showed evidence against the idea that responses
in the continuous reproduction task and similarity judgments in the simultaneous
comparison task change according to the idea of task imprinting, we modeled the task to
measure representations in Experiment 4 as even closer to the category learning task. The
idea was similar as in Experiment 3, in particular to create a context, in which category
membership becomes even more salient. Therefore, we emphasized category membership
even more in the instructions. To achieve that, we asked people to judge how likely two
simultaneously presented stimuli belong to the same category. Evidence for task imprinting
in such a task in combination with the previous null findings would suggest that changed
responding is mostly strategic Goldstone et al. (2001), that the representational change is
tightly linked to the practiced task, and that it generalizes only very narrowly and in a
task-specific fashion.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 58
4.8.1 Method
4.8.1.1 Participants
113 participants (5 unknown, 40 women, 68 men) took part in one session lasting
approximately 45 minutes. They received a base payment of 5 GBP and an additional
performance-dependent bonus of up to 2.50 GBP. 26 participants did not reach the
predefined performance criterion for their secondary task. We further excluded 3
participants because the correlation between their similarity judgments and Euclidean
distance was larger than three standard deviations above the mean correlation. We
excluded 2 additional participants because they restarted the experiment after they had
already progressed through a substantial portion of the experiment. Thus, 82 participants
remained in the experiment, 42 in the experimental group, 40 in the control group.
4.8.1.2 Materials and procedure
Materials and procedure were the same as in Experiment 3 with the following exception in
the instruction: in the simultaneous comparison task participants were instructed to
respond by how likely they thought that the two stimuli belonged to the same category.
Note that the control group was never exposed to any categories, but was still asked about
how likely they thought that two stimuli may belong to the same category.
4.8.2 Results
As in the three previous experiments, (a) categorization performance improved
substantially over blocks (BF > 100) and (b) similarity ratings in the sequential
comparison task were a negative linear function of Euclidean distance between subsequent
stimuli (BF > 100). Model predictions for the simultaneous comparison task were the same
as for Experiment 3; the pattern may even be quantitatively amplified, because
participants were explicitly instructed to rate the likelihood of category membership. The
results confirmed the predictions. Similarity ratings for stimuli from the same category
slightly increased whereas similarity ratings for stimuli from different categories decreased
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 59
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
1 2 3 4 5
Block of 20 Trials
ycaruccA
noitazirogetaC
2 4 6 8
Euclidean Distance (Binned)
Bukil Venak
Category
Monus Ladiv
ytiralimiS
egarevA
0.0
−0.5
−1.0
Same Different
Category Comparison
Similarity
Group
erofeB
retfA
gnitaR
4 Categories
Group
Similarity
Left: Average categorization accuracy plotted per block of 20 trials separately for the two
categories in Experiment 4. Middle: Average similarity rating plotted against Euclidean
distance of subsequent stimuli in the sequential comparison task. Right: Difference between
the similarity ratings given to the same pairs of stimuli after vs. before. Note: Error bars
represent 95% within-subjects confidence intervals.
Seq. Comparison Cat. Learning
2.50
2.25
2.00
1.75
1.50
Before AfterBefore After
Time Point
Category
Comparison
Same
Different
Estimated c parameters for the model relating psychological distance to similarity for the
two groups in Experiment 4.
for the experimental group, but not for the control group (BF = 88 for the category
the same when accounting for individual differences in the mapping between psychological
space and similarity ratings in the c parameter. Generalization between stimuli was only
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 60
modulated by the secondary task in the experimental group, but not in the control group.
The BF in favor of the three-way interaction effect was decisive (BF > 100).
4.8.3 Discussion
In Experiment 4, we modeled the context of the task measuring representations
even closer to the category learning task than in Experiment 3. The idea was that
representations stored in long-term memory during the category learning task are more
likely to be used with an even more overlapping task context. The results provided
evidence that participants’ responses changed as predicted from task imprinting. Whereas
stimuli were perceived as similar across the two groups before the secondary task, only
category learning but not sequential comparisons changed their interpretation. After the
secondary task, participants in the category learning group rated stimuli from different
categories as less likely to come from the same category and tended to rate stimuli from the
same category as more likely to come from the same category. Responses in the control
group remained unchanged. The conclusion remained the same when we accounted for
individual differences in the mapping from physical space to psychological space with a
computational model.
5 General Discussion
Research from several areas suggests that object representations are affected by
knowledge about the same objects accumulated in a different task. In the current paper,
we proposed a new mechanism of this type of representational change relying on cross-task
talk, task imprinting. The assumed mechanism was inspired by previous research about the
particular phenomenon that short-term memory responses are affected by previously
learned categorical information (e.g., Donkin et al., 2015; Hasantash & Afraz, 2020;
Huttenlocher et al., 1991; Souza & Skóra, 2017). We implemented the idea of task
imprinting in a computational model based on principles of perceptual variability or noisy
stimulus encoding akin to population coding (Ashby & Lee, 1993; Ashby & Townsend,
1986; Bays, 2014; Pouget et al., 2000) and preferential storage of helpful information in
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 61
long-term memory.
We tested the model’s predictions in a series of four experiments. The main
qualitative prediction of the model was that representations of stimuli, which are assumed
to be a mixture of perceptual and memory representations, close to a decision boundary
drift away from that boundary towards the category center. For all categories the shift
should direct away from the category boundary and for all but the residual category in
Experiment 1, the shift should direct towards the respective category center. Only
Experiment 4 showed signatures of task imprinting. In that experiment the task context of
the task aimed at measuring representations was intended to be very similar to the
category learning task. The continuous reproduction task, which we used in Experiments 1
and 2, was modeled according to previous research that found influence from categorical
knowledge on behavior (Donkin et al., 2015; Hasantash & Afraz, 2020; Huttenlocher et al.,
1991; Souza & Skóra, 2017). Despite achieving acceptable levels of category learning in
Experiment 2, the results showed evidence against task imprinting. We assumed that
representations, which have been stored in long-term memory during the category learning
task as predicted by our model, would assist as additional information to make the
pairwise similarity judgments in Experiment 3. The reasoning was that pairwise similarity
ratings are more likely to be context-specific (Barsalou, 1982; Hebart et al., 2020; Holt
et al., 2014; Medin et al., 1993) and therefore activate categorical information from
long-term memory. However, similarity judgments in Experiment 3 were left completely
unaffected by learned category knowledge. To test whether the results depended on the
specific method we used to measure representational change, we also analyzed
representational change with the representational behavioral similarity analysis (see
Appendix, Karagoz et al., 2022). The results, though, showed the same pattern as the
analyses reported in the main part of the manuscript.
The results overall do not support the idea that representations of objects are biased
by helpful representations in another task. They point more towards an account that
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 62
participants strategically change their responses given task demands. For example, a
potential alternative explanation is the strategic judgment bias account (Goldstone et al.,
2001). That account assumes that categorical information serves as an additional cue,
which is added to the computation when determining the similarity between two presented
stimuli. As our proposed account of task imprinting, however, it would have predicted an
effect on similarity judgments in Experiment 3. By additionally assuming that only tasks
sufficiently similar to a category learning task prompt the strategical use of categorical
cues, the account could be made consistent with the current results.
Similarly, our results are partially in line with the literature on categorical
perception. On the one hand, the combined analysis of Experiment 1 and Experiment 2
showed that category learning increased perceptual sensitivity as assessed via the
continuous reproduction task over and above mere pre-exposure to the same stimuli, a
similar effect already shown previously by Goldstone (1994). On the other hand, we did
not observe any differential effects from category learning on similarity judgments for
stimulus pairs between categories and stimulus pairs within categories. Such an effect
would be predicted if stimuli from the same category were harder to differentiate (i.e.,
acquired equivalence) and stimuli from different categories easier to differentiate (i.e.,
acquired distinctiveness).
Previous studies showed that responses in short-term memory tasks are affected by
categorical knowledge (Donkin et al., 2015; Hasantash & Afraz, 2020; Huttenlocher et al.,
1991; Souza & Skóra, 2017). Experiments 1 and 2 could not experimentally induce a
tendency to use categorical representations over and above visual-perceptual
representations. The observation in Experiment 2, however, that some participants used
stereotypical responses, as opposed to categorical representations, adds a new flavor to
some of the previous studies. For example, responses shifted to stereotypical angles and
locations on a circle in Huttenlocher et al. (1991) might also be partially due to
stereotypical responding. That is, participants just preferentially responded at a few
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 63
stereotypical locations from the whole space of possible responses.
5.1 Comparison To Other Models
Is the main qualitative prediction of the task imprinting model unique? Even
though we believe that the mechanics and the implementation we propose are novel,
previously introduced Bayesian models of cognition, connectionist models, and
rate-distortion models can predict the same pattern of shifted representations towards
category centers or away from category boundaries. For example, in the Category
Adjustment Model by Huttenlocher et al. (2000) stimulus estimates are constructed by
combining an imprecise stimulus representation (i.e., the likelihood of the data) with a
category representation (i.e., the prior), which is represented by the central category value.
This bears clear similarities with our implementation, and the predictions for the currently
used designs are the same. However, the current predictions from the task imprinting
model are more general, because they do not depend on the assumption that categories are
represented as prototypes. The same prediction can be derived from connectionist models.
For example, in the model by Harnad (1995), which is sequentially trained to
auto-associate and categorize one-dimensional stimuli, attraction towards category averages
evolves as a natural side-effect due to general principles of how neural networks learn.
Similar to the task imprinting model, the emergence of categorical perception can be
described as adaptive to the dual-task demands of the auto-association task and the
categorization task. Finally, rate-distortion models, which bear similarities to Bayesian
models, but add the assumption of a capacity-limited channel to transmit information from
input to output, can make a similar prediction (e.g., Sims, 2016). The larger the capacity
limitation, the more these models predict an assimilation towards prototypes (e.g., the
mean value), because a precise representation of an individual stimulus becomes too costly.
5.2 Broader Context
In line with previous work (e.g., Firestone & Scholl, 2016; Goldstone, 1994), we
made the point that behavioral responses most often cannot unambiguously be interpreted
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 64
as purely driven by perceptual representations and/or long-term memory representations.
The latter can moreover be stimulus specific (i.e., Nosofsky, 1986) or
categorical/conceptual. The strong version of the task imprinting model predicted a change
on both levels, such that perceptual representations become biased by long-term knowledge
in order to become a better conceptual or categorical learner. The result that people only
changed their responses accordingly in a situation, in which they seemed to be able to infer
the correct response, shows that people can decide to use their knowledge in some
situations, but not in others. This aligns with work on the development of knowledge
structures, which has shown that outdated knowledge and newly acquired knowledge, for
example about the solar system, coexist together in the same individuals (Shtulman &
Harrington, 2016). Similarly, Vosniadou and Brewer (1992) showed that when children are
asked to change their mental model of the world, for example when they learn that the
earth is a sphere, they integrate the new knowledge in such a way that they change as few
of their presuppositions as possible. The current findings add to the understanding of how
several concepts about the same objects develop and coexist together mentally.
Our results also shed new light on findings from neuroscience that showed that
representations as measured via activation patterns in the hippocampus change according
to concept learning (Mack et al., 2016; Theves et al., 2019; Theves et al., 2020; Theves
et al., 2021). Especially the finding that representations become preciser, but not biased as
predicted by the task imprinting model seems relevant. Correlations between neural
activation and concept space after category learning are therefore less likely to be
attributed to changed perceptual or memory representations of individual objects than to
learned representations of the categories. We suspect therefore that the adaptation reflects
the changed meaning of the stimulus in the context of the category learning task. Given
the current results, we would predict that presenting the same stimulus in different task
contexts would elicit different patterns of activation in the hippocampus once the different
tasks have been learned sufficiently. That could be tested, for example, by presenting a
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 65
random pre-cue indicating one of two category structures to be used for an upcoming
categorization. The current results also add to the discussion about what mechanisms
repetition suppression reflects. In their review, Barron and colleagues listed four
mechanisms of repetition suppression proposed in the literature (Barron et al., 2016). All
of them emphasize the identity of the stimulus to be crucial for a repetition suppression
effect to emerge. Our findings permit an interpretation of repetition suppression effects not
purely based on stimulus properties. We propose that repetition suppression measures
adaptation to a context-specific representation of a stimulus. The same stimulus may not
give rise to a repetition suppression effect if it was used in a different task.
5.3 Conclusion
In the current work, we introduced a computational model predicting a mechanism
of representational change called task imprinting. We tested the main qualitative
prediction of the model in a series of four experiments. Based on the results, we can
exclude that task imprinting is a general, context-free phenomenon biasing perceptual and
memory representations of individual objects. The results suggest much more that
perceptual representations are strategically re-interpreted within a given task context using
additional knowledge stored in long-term memory - for example representations that were
helpful in another task. People are more likely to respond with signatures of task
imprinting the closer the task context of the task used to measure representations is to the
task context in which a particular representation was helpful.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 66
6 Appendix
6.1 Psychophysical Scaling Experiment
6.1.1 Participants and Methods
51 participants (5 unknown, 17 women, 29 men) took part in one session lasting
approximately 25 minutes in an online study on prolific. They received a fixed payment of
4 GBP for their participation. The experiment was programmed using the software jsPsych
(De Leeuw, 2015). Due to technical problems, we had to exclude the data of 11
participants, because a substantial amount of the data was not saved for them (< 80% of
their data were saved). We further excluded 3 participants whose responses were not
significantly affected by the intensity of the feature values (see head dimension in right
Belly Head
0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0
Regression Coefficient
stnapicitraP
fo
.rN
Experiment 2
By-participant beta coefficients relating object properties to psychological values (see lower
approach Maloney and Yang, 2003.
In every trial of the task, participants were presented with three stimuli. They had
to decide whether a target stimulus presented centrally in the bottom of the screen was
more similar to one of two reference stimuli presented in the top left and top right of the
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 67
screen. In half of total 364 trials, the value of only one dimension was varied in 14 linearly
spaced steps of equal size. The value of the other dimension was set to the average
objective value. From all possible combinations of stimuli, we selected those, in which the
target stimulus had a value in between those of the two comparison stimuli. We randomly
divided the 364 possible triplets in each dimension into two sets a and b of each 182
triplets. Every participant observed 182 triplets in each domain resulting in the total 364
trials. Half of the participants observed sets a, half of the participants observed sets b. The
two dimensions were presented in blocked order. The order of presenting the sets (i.e., first
head spikiness dimension or first belly fill dimension) was counterbalanced across
participants. In each dimension, participants received 5 initial practice trials.
6.1.2 Results
For every participant, we applied the MLDS function in the mlds package in R
(Maloney & Yang, 2023) to the by-trial responses, separately for every participant. We
then fit a linear regression predicting each participant’s values on the psychological scale
22. We excluded participants whose responses were not significantly (p < .05) related to
the objective properties (i.e., participants whose coefficient was below the grey dashed line
dimension and fully crossed the resulting values. These average values are used throughout
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 68
6.2 Hierarchical Structure of Bayesian Models
Random effects were random with regards to participants except for the analysis
modeling attraction towards the global average, in which we modeled stimulus id as a
random effect.
Experiment 1
Category Learning: random intercept, random slope trial, fixed slope category,
fixed slope category x trial (note. models with random slopes on category or
random slopes on category and category times trial did not converge)
Sequential Comparison: random intercept, random slope distance
Movement (i.e., differences between distances before and after the secondary
task) Towards Category Center / Closest Boundary: random intercept, random
slope category, fixed slopes number of categories and number of categories times
category
Individual Differences in Movements: simple linear regression without random
effects.
Experiment 2
Category Learning: random intercept, random slope trial
Sequential Comparison same as for Experiment 1
Movement Towards Category Center / Closest Boundary (square-root
transformed): random intercept, random slope time point, fixed slopes number
of categories and number of categories times time point; note. this model fit
better than a model with random-intercept only.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 69
Individual Differences in Movements: simple linear regression without random
effects.
Move Model "Normal Shift": Random intercept
exGaussian: random intercepts for sigma and tau parameters
• Combined Analysss
Precision Model: fixed mean value to zero on both dimensions; hierarchical
regression on standard deviations with random intercept only and fixed effects
of boundary distance, number of categories, time point, all higher order
interactions between the latter three predictors, and experiment
Global Average Model: random intercept across items, fixed effects of group,
experiment, and the group times experiment interaction
Experiment 3
Category Learning and Sequential Comparison same as for Experiment 2
Differences in Similarity Judgments: random intercept and random slope
category comparison, fixed slopes number of categories and number of
categories times category comparison; note. this model fit better than a model
with random-intercept (without random slope category comparison) only.
Experiment 4
All three models were specified in the same way as in Experiment 3
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 70
6.3 Monetary Rewards
• Continuous reproduction: We calculated the average deviation from a participant
across all trials. When the average deviation was below 5, a participant got the
largest bonus. When the average deviation was above 51, a participant did not get
any bonus. Average deviations between 5 and 51 were linearly scaled from the
maximum bonus to no bonus.
• Category learning: The proportion of correct responses was multiplied by the
maximum bonus.
• Sequential comparison: All participants were paid the same average bonus.
• Simultaneous comparison in Experiment 3 and Experiment 4: The correlation
between Euclidean distance and participants responses was multiplied with the
maximum bonus.
The maximum rewards in
• Experiment 1 were 2.60 £ and 2.60 £ for the continuous reproduction task and the
category learning task, respectively. We paid 1.30 £ for the sequential similarity task
by default.
• Experiment 2 were 3.25 £ and 3.25 £ for the continuous reproduction task and the
category learning task, respectively. We paid 2.85 £ for the sequential similarity task
by default.
• Experiment 3 and Experiment 4 were 1.25 £ and 1.25 £ for the simultaneous
comparison task and the category learning task, respectively. We paid 0.85 £ for the
sequential similarity task by default.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 71
6.4 Bayesian Group-Level Posterior Estimates
For the sake of completeness, here we report the MAPs, 95% HDIs, and the BFs for
all group-level effects of the Bayesian models used in Experiments 1 - 4.
BF = Decisive
Category
BF = Decisive
Trial (Binned)
BF = 82.39
Trial x Category
−0.25 0.00 0.25
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Category Learning
BF = 18.5
Euclidean Distance
−0.4 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Seq. Comparison
BF = 0.04
Ellipse Category
BF = 0.03
Ellipse Category x Group
BF = 0.02
Group
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Move: Cat. Center
BF = 0.02
Ellipse Category
BF = 0.02
Ellipse Category x Group
BF = 0.01
Group
−0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Move: Boundary Aversion
BF = 0.06
Category
BF = 0.29
Category x Final Accuracy
BF = 0.21
Final Accuracy
−1 0 1
Posterior Value
retemaraP
ID: Final Accuracy
BF = 0.06
Category
BF = 0.27
Category x Delta Accuracy
BF = 0.16
Delta Accuracy
−1 0 1
Posterior Value
retemaraP
ID: Delta Accuracy
Experiment 1
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 72
BF = Decisive
Trial (Binned)
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Category Learning
BF = Decisive
Euclidean Distance
−0.9 −0.6 −0.3 0.0
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Seq. Comparison
BF = 0.09
Group
BF = 189.71
Timepoint
BF = 0.05
Timepoint x Group
−0.20 −0.15 −0.10 −0.05 0.00 0.05
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Move: Cat. Center
BF = 0.01
Group
BF = 0.03
Timepoint
BF = 0.08
Timepoint x Group
−0.1 0.0 0.1
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Move: Boundary Aversion
BF = Decisive
mu_tau[1]
BF = Decisive
mu_tau[2]
BF = 0.04
mu_tau_diff
−0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
Posterior Value
retemaraP
ExGaussian
BF = 0.81
Final Accuracy
−1 0 1 2
Posterior Value
retemaraP
ID: Final Accuracy
BF = 0.84
Delta Accuracy
−1 0 1 2
Posterior Value
retemaraP
ID: Delta Accuracy
Experiment 2
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 73
BF = Decisive
Trial (Binned)
0.0 0.2 0.4
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Category Learning
BF = Decisive
Euclidean Distance
−0.9 −0.6 −0.3 0.0
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Seq. Comparison
BF = 0.06
Category Comparison
BF = 0.05
Category Comparison x Group
BF = 0.06
Group
−0.4 0.0 0.4
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Move: Cat. Center
Experiment 3
BF = 0.09
Group
BF = 11.88
Category Comparison
BF = 104.90
Time Point
BF = Decisive
Gr x CC
BF = 0.01
Cr x TP
BF = 0.01
CC x TP
BF = 0.02
Gr x CC x TP
0.0 0.2 0.4
Experiment 3 - c
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 74
BF = Decisive
Trial (Binned)
−1.2 −0.9 −0.6 −0.3 0.0
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Category Learning
BF = Decisive
Euclidean Distance
−1.2 −0.9 −0.6 −0.3 0.0
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Seq. Comparison
BF = 7'886.79
Category Comparison
BF = 88.31
Category Comparison x Group
BF = 1.16
Group
−1.5 −1.0 −0.5 0.0
Posterior Value
retemaraP
Move: Cat. Center
Experiment 4
BF = 0.08
Group
BF = Decisive
Category Comparison
BF = 79.94
Time Point
BF = Decisive
Gr x CC
BF = Decisive
Cr x TP
BF = Decisive
CC x TP
BF = Decisive
Gr x CC x TP
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
Experiment 4 - c
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 75
6.5 Behavioral Representational Similarity Analysis
We also analyzed task imprinting using the behavioral similarity approach proposed
by Karagoz et al. (2022), called behavioral representational similarity analysis (bRSA).
Therefore, we calculated the change in distance for every pair of stimuli when comparing
responses before the secondary task and responses after the secondary task. In
Experiments 1 and 2, we calculated the mean Euclidean distances between all pairs of
stimuli before and after the secondary task. In Experiments 3 and 4, we calculated the
mean difference in simultaneous comparison judgments for all the rated pairs, also before
and after the secondary task. We then calculated the difference for every pair after vs.
before. We proceeded in the same way for the model predictions and then correlated
differences according to the model with with the observed differences in the four
Experiments. Correlations between model matrices and responses should be positive for
the experimental group in Experiments 1 and 2 because predictions and data reflect
distances, but negative for Experiments 3 and 4 because data are similarity judgments, but
predictions are distances.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 76
bRSA Experiment 1
r = .03 (sequential comparison), .01 (category learning)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Stimulus ID 1
DI
sulumitS
Model Matrix
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Stimulus ID 1
DI
sulumitS
Category Learning
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Stimulus ID 1
DI
sulumitS
Sequential Comparison
Delta
(Eucl. Dist.)
−5
−10
Left: bRSA Model matrix of movements towards the corresponding category center from
individual stimulus representations derived from model predictions for Experiment 1. Note.
Lighter colors represent larger movements towards the corresponding category center,
darker colors smaller movements. Middle: Average observed movements in the category
learning group. Right: Average observed movements in the sequential comparison group.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 77
bRSA Experiment 2
r = .01 (sequential comparison), .07 (category learning)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Stimulus ID 1
DI
sulumitS
Model Matrix
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Stimulus ID 1
DI
sulumitS
Category Learning
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Stimulus ID 1
DI
sulumitS
Sequential Comparison
Delta
(Eucl. Dist.)
−5
−10
Left: bRSA Model matrix of movements towards the corresponding category center from
individual stimulus representations derived from model predictions for Experiment 2. Note.
Lighter colors represent larger movements towards the corresponding category center,
darker colors smaller movements. Middle: Average observed movements in the category
learning group. Right: Average observed movements in the sequential comparison group.
The RSA plots for E3 and E4 show some empty cells, as not all 10k pairs were
observed by the participants.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 78
bRSA Experiment 3
r = .03 (sequential comparison), .01 (category learning)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Stimulus ID 1
DI
sulumitS
Model Matrix
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Stimulus ID 1
DI
sulumitS
Category Learning
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Stimulus ID 1
DI
sulumitS
Sequential Comparison
Delta
(Eucl. Dist.)
−3
−6
Left: bRSA Model matrix of movements towards the corresponding category center from
individual stimulus representations derived from model predictions for Experiment 3. Note.
Lighter colors represent larger movements towards the corresponding category center,
darker colors smaller movements. Middle: Average observed movements in the category
learning group. Right: Average observed movements in the sequential comparison group.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 79
bRSA Experiment 4
r = .00 (sequential comparison), -.17 (category learning)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Stimulus ID 1
DI
sulumitS
Model Matrix
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Stimulus ID 1
DI
sulumitS
Category Learning
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Stimulus ID 1
DI
sulumitS
Sequential Comparison
Delta
(Eucl. Dist.)
−4
Left: bRSA Model matrix of movements towards the corresponding category center from
individual stimulus representations derived from model predictions for Experiment 4. Note.
Lighter colors represent larger movements towards the corresponding category center,
darker colors smaller movements. Middle: Average observed movements in the category
learning group. Right: Average observed movements in the sequential comparison group.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 80
6.6 Funding
This work was funded by the Max-Planck institute for biological Cybernetics.
Acknowledgements
We thank Alex Kipnis for valuable input on notational issues, Marcel Binz, René
Schlegelmilch, and two anonymous reviewers for valuable feedback on a previous version of
this manuscript.
TASK-SPECIFIC REPRESENTATIONAL CHANGE 81