THIS IS A PREPRINT VERSION THAT HAS NOT YET BEEN PEER REVIEWED
Identification of user groups of autonomous shuttle buses:
A latent profile analysis
Franziska Hofbauer1, Peter Fischer1, Matthias Hudecek1
1Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany
Correspondence address: Chair of Social, Organizational, Working and Business Psychology,
Universitätsstraße 1, 93040 Regensburg.
Email: franziska.hofbauer@psychologie.uni-regensburg.de
Abstract
Autonomous driving and its acceptance are becoming increasingly important in psychological research
as the application of autonomous functions and artificial intelligence in vehicles increases. In this context, the
person of the user is increasingly considered, which is the basis for the successful establishment and use of
autonomous vehicles. Numerous studies show an association between personality variables and the acceptance of
autonomous vehicles. This makes it more relevant to identify potential user profiles to adapt autonomous vehicles
to the user and the needs of the user groups to marketing them effectively. Our study, therefore, addressed the
identification of user groups of autonomous vehicles (AVs). A sample of 388 subjects answered questions about
their intention to use autonomous buses, their sociodemographics, and various personality variables. Latent Profile
Analysis was used to identify four user group profiles that differed significantly from each other in their
willingness to use AVs. In total, users with lower anxiety and increased self-confidence were more open toward
AVs. Technology affinity as a trait also contributes to the differentiation of user groups and AV acceptance. The
profile solutions and the correlations with the intention to use proved to be replicable in cross validation analyses.
Keywords: autonomous driving, artificial intelligence, latent profile analysis, autonomous vehicle
acceptance, user groups
Funding Statement
The research was funded by a grant from the Federal Ministry for Digital and Transport (BMDV), Germany (FKZ:
01MM20003F).
Statements and Declarations
All authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.
Short Biography
Franziska Hofbauer is a PhD candidate at the Chair of Social, Work, Organizational and Economic Psychology,
University of Regensburg, Germany. Her main research focuses on the acceptance of autonomous systems with a
specialization in autonomous driving systems.
Peter Fischer is a full professor and Chair of Social, Work, Organizational and Economic Psychology at the
University of Regensburg, Germany. His main research areas comprise the psychology of digitalization,
blockchain, judgment and decision-making, aggressive behavior and prosocial behavior.
Matthias Hudecek is a postdoctoral researcher at the Chair of Social, Work, Organizational and Economic
Psychology, University of Regensburg, Germany. His main research areas comprise the acceptance of
autonomous systems with a specialization in autonomous driving systems, personality and narrative identity and
self-determination theory.
Contribution statement
All authors developed the study concept, contributed to the study design, and interpreted the results. Material
testing and data collection were performed by FH and MH. The data were analyzed by FH. FH drafted the
manuscript, and MH and PF provided critical revisions. All authors contributed to the article and approved the
submitted version.
Introduction
In recent years, psychological research on the acceptance of autonomous driving has increased
significantly. In local public transport, the so-called micro-transit, autonomous buses are expected to be part of
everyday life as early as 2030 (Litman, 2022). Currently, autonomous micro transit pilot systems are being tested
in various fields of application worldwide (e.g., Bernhard et al., 2020). In these test projects, in addition to the
technological component, the psychological perspective is increasingly becoming the focus of interest. With their
experience and acceptance, the passenger is crucial for establishing autonomous micro-transit systems. The more
autonomous driving is adapted to user needs and interests, the easier it can develop into an attractive alternative
to non-autonomous driving (Haboucha et al., 2017). It is becoming increasingly clear that personality traits, e.g.,
extraversion or self-efficacy of potential users are significant factors influencing the intention to use (ITU, Du et
al., 2021; Qu et al., 2021; Venkatesh et al., 2012). To map the complexity of personality factors and thus respond
best to the needs of potential users, we aim to analyze patterns in personality characteristics and identify user
group profiles from them. To the best of our knowledge, there are no extensive empirical studies on this topic
until now. The goal of this study is therefore the explorative analysis and identification of user groups of
autonomous vehicles (AV) based on selected personal characteristics and dispositions.
Literature Review and Research Framework
The person of the passenger must be taken into account when promoting the acceptance of autonomous
driving systems. A vast body of research shows that intrapersonal factors contribute to AV acceptance and ITU.
For example, acceptance of autonomous vehicles is significantly related to sociodemographic variables, such as
gender (Lemonnier et al., 2020), age (Qu et al., 2021), education (Yuen et al., 2022), and income (Ding et al.,
2022). Several previous studies consistently show that males and younger subjects are more receptive to AVs
(e.g., Ding et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2019). Gender effects may be due to men reporting a higher general affinity
for technology and being more likely to pursue technical careers (Trapani & Hale, 2019). Women, on the other
hand, attribute greater discomfort and uncertainty with technology to themselves, possibly due to stereotypical
biases (Blasko et al., 2020; Koch et al., 2008). However, acceptance of new technologies such as AVs also appears
to be a generational issue. Younger individuals are less concerned about this change in transportation (Charness
et al., 2018), but on the other hand have greater concerns about hacking attacks (Garidis et al., 2020). Bonem et
al. (2015) found that older individuals rate risks particularly high when the risk addresses health or ethics. It is
possible that AV technology, in which artificial intelligence (AI) is responsible for accident-free driving and
ethical decision-making, is experienced as more threatening due to its novelty (Cui et al., 2019; Sankeerthana &
Raghuram Kadali, 2022). High levels of education and income are also associated with higher technology
acceptance (Yuen et al., 2022). Individuals with higher education are in many cases more familiar with new
technologies such as AVs due to broader knowledge of technical functions and developments (Yuen et al., 2022).
In addition, high levels of education are often associated with higher socioeconomic status and income (Rojas-
Méndez et al., 2017). Moreover, the often expensive technological innovations, e.g., the newest smartphones or
laptops, can often only be financed if income permits. As a result, individuals with high levels of education and
income often have better access to technology, which in turn favors familiarity and adoption (Rojas-Méndez et
al., 2017).
In addition to sociodemographics, there is now particularly insightful evidence on personality variables
in relation to the adoption of autonomous driving technology. Various studies show significant relationships
between classic personality traits such as the Big Five (neuroticism, extraversion, openness, agreeableness, and
conscientiousness; Costa & McCrae, 1989) and attitudes toward AVs (e.g., Zhang et al., 2020). As demonstrated
in a study by Qu et al. (2021), individuals with high scores in extraversion and openness are more open to AVs,
whereas high neuroticism scores negatively affect acceptance. However, Charness et al. (2018) also showed that
particularly open-minded users are more willing to relinquish control to the AI in an autonomous vehicle.
Particularly conscientious and compatible users showed more concern in this regard, e.g., regarding the reliability
and usability of AVs (Qu et al., 2021).
In addition to these classical personality traits, constructs related to one’s attribution of control seem to
have an impact on AV acceptance. However, a look at the studies on control beliefs and self-efficacy reveals
partly contradictory results. Control beliefs can be located as a construct on a dimension whose extremes are
internal and external control beliefs. People differ individually in whether they generally attribute control over
situations or facts to themselves (internal) or to external factors (external; Rotter, 1966). According to Choi and
Ji (2015), an external control belief contributes positively to ITU. The authors explain this by the fact that, for
example, people who do not feel able to participate in traffic under their control or responsibility (e.g., due to
physical impairment) prefer to use autonomous vehicles as a means of transportation. Another reason for this
could be that people with external control beliefs generally attribute low levels of their control to themselves and
thus experience the relinquishment of control to AI as less drastic (Takayama et al., 2011). This is contrasted with
a finding by Du et al.(2021) showing that high self-efficacy has a positive effect on trust in AVs and thus ITU.
The authors explain this result by the fact that people with high self-efficacy prefer to accept challenges rather
than avoid them and thus react more openly to AVs (Graham, 2011). Since high self-efficacy is associated with
internal rather than external locus of control beliefs, the results contradict the finding of Choi and Ji (2015), who
found external locus of control beliefs to be a predictor of ITU (Chen & He, 2014). A low general need for control
also contributes positively to the ITU (Garidis et al., 2020).
One reason for the contradictory results on own control attribution might be the interaction with other
personality traits. Among other things, the acceptance of AVs is also determined by the general disposition to
trust (Benleulmi & Blecker, 2017). It is plausible that individuals who have a fundamentally higher level of trust
also trust AVs more strongly without needing a high level of their own experience of control. Thus, people with
high general trust are more willing to use AVs (Benleulmi & Blecker, 2017). In addition, technology affinity
contributes positively to trust in new technologies, which in turn lowers perceptions of potential risks (Choi & Ji,
2015). High technology confidence, in the sense of confidence in one’s technological capabilities, is in turn
considered a basis for trust in human-machine interaction (Jian et al., 2000). According to Venkatesh (2000), this
type of trust also influences the perceived ease of use, which in turn favors the ITU of AVs (Jing et al., 2020).
Another major determinant of AV acceptance is anxiety, although the study results still differ regarding
the direction of the relationship. For example, contact with AV technology can create anxiety among potential
users due to the novelty of the technology (Fraedrich & Lenz, 2016). Fears about AVs can also reduce the
willingness to use AVs (Hohenberger et al., 2017). Based on these results, it would be plausible to assume that
high trait anxiety as a stable personality trait is also associated with low AV acceptance. In contrast, the results of
Qu et al. (2021) showed a positive correlation between trait anxiety and the acceptance of autonomous driving
systems. Anxious people rate the reliability of AVs higher. The authors explain these expected findings by arguing
that anxious people would rather hand over control to an autonomous system because they are more afraid of
human errors than AI errors (Qu et al., 2021). Regardless of the direction of the association, trait anxiety seems
to play a role in AV acceptance. Similar findings also emerged for the so-called technology anxiety. Kopeć et al.
(2022) found that higher technology anxiety impairs the acceptance of an autonomous working environment. This
association can also be applied to AVs. Keszey (2020) found that both fears of technology in general and specific
technological fear (e.g., related to hacking attacks) have a negative impact on AV adoption.
The answer to the question which needs are important for the users of autonomous driving systems and
how these can be satisfied is correspondingly complex and cannot be given in a generalized way. Previous research
has already identified some personality traits that are predictive of ITU. As described before, it was found that
both classic personality traits such as the Big Five (i.e., neuroticism, extraversion, openness, agreeableness,
conscientiousness), as well as traits related to technology affinity (e.g., technology competence, acceptance,
confidence, and anxiety), are positively related to the acceptance of AVs. In addition, especially variables related
to self-confidence (e.g., self-efficacy expectancy, control belief), the disposition to trust, and trait anxiety have a
significant effect on the acceptance of AVs. However, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, no attempt has yet
been made to combine these characteristics and to investigate whether typical response patterns for different user
types can be identified. To address interindividual requirements and expectations in AV development and to
further adapt AVs to potential passengers, it is important to analyze patterns in selected user characteristics and
thus identify user groups. These user groups can present the complex set of user characteristics and needs
abstractly and at the same time allow AV providers a more differentiated perspective on their potential passengers.
In other contexts, e.g., general public transport (Shrestha et al., 2017) or Bitcoin (Kang et al., 2020), user group
analysis has already been successfully applied to better understand target groups from a marketing point of view
and thus to better target their needs. Thus, the analysis of different user groups is also desirable in the context of
AVs, especially because this technological innovation is expected to affect the general population (Litman, 2022).
The aim of this study is therefore the identification and explorative analysis of AV user groups based on the
personality variables that were found to be relevant to AV acceptance in previous research: the Big Five, the
dispositional technology affinity variables, the self-confidence variables, disposition to trust and trait anxiety.
Following the approach of Spurk et al. (2020), our study addresses the following research questions:
1. What is a meaningful and useful number of user groups?
2. How can the different profiles be characterized?
3. How big are the profiles?
4. To what extent is profile affiliation predictive for ITU of AVs?
5. How valid are the results?
Method
Sample
A sample of 388 volunteers (111 male, 276 female, 1 diverse) aged between 18 and 64 was recruited via
different online at universities, social media, and personal approach. The participants watched a video of an
autonomous bus and then answered the questionnaire. Two people were pre-excluded because they had processed
Participation in the study was without payment; students received course credit for participation (students must
take part in studies and experiments carried out by researchers of the universities).
Instrument and profile indices
Based on the current state of research, we selected 16 variables as possible indices for user profiles: 15
of the indices refer to personality, and one variable to age. Age has a significant effect on the acceptance of AVs
(Charness et al., 2018). We, therefore, consider it useful to include age when analyzing potential user groups,
because it can contribute to a deeper understanding of user group characteristics. This combination should later
enable us to place the ITU of customers on AVs in the context of individual personality characteristics. The
survey on the first impression of autonomous vehicles. Therefore, in addition to the variables mentioned, the
following variables were collected: education, area of work, working hours, income, political orientation,
neighborhood, motivation for AV use, AV knowledge, expectations, and suggestions for improvement (all self-
developed), transport usage habits (adapted from Nordhoff et al., 2019), Satisfaction-with-Travel-Scale (Ettema
et al., 2011), facilitating conditions (van der Laan et al., 1997), performance expectations (based on Nordhoff et
al., 2018), effort expectations (based on Venkatesh et al., 2012), service and vehicle characteristics (based on
Nordhoff et al., 2019), social influence (based on Venkatesh et al., 2012), hedonic motivation (based on Venkatesh
et al., 2012), the perceived benefits and risks (Liu et al., 2019), the willingness to share (Nordhoff et al., 2019)
and the perceived safety (based on Xu et al., 2018).
Procedure
The data was collected via an online questionnaire using the soscisurvey online application. Driverless
buses are too rare in Germany to assume that the respondents have any experience in this area. The video format
has already proven to be a useful alternative to the presentation of AV technology in previous studies (e.g.,
Bjørner, 2015). For this reason, participants who were interviewed online watched a video of 4.5 minutes of a trip
with the autonomous bus before answering the questionnaire to get the most comprehensive first impression of
the bus possible. This video provides the perspective of a passenger boarding an autonomous bus with other
passengers, looking around the shuttle, sitting down, riding in it through several stops, getting off, and watching
the autonomous bus drive away. The video is accessible in the online repository. Before processing the actual
questionnaire, all participants were informed about the study objective and the protection of their data and then
had to confirm their consent for participation. The datasets generated during the current study are available in the
Statistical analysis
The focus of this study is on a Latent Profile Analysis with subsequent analysis of the relationship between profile
affiliation and ITU as well as a validation of the results. For preliminary and descriptive analyses, we used SPSS
(version 26). The LPA was conducted in R (Version 4.1.3; R Core Team, 2022) with the tidyLPA- and the caret-
package via Gaussian mixture modelling (Rosenberg et al., 2018). Possible outliers were checked in advance in
boxplots. We did not exclude outliers because the values were within the plausible range, did not represent error
outliers, and thus are part of the normal distribution in the population (Leys et al., 2019; Wiggins, 2000). The
graphical analysis indicated the normal distribution of the residuals. All data were z-standardized in advance to
determine the interpretability of the profiles.
We opted for an LPA followed by regression to investigate differences in ITU in the identified profiles.
LPA is a person-centered procedure that identifies latent profiles based on similar response patterns. It enables
the probabilistic assignment of each user to the profile with the best fit based on the response pattern (Tein et al.,
2013). LPA is therefore particularly well suited for our goal of identifying and distinguishing user groups
(Howard & Hoffman, 2018; Woo et al., 2018). The approach allows a subsequent description of various
empirically determined user profiles in relation to personality. Our study thus contributes to mapping the
knowledge about the person of the users as well as their needs about AVs in a differentiated and multidimensional
manner and on this basis to be able to respond more purposefully to their needs, e.g., in the marketing of AVs.
For later validation of the profile solution, we randomized the dataset into a training dataset (80 %, n = 315) and
a test dataset (20 %, n = 73). To identify the correct number of profiles, we calculated several models in R based
on the training data set, each with a different number of profiles. We followed the recommendation of Nylund-
Gibson and Choi (2018) and started with the model calculation for a single latent profile, after which we gradually
increased the number of profiles. We ended this increase after the four-model solution when the profile size fell
below the limit of 5 % of the data set for the first time. This procedure, which is common in LPA research (e.g.,
Kircanski et al., 2017; Ricketts et al., 2018), preserves the practical applicability and interpretability of the profiles
because small profile sizes are considered difficult to replicate. We compared the resulting four profile solutions
based on predefined criteria with regard to their model fit (Nylund-Gibson & Choi, 2018; Ricketts et al., 2018).
We followed the recommendation of Lubke and Neale (2006) and considered the Akaike Information Criterion
(AIC), and Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) adapted to the sample size in the form of the Sample-Size-
Adjusted Bayesian Information Criterions (saBIC), where low values suggest a better model fit. We also examined
the Lo Mendell Rubin Likelihood Test (LMR; Lo et al., 2001). This compares the solution of k profiles with a
solution with k-1 profiles. A significant test indicates a better fit of the model with k profiles (Lo et al., 2001;
Pastor et al., 2007). The entropy was additionally tested as a measure of the separation reliability of the profiles
(Clark & Muthén, 2009). It reflects the mean probability that a person can be correctly classified based on their
response pattern within the model with values from .80 being considered very separable (Araújo et al., 2018;
Celeux & Soromenho, 1996; Muthén, 2008; Tein et al., 2013). In addition to the statistical parameters, we
considered all model solutions under the condition of theoretical plausibility and applicability (Celeux &
Soromenho, 1996; Clark & Muthén, 2009). All characteristic values are interpreted with regard to the smallest
profile size. To maintain the replicability and practicability of the profile solutions, the minimum accepted profile
size is set at 5 % of the data set. Solutions with profiles below this minimum size were declined according to the
recommendation of Ferguson et al. (2020). In contrast, profiles above the 5 % threshold indicate remarkable
proportions of the profile in the total sample and, accordingly, the relevance of the user group. Subsequently, the
procedure was repeated using the test data set to check whether the profile solution found can be replicated. Based
on the determined profile solution, the test persons were assigned to the user profile to which they are most likely
to belong according to their response pattern. In complementary analyses, the identified profiles were examined
descriptively for differences in gender share, degree, income, public transportation use, car ownership, and driver's
license ownership. We refrain from introducing names for the profiles because bare designations would be too
general and too simple given the probabilistic, complex response patterns. Instead, we assign numbers (1 to 4) to
the identified profiles.
To test the predictive validity of the user groups found in relation to the ITU, a regression under 10-fold
cross-validation was performed (Reguera-Alvarado et al., 2016). We again randomly split the LPA training data
set and performed the regression with a new training data set (80 %, n = 253), and validated the solution using a
new test data set (20 %, n = 60). To ensure the highest possible validity within the data sets, we also carried out a
10-fold cross-validation in both data sets. The 10-fold cross-validation is a machine learning method in which the
data set is randomly divided into ten blocks. Nine of the blocks would again be used together as a training data
set, the tenth block serves as a test data set to validate the results. This procedure was repeated ten times, each
time a different block becomes the test data set. Repeating it several times increases the accuracy of the
measurement (Wong & Yeh, 2020). In this way, we performed a regression with the independent variable user
group and the dependent variable ITU. The mean squared error provides information about the validity of the
analysis results as the average distance between the result coefficients of the training and test data sets (Steyerberg
et al., 2001).
Results
Latent Profile Analysis
Selection of the most suitable profile solution
Using latent profile analysis, we identified the solution that best fits the data among several possible profile
solutions (training data set) and then validated this solution (test data set). We first analyzed a model with one
profile within the training data set and gradually added a profile, observing the change in the profile indices. We
ended this procedure after the five-profile solution when the smallest profile size fell below the predetermined
decreased as the number of profiles increased, without reaching a low point. We found a similar pattern for the
LMR, which reached significance for all profile solutions, indicating a robust model fit. This is a known
phenomenon in the literature on LPA and is caused by the fact that adding further profiles provides more
information (Masyn, 2013). There is no fixed value above which a reduction in the information criteria is
considered insignificant, which affects the interpretability of the indices (Ferguson et al., 2020). Therefore, in
these cases, the course of the indices is visualized in so-called Elbow plots (Nylund-Gibson & Choi, 2018). The
kink or elbow of the plot reveals the profile solution from which the decrease of the index flattens out. This profile
solution, therefore, promises the highest possible, if not the maximum, model fit with the simultaneous economy
of the profiles (Masyn, 2013). Therefore, based on the results, during the evaluation we decided to consider elbow
plots for the information criteria, which are shown in Fig. 1a. The graph follows a consistent downward trend. A
slight elbow can be seen for the model with two profiles, suggesting that the two-profile solution fits better. This
finding was contrasted with the analysis of the smallest profile size. While the smallest profile in the two-profile
solution accounted for 45.0 %, the smallest profile in the three-profile solution at 16.0 %, and in the four-profile
solution at 11.5 %, each still account for a substantial portion of the data set. With the addition of a fifth profile,
the share of the smallest profile dropped to 4.5 % of the data, i.e., below the predefined 5.0 % limit. Entropy
exceeded .80 as a measure of classification confidence only for the four- and five-profile solutions above which
it is classified as highly discriminative (Celeux & Soromenho, 1996; Muthén, 2008; Tein et al., 2013). Our goal
to identify potential user groups as differentiated and precisely as possible while maintaining economic efficiency
is thus best met by the four-profile solution since it has a high degree of classification reliability. In addition, the
fourth profile takes up significant proportions that we want to consider. Given the continuously decreasing
information criteria and the permanently significant LMR value, we opted for the four-profile solution in the
training data set.
Validation of the profile solution
To validate the profile solution, we conducted the LPA analogously with the test data set. The fit indices
the smallest profile fell below the minimum share of 5 % for the first time. The analysis of the fit indices also
revealed a similar picture that supports our decision for the four-profile solution. Again, the LMR value remained
significant across all solutions. The AIC and the saBIC decreased as the number of profiles increased (see elbow
plot in Fig. 1b). In contrast to the training analysis, the BIC for the three-profile solution reached a low point. The
BIC was therefore explicitly in favor of the three-profile solution, as was the Elbow plot of the AIC and the saBIC.
The entropy, whose value was recognizably higher than those of the training analysis, exceeded the critical value
of .80 for all profile solutions and thus confirmed the classification reliability. In addition to the three-profile
solution (16.0 %), the smallest profile still took a remarkable share in the four-profile solution with 13.3 %. With
4.0 %, the size of the fifth profile was again below the acceptance threshold. Although the information criteria of
the test data were in favor of the three-profile solution, the addition of the fourth profile granted a higher
differentiation with at the same time very good classification reliability and represented with its size of 13.3 % a
remarkable share of the data. Under these aspects, the choice fell again on the four-profile solution. With the
aforementioned limitations regarding the information criteria, our profile decision thus proved to be replicable
and valid.
*** Please insert Figures 1a and 1b around here ***
Description of profiles
The LPA allows the probabilistic classification of each person to a profile based on their response pattern.
In the next step, each training data set was thus assigned to the profile to which it belongs with the highest
probability according to its response pattern. The four identified profiles were then compared and interpreted
based on their underlying personality traits. Fig. 2 provides an overview of the mean variable expressions of the
four different groups. All four profiles differ in their characteristics. This supports the decision that the number of
four profiles is necessary to represent the profiles in a sufficiently differentiated way. We refrain from introducing
names for the profiles because naming would be too simplistic with regard to the probabilistic, complex response
patterns.
User group 1 accounted for the smallest proportion of the examined sample, with n = 36. It was
characterized by increased levels in the anxiety-related scales (neuroticism, trait anxiety, and technology anxiety),
while the remaining variables were rather low in comparison. Complementing the high anxiety, individuals in
user group 1 exhibited lower-than-average self-efficacy and internal control beliefs. The group also turned out to
have a rather low affinity for technology, although the scores of the technology-related variables were within one
standard deviation. User group 1 was with M = 24.89 (SD = 4.83) years the youngest group. Further analysis of
sociodemographics showed that this group also had the highest proportion of females (86.11 %) and the highest
educational qualification (M = 5.02, SD = 1.04). At the same time, the proportion of people with a car (55.56 %)
or a driver’s license (83.33 %) was the lowest in this group.
User group 2 (n = 66) was also characterized by increased anxiety-related scores. Unlike user group 1,
neuroticism and trait anxiety were less pronounced. Rather, this group showed the highest values of technology
anxiety. This corresponded with a low affinity for technology, especially with a strikingly low technology
competence. In addition, individuals in user group 2 attributed relatively low levels of control to the external
environment. At 25.95 (SD = 7.61) years, the age of the associated individuals was in line with the sample average,
with again a relatively high proportion of women (80.30 %). The user group also reported the highest level of
acceptance of using public transportation compared to the other groups (M = 4.22, SD = 1.73).
The response pattern of user group 3 (n = 145) was primarily characterized by average expressions in all
variables. Nevertheless, it showed slightly increased technology competence and relatively low technology
anxiety, with both expressions within one standard deviation. The age of the group was also close to the sample
average with M = 26.26 (SD = 7.16). Further analyses revealed that members of user group 3 enjoyed public
transportation use the least compared to the other groups (M = 3.52, SD = 1.74).
User group 4 (n = 66) showed a response pattern that was opposite in its characteristics to the pattern of
user group 1. It was noticeably less anxious. A particularly noteworthy difference was the strikingly low
technology anxiety and high technology affinity of user group 3, which clearly distinguished it from the other two
groups. This corresponded with increased openness to change, extraversion and conscientiousness. In addition,
the group rated its self-efficacy and internal and external control beliefs higher. User group 4 was also the oldest
group on average (M = 27.55, SD = 7.75) with the highest proportion of men (42.42 %) and the highest income
(10.61 % earned more than 60,000€). Individuals in this group were more likely to own a driver's license (95.45 %)
and own a car (77.27 %) compared to the other groups.
Relationship analysis between profile affiliation and ITU
We next used regression analyses to check the extent to which the four profiles were predictive of ITU.
For this purpose, we again divided the training data set used in the LPA into a new training data set (80 %, n = 253)
and a new test data set (20 %, n = 60), the latter serving for validation purposes. Within the training data set, we
used ten-fold cross-validation to validate the results. Profile membership significantly predicted ITU,
F(3, 249) = 7.36, p < .001, R² = .08.
Compared to user group 1, individuals in user group 2 had a 0.33 lower ITU, t(259) = -1.15, p = .252,
and individuals in user group 3 had a 0.18 higher ITU, t(259) = 0.69, p = .492, although the differences were not
significant. For user group 4, ITU was significantly higher by 0.78, t(259) = 2.75, p = .001. The ITU of user
group 2 was again significantly different from the ITU of user group 3, b = 0.51, t(259) = 2.46, p = .015, and from
the ITU of user group 4, b = 1.12, t(259) = 4.61, p < 001. The difference between user groups 3 and 4 was also
significant, with the ITU of user group 3 being 0.31 lower, t(259) = -2.98, p = .003. Thus, user group 4 showed
the highest ITU, followed by user groups 3 and 1. User group 2 had the lowest ITU.
Using the regression coefficients, we next predicted the ITU for the test data set as a function of profile
membership. The RMSE revealed an average difference of 1.26 between the predicted and the actual value of
ITU. The RMSE revealed a moderate average difference of 1.39 between the predicted and the actual value of the
seven-point ITU scale (James et al., 2021).
Discussion
Summary and practical implications
Our study aimed to identify possible AV user groups and their predictive power in relation to the ITU.
For this purpose, we have performed an LPA with subsequent validation. Our study differs from previous research
in several aspects. First, we did not focus on a specific area of personality but tried to depict the user groups as
comprehensively as possible in their personality. Based on current research and theories on AVs, we selected the
most crucial personality traits for the ITU and used them in an LPA as indices for rich, meaningful user profiles.
Second, we tested these user groups directly for their predictive power for AVs’ ITU to ensure their practical
relevance. As a result, our user groups have already been confirmed for the first time in their practical applicability
concerning AVs. Third, we underpinned each of our analysis steps with a validation analysis to ensure the
reliability of our results and thus the quality of our study. The validation confirmed our findings almost completely
and thus supports the replicability and validity of our results. We put great emphasis on differentiating the profiles
as much as possible while maintaining clarity and practicality. We were able to identify four AV user groups and
placed them in the context of their ITU. The profiles have characteristic differences, but also similarities.
Regarding ITU, it is relevant to which of the identified profiles a user belongs. The user groups and their predictive
power for the ITU proved to be valid in our analyses.
The core and largest contribution of our study was the identification of four user groups that differed
significantly in their profile characteristics. Particularly important indices of profile affiliation were the variables
of self-confidence (i.e., self-efficacy, internal and external control belief), general anxiety (neuroticism and trait
anxiety), an affinity for technology (i.e., technology acceptance, competence, and control belief), technology
anxiety and trust in technology. This resulted in four different profiles.
People in user group 1 were characterized by a high level of general anxiety and insecurity, with a slightly
below-average affinity for technology and increased fear of technology. Thus, self-insecurity in this group might
have a negative impact on perception, or new technologies could be more likely to be experienced as threatening
or risky. AV marketing could address the needs of this relatively anxious user group by emphasizing the safety-
related benefits of AVs (e.g., reducing the likelihood of accidents; Yu et al., 2019). In this context, it should be
made clear to what extent AV technology contributes positively to road safety. To reduce potential fears with
corrective (positive) experiences, it is necessary to encourage this group to actively use AVs. However, due to
general anxiety, people in user group 1 may be more likely to avoid AV use. AV providers should accordingly
create ride offerings that are as low-threshold as possible and promise high utility for the group so that the benefits
of the ride outweigh the costs of anxiety. Autonomous buses, for example, could be offered temporarily or
permanently as a free alternative to paid public transit. Transit agencies could also use reinforcement mechanisms,
such as distributing small reinforcing giveaways at the end of a test ride (Angermeier et al., 1994). Similarly,
autonomous buses could be offered as free transportation to positively associated destinations, e.g., to the
swimming pool or cinema, to generate or increase a positive perception of the bus trip. For this user group in
particular, a temporary deployment of service personnel in the bus interior could also make the switch to AV
technology easier, to mitigate the potentially anxiety-inducing transition to driverlessness (Dong et al., 2019).
In contrast to user group 1, user group 2 was characterized less by general anxiety and more by strong
technology anxiety and a low affinity for technology. The external control belief was low (analogous to user group
1). It is possible that user groups 1 and 2 attributed less control to the external AI technology than to themselves
and were therefore less convinced of AVs. To give users control options in the autonomous bus, warning systems
could be installed in buses, for example, so that passengers can contact the transport operations center in an
emergency (Dong et al., 2019). Nordhoff et al. (2020) have shown in a qualitative setting that an emergency button
inside the vehicle contributes to the perceived safety in autonomous buses. Information on driving safety and AV
functionality could also be helpful for user group 2. Manufacturers could provide training to help users to better
understand AVs and reduce potential technology anxiety. Compared to user group 1, however, the focus in this
group should be on providing simple and understandable information, taking into account the low affinity for
technology. Manufacturers should also make the handling of AVs as intuitive as possible due to the lower level
of technical competence. They should also counter the low confidence in new technologies by making AVs as
predictable as possible for this user group, e.g., by using monitors inside the vehicle that transmit the stimulus
detection and response of the AV sensors in real-time (Yuen et al., 2022). In addition, transit agencies should
focus primarily on reliable, trusted manufacturers to increase the AV trust of the technology-critical group (Yuen
et al., 2022).
For user group 3, a relatively average response pattern emerged across the variables, with slightly
increased technology competence and slightly decreased technology anxiety. The group showed an average ITU,
although their members were less likely in general to use public transport. It is possible, therefore, that the ITU
for autonomous cars would be even higher than in our study related to autonomous buses. This group is thus likely
to be more of a target group for autonomous cars. Overall, this group can nevertheless be expected to adopt
autonomous buses. From a marketing perspective, little consideration of potential fears or skepticism is necessary
according to our model. Rather, this group could be further encouraged in their motivation to use AVs by
highlighting possible benefits and the fun of driverless driving, e.g., in advertising. However, no in-depth
knowledge of AV technology should be assumed.
The profile of user group 4 differed from that of user group 1 in almost all variables. The group was
characterized by pronounced self-confidence, low anxiety, and a high affinity for technology in every respect. It
seems plausible that members of user group 4, i.e., people with self-confidence attribute better-coping skills to
themselves and are less anxious. As a result, they may be more open to new technology. Accordingly, this group
was most likely to use AVs. Given their high extraversion and openness, this user group could be further
encouraged to use AVs by highlighting social and sustainable aspects of autonomous ridesharing services. With
their openness to technologies and AVs, this user group also has great potential to act as a multiplier for AVs.
Sharma and Mishra (2022) showed in their study that peer influence can have an even greater impact on AV
adoption than media marketing. Accordingly, user group 4 could be suitable for introducing skeptical target
groups, such as user groups 1 and 2, to AVs and motivating them to use it. This could be both, for example, in
private or via public reports of positive experiences in social media.
Overall, the four user groups showed a very heterogeneous pattern of characteristics and willingness to
use AVs. Specially for user groups 1 and 2, AVs were still associated with anxiety. These results are a significant
sign that the transition from conventional vehicles to AVs must be gradual to pick up AV-skeptical groups and
get them accustomed to the new technology. A too abrupt changeover could lead to overwhelming people in user
groups 1 or 2 and thus frustrating them right from the start. Manufacturers and public transport operators should
therefore not implement the system too quickly and should define specific measures in advance to meet the needs
of each of the four user groups.
Limitations and outlook
To be able to classify the results of our study in a well-founded manner, possible limitations of our study
must be reflected, too. First, it should be noted that our sample was not balanced in terms of gender, age, or
experience with AVs. To ensure a meaningful user analysis, we aimed for the largest possible sample, for which
we were dependent to a significant extent on the recruitment of students who completed the study participation as
part of their studies. This is due to the relatively young sample and is presumably also responsible for the
predominance of female participants due to the focus on psychology. Due to the high proportion of participants
with a comparatively high level of education, it can also be assumed that the sample tends to have more knowledge
or experience with new technologies and was therefore relatively open to AVs (Ding et al., 2022). Edelmann et
al. (2021) showed that different cultures differ in their AV acceptance. We, therefore, consider it important to
replicate the study in different socio-demographic contexts and, in addition, to examine the cultural
generalizability through studies in other countries. Furthermore, the study findings should be verified under real-
life conditions as soon as autonomous buses are widely available. In our study, the recruitment of test persons
under real conditions with the desired sample size proved to be almost impossible due to the anti-Coronavirus
measures applicable at the time of the survey and the limited availability of autonomous shuttle buses. For this
reason, we opted for a sample, which was shown a video of the autonomous bus. In previous studies, this type of
presentation has also proven to be representative (e.g., Lemonnier et al., 2020). However, we cannot guarantee
that relatively abstract technologies such as AI and AVs have been sufficiently illustrated by the videos in this
study. It will be the necessary task of future studies to investigate this question.
In terms of statistical analysis, our studies have the characteristic limitations of LPA. On the one hand,
LPA is a probabilistic procedure. Therefore, the results represent probabilities and not absolute values. Our class
assignments are highly likely to apply, but LPA does not guarantee the correctness of our solutions. Regarding
the model decision, it must be noted that most our information criteria did not reach a low point for any of the
model solutions considered and that the likelihood parameters remained significant. This suggests that each
additional profile provided insights. According to Nylund-Gibson and Choi (2018), however, the steady decline
can also be an indication that the chosen mixture model is not a perfect model for our data. To make a profile
decision, we therefore relied on a combination and best possible matching of the fit indices under consideration
of the profile size, which best supported the four-profile solution. It must be mentioned that we selected several
parameters for the assessment of the fit and brought them into a decision hierarchy. However, there are no uniform
rules for this approach. In this study, we followed current recommendations and best practices from simulation
studies. Nevertheless, the profile decision and the interpretation are also subject to a subjective decision-making
framework that the LPA entails. The classification of the profiles is also essentially dependent on the separation
potential of the used items (Nylund-Gibson & Choi, 2018). With our results, we have now made a first contribution
to measuring the separation potential of our items. One task of future studies may be to further refine the findings
and the item pool.
Conclusion
Personality plays a significant role in AV acceptance. Our study went beyond these previous findings
and integrated them by identifying four user groups based on the most relevant personality traits. Our results allow
us to draw implications about the characteristics of the four user groups and how to respond to them in the
development and marketing of AVs. Manufacturers and transit agencies should avoid a too abrupt transition to
AV technology to avoid alienating user groups with potential fears. An implementation concept tailored to the
user groups can help to meet the individual needs of each of the four user groups. Thus, our study provides
important contributions from a psychological perspective to the dissemination and acceptance of AVs.