DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
School Climate Perception Among Latinx and White Students: An Examination of
Intersecting Racial/Ethnic and Socioeconomic Identities in Context
Mei-ki, Chan1, Jill D. Sharkey2, Karen Nylund-Gibson3, Erin Dowdy2, and
Michael J. Furlong4
1 Department of Psychology, Utah State University
2Department of Counseling, Clinical, and School Psychology, University of California Santa
Barbara, Santa Barbara
3 Department of Education, University of California, Santa Barbara
4 International Center for School Based Youth Development, University of California Santa
Barbara.
This article has been accepted for publication in School Psychology Review. This manuscript is
not the copy of record and may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article.
The final version of record is available via its DOI: to be updated
The research reported here was supported in part by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
Department of Education, through Grant # R305A160157 to the University of California, Santa
Barbara. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent views of the
Institute of Education Sciences or the U.S. Department of Education.
Corresponding Author: Mei-ki Chan, Email: meikichan@ucsb.edu/ maggie.chan@usu.edu
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
Abstract
Limited research has explored how the characteristics of student and teacher racial/ethnic
composition may explain students’ perceptions of school climate. This study used stratified
analysis to assess the associations of two prominent diversity aspects (i.e., student racial/ethnic
diversity and teacher racial/ethnic diversity) with students’ perceived school climate.
Particularly, this study controlled for student- and school-levels demographic characteristics
among 41,237 Latinx students and 23,819 White students from 7th grade to 12th grade enrolled in
250 California public schools. The findings indicated that higher teacher racial/ethnic diversity
had a mild to moderate positive association with perceived school attitudes to parental
participation (Economically Disadvantaged Latinx: 𝛽 = .20, p < .05; Economically
Disadvantaged White: 𝛽 = .37, p < .01) and perceived school equity and safety (Economically
Disadvantaged Latinx: 𝛽 = .16, p < .05; Economically Disadvantaged White: 𝛽 = .19, p < .05)
among Latinx and White students from economically disadvantaged backgrounds. Only Latinx
students from economically disadvantaged backgrounds perceived less favorable school safety
and equity in schools with a higher student racial/ethnic diversity (Economically Disadvantaged
Latinx: 𝛽 = -.20, p < .05). Results have implications for addressing school climate disparities at
an organizational level.
Impact Statement
Although ecological theories have proposed that school climate perception is constructed by
contextual and individual characteristics interactively, relatively little research has attempted to
understand how school demographic compositions, such as teacher and student racial/ethnic
diversity, interact with students’ intersecting social identities in shaping perceived school
climate. This study provided empirical evidence of the positive influences of teacher
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
racial/ethnic diversity on perceived school climate. This effect was observed among White and
Latinx students from economically disadvantaged backgrounds. Latinx students from
economically disadvantaged backgrounds perceived less safety and equity in schools with higher
racial/ethnic diversity.
Keywords: diversity, prevention, social justice, school-wide intervention
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
School Climate Perception Among Latinx and White Students: An Examination of
Intersecting Race/Ethnicity and Socioeconomic Identities in Context
Students’ perceptions of school climate emerge from reciprocal interactions between
individual and contextual characteristics (La Salle et al., 2015). Research on students’ perceived
school climate has been burgeoning (Thapa et al., 2013; Wang & Degol, 2016) because of its
positive impact on student’s physical health, mental health, and educational outcomes
(Berkowitz et al., 2017; Wang & Degol, 2016). However, limited research has examined how
school demographic composition, a contextual characteristic within the school microsystem, may
shape school climate perception. Furthermore, an understanding of school diversity’s association
with school climate from an intersectionality perspective is even more lacking. Emerging
evidence has shown systematic differences in perceived school climate depending on students’
intersecting identities (Adams & Roach, 2023). Apart from disparity in outcomes, an
intersectionality framework has helped to understand how and why multiply-minoritized (e.g.,
race and socioeconomic status) youth are at a higher risk for mental health problems (Patil et al.,
2018). Similarly, an intersectionality lens that attends to multiple aspects of identities may also
help understand differential mechanisms in school climate perception by students’ intersecting
identities.
School racial/ethnic composition influences students’ school climate perceptions, an
association that is likely to vary with their backgrounds (Rudasill et al., 2018). Race/ethnicity
and socioeconomic circumstances have been intertwined and associated with power and inequity
in structure in the U.S. (Graham, 2006; Park et al., 2013). Their associations with social power
are particularly relevant to the theoretical assumption of school diversity’s impact built upon
power balance thesis. Intersecting socioeconomic and racial/ethnic identities affect individuals’
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
developmental contexts and outcomes (Henry et al., 2018). Thus, this study examines how
student and teacher racial/ethnic diversity is related to three aspects of school climate (i.e.,
school support, safety and equity, and school attitudes to parental participation) by student
groups with intersecting identities based on the race/ethnicity and socioeconomic background
(i.e., economically disadvantaged and non-economically disadvantaged) among White and
Latinx students in California public schools.
School Climate
School climate has been defined as the “cognitive and affect perceptions of social
interactions, relationships, safety, values, and beliefs held by students, teachers, administrators,
and staff within a school” (Rudasill et al., 2018, p. 46). This school climate definition is a
multidimensional construct, including the perceived quality of interpersonal relationships, school
safety, and shared norms and practices. There is rich evidence on the positive impact of school
climate, either based on students’ or adults’ reports, including a moderate effect in reduced
school violence (Steffgen et al., 2013) and increased academic achievement (Dulay & Karadağ,
2017), as well as mild to moderate relations with psychological outcomes (Ancheta et al., 2021;
Colvin et al., 2019). Despite variations in findings depending on study design and outcomes,
school climate is consistently found to be related to positive outcomes among students with mild
to moderate effect sizes. Nevertheless, after more than a decade of work in promoting school
climate for all students (U.S. Department of Education, 2007), underrepresented and
marginalized groups (e.g., racially/ethnically minoritized students) still perceive less favorable
interpersonal relationships, safety, and school support compared with their counterparts (Bottiani
et al., 2016; Konold et al., 2017; Voight et al., 2015). Even from the school staff’s perspective,
schools with a high concentration of students from low-income backgrounds and students of
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
color have been found to have a less favorable school climate (Jain et al., 2015). Efforts to
improve the school climate among these schools and students are much needed. Based on a
review of studies using responses from students, school staff, and parents, school climate can
compensate for the adverse influences of low socioeconomic background on academic outcomes,
including alleviating the adverse contribution of low socioeconomic background to academic
outcomes (Berkowitz et al., 2017). In addition to other well-studied linkages with school climate
perception (e.g., interpersonal factors and school-wide practices), contextual factors are
conceptually expected to affect school climate perception but have been relatively less studied
(Rudasill et al., 2018).
Link Between School Diversity and School Climate
School diversity has received burgeoning attention among different school ecological
characteristics due to the increasingly diverse school environments in the U.S. and its conceptual
associations with students’ educational and psychosocial outcomes (Graham, 2018; Juvonen et
al., 2019). School ecological characteristics may contribute to varied psychosocial experiences
across students (La Salle et al., 2015), resulting in a different perceived school climate for
various groups within the same school. Diversity has been commonly conceptualized as a
continuum constructed by the number of groups (e.g., Black, Latinx, White) and distribution
across groups (Rjosk et al., 2017; Teachman, 1980). A high level of diversity refers to a higher
number of groups and a more even distribution across groups (Graham, 2018).
Student Racial/Ethnic Diversity
Power balance theory provides a conceptual lens to consider the associations between
students’ racial/ethnic diversity and their school climate perceptions. From this perspective,
students’ perceived social power within a school context is differentiated by their status-based
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
identities and the relative number of group members sharing similar social identities (Agirdag et
al., 2011). Pondering the influences of race/ethnicity on students’ school experiences (Chan et
al., 2023; Graham et al., 2022), student racial/ethnic compositions likely influence students’
perception of school climate. School diversity is also empirically linked to group dynamics and
interpersonal relationships (Graham & Echols, 2018). However, the literature is uncertain on the
impact of school diversity on perceived school climate or its related constructs. A line of
empirical studies observed favorable effects of student racial/ethnic diversity on students’
perceived safety and trust (Juvonen et al., 2006, 2018; Lanza et al., 2018). For example, Juvonen
et al. (2018) studied a sample of Black, Latinx, White, and Asian students from public schools in
California. This study observed that a higher school-level student racial/ethnic diversity had a
mild to moderate association with higher levels of students’ perceived safety and teacher fairness
and less loneliness and peer victimization.
Meanwhile, a negative association of student racial/ethnic diversity and minority
representation with school climate has also been evident within the empirical literature (DuPont-
Reyes & Villatoro, 2019; Munniksma et al., 2022; Parris et al., 2018). For example, Parris et al.
(2018) observed that when the percentage of minority groups increased in a school, students’
perceptions of the overall school climate slightly decreased (𝛽 = . −.03 𝑡𝑜 − .06) among
309,327 middle school students from 629 schools in Georgia. Beyond the U.S. context, a study
conducted in the Netherlands found that societal dominant or marginalized groups perceived less
positive peer relations and more victimization experiences in classrooms with higher student
racial/ethnic diversity and concentration of students from a lower socioeconomic background
(Munniksma et al., 2022).
Most existing research has focused on student racial/ethnic diversity’s association with a
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
few aspects of school climate without looking into other facets, such as school attitudes to
parental participation. Perceived school attitudes to parental participation represents school
partnership with parents and community, which has been suggested to be vital for student
achievement (Wang & Degol, 2016). It may also be crucial to assess the association of school
diversity with school attitudes to parental participation because school-wide and teachers-related
variables, including teachers’ bias, have been identified as barriers to parental engagement (Kim,
2009). Diversifying the teacher workforce may positively affect school attitudes to parental
participation.
Teacher Racial/Ethnic Diversity
Teacher racial/ethnic diversity is a significant but frequently overlooked part of school
diversity. At the state and federal levels, there has been renewed interest in diversifying the
teacher workforce to combat injustice and prejudice (Sleeter et al., 2015). Arguments for
diversification built upon the benefits of early and ongoing exposure to a diverse population in
preventing bias and enhancing educational achievements support efforts to diversify the teacher
workforce (Gershenson et al., 2021). The voices of teachers of color are theorized to improve
equity and justice in educational procedures (Hughes et al., 2020; Lindsay & Hart, 2017), close
racial/ethnic gaps in teachers’ performance expectations for students (Gershenson et al., 2021),
and lessen the likelihood that educators are unfamiliar with the cultures and learning preferences
of their students (Blake et al., 2016). Moreover, as proposed by power balance theory, increased
teacher racial/ethnic diversity indicates a more balanced representation of racially/ethnically
minoritized groups in schools. Teachers play a central role in many decision-making processes as
an authority (Hughes et al., 2020); more teachers from racially/ethnically minoritized
backgrounds may be even more effective in enhancing the perceived power of students with
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
shared social identities. Several research studies documented a mild correlation between higher
teacher racial/ethnic diversity and reduced racial bullying and discrimination (Benner & Graham,
2011; Larochette et al., 2010). Despite strong theoretical underpinnings, little research has
examined the impact of teacher racial/ethnic diversity on various aspects of school climate
perception.
Interaction Between Students’ Intersecting Identities and School Diversity
The Cultural-Ecological Model of School Climate and the Systems View of School
Climate offer multisystem frameworks to understand the formation of school climate perceptions
because they consider the reciprocal effects between contexts and individual characteristics (La
Salle et al., 2015; Rudasill et al., 2018). The Cultural-Ecological Model of School Climate
depicts the significance of cultural factors in varying how school climate is conceptualized and
formed (La Salle et al., 2015). One unique tenet of the Systems View of School Climate assumes
nanosystems mediate the impact of school on students’ perceived school climate, referring to
interpersonal interactions in smaller social units in school (Rudasill et al., 2018). Although these
two theories emphasize different components in the multisystem framework, they theorize that
perceived school climate is a process resulting from the interplay between contextual and
individual factors and expect differential responses of students from different cultural
backgrounds to ecological factors. We hypothesize differential impacts of student and teacher
racial/ethnic diversity on students’ perceived school climate.
An intersectionality lens recognizes how students’ various social identities overlap and
how the structural advantages and disadvantages experienced by varied social groups affect
individuals’ day-to-day lives (Purdie-Vaughns & Eibach, 2008; Syed & Ajayi, 2015).
Understanding people’s lived experiences through their intersecting identities facilitates
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
effectively addressing oppressive institutional practices and enacting structural changes
(Rosenthal, 2016). Based on prior research indicating the relevance and ubiquity of interacting
effects between socioeconomic background and race/ethnicity, the junction between these two
layers of social identity is crucial (Henry et al., 2018). There has been relatively less work on
school climate from an intersectional framework, with limited evidence showing school climate
systematically differed across students with intersecting identities. Recently, Adams and Roach
(2023) documented that Black girl with and without special education services perceived a
slightly less favorable school climate than their White counterparts. Instead of focusing on
individual outcomes or group differences, guided by the intersectionality framework (Bauer,
2014), we investigate how school diversity, a contextual factor, may change students’
experiences in the existing school system that has been shown to oppress students from
racial/ethnic minoritized and low socioeconomic backgrounds (Henry et al., 2018).
In light of the possibility that these two diversity features may have various implications
for children with varied intersecting status-based identities, differential responses to student and
teacher racial/ethnic diversity across students from different racial/ethnic and socioeconomic
backgrounds are also conceptually expected. Notably, teacher racial/ethnic diversity may
influence students’ school climate perceptions because of its hypothesized links with justice and
fairness in educational practices, less prejudice toward minority groups, and power balance
(Agirdag et al., 2011; Hughes et al., 2020; Lindsay & Hart, 2017). Student racial/ethnic diversity
is also proposed to lessen the power disparity in the educational setting (Fisher et al., 2015;
Graham, 2006). High teacher and student racial/ethnic diversity may have stronger associations
with school climate among students who perceive less social power and experience more
systematic suppression in the existing school system.
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
The Current Study
To better understand the interplay of students’ intersecting racial/ethnic and
socioeconomic identities with school diversity in students’ perceived school climate, this study
employed stratified analyses in a multilevel framework to examine how teacher racial/ethnic
diversity and student racial/ethnic diversity are differentially related to three aspects of school
climate (i.e., students’ perceptions of school support, school safety, equity, and school attitudes
to parental participation). Rather than comparing outcomes across students, we aim to understand
how students with different identities experience schools with different diversity levels because
social stratification results in different developmental processes for youth (Coll et al., 1996).
Thus, we utilized stratified analysis without assuming that the effects of race/ethnicity and
socioeconomic backgrounds could be isolated. This approach allowed us to understand how the
association between school diversity and perceived school climate may present uniquely in
students with different social identities.
Considering the theoretical rationales of the influences of the two diversity aspects, this
study expected that the associations between the two diversity aspects and school climate would
differ across groups grounded in ecological models (La Salle et al., 2015; Rudasill et al., 2018).
This study anticipated that student and teacher racial/ethnic diversity would be positively
associated with the three aspects of school climate. Furthermore, these associations would be
stronger among students from economically disadvantaged backgrounds and racially/ethnically
minoritized groups. Additionally, this study included student-level demographics (gender, grade
level, and sexual orientation) and school-level factors (percentage of enrollment eligible for free
and reduced-price meals as a proxy for school-level socioeconomic composition, school size, and
school level) as covariates to reduce the risk of confounding in the analysis.
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
Method
Procedure and Participants
We collected school and student-level data for this study. School-level demographic data
were extracted from the California Department of Education (CDE) public dataset. Student-level
data was from the California Healthy Kids Survey (CHKS; WestEd, 2014), a biennial statewide
survey conducted in California that inquires anonymously about student risk and resilience
variables. Between October 2017 and June 2019, the sample for this study responded to the
questionnaire. Trained school staff members designated to administer the CHKS followed a
script informing pupils that the survey was voluntary and anonymous. Students voluntarily
completed the survey during class time. Parents gave passive consent by following the protocol
We extracted CHKS participating school information (students’ racial/ethnic
composition, number of students in the Free and Reduced Meals Program [FRMP], teachers’
racial/ethnic composition, school size, and school level) from the CDE for the academic year of
2018–2019. The student-level CHKS data came from the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 academic
years. Given the CHKS dataset’s characteristics and sample sizes of each group, we decided to
focus on students who identified as Latinx and non-Latinx White. Enrollment in FRMP was an
indicator of a student’s socioeconomic background. The final sample included 41,237 Latinx and
shows this study’s participants’ demographic information per race/ethnicity ´ socioeconomic
status. Among the 250 participating schools, 16.5% were elementary schools, 38.6% were
middle schools, and 44.9% were high schools. As measured by the Simpson’s D index, the
average student racial/ethnic diversity was 0.53 (SD = 0.13), and teacher racial/ethnic diversity
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
was 0.37 (SD = 0.18). The average percentage of students in the Free or Reduced-Price Meal
program was 54% (SD = 27%), and the average student enrollment was 1,012 (SD = 694).
Measures
School Level: Student and Teacher Racial/Ethnic Diversity
Student and teacher racial/ethnic diversity was measured with the Simpson’s D formula
as seen in Equation 1, whereby, 𝑝 is the proportion of the racial/ethnic group. Specifically,
𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑠𝑜′𝑠 𝐷 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥 = 1 − ∑𝑝 (1)
Simpson’s D has been widely used in school diversity research (Rjosk et al., 2017), assuming a
context is more diverse when there is a higher probability of randomly picking two persons from
different groups within a context (Simpson, 1949). Groups included in the calculation of the
statistic for all schools were the percentages of Black, White, Latinx, Asian (i.e., Asian and
Filipino), and Other (i.e., American Indian or Alaska Native, Pacific Islanders, and Two or More
Races) students/teachers in each participating school.
Student-Level: Students’ Intersecting Identities
Two questions asked students about their race and ethnicity. Students reported six racial
identifications (American Indian, Asian, Black or African American, Native Hawaiian or Pacific
Islander, White, or Mixed Race) to the question “What is your race?” Students also reported if
they identified as Latinx. Only students who identified as non-Latinx White and Latinx were
included in the data analyses, because most participating schools had less than 10 respondents
identifying with other racial/ethnic groups. Students’ socioeconomic background was indicated
by enrollment in Free or Reduced-Price Meal (FRPM) using three categories (yes, no, or don’t
know), with students selecting “don’t know” categorized the same as missing responses. FRPM,
as a proxy, sufficiently reflects students’ educational disadvantages (Domina et al., 2018).
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
Students enrolled in FRPM were grouped as economically disadvantaged, with others as non-
economically disadvantaged. Finally, based on these two questions, students were in four groups:
(a) Non-Economically Disadvantaged Latinx, (b) Economically Disadvantaged Latinx, (c) Non-
Economically Disadvantaged White, and (d) Economically Disadvantaged White).
Endogenous Variables
Safety and Equity. Three items measured school safety and equity. Items were rated on
a 4-point response scale (1 = not at all true, 2 = a little true, 3 = pretty much true, and 4 = very
much true). Example items are: “I feel safe in my school.” “The teachers at this school treat
students fairly,” and “My school is usually clean and tidy.” The survey has previously reported
validity and reliability evidence for various aspects of school climate (Hanson & Voight, 2014).
A high mean score indicates a school being perceived as safer and more equitable. The omega
values of each subscale’s internal reliability for each group ranged from .69 to .71.
School Attitudes to Parental Participation. Three items measured students’ perceived
school attitudes to parental participation (Hanson & Voight, 2014). Example items are: “Parents
feel welcome to participate in this school.” and “School staff takes parent concerns seriously.” A
4-point response scale (1 = not at all true, 2 = a little true, 3 = pretty much true, and 4 = very
much true) was utilized. A higher value indicates a more favorable perception of schools’
attitudes in parental participation in school. The omega values of the scales’ internal reliability
for each group ranged from .76 to .79.
School Support. Three items from the Social Emotional Health Survey-Secondary
(SEHS-S; Furlong et al., 2020) measured students’ perceived school social support. An example
item is, “At my school, there is a teacher or adult who always wants me to do my best.” Items
were rated on a 4-point response scale (1 = not at all true, 2 = a little true, 3 = pretty much true,
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
and 4 = very much true; Furlong et al., 2020). A high mean score on school support represents a
student’s perceived higher quality and availability of support from school staff. The omega
values of each subscale’s internal reliability for each group ranged from .85 to .88.
Control Variables
School and Student Demographics. School socioeconomic status was the percentage of
students enrolled in FRMP. The dataset included school enrollment and school level (elementary,
middle, or high school). Students reported their sexual orientation, grade level, and gender
identity, used as control variables because of their documented associations with students’
perception of school climate and engagement (e.g., Elmore & Huebner, 2010; Sansone, 2019).
Students responded to the gender identity item using a binary option (female or male); the
researchers recognize this is a limiting approach, however, it was the only data available from
the CHKS. Students reported their preferred sexual identification using six categories
(straight, gay or lesbian, bisexual, I am not sure yet, something else, or declined to respond).
Sexual identity was regrouped as straight and sexual minorities. These student-level
demographic variables were included in the analysis as categorical variables.
Data Analysis
We first reviewed the student data for missing responses and evaluated for patterns of
missingness. We then assessed descriptive statistics and correlations among the study variables.
A preliminary descriptive analysis examined the observed means of the outcomes and
demographic information of each racial/ethnic and socioeconomic status group (e.g., Non-
Economically Disadvantaged Latinx and Economically Disadvantaged Latinx). Non-
Economically Disadvantaged Latinx, Economically Disadvantaged Latinx, Non-Economically
Disadvantaged White, and Economically Disadvantaged White students were the units of
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
investigation in the stratified analysis. A series of multilevel regression models were estimated
using maximum likelihood estimation on Mplus 8.4 (Muthén & Muthén, 2017) by each
intersecting group of race/ethnicity and socioeconomic backgrounds.
Model building involves three steps (Peugh, 2010) to examine the effect of student and
teacher racial/ethnic diversity on the three aspects of school climate. First, the three school
climate outcomes were entered into the unconditional model without any covariates and
predictors to get intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs). The ICCs were used to calculate the
design effect with a value greater than 2, indicating that a significant proportion of the variance
occurs across schools (Heck & Thomas, 2020). Second, the student-level predictors were added.
Predictors included at the student level were grade level, gender, and sexual orientation. Student-
level covariates were grand-mean centered on controlling its effects on the outcomes. The third
step was adding the school-level predictors (i.e., the percentage of students receiving FRMPs,
student and teacher racial/ethnic diversity, school level, and school size). Continuous variables at
the school level were grand-mean centered. Categorical variables were not centered at the school
level because they had meaningful zero values. The predictors’ regression coefficients on the
three outcomes were estimated simultaneously because the correlations between the dependent
variables were then accounted for (Snijders & Bosker, 2011). Akaike and Bayesian information
criteria and likelihood ratio tests (Raudenbush and Bryk, 2002; Peugh, 2010) evaluated the
model comparison. Standardized coefficients were interpreted as effect sizes (Nieminen et al.,
2013). The model included the student-level and school-level predictor main effects. These data
analysis steps were repeated for each race/ethnicity x socioeconomic status group.
Missing Data
Missing data for the demographic (i.e., grade level) and dependent variables were all
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
under 5.0%, an acceptable level (Dong & Peng, 2013). However, the sexual orientation item had
6.1% missing responses in Economically Disadvantaged Latinx groups and 2.4%, 3.7%, and
4.8% missing responses in Economically Disadvantaged White and Non-Economically
Disadvantaged Latinx students, respectively. For the sexual orientation items, independent t-tests
evaluated if the missingness was significantly associated with the outcome responses for
Economically Disadvantaged Latinx students. There were statistical differences in safety and
equity and school attitudes to parental participation between those who responded to the sexual
orientation item and those not responding for the Economically Disadvantaged Latinx students,
but the effect size was small. Students’ sexual orientations were controlled in the analyses. Data
were assumed to be missing at random (MAR; Enders, 2010). Analyses used full information
maximum likelihood (FIML) to manage missing data.
Results
Preliminary Analysis
shows the ICCs and design effects. As suggested by ICCs, perceived school support had 3%
variances at the school level, perceived school attitudes to parental participation had 7% to 10%
school-level variances, and perceived school safety and equity had 10% to 13% of variances at
the school level. Although the design effects of outcomes in Economically Disadvantaged
Whites were smaller than two, we proceeded with multilevel analyses for the four groups, given
our research interests in the impact of school-level variables on students’ perceived school
4). At the school level, the percentage of enrollments in FRMP was negatively correlated with
student racial/ethnic diversity and positively correlated with teacher-student racial/ethnic
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
diversity.
Relations of Student and Teacher Racial/Ethnic Diversity and School Climate
of models by the four student groups. Student racial/ethnic diversity was negatively associated
only with students’ perceived safety and equity among Economically Disadvantaged Latinx
students (𝛽 = −.20, 𝑝 < .05). Student racial/ethnic diversity was not significantly related to
other aspects of school climate across groups.
Regarding teacher racial/ethnic diversity, among White and Latinx students from
Economically Disadvantaged backgrounds, teacher racial/ethnic diversity was positively
associated with perceived school attitudes to parental participation (Economically Disadvantaged
Latinx students: 𝛽 = .16, 𝑝 < .05; Economically Disadvantaged White students: 𝛽 = .37, 𝑝 <
.01 ) and safety and equity (Economically Disadvantaged Latinx students: 𝛽 = .16, 𝑝 < .05;
Economically Disadvantaged White students: 𝛽 = .19, 𝑝 < .01 ). However, null results of these
relations were observed among students from Non-Economically Disadvantaged.
Student and School Characteristics
Regarding student characteristics, the results of multilevel analyses showed that sexual
minorities were negatively associated with the three aspects of school climate across groups
(𝛽 = −0.04 – −0.16, 𝑝 < .05). Another consistent relation across student groups was higher
grade level relating to less positive perceived school attitudes to parental participation (𝛽 =
−0.12 – −0.17, 𝑝 < .001). For school characteristics, a higher concentration of FRMP
enrollment related to a less favorable perception of school climate across groups, particularly for
student group. These models explained 16% to 60% of variances of the outcomes, with school
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
support having the most considerable portion of variances explained by the model.
Discussion
Considering the limited research on contextual factors contributing to school climate
perception, this study employed multilevel analysis to assess differential relations of teacher and
student racial/ethnic diversity with three aspects of school climate by race/ethnicity x
socioeconomic status among White and Latinx students. The results revealed that student
characteristics (i.e., gender, grade level, and sexual orientation) were consistently related to the
three school climate aspects across students with intersecting identities. Corresponding to the
Cultural-Ecological Model of School Climate and the Systems View of School Climate,
differential responses to school diversity were observed across students with different social
identities. Teacher racial/ethnic diversity was related positively to perceived school attitudes to
parental participation and safety and equity only among students from low socioeconomic
backgrounds. There was a negative association between student racial/ethnic diversity and
perceived safety and equity among Economically Disadvantaged Latinx students. The findings
provide evidence of the positive impact of diversifying the teacher workforce on school climate
perception for students from low socioeconomic backgrounds.
School Racial/Ethnic Diversity
Student racial/ethnic diversity was mildly associated with decreased perceived school
safety and equity. This finding is potentially attributed to the overall student demographic in
California public schools. The participating schools had an average of 51% enrollments from
Latinx students, and 53% had more than half of the total students identified as Latinx. That
means schools with higher student racial/ethnic diversity meant reduced numerical representation
of Latinx students in our sample, which may suggest Latinx students perceived less power in
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
those schools with higher student racial/ethnic diversity. However, the adverse impact of high
student racial/ethnic diversity on perceived school safety and equity was only observed among
Latinx students from low socioeconomic backgrounds but not Latinx students from higher
socioeconomic backgrounds. Thus, it appears that having more same-racial/ethnic representation
can be particularly important for students from racially/ethnically marginalized and economically
disadvantaged backgrounds. With the continuous effort to desegregate public schools in the U.S.,
more attention should be placed on how students with different social identities may respond to
these contextual changes.
Students from low socioeconomic backgrounds perceived more positive school attitudes
to parental participation and school safety and equity when attending a school with higher
teacher racial/ethnic diversity. A positive influence of teacher racial/ethnic diversity was
observed for Latinx and White students from low socioeconomic backgrounds. However, we did
not find a positive impact of teacher racial/ethnic diversity for student groups from high
socioeconomic backgrounds. The findings suggest that teacher racial/ethnic diversity is
particularly impactful to students from low socioeconomic backgrounds, and its positive impact
benefits students of color and White students, with mild to moderate effect sizes. Such effects are
more salient than prior studies on teacher racial/ethnic diversity (Benner & Graham, 2011;
Larochette et al., 2010), potentially because our study examined teacher racial/ethnic diversity’s
impact on students’ intersecting identities. The differential impact across students’
socioeconomic backgrounds may be explained by teacher racial/ethnic diversity on school-wide
practices, such as disciplinary measures (Sleeter et al., 2015), which could result in a more
equitable and welcoming climate for students and parents from lower socioeconomic
backgrounds. This study’s results indirectly corroborated the hypothesis that a high teacher
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
racial/ethnic diversity likely enhances fairness and justice in school-wide practices (Hughes et
al., 2020; Lindsay & Hart, 2017). Unlike the power balance theory implying high teacher
racial/ethnic diversity has a more substantial influence among students from racial/ethnic
marginalized backgrounds, Economically Disadvantaged White students reported better school
climate. The findings suggest the “spillover” effect of racially/ethnically diverse teacher
workforce on students with less social power due to marginalized identities not limited to their
race/ethnicity. The impact of teacher racial/ethnic diversity on students with different social
identities and its underlying mechanism warrants more research. Overall, the universal positive
influences of having teachers from racial/ethnic diverse backgrounds observed in this study
encourage more effort in diversifying the teacher workforce.
School and Student Characteristics
The current study’s findings align with the literature regarding the negative impact of
school or classroom socioeconomic composition on students’ school climate (e.g., Voight et al.,
2015). We observed a higher concentration of students from lower socioeconomic backgrounds
negatively associated with school climate, having a moderate association with perceived safety
and equity across student groups. This adverse impact was more substantial than student and
teacher racial/ethnic diversity. Given the complex association of school socioeconomic
composition with other school-level and community-level factors, this observation has various
potential explanations. For instance, schools with more students from low socioeconomic
backgrounds tend to have fewer quality teachers (Clotfelter et al., 2006; Ingersoll, 2004), higher
teacher turnover rates (Simon & Johnson, 2015), and fewer school resources (Bettini et al.,
2022). Solving these deep-rooted inequities requires structural and fundamental changes in
policies governing education. In the meantime, research about what critical school- and
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
community-level factors mediate and moderate the associations would be meaningful to
minimize the discrepancy in students’ perceived school climate across schools.
At the student level, regardless of racial/ethnic identities and socioeconomic
backgrounds, students who identified as sexual minorities reported a less favorable school
climate. These findings echoed the literature, showing that students who identified as sexual
minorities have encountered more barriers to having positive school experiences and engagement
(e.g., Allen et al., 2022; Fullarton, 2002; Ioverno & Russell, 2021). Overall, much smaller
portions of variances of school safety/equity and school attitudes to parental participation were
explained by the model compared with school support, reflecting distinctive mechanisms
contributed to different dimensions of school climate.
Practical Implications
The collective evidence from the current study combined with previous research on
student racial/ethnic diversity’s impact on student outcomes implies its complex nature. A highly
diverse school context has a differential impact on students. Family, school, and community
factors, including students’ social identities, likely moderated its influence. Differential
responses of students from different backgrounds to school diversity suggests that when
promoting and monitoring school climate, school psychologists and other administrators may
investigate the challenges students from racially/ethnically and socioeconomic minoritized
backgrounds encounter in response to a highly diverse student population to provide relevant
support. Concurrently, a positive association was found for teacher racial/ethnic diversity with
school safety and equity and perceived school attitudes to parental participation among students
from low socioeconomic backgrounds. This observation suggests that diversifying the teacher
workforce may be a promising way to address the lower perceived school climate observed
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
among students from low socioeconomic backgrounds. At the same time, school staff, such as
school psychologists, may work with teachers and administrators to improve cultural
responsiveness and equity in school practices and actively engage school members from different
backgrounds. Students identifying as sexual minorities across race/ethnicity and socioeconomic
backgrounds encountered challenges developing positive interpersonal relationships with school
staff and perceiving schools as safe and welcoming to them and their families. These
observations call for practices and continuous efforts to create an inclusive environment for
students, particularly those with less social power and marginalized identities.
Limitations and Future Directions
This study was a preliminary investigation of students’ school experiences varying with
students’ intersecting identities. Among this study’s limitations, it only assessed student-level
intersections of race/ethnicity and socioeconomic background among White and Latinx students.
Moreover, students’ socioeconomic background and gender identity were only measured as a
binary variable. Likewise, we categorized students reporting different sexual orientations into
“straight” and “sexual minorities.” These groupings neglected more granular information about
socioeconomic backgrounds, gender identity, and sexual orientation. Future study is encouraged
to explore intersections across different status-based identities when studying school contextual
variables’ impact on students. This study also did not capture dynamic and fluid aspects of
diversity, such as controlling classroom diversity and students’ prior diversity experiences
(Graham, 2016).
Regarding the generalizability of the findings, this study only included public schools in
California and among Latinx and White students. To generalize the findings requires replication
studies using different data representing characteristics of other states and students. Replication
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
studies are warranted to gather information at the student-, classroom-, school-, community level,
and macrosystem to understand how to bolster students’ learning and develop healthy
relationships with peers and adults from culturally rich and diverse backgrounds.
Conclusion
The current study contributed to the existing school climate research by examining how
school diversity aspects were related to students’ school climate perception among Latinx and
White students from an intersectionality framework. The findings suggest that associations
between school diversity and school climate in school varied with school climate aspects and
differed across groups with different intersecting race/ethnicity identities and socioeconomic
backgrounds. This study is among the few studies empirically assessing the association between
teacher racial/ethnic diversity and school climate perception. The results suggest diversifying the
teacher workforce promotes positive school climate perception among students from low
socioeconomic backgrounds. Beyond socioeconomic and race/ethnicity, at the student level,
sexual minorities were consistently and robustly related to a less favorable perception of school
climate. At the school level, a higher concentration of poverty was associated with a less positive
school climate perception. Additional work is needed in schools to ensure all students experience
a diverse learning environment and a positive school climate.
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE
Declaration of Interest Statement
The authors report there are no competing interests to declare.
DIVERSITY AND SCHOOL CLIMATE 25