From Intentions to Action 1
From Intentions to Action:
An Integrative Review of Action Control Theory and Research
Sander L. Koole
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Nils B. Jostmann
University of Amsterdam
Nicola Baumann
Trier University
Draft: June 9, 2023
To appear in: Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Volume 68
AUTHOR NOTE
Correspondence may be addressed to Sander L. Koole, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Depart-
ment of Clinical Psychology, Van der Boechorststraat 7, 1081 BT Amsterdam, the Nether-
lands. Email: s.l.koole@vu.nl. We thank Julius Kuhl for helpful comments on previous drafts
of this manuscript.
From Intentions to Action 2
Abstract
People differ in how readily they enact their intentions. Some people manage to enact very
difficult intentions -like writing a book or starting a business- under demanding circum-
stances -like extreme stress or oppressive bureaucracy. Other people struggle to enact even
mundane intentions -like replying to an email or taking out the trash. These individual differ-
ences in intention enactment have been the central focus of action-theoretical research.
Section 1 of this chapter traces the historical development of the action-theoretical perspec-
tive, from prescientific notions to Action Control Theory (ACT; Kuhl, 1984). Section 2 pre-
ψ ψ
sents an update of ACT in the form of ACT (‘act-psi’). According to ACT , efficient action
control requires the person to use affect regulation to coordinate the interplay of intention
memory and intuitive behavior control. Chronic individual differences in affect regulation
presumably underlie the personality disposition of action versus state orientation. Section 3
considers the measurement of action versus state orientation. Section 4 reviews research
showing that, as compared with state-oriented people, action-oriented people: 1) Enact de-
manding and self-directed intentions more efficiently in real life and controlled settings; 2)
Form, maintain, and update their intentions more readily; 3) Regulate own affective states
more rapidly, are better shielded against stress and mental illness, and display more per-
sonal growth. Finally, section 5 considers how the action-theoretical perspective comple-
ments social-psychological approaches to intention-behavior relations.
Keywords: ACTION CONTROL, VOLITION, MOTIVATION, ACTION ORIENTATION, STATE ORI-
ENTATION, INTENTION-BEHAVIOR GAP, INTENTION-BEHAVIOR RELATIONS, PERSONALITY!
From Intentions to Action 3
From Intentions to Action:
An Integrative Review of Four Decades of Action Control Theory and Research
th
In the early 20 century, Franz Kafka wrote a tantalizing short story titled Before the
Law (Kafka, 1919). The story tells of an unnamed countryman who wants to pass through a
gateway so that he can enter the law. The gateway is open, but the passage is blocked by a
gatekeeper. He tells the man that he might be allowed in, but it is unclear when or how this
might take place. The gatekeeper also warns that there are other gatekeepers ahead. The
man decides to wait until he gets permission to pass. Days, weeks, and months pass by and
the man becomes obsessed with entering the gate. Unfortunately, nothing he says or does
impresses the gatekeeper. After years of waiting, the man grows old and deaf. In his dying
moments, the man asks the doorkeeper why nobody ever passed through the door. The
doorkeeper answers: "No one else could be admitted because the gate was made only for
you. I am now going to close it".
As a work of art, Kafka’s short story lends itself to many interpretations, including lit-
erary, philosophical, and political ones. From a psychological perspective, however, the story
may be read as a parable of a particularly frustrating psychological phenomenon: People’s
frequent failure to act upon their intentions. Much like Kafka’s countryman, who was deter-
mined to pass the court, countless people start each day with a fresh resolve to perform the
actions that they deem necessary, like filling out a tax form or calling an old friend. However,
just like the fateful countryman never passed through the gate, all too many of people’s in-
tentions never become enacted. Indeed, around half of people’s intentions are destined to
end this way (Sheeran & Webb, 2016). This gap between intentions and behavior emerges in
virtually every domain of human activity and has persisted despite sustained efforts to close
From Intentions to Action 4
it (Fishbein & Ajzen, 2011; Papies et al., 2022; Sheeran & Webb, 2016). As such, the inten-
tion-behavior gap may be regarded as one of the greatest unresolved problems in psychol-
ogy today.
Since the 1970s, the intention–behavior gap has developed into a well-known area in
social psychology (Sheeran & Webb, 2016). Somewhat less known, however, is a parallel line
of research that has emphasized individual differences in intentional action control. The lat-
ter work, which has been conducted within the action-theoretical tradition (Baumann et al.,
2018; Kuhl, 1984; Kuhl & Beckmann, 1994) has been somewhat difficult to access for those
who are not associated with the tradition. One reason for this lack of access is that a number
of landmark action-theoretical works have exclusively appeared in German (e.g., Ach, 1910;
Kuhl, 1983, 2001; Schulte et al., 1997). Another reason is that the action-theoretical perspec-
tive has successively developed into a broad framework. Current action-theoretical publica-
tions therefore cover a host of issues relating to human motivation and personality function-
ing (Kuhl et al., 2021a). This rich tapestry of findings and ideas can be overwhelming for re-
searchers who are merely interested in intention-behavior relations. Our aim in this chapter
is to overcome these problems, by providing an integrative review that focuses strictly on
intention-behavior relations while still covering all the important landmarks of the action-
theoretical perspective.
The remainder of this chapter is divided into four sections. In section 1, we provide a
conceptual history of the intention-behavior gap, from early cultural notions to classic theo-
ries of intentional action control, culminating in Action Control Theory (ACT, Kuhl, 1984). In
section 2, we present an update of ACT in the form of ACT (pronounce as ‘act-psi’). In sec-
tion 3, we discuss the measurement of individual differences in action control, specifically,
From Intentions to Action 5
the dimension of action versus state orientation. In section 4, we use ACT as an organizing
framework to review action-theoretical research as it pertains to intention-behavior rela-
tions. Finally, in section 5, we assess our main conclusions and consider how action-theoreti-
cal research complements traditional social-psychological research on intention-behavior re-
lations.
1. Historical Context
Research on intention-behavior relations is often held to begin in the 1970s, when
the first social-psychological research on the topic began to appear (Sheeran, 2002). How-
ever, there are much older conceptions of intention-behavior relations, from prescientific
th
notions to classic psychological theories that were formulated in the early 20 century.
These earlier traditions directly and indirectly shaped the modern scientific understanding of
intention-behavior relations, including the action-theoretical approach. We briefly consider
them here, so that readers can properly contextualize the action-theoretical approach. We
begin with a short history of the development of prescientific conceptions of intention-be-
havior relations. We then discuss two classical psychological approaches, Ach’s volition psy-
chology (Ach, 1910/2006)and Lewin’s field theory (Lewin, 1926, 1936/2013), which offer
contrasting views of intentional action control. Finally, we review how these two classical ap-
proaches were eventually reconciled in the modern action-theoretical tradition (Kuhl, 1984).
1.1 The Intention-Behavior Gap: From Moral Failure to Psychological Problem
People have long recognized the mismatch between what they intend to do and what
they actually end up doing. Indeed, this problem is mentioned throughout philosophical and
religious sources from diverse times and places. For instance, the Analects of Confucius, one
of the most widely read and studied Asian philosophical texts over the last two thousand
From Intentions to Action 6
years, contains various passages that acknowledge the difficulties in enacting one’s inten-
tions. For instance, one saying attributed to Confucius purports that, ’If you see what is right
and fail to act on it, you lack courage’. Confucian philosophy has thus recognized the inher-
ent difficulties of intentional action control. Indeed, several Confucian sayings suggest po-
tential strategies for overcoming these difficulties, such as ‘When it is obvious that the goals
cannot be reached, don't adjust the goals, adjust the action steps’, and ‘It does not matter
how slowly you go as long as you do not stop.’
Similar to the Confucians, the ancient Greeks contemplated why people often fail to
th th
act according to their own interests. For instance, in Plato's (5 – 4 century BCE) dialogue
Protagoras, Socrates wonders how it is possible that, if a person judges action A to be the
th
best course of action, that person would do anything other than A? Aristotle (4 century
BCE) in Nicomachean Ethics discussed the notion of akrasia, or lack of self-restraint. Some-
one with akrasia knows what is right but nonetheless does the opposite. A similar problem
st
was discussed within the Judeo-Christian tradition by the Apostle Paul (1 century CE), who
lamented, ‘I do not understand what I do. For what I want to do I do not do, but what I hate I
do’ (Letter to the Romans, 7:15, New International Version). Under Paul’s influence, Chris-
tians adopted the doctrine that people are inherently sinful and hence fall short of their di-
vine purpose. The latter could be considered a theological version of the intention-behavior
gap. Thus, from historical sources dating back at least two thousand years, cultural frame-
works both in the East and West have acknowledged the intention-behavior gap, along with
the desirability of closing it.
As these historical texts illustrate, the gap between intentions and behavior was orig-
inally conceived in moral terms. Over time, however, the intention-behavior gap came to be
From Intentions to Action 7
seen more and more as a psychological problem. This historical development is reflected in
the iconic fictional character of Hamlet, the famous hero in one’s of Shakespeare plays, writ-
ten around the turn of the 17th century CE. In the play, Hamlet delays his plans to avenge his
father, which causes six subsequent deaths, including his own. Nevertheless, Hamlet is not
only depicted as indecisive, but also as an intelligent young man, who is loving and decent,
and well-liked by the people that know him. Although Hamlet is tragically prone to become
entrapped by his own thoughts, his character remains relatable for the audience. This is be-
cause Hamlet’s failure to act decisively -and, thereby, the intention-behavior gap- is por-
trayed by Shakespeare not such much as immoral, but rather as the result of Hamlet’s inner
psychological conflicts.
The trend to treat the intention-behavior gap as a psychological problem gained trac-
was philosopher William James, who is nowadays often viewed as the father of American
psychology. In his monumental The Principles of Psychology, James (1890) wrote a chapter
titled Will, where he observed, ’We know what it is to get out of bed on a freezing morning
in a room without a fire, and how the very vital principle within us protests against the or-
deal. Probably most persons have lain on certain mornings for an hour at a time unable to
brace themselves to the resolve.’ (p. 1284). The intention-behavior gap is described here in
terms of the difficulty of getting out of bed in a cold room, an instantly recognizable experi-
ence for 19th century readers, whose houses had no central heating. Importantly, James
does not condemn the desire to linger in the warm bed as a moral flaw or weakness of char-
acter. Instead, James portrays the situation as arising from the conflict between opposing
psychological tendencies.
From Intentions to Action 8
The writings of James (1890) and others like him helped to pave the way for the psy-
th
chological study of the intention-behavior gap. By the end of the 19 century, psychology
was beginning to turn into a science. During this era of great intellectual excitement, the in-
tention-behavior gap was one of the topics that attracted the attention of the first genera-
tion of psychological researchers. In the next section, we turn to the classic psychological
theories of this time period. Still, it should be acknowledged that the paradigm of scientific
psychology never fully replaced the old religious-philosophical paradigm, which has contin-
ued to regard the intention-behavior gap as a moral shortcoming. Indeed, to this day, people
who fail to enact their intentions are condemned for being sinful or lazy. Developing a viable
alternative to this moral narrative thus remains an ongoing mission of modern psychology -
including this chapter.
1.2 Classic Traditions in Psychology
Around the end of the 19th century, Germany became the first country where psy-
chology became established as a scientific discipline. It was not a coincidence that this hap-
th
pened in Germany. The German version of the Enlightenment had since the 18 century
promoted the value of ‘Innerlichkeit’ or ‘inwardness’ in art and philosophy, a cultural stance
that idealized the person’s reflecting on and cultivating their inner experiences (Watson,
2010). This inwardness is highly compatible with the introspective nature of psychology.
Moreover, Germany had become a major hub of scientific activities, as the place where the
modern university was invented by Wilhelm von Humboldt in the early 19th century. This
combined cultural momentum allowed Wilhelm Wundt (1832-1920) to found the first psy-
chological laboratory in 1879 in Leipzig. The latter event is often taken as the historical mo-
ment when psychology became an empirical science.
From Intentions to Action 9
1.2.1 Ach’s Volition Psychology
Wundt believed that the experimental method was only suited for examining ele-
mentary psychological processes, such as associations between thoughts (Hatfield, 2020).
However, Wundt’s contemporaries at the Würzburg School adapted the experimental
method to study higher psychological functions like conceptual thought and creative prob-
lem-solving (Hackert & Weger, 2018). Among the most accomplished experimenters of the
Würzburg School was Narziss Ach (1871-1946). Ach, like his colleagues from the Würzburg
School, combined methods of introspection with objective measurements in his experiments
(e.g., response times). His main research interest was ‘the problem of the will’ (Ach, 1905, p.
V), defined by Ach as the psychological processes that allow intentions to become translated
into action. Key findings and conclusions of Ach’s work are summarized in a conference lec-
ture (Ach, 1910/2006), the only publication by Ach that has so far been translated into Eng-
lish.
Ach (1910/2006) understood an intention as an inner commitment to enact a given
behavior, a notion that closely corresponds with modern conceptions (Fishbein & Ajzen,
2011). For Ach, however, merely forming an intention was not enough to ensure its enact-
ment. Whenever a person encountered difficulties, the process of volition allowed them to
mobilize the additional efforts needed to convert an intention into action. Ach referred to
this as ‘the law of difficulty’. From his experiments, Ach concluded that volition operates
more effectively to the extent that the intention is stated in more specific terms that can be
readily enacted. Ach called this principle ‘the law of specific determination’. Finally, Ach ob-
served that the most intense forms of willing were accompanied by certain subjective expe-
riences, which Ach termed ‘moments of the will’. These included: a) Inner speech; b) A
From Intentions to Action 10
special sense of obligation to perform the action; c) The experience of effort; and d) Feelings
of increased muscular tension, particularly in the face and neck and upper body regions.
During his time, Ach’s (1910/2006) research was renowned for its methodological ri-
gor. Even by today’s standards, some aspects of his methodology -such as the careful control
of stimuli, the use of trained introspectionists, the comparison between introspection and
objective measurements- qualify as sophisticated. Nevertheless, Ach’s ideas about volition
received a mixed reception from his colleagues. Among Ach’s earliest and fiercest critics was
his younger contemporary Kurt Lewin (1890-1947).
1.2.2 Lewin’s Field Theory
Kurt Lewin is nowadays most known as one of the founding fathers of social psychol-
ogy. This stellar reputation is mostly based on the work that Lewin and his colleagues con-
ducted in the US during the 1930s and 40s (Wheeler, 2008). Some two decades earlier, how-
ever, Lewin had already begun to make a name for himself at the Psychological Institute of
the University of Berlin (for a detailed history, see Perlina, 2016). Lewin believed that Ach
was wrong in asserting that enacting an intention requires that the person commits to one
specific course of action. Instead, Lewin believed that intentional action control is flexible
and holistic. Here, Lewin’s thinking was influenced by the ideas of Gestalt psychology of the
1920s and 1930s, which emphasized a holistic approach to psychology.
Lewin (1926, 1936/2013) proposed a grand theory of personality, which holds that
intentional action arises from the totality of the objective and subjective influences that are
operating on a person at a given point in time (for overviews, see Burnes & Cooke, 2013; Lin-
dorfer, 2020). The person’s psychological situation was represented as a metaphoric land-
scape, which Lewin called the ‘life space’ or ‘psychological field’. Different areas of the
From Intentions to Action 11
psychological field represent different possible courses of actions for the person. Goal-di-
rected action is described as a process of locomotion whereby the person navigates through
different parts of the psychological field to reach the goal area. Locomotion is determined by
psychological tensions or forces that energize the person’s behavior. These tensions are
highly dynamic and changeable, being sensitively attuned to any changes in the person’s in-
ner and outer environment. In field theory, there is no need for the person to commit them-
selves to a single course of action. Instead, goals function flexibly, like needs, by endowing
elements of the psychological field with valence (i.e., evaluations of things as good or bad).
The abstract terminology of field theory (Lewin, 1926, 1936/2013) did not lend itself
to direct empirical investigation. Instead, Lewin and his students loosely derived hypotheses
from field theory which they then tested across a range of topics, including recall of
(un)completed tasks, aspiration levels, substitution between tasks, and anger/frustration. In
the Berlin years, Lewin and his team conducted a variety of psychological experiments, in-
cluding the renowned Zeigarnik (1927) experiments on people’s memory for completed ver-
sus uncompleted tasks (see MacLeod, 2020, for a detailed history). However, experiments
were of limited interest to Lewin. After moving to the USA in the 1930s, Lewin’s attention
turned increasingly away from experimental research, toward applied research in real-world
settings.
Contrasting Conceptions of Action Control. The early years of scientific psychology
thus gave rise to two contrasting conceptions of intentional action control. According to Ach
(1910) intentional action control requires volition, a single-minded commitment to a chosen
course of action, that inhibits competing action alternatives. By contrast, Lewin’s field theory
(Lewin, 1926, 1936/2013) viewed intentional action control as an open-minded process, in
From Intentions to Action 12
which the person flexibly navigates between different action alternatives that emerge from
the dynamic interplay of motivational forces in the person’s psychological field.
1.3 Modern Psychological Approaches
By the end of World War II, the USA became the world’s leading country in scientific
research. During the immediate post-war years, psychology was dominated by behaviorism,
which left little room for the study of complex goal-directed behavior (O’Donohue & Kitche-
ner, 1998). From the second half of the 20th century onward, however, new theoretical
modes made it possible to conceive how goal-directed behavior could unfold within a caus-
ally determined system (Carver & Scheier, 1981; Kuhl, 1984; Newell & Simon, 1972). These
theoretical developments allowed psychologists to reconcile the notion of intentional action
with scientific determinism (Baumeister, 2008; Kuhl & Quirin, 2011; Roediger III et al., 2008).
Intentional action control thus once again became a legitimate topic of study within aca-
demic psychology. By this time, the classic works of Ach (1910/2006) and Lewin (1926,
1936/2013) were largely forgotten. Nevertheless, several of the underlying ideas of these
class works remained influential.
1.3.1 Lewin’s Legacy: Expectancy-Value Models
Lewin’s ideas have had far-ranging impacts, especially in social psychology (Wheeler,
2018) and applied psychology (Burnes & Cooke, 2013). The original formulation of field the-
ory (Lewin, 1926, 1951) is hardly referenced anymore. Nevertheless, elements of the theory
were imported into modern psychology when they were reinterpreted by motivation psy-
chologist John W. Atkinson (1923-2003) in terms of expectancy-value theory. Atkinson pro-
posed that the subjective meanings (or ‘valences’) of Lewin’s psychological field can be un-
derstood as the expected value that the person seeks to maximize (Atkinson, 1957; Atkinson
From Intentions to Action 13
& Feather, 1966; Kuhl & Blankenship, 1979) . This expectancy-value interpretation of field
theory portrays goal-directed behavior as a choice between options with varying expected
outcomes. Consequently, the expectancy-value tradition has led psychologists to emphasize
reason and states of desire (e.g., fear of failure or hope for success), while ignoring the
states of resolute commitment and action plans that were central to volition psychology
(Ach, 1910/2006).
Expectancy-value models have shaped modern theories of motivation (J. Heckhausen
& Heckhausen, 2018). In such models, motivated behavior follows directly from the person’s
choices (e.g., Wigfield & Eccles, 2020), which, in turn, are derived from the person’s goals
(e.g., Elliot & Hulleman, 2017) and desires (e.g., Hofmann & van Dillen, 2018). Expectancy-
value models also form the basis of social-psychological theories on attitude-behavior rela-
tions. For instance, one influential model proposed that attitudes, when made accessible,
guide behavior by changing how people perceive and interpret the situation (Fazio, 1990).
Another influential model, the theory of planned behavior, does leave room for volitional
processes, by proposing that attitudes influence behavior only indirectly, by altering a per-
son’s proclivity to form intentions (Fishbein & Ajzen, 2011). However, the latter theory still
assumes that intentions -as long as the relevant behavior is under personal control- become
directly translated into action. In this sense, the theory of planned behavior is a continuation
of the Lewinian tradition.
1 Notably, the expectancy-value model was not part of the original formulation of field theory (Lewin, 1926,
1936/2013). It is therefore possible to interpret the theory in other ways. For instance, some authors view field
theory’s holistic form of action control as an emergent, self-organizing process that arises from complex sys-
tems with multiple interacting components (Tschacher & Haken, 2007). Others have suggested that field the-
ory’s holistic action control may be implemented by parallel-distributed processing that rapidly integrates the
totality of information of the person’s psychological field (Kuhl & Koole, 2004). During Lewin’s lifetime, it was
not yet possible to envision the mechanisms that give rise to holistic action control. Such mechanistic analysis
may have come within reach through new concepts like self-organization and parallel-distributed processing.
From Intentions to Action 14
1.3.2 Revival of Volition Psychology: Action Control Theory
In contrast to Lewin’s (1926, 1936/2012) work, Ach"s (1910/2006) work fell into
near-complete obscurity after World War II. Against the odds, however, it was eventually re-
discovered by Julius Kuhl (1983, 1984) during the 1980s. Kuhl believed that Ach and Lewin
described complementary aspects of purposive action. Specifically, Kuhl suggested that ex-
pectancy-value models in the Lewinian tradition relate to the problem of selecting a course
of action (in German, ‘Selektionsmotivation’), whereas Ach’s conception of volition relates to
the problem of realizing an intended action (in German, ‘Realisationsmotivation’) . This inte-
grative conception became the starting point for Action Control Theory (ACT; Kuhl, 1984).
Within ACT, volitional action control is defined as the set of processes that ‘shield the
intention against competing motivational tendencies, and […] ensure that it will be executed
rather than replaced by one of the competing tendencies’ (Kuhl, 1984, p. 101). To achieve
this shielding function, volitional action control can use selective attention, encoding, and
parsimonious information processing, mechanisms that each support persistent goal pursuit.
ACT’s conception of action control thus explicitly draws from Ach’s (1910/2006) volition psy-
chology. Moreover, in keeping with Ach’s law of difficulty, ACT assumes that action control
becomes especially relevant when acting on an intention is difficult, either because of
2 The distinction between motivation and volition was also elaborated in the Rubicon model of action
phases (H. Heckhausen & Gollwitzer, 1987; Kuhl, 2020), which has had a considerable impact in social psychol-
ogy (Gollwitzer & Sheeran, 2006). According to the Rubicon model, people develop different mindsets as they
transition from weighing action alternatives (the interplay of forces described by Lewin’s field theory) to imple-
menting the chosen alternative (Ach’s volition psychology). We acknowledge the important contributions of
the Rubicon model, which has helped to revive the notion of volition in modern psychology. ACT further ex-
tends this notion, by proposing that volition contributes to both pre-decisional and post-decisional action
phases (Beckmann & Kuhl, 1984). ACT further 1) articulates the functional mechanism(s) that allow the person
to transition between different volitional systems, and 2) systematically addresses individual differences in ac-
tion control.
From Intentions to Action 15
properties inherent in the action itself (e.g., climbing the Mount Everest) or because of ex-
ternal circumstances (e.g., time pressure, competing obligations, delays, low reward, and so
on). ACT thus incorporates key insights from Ach’s volition psychology.
At the same time, ACT’s conception of action control adopts elements of Lewin’s
(1926, 1936/2013) flexible conception of goal-directed behavior. In particular, ACT suggests
that action control includes processes that regulate the person’s emotions, motivations con-
trol, and environment. The latter control processes require that the person is holistically at-
tuned to their feelings, intuitions, and the broader context of their actions(Engel & Kuhl,
2015). This more holistic focus and contextual flexibility are in line with Lewin’s (1926, 1951)
work. ACT thus proposes that effective goal pursuit has elements of both persistence (remi-
niscent of Ach’s volition psychology) and flexibility (emphasized by Lewin’s field theory). Vo-
litional action control supports flexible determination in goal pursuit. Still, the extent to
which the person can access the full repertoire of action control processes may vary. Accord-
ing to ACT, the person can access action control processes to the extent that the intentions
are self-directed rather than externally imposed. Flexible determination should thus apply
especially to people whose goals originate from the self (see also section 4.2.1 on the self-
direction hypothesis).
Finally, a new element of ACT (Kuhl, 1984) is that the theory elaborates different
modes of volitional action control. The classic conception by Ach (1910/2006) contrasted vo-
litional action and habitual action as distinct forms of action control. ACT incorporates this
basic distinction, but suggests that volitional action control in turn can be further divided
into different subtypes: In the metastatic (change-promoting) mode, the enactment of
change-oriented intentions is facilitated. By contrast, in the catastatic (change-preventing)
From Intentions to Action 16
mode, the enactment of change-oriented intentions is inhibited, and the person becomes
absorbed by their own internal states.
According to ACT (Kuhl, 1984), people differ in the activation of the volitional modes.
People for whom the metastatic mode is activated are referred to as ‘action-oriented’ peo-
ple. People for whom the catastatic mode is activated - are referred to as ‘state-oriented’
people. The catastatic and metastatic modes may be activated either momentarily, by situa-
tional influences, or chronically, by the person’s enduring dispositions. According to ACT,
chronic dispositions toward action versus state orientation are formed by early socialization
experiences. Nevertheless, dispositions toward action versus state orientation may change
later in life due to maturation and changes in person-environment fit.
ACT was further developed in the 1990s by Kuhl and associates (Kuhl, 1992; Kuhl &
Beckmann, 1994). In the 2000s, Kuhl and associates elaborated the action-theoretical ap-
proach into Personality Systems Interactions (PSI) theory (Kuhl, 2000a). PSI theory can be re-
garded as the culmination of the action-theoretical tradition, that integrates the seminal
ideas of Ach (1910) and Lewin (1926, 1936/2013) and places them in a comprehensive theo-
retical framework for human motivation and personality functioning.
1.4 Summary
People’s difficulties in enacting their intentions have been documented across many
different time periods and cultures. The intention-behavior gap thus appears to be a univer-
sal problem that has been recognized by people everywhere throughout recorded history.
Historically, the intention-behavior gap was first conceived as a moral failure, but it gradually
came to be regarded as a psychological problem. How people enact their intentions was of
great interests to the first generation of psychologists, around the start of the 20th century.
From Intentions to Action 17
German psychologists Ach (1910/2006) and Lewin (1926, 1936/2013) proposed contrasting
conceptions of intention enactment. Ach highlighted the importance of volition, or an unwa-
vering commitment to a chosen course of action. By contrast, Lewin believed that people
navigate their goal pursuits flexibly and dynamically in response to contextual changes. The
th
two classic conceptions of intentional action control were largely forgotten by the mid-20
century. Eventually, however, Ach and Lewin’s ideas were rediscovered and became the
foundation of modern action control theory (ACT; Kuhl, 1984, 2000a). According to ACT, voli-
tion is a special form of action control that promotes efficient goal pursuit that is character-
ized by both flexibility and persistence.
2. ACT
Just how do volitional processes promote efficient goal pursuit? The answer to this
question, according to the action-theoretical approach, can be found in the ways in which
cognitive, affective, and behavioral processes become mutually coordinated in intentional
action. It is therefore not enough to separately analyze cognitive systems (that form and
maintain intentions), affective systems (that fuel approach motivation), and behavioral sys-
tems (that guide overt action). Instead, action theorists must address the complex interplay
between cognitive, affective, and behavioral systems that allows people to enact their inten-
tions.
To unravel this complexity, researchers in the action-theoretical tradition have
turned to functional-design analysis (Kuhl, 2000a) also known as simply ‘functional analysis’.
Functional analysis is a general scientific approach that seeks to understand a complex sys-
tem by determining: a) The relevant parts of the system; b) The operations these parts per-
form and; c) How the parts and operations work together to realize the behavior of the sys-
tem (Bechtel, 2009). In principle, functional analysis is applicable to all aspects of human
From Intentions to Action 18
functioning. In this chapter, however, our focus is on the functional analysis of intentional
action control.
Our functional analysis of intentional action control is based on key principles from
ACT (Kuhl, 1984), updated with relevant insights from PSI theory (Kuhl, 2000a). We call the
ψ ψ
resulting framework ACT (‘act-psi’). ACT is not a new theory, but rather a digest or con-
densed statement of the action-theoretical perspective as it pertains to intention-behavior
relations. With ACT , we hope to make this theoretical perspective more accessible for in-
tention-behavior researchers.
In the following paragraphs, we lay out the framework of ACT . Our discussion is or-
ganized according to the three modes of action control within ACT . We begin with the auto-
matic mode, in which the person’s behavior is guided by the intuitive execution of habitual,
overlearned action sequences. Next, we turn to the static mode of action control, which
emerges when the person has run into difficulties that cannot be resolved through routine
action. The static mode inhibits intuitive behavior control so that the person can analyze the
situation and formulate suitable action plan or intentions. Finally, we discuss the dynamic
mode of action control, in which the person flexibly forms and enacts their intentions. The
analysis of ACT is rather abstract, which may lead some readers to wonder whether it is
amenable to empirical testing. To address this concern, we added some brief discussions of
how specific constructs from ACT may be examined empirically. We also refer to later sec-
tions that cover relevant empirical evidence.
2.1 The Automatic Mode: Intuitive Behavior Control
When the person is in a situation that is familiar and predictable, there is no need for
the person to engage in extensive planning and premeditation of their actions. Instead, the
From Intentions to Action 19
person can rely on overlearned behavioral schemas that are automatically triggered by the
perception of situational cues that are relevant to the person’s goals. The resulting behavior
thus emerges spontaneously, on the fly, in response to moment-to-moment changes in cir-
ψ 3
cumstances. ACT hence refers to this form of behavioral regulation as the automatic mode
of action control.
Within ACT , each mode of action control is characterized by the predominance of
one or more systems that control the person’s cognitive and behavioral functioning. In the
automatic mode, the dominant system is intuitive behavior control. Intuitive behavior con-
trol is most clearly observable in spontaneous face-to-face interactions in informal settings
between people who know each other well. For instance, an informal meeting of old friends
who are hanging out together in their home neighborhood would be a situation where intui-
tive behavior control can be expected to be the prevailing mode of behavioral regulation.
However, intuitive behavior control emerges in all environments that are sufficiently familiar
and predictable to permit the person to go by behavioral routines that are either innately
prepared or well-rehearsed. The more applicable the behavioral schemas the person has at
their disposal, the more intuitive behavior control will predominate. Common everyday ex-
amples of intuitive behavior control include joyful dancing, playful banter between lovers, or
a worker’s daily commute on an uneventful morning.
3 The automatic mode has been described by some theorists as a form of self-organization (Tschacher & Haken,
2007). However, the ‘self’ in ‘self-organization’ denotes an emergent, bottom-up process. This is a different
meaning of the word in ‘self-regulation’, where the word ‘self’ refers to a central executive that exerts a top-
down influence on the person’s functioning (Baumeister, 1998; Kuhl et al., 2015). To avoid conceptual confu-
sion, we use the term ‘self’ only to refer to central executive processes and the term ‘auto’ to denote emer-
gent, bottom-up processes.
From Intentions to Action 20
Action-theoretical researchers have usually not focused specifically on the automatic
mode and its intuitive behavior control, given that action-theoretical work has been mostly
concern with planful, premeditated behavior. Nevertheless, as we explain later, some forms
of intentional behavior can recruit intuitive behavior control. It is therefore useful to take a
closer look at the functional characteristics of intuitive behavior control. In the original ACT
(Kuhl, 1984), intuitive behavior control was assumed but its functional characteristics were
not explicitly elaborated. Subsequently, however, a detailed functional profile of intuitive
behavior control was provided by PSI theory (Kuhl, 2000a). A summary of this functional pro-
2.1.1 Perception-Action Fusion
A first characteristic of intuitive behavior control is the merging of perception and ac-
tion. While processing the perceptual features of situation, intuitive behavior control simul-
taneously activates relevant behavioral routines. Perception and action thus operate in
unison. Because the person’s perceptions can vary from moment to moment, intuitive be-
havior control is highly suited for spontaneous behavior that is flexibly adapted from mo-
ment to moment. As long as intuitive behavior control predominates, the person functions
completely in the here and now, which leads to present-focused, subject-centered percep-
tions. Instances of perception-action fusion are well-documented between mothers and in-
fants, who have been shown to imitate and synchronize another’s nonverbal behavior (Feld-
man, 2007). Such imitation and synchronization continue in adulthood (Chartrand & van
Baaren, 2009; Koole & Tschacher, 2016), attesting to the continuing importance of intuitive
behavior control.
From Intentions to Action 21
The functional characteristic of perception-action fusion is broadly consistent with
notions of ideomotor action (Carpenter, 1874; James, 1890), common coding (Hommel et
al., 2001), and grounded cognition (Papies et al., 2022). Although different in their particu-
lars, each of these notions presumes some kind of shared representation of perception and
action. The empirical methods associated with these research traditions can hence be
adapted to study intuitive behavior control. For instance, mental simulation of an action or
perception-action compatibility can be used to elicit behavior change even when people are
not engaging in intentional action control.
2.1.2 Parallel Processing and Context-Sensitivity
A second characteristic of intuitive behavior control is parallel-distributed processing,
or simply ‘parallel processing’ (Bowers, 2017; Rogers & McClelland, 2004; Rumelhart et al.,
1988). Parallel processing allows intuitive behavior control to integrate enactment-related
information without conscious action planning. This information includes momentary per-
ceptual inputs that are sensitive to spatial orientation and movement. Intuitive behavior
control integrates information across different sensory modalities. Consequently, intuitive
behavior control leads the person to form global impressions. Parallel processing can pick up
hidden patterns that are embedded in fragmented or incomplete information, which allows
intuitive behavior control to quickly fill in the blanks and prepare the next required actions.
Pattern completion also renders intuitive behavior control robust against interference from
irrelevant information.
Finally, parallel processing can rapidly integrate contextual information, which allows
intuitive behavior control to be flexibly attuned to changes in situational contexts, for in-
stance, between different interaction partners (Hess & Fischer, 2013). This intuitive form of
From Intentions to Action 22
contextual flexibility can be understood in terms of affordances (Gibson, 1977), situated cog-
nition (Smith & Semin, 2007) or emergent system dynamics (Tschacher & Haken, 2007),
where the perception of environmental stimuli directly invites an appropriate action, like the
door handle tacitly says “turn me” and the cool pint of beer on a hot summer day tacitly says
“drink me”. The contextual flexibility of intuitive behavior control is reminiscent of the dy-
namic picture of human goal pursuit in Lewin’s (1926, 1936/2013) classic field theory. In-
deed, many instances of purposive behavior may not involve goals in the traditional sense,
but instead may emerge synergistically from the self-organizing, context-driven properties of
intuitive behavior control (see also Tschacher & Haken, 2007).
The aforementioned parallel-processing characteristics can be investigated in appro-
priate perceptual-motor tasks. A task will rely more on intuitive behavior control to the ex-
tent that it requires: a) Cross-modal processing; b) Dealing with incomplete information; c)
Flexible attunement to context. This type of tasks is less common in traditional laboratory
studies within psychology, which have tended to focus on responses to simple, unambiguous
stimuli in an environment that shows little or no change. Real-life settings, however, are
more likely to meet the requirements for intuitive behavior control. Intuitive behavior con-
trol can thus be expected to be in a wide variety of everyday settings where people are try-
ing to achieve their daily goals. Action-theoretical research in everyday settings is covered in
section 4.1.
From Intentions to Action 23
2.1.3 Affective Energization
A third and last feature of intuitive behavior control is its modulation by positive af-
4 ψ
fect . Within ACT , positive affect is defined as an approach-oriented state that goes to-
gether heightened motoric arousal and is directed at moving the person toward a desired
object. Positive affect (e.g., implicit or explicit feelings of joy) is generated when someone
fulfills a need (e.g., affiliation), achieves an important goal (e.g., passing an exam) or makes
significant progress toward the goal (Carver & Scheier, 1990). Thus, positive affect often fol-
lows from goal-related activities. Once generated, however, positive affect also influences
the manner in which the person seeks to attain their goals. Specifically, ACT proposes that
positive affect directs the person’s motivational energies toward intuitive behavior control
(Kuhl, 2000a). Thus, a person in a positive affective state will be more likely to approach
their goals using a behavior repertoire that fosters intuitive actions and flexible exploration.
Affective energization of intuitive behavior control means that this form of behavioral
regulation is closely aligned with the person’s motivational states, especially activation of
the reward system. For instance, mental simulations of a reward can be expected to activate
intuitive behavior control (Papies et al., 2022). Intuitive behavior control will further come
into play when people are engaging in intrinsically rewarding, pleasant activities. Positive
motivation and energization of behavior is thus an important set of empirically observable
features that distinguish intuitive behavior control from other forms of behavioral regula-
tion.
4 Positive affect is not the only energetic influence on intuitive behavior control according to ACTψ. Negative
affect (and the need to prevent it) can also energize intuitive behavior (though less flexibly) and there is a third
pathway into intuitive action control that does not need positive or negative affect (based on the nigrostriatal
dopaminergic system). The latter was also observed by classical behaviorist researchers: Stimulus-response
connections can be strengthened by pure repetition, without reinforcement by rewards (Thorndike, 1932). For
instance, most people brush their teeth every day regardless of how much fun it is.
From Intentions to Action 24
2.2 Goal Striving, Interrupted: The Static Mode of Action Control
In modern life, many situations involve complexities that cannot be resolved through
familiar routines. For instance, some situations are too cognitively demanding, in that they
require complex actions, such as novel actions, action sequences that need to be continually
updated, actions that are to be executed only at particular time intervals, or actions with
multiple steps that have to be conducted in sequence (Botvinick et al., 2001; Miller, 2000).
Other situations are too motivationally demanding, for instance, by requiring the person to
perform activities that are meaningless, monotonous, or effortful (Eastwood et al., 2012;
Richter et al., 2016; van Tilburg & Igou, 2012). Yet other situations are socially demanding, in
that they involve adherence to external norms, rules, and standards (Deci & Ryan, 2000) or
public scrutiny (Dickerson & Kemeny, 2004)
According to ACT , demanding situations lead people to switch to different forms of
behavioral regulation that rely on volitional processes. This notion is reminiscent of Ach’s
(1910/2006) classic law of difficulty, which states that volition only becomes engaged when
people encounter difficulties in their goal pursuits. The role of situational demands in voli-
tional action control has been extensively studied in action-theoretical research. We review
this work in Section 4.2.1.
One common type of behavioral regulation under demanding conditions is the ‘static
mode’ of action control. In the static mode, the person’s behavior is guided by stored
5 The static mode of action control within ACTψ corresponds with the catastatic mode within the classical for-
mulation of ACT (Kuhl, 1984). The original term ‘catastatic’ was taken from classical Greek drama, where
catastasis refers to the third and penultimate act, in which action is heightened for the catastrophe. Though
evocative, this metaphor is likely lost on many modern readers, who may not be familiar with classical Greek
dramaturgy. Hence, we opted for the term ‘static’, which commonly refers to a state of lacking in movement or
action, a meaning that captures the behavioral passivity that is characteristic of the relevant mode of action
control.
From Intentions to Action 25
cognitive representations of explicit action plans and intentions, using a system called ‘inten-
tion memory’ (Kuhl, 2000a). The transition from intuitive behavior control to intention
memory can be likened to a car that switches from cruise control to manual control. The less
well-rehearsed schemas the person has for executing actions, the more intention memory is
likely to predominate. Everyday examples of people who are likely to rely on intention
memory are a young entrepreneur who is filling out a tax form for the first time or a student
who draws up a study schedule for a difficult exam.
Intention memory makes use of explicit linguistic representations of different courses
of action. Consequently, intention memory can handle both action plans and intentions that
originate from the person themselves (self-directed intentions) and action plans and inten-
2, the functional profile of intention memory is the mirror image of intuitive behavior con-
trol. This is because intention memory’s primary function is to interrupt the automatic
mode. More specifically, intention memory has three key components. First, intention
memory inhibits the intuitive control of behavior by perception-action links. Second, inten-
tion memory promotes problem-solving and the formulation of explicit action plans. Third
and last, intention memory inhibits positive affect, to prevent the energization of intuitive
behavior . We consider each component in turn.
2.2.1 Inhibition of Intuitive Behavior
The first component of intention memory is inhibition of intuitive behavior control.
This inhibition decouples perception from behavior, which puts an end to the automatic
6 Intuitive behaviors that are unrelated to the intended action can still become energized when the person is in
the static mode. This can sometimes make it difficult for the person to resist temptations even when intention
memory is activated.
From Intentions to Action 26
execution of behavioral routines. As a result, the person will become more passive at a be-
havioral level. This behavioral passivity has its use, though, because it keeps the person from
acting prematurely. Indeed, the decoupling of perception and behavior allows the person to
mentally simulate different actions without being compelled to immediately enact these ac-
tions.
By blocking the pathway from an intended action to intuitive behavior control, inten-
tion memory creates a time window for the person to stop, think, and reason about the situ-
ation. This thinking and reasoning both serve to help the person to come up with action
plans that allow them overcome momentary obstacles and to move closer to the goal. The
latter action plans often include new behaviors or new sequences of action steps that are
not yet part of the person’s established repertoire. The latter is a further reason to inhibit
intuitive behavior control during the static mode.
2.2.2 Prospective Memory and Analytic Thinking
The second component of intention memory is activation of prospective memory
(Brandimonte et al., 2014), a part of working memory that is specifically devoted to the
maintenance of intended actions. Unlike traditional forms of memory, which are about
things that happened in the past, prospective memory is about remembering to perform a
planned action at some point in the future. Prospective memory closely collaborates with
analytic thinking processes that allow the person to diagnose the situation. Thus, intention
memory activation often leads the person to engage conscious self-talk and explicit
7 The explicit self-representations supported by intention memory form what social cognition researchers have
termed the person’s self-concept (Swann Jr. et al., 2007)or what psychoanalysts have termed ‘the ego’ (Westen
et al., 2008). Within PSI theory, such explicit self-representations are distinguished from integrative self-repre-
sentations, which are assumed to be supported by complex intuitive processing (Kuhl et al., 2015).
From Intentions to Action 27
problem-solving. These analytic, consciously verbalizable cognitive processes are meant to
help the person to formulate action plans.
In many situations where intention memory is activated, the person’s difficulties can
be resolved relatively easily. The positive affect that results from finding a solution will be
enough to leave the static mode, allowing the action plan to reconnect with intuitive behav-
ior control. Sometimes, however, the person’s difficulties endure. In such situations, the
static mode of action control will persist. In this state of ‘passive goal fixation’ (Kuhl, 2018),
the person is unable to access intuitive behavior control in demanding situations, which
makes intention enactment slow and inflexible.
The static mode may thus give rise to a somewhat paradoxical state in which the per-
son is passive at a behavioral level (due to inhibition of intuitive behavioral control) while be-
ing simultaneously highly active at a cognitive level (during to activation of intention
memory. Within ACT , this distinctive psychological state is known as passive goal fixation
(Kuhl, 2018). During passive goal fixation, the person is often preoccupied with their inner
states (e.g., self-talk, introspection, self-analysis). ACT therefore refers to people who are
prone to passive goal fixation as ‘state-oriented’ people. We cover empirical research on
state orientation and passive goal fixation in section 4.3.
2.2.3 Vulnerability to Depression
The third component of intention memory is inhibition of positive affect. As dis-
cussed in section 2.1.3, positive affect serves to energize intuitive behavior control. Inhibi-
tion of positive affect is therefore typically necessary to realize inhibition of intuitive behav-
ior control. When the person’s difficulties can be easily resolved, inhibition of positive affect
From Intentions to Action 28
will be brief. Indeed, in many situations, inhibition of positive affect may be so brief that the
person hardly realizes that it has occurred.
When the person encounters enduring difficulties, however, the state of inhibited
positive affect may persist for longer periods of time. In this type of situation, the static
mode of action control may increase the person’s vulnerability to depression (Kuhl & Helle,
1986; Rholes et al., 1989) and stress-related complaints (Baumann et al., 2005). These prob-
lems may be exacerbated when the person enters into a state of passive goal fixation, which
makes it harder for the person to act upon their goals. The resulting lack of goal achieve-
ment may further lower the person’s resilience, given that successful goal achievement con-
tributes to mental health (McGregor & Little, 1998). We cover empirical research on these
psychological vulnerabilities in section 4.3.3
2.3 Flexible Determination: The Dynamic Mode of Action Control
The automatic mode and the static mode each come with certain tradeoffs. The auto-
matic mode is fast and flexible in enacting established behavioral routines, but it is not well-
equipped for new and unexpected difficulties. The latter can be addressed in the static
mode, which can use intention memory to formulate new action plans and keep them in
mind. However, the resulting action plans cannot be efficiently enacted, given that intention
memory inhibits intuitive behavior control. Thus, to optimize action control, it would be
ideal if the person could find some way of combining the efficiency of intuitive behavior con-
trol with the rigor of intention memory.
From Intentions to Action 29
ψ 8
According to ACT , people can accomplish such a combination in the dynamic mode
of action control. The dynamic mode requires that the person is capable of motivating them-
selves to a sufficient degree to be able to switch from the static mode to the automatic
mode on their own. Because of the importance of the self in supporting the dynamic mode,
this mode is most accessible when the person’s intentions are self-directed rather than ex-
ternally imposed. In section 4.2.1, we cover empirical research on the significance of self-di-
rection in volitional action control. In the dynamic mode, behavioral regulation flexibly alter-
nates between intuitive behavior control and intention memory. This process is visualized in
2.3.1 Fluent Switching
Action control in the dynamic mode can readily move between the automatic and
static modes. In more concrete terms, this means that the person switches between activa-
tion of intention memory, which decouple perception and action, and intuitive behavior con-
trol, which recouples perception and action. This switching between opposing cognitive-mo-
tivational states can occur from moment to moment, giving rise to highly dynamic psycho-
logical states -that is why we call this the ‘dynamic mode’ of action control.
The capacity for flexible switching between systems permits the person to optimize
the use of each mode to the demands of the situation. When the situation involves difficul-
ties, the person activates intention memory (decoupling perception and action). However, as
8 The dynamic mode in ACTψ corresponds with the metastatic mode within classic ACT (Kuhl, 1984). The notion
of metastasis refers to a change of position, state, or form and is nowadays most known from the spread of
cancer cells across the body. Because the latter metaphor seems unsuitable, we opted for a different term. The
term ‘dynamic’ is a nod to Lewin’s (1935) notion of dynamic tension systems, whose waxing and waning he re-
garded as the driving forces of motivation. Moreover, ‘dynamics’ are explained within PSI theory (Kuhl, 2000a)
in terms of the affective modulation of the connectivity between personality systems. The latter seems fitting
given that the third volitional mode relates to self-regulated switches between intention memory and intuitive
behavior control.
From Intentions to Action 30
soon as an appropriate intention is formed, the person can go back to intuitive behavior con-
trol (intention-action fusion). Thus, even under demanding conditions, which necessitate the
use of intention memory, the person can maintain access to the efficiency and contextual
sensitivity of intuitive behavior control in enacting their intentions. This circumvents the
problem of passive goal fixation, which is inherent to the static model of action control. All
the while, the person can call upon intention memory in forming new action plans, bypass-
ing the limitations of intuitive behavior control.
2.3.2 Affect Regulation
What allows people in the dynamic mode to switch fluently between intuitive behav-
ior control and intention memory? According to ACT , the answer lies in affect regulation.
Recall that positive affect modulates the balance between intuitive behavior control and in-
tention memory: Under high positive affect, the person’s motivational energy shifts toward
intuitive behavior control; under low positive affect (i.e., increased difficulty), the person’s
motivational energy shifts toward intention memory (Kuhl & Kazén, 1999). Consequently, a
person who is capable of self-regulating positive affect can flexibly switch between intuitive
behavior control and intention memory.
According to ACT , this affect-regulatory competency is characteristic of people high
on action orientation (Koole & Kuhl, 2008). Action-oriented people -unlike their state-ori-
ented counterparts- can use their affect-regulation competencies to optimize the balance
between intuitive behavior control and intention memory. During demanding situations, ac-
tion-oriented people up-regulate positive affect to maintain access to intuitive behavior con-
trol. Affect-regulation competencies may thus allow action-oriented people to enact their
intentions more flexibly and efficiently than their state-oriented counterparts.
From Intentions to Action 31
2.3.3 Acquisition of Affect Regulation Competencies
Given that affect-regulation competencies enable flexible action control, it becomes
important to understand where such competencies come from. According to ACT , the per-
son acquires affect-regulation competencies via socialization experiences. This socialization
begins presumably during early childhood (Kuhl, 2000a). Autonomy-supportive interactions
with significant others, like family members and close friends, can provide the person with
the emotional security that is needed to tolerate and overcome demanding conditions (Feld-
man et al., 1999; Mikulincer et al., 2003; Schore, 2015). Specifically, when the person ex-
presses a frustrating experience, caregivers may provide that person with encouragement.
With each autonomy-supportive episode, the person’s self will become more strongly
associated with the transition from low positive affect (due to the demanding situation) to
high positive affect (due to the encouragement) (Koole & Coenen, 2007). When the associa-
tions between the self and positive affect become sufficiently strong, they allow the person
to self-regulate positive affect. Different experiences with interpersonal affect regulation
thus give rise to variations in volitional affect-regulation competencies, which -at least, theo-
retically- underlie individual differences in action orientation versus state orientation.
Competencies at volitional affect regulation are thus closely tied to the person’s self.
It follows that volitional affect regulation is especially available when the person engages in
self-directed actions. We cover empirical research relevant to this notion in Section 4.2.1.
Moreover, volitional affect regulation plays an important role in the health functioning o the
self, that is, in the person’s enduring psychological health and personal growth. We cover
empirical research relevant to this notion in Section 4.4.3.
From Intentions to Action 32
2.4 Summary
Drawing from ACT (Kuhl, 1984) and PSI theory (Kuhl, 2000a), ACT (‘act-psi’) provides
a functional-design analysis of intentional action control. The theory distinguishes three
modes of action control. First, in the automatic mode, behavior is guided by intuitive action
routines that are characterized by fused perception-behavior links, supported by holistic par-
allel- processing, and energized by positive affect. Second, in the static mode, intention
memory inhibits intuitive behavior and positive affect, supported by analytic thinking and
cognitive maintenance of intentions. The static mode is most commonly found among peo-
ple with a chronic disposition toward state orientation, who are prone to passive goal fixa-
tion. Third and last, in the dynamic mode, the person flexibly alternates between intuitive
behavior and intention memory using affect-regulation competencies. The dynamic mode is
most commonly found among people with a chronic disposition toward action orientation,
who are characterized by flexible determination in goal pursuit, especially when goals are
demanding and self-directed.
3. Measuring Individual Differences in Volitional Action Control
Roughly two thousand years ago, the Greek historian Polybius (circa 200-118 BCE)
noted that, ‘…some men, like bad runners in the stadium, abandon their purposes when close
to the goal; while it is at that particular point, more than at any other, that others secure the
victory over their rivals’ (Histories, Book 16, chapter 28; Polybius, 2012). Observers of human
nature thus appear to have long recognized that people differ in the enactment of their in-
tentions.
The first scientific effort to individual differences in volitional action control was con-
ducted by Ach (1910/2006). Ach asked his participants to first practice specific responses to
From Intentions to Action 33
nonsense syllables (e.g., provide a rhyming sound) until they became habitual. Next, partici-
pants had to switch to a new type of response (e.g., simply reading the syllables aloud). The
numbe of practice trials at which participants were still capable of overriding their habitual
responses was taken as an index of volitional strength. Though ingenious, Ach’s method was
cumbersome, involving a complex protocol and hours of practicing monotonous activities by
each participant. Moreover, Ach’s stimuli were artificial, so it was unclear whether his ob-
served individual differences generalized to volitional action control in real-life situations.
During the 1980s and 1990s, Kuhl and associates adapted modern psychometric
methods to develop a self-report instrument for assessing individual differences in volitional
action control. This instrument has become known as the Action Control Scale (Kuhl, 1994).
In this section, we review the scale, its psychometric properties, and stability over time.
3.1 The Action Control Scale
The Action Control Scale (ACS-90; Kuhl, 1994) has three subscales, that each relate
to a different set of volitional competencies. Among these three, only the demand-related
subscale bears directly on intention-behavior relations. This subscale is our main interest in
9 A second, less widely used, instrument is the self-motivation scale of the Volitional Components
Questionnaire (VCQ; Kuhl & Fuhrmann, 1998; see also Forstmeier & Rüddel, 2008). The VCQ is designed to pro-
vide a comprehensive assessment that is based on PSI theory (Kuhl, 2000a). The self-motivation scale has 5
items and is thus briefer than the 12-item AOD-scale (Kuhl, 1994). Nevertheless, the two scales are designed to
tap into the same underlying construct, and responses to them tend to be highly correlated. We therefore treat
the self-motivation scale as an alternative measure of action versus state orientation.
The demand-related subscale of the Action Control Scale is -rather confusingly- known under various
other names. The name initially proposed by Kuhl (1994) was ‘decision-related action orientation versus state
orientation’. However, the term ‘decision-related’ does not fully capture the theoretical meaning of the scale. In
our view, the label ‘demand-related action versus state orientation’ best captures the conceptual meaning of
the scale. We therefore use this label to distinguish the scale from other facets of action orientation (e.g., threat-
related action orientation).
From Intentions to Action 34
this chapter, given that it is the most widely used instrument to measure individual differ-
In discussing the AOD-scale, we adopt some linguistic conveniences. First, we gener-
ally use ‘action versus state orientation’ to refer to the demand-related facet of action-state
orientation. Second, we refer to people who score relatively high on this subscale as ‘action-
oriented people’ and to people who score relatively low on this subscale as ‘state-oriented
in action versus state orientation in a graded, dimensional manner. Third and last, we usually
refer the AOD-scale when talking about the specific items of the demand-related subscale of
the ACS90.
stated the form of a ‘If… then’-proposition. The ‘if’ part always describes a specific, broadly
recognizable demanding situation that the person might find themselves in. This part is de-
signed to rule out individual differences in sensitivity or exposure to demanding situations.
Some people may have a high threshold for experiencing a situation as demanding or not of-
ten find themselves in demanding situations. Nevertheless, even the latter people will at
least have experienced some demanding situations. The ‘if’ part of the AOD ensures that
every test taker will bring a relevant class of demanding situations in mind. Note that the
types of demanding situations that are specified in the ‘if’-part of the items are somewhat
varied. This variability ensures that the AOD-scale taps into a general disposition that is ap-
plicable across domains.
The ‘then’ part of each AOD-item specifies two qualitatively different ways of coping
with the demanding situations. One option always corresponds with a state-oriented way of
From Intentions to Action 35
coping (static mode). Another option always corresponds with an action-oriented way of
coping (dynamic mode). The dichotomous nature of the ‘then’ part is based on the theoreti-
cal idea that, in a given situation, the person’s coping responses will be directed toward one
of the two volitional modes (static versus dynamic). The coping strategies always refer to
outwardly observable behaviors. The latter minimizes the need for participants to rely on in-
trospection, given that the validity of introspection is limited for untrained participants (Wil-
son et al., 1989).
3.2 Translations and Psychometric Properties of the Action Control Scale
The AOD-scale first appeared in German and English (Kuhl, 1994). In subsequent
years, the scale has been translated into at least 16 additional languages, including Bengali
(Chatterjee et al., 2018), Chinese (Song et al., 2006), Croatian (Niemivirta et al., 2001), Dutch
(Koole & Jostmann, 2004), Farsi (Calero et al., 2007), Finnish (Niemivirta et al., 2001), French
(Bouzidi & Gendolla, 2022), Greek (Papantoniou et al., 2010), Indonesian (Elia et al., 2022),
Japanese (Sakuma & Sato, 2008), Polish (Marszał-Wiśniewska, 2002), Portuguese (Branco et
al., 2015), Russian (Shlyapnikov, 2020), Spanish (Calero et al., 2007), Turkish (Peker & Meşe,
2021), and Vietnamese (Helmke & Tuyet, 1999). Across these languages, the AOD-scale has
consistently shown adequate internal consistency, with Cronbach’s alphas typically ranging
between .60 and .80. Higher internal consistencies might be achievable by sampling items
more narrowly from a specific coping domain. However, the latter would compromise the
validity of the AOD-scale as a measure of a general, cross-domain disposition. The AOD-scale
thus optimizes rather than maximizes internal consistency.
Factor-analytic studies have consistently found that the items from the AOD-scale -
again, across different translations- form an internally consistent cluster that is separable
From Intentions to Action 36
from other personality traits (Diefendorff et al., 2000; Papantoniou et al., 2010; Peker &
Meşe, 2021). For instance, in two samples of Turkish students (N = 569) and Turkish employ-
ees (N = 377), the items of the AOD-scale emerged as a reliable factor that was distinct from
the other two (i.e., threat-related and performance-related) subscales of the Action Control
Scale (Peker & Meşe, 2021). The AOD-scale usually shows moderate to small overlap with
the ‘Big Five’ personality dimensions -extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness, neu-
roticism, and intellect/culture. For instance, among a sample of 239 American university stu-
dents, all of the Big Five and dispositional affect were found to explain 28% of the variations
in AOD scores (Diefendorff et al., 2000). The Big Five dimension that is most consistently
positively correlated with the AOD-scale is conscientiousness. In the aforementioned Ameri-
can study, this correlation was r = .38, indicating an overlap of 14% between conscientious-
ness and the AOD-scale.
Aside from the broad Big Five dimensions, it is important to establish whether the
AOD-scale is distinct from other, more specific personality traits. AOD studies have regularly
included measures of other, theoretically related, personality constructs, to establish
whether their predictive effects might overlap. Among the examined traits have been: a)
Self-related constructs like self-esteem (Koole, 2004; Kuehner & Huffziger, 2013), self-effi-
cacy (Sniehotta et al., 2005; Wolf et al., 2018), and self-focus (Diefendorff et al., 2000); b)
Motivational constructs like goal orientation (i.e., adopting mastery versus performance
goals; Diefendorff, 2004) achievement motivation (H. Heckhausen & Strang, 1988), achieve-
ment flow (Baumann & Scheffer, 2011), intrinsic motivation (de Ridder et al., 2009), need for
cognition (Grass et al., 2019), and approach motivation (Düsing et al., 2016a); c) Affective
constructs such as mood (Schlinkert & Koole, 2018), trait anxiety (Landman et al., 2016), trait
rumination (Koole, 2004), trait reappraisal (Koole & Jostmann, 2004), and trait vitality
From Intentions to Action 37
(Schlinkert & Koole, 2018) and; d) Cognitive constructs like general cognitive ability (Die-
fendorff et al., 2000) and working memory capacity (Jostmann & Koole, 2006, 2007).
Across the aforementioned specific traits, a consistent pattern of correlations has
emerged. Typically, the AOD-scale is correlated in the small-to-moderate range with each
specific trait, with correlations varying between .1 and .4. This suggests the AOD-scale and
specific personality traits have roughly between 1 and 20% overlap. At the same time, the
predictive effects of the AOD-scale rarely, if ever, become diminished after statistically con-
trolling for the influence of specific personality traits. The AOD-scale measures thus appears
to be a distinct aspect of personality that is irreducible to broad personality dimensions (like
conscientiousness) or specific self-related, motivational, affective, and cognitive personality
traits.
3.3 Stability and Change in Action-State Orientation
To the extent that action versus state orientation is an integral part of someone’s
personality, one would expect people’ s scores on the AOD-scale to be stable over time. A
preliminary indication of such stability is that AOD-scores have been found to predict behav-
ioral outcomes over a period of weeks (Diefendorff, 2004), months (Diefendorff et al., 2000),
and even years (Kuehner & Huffziger, 2013). More direct evidence for the stability of AOD-
scores has been provided by longitudinal studies (Bettschart et al., 2021; Frese et al., 1997).
The largest and most comprehensive study of this kind included 1,016 Swiss adults of varying
ages over one to four years (Bettschart et al., 2021). The rank-order stability of AOD-scores,
indexed by Pearson correlation coefficients from one measurement time to the next, ranged
between .76 to .80 over one year and between .68 to .74 over four years. These results -
From Intentions to Action 38
which similar to those found in other studies- suggest that individual differences in action
versus state orientation are rather stable over time.
Additional evidence points to genetic contributions to action versus state orientation
(Gustavson et al., 2014, 2015, 2017, 2019). For instance, Gustavson et al. (2014) examined
trait procrastination -using a composite measure that included the AOD-scale (Kuhl, 1994)-
among a sample of 181 monozygotic twin pairs and 166 dizygotic twin pairs. Using statistical
estimation methods from behavioral genetics, the researchers found that trait procrastina-
tion had a moderate heritability of 46%. Although trait procrastination was separable from
trait impulsivity at the phenotypic level (r = .65), the two traits were perfectly correlated at
the genetic level. Moreover, the genetic overlap between trait procrastination and trait im-
pulsivity was explained by shared genetic influences on the ability to use high-priority goals
to effectively regulate actions. These findings point to a meaningful contribution of genetic
factors to individual differences in action versus state orientation.
This is not to say that individual differences in action versus state orientation are im-
pervious to life experiences. The aforementioned behavioral genetics studies indicate that
more than half of the variations in action versus state orientation is explained by situational
factors. Action-oriented people have been found to recall more parental support during
their childhood than state -oriented people (Liesenfeld, 2018), which fits with the idea that
action versus state orientation is at least partly shaped by early socialization experiences.
However, a well-designed behavioral genetics study of more than 400 twin pairs found no
contribution of family environment to individual differences in action-state orientation (Gus-
tavson et al., 2019). The latter findings suggest that most of the variance in action-state
From Intentions to Action 39
orientation may be explained by environmental influences outside the family, such as inter-
actions with peers and educators.
Large-scale studies of personality development indicate that, generally speaking, the
greatest changes in personality traits like conscientiousness and emotional stability occur in
young adulthood (Bleidorn et al., 2022). This developmental pattern may also apply to ac-
tion-state orientation. One hint in this direction can be found in a study among 327 German
aspiring young athletes, where young athletes had higher action orientation when they were
living on the campus of a sport school, which presumably stimulated their athletic achieve-
ments, rather than at home (Elbe et al., 2005). These findings fit with the notion that sociali-
zation from peers and educators may influence the person’s action versus state orientation
in early adulthood. Still, the latter findings are no more than suggestive, and more research
is needed to examine social influences on the development of action-state orientation in
early adulthood.
Both cross-sectional and longitudinal studies indicate that action orientation in-
creases throughout adulthood (Bettschart et al., 2021; Gröpel et al., 2004; Kessler &
Staudinger, 2009). For instance, one cross-sectional study among more than 14,000 German
adults (Gröpel et al., 2004) observed that action orientation scores were half a standard de-
viation higher from the age of 18 years, the youngest age group, to 70 years, the oldest age
group. The steepest increase in action orientation occurred in early adulthood, among peo-
ple from the ages of 18 to 25. Nevertheless, there was still an increase in action orientation
observable from the ages of 50 to 70. Age-related increases in action orientation fit with the
well-documented broader trend for people to become more agreeable, conscientious, and
emotionally stable across the lifespan (Bleidorn et al., 2022; Specht et al., 2014).
From Intentions to Action 40
Age-related increases in action orientation are presumably driven by a combination
of life experiences and biological maturation. More specifically, action orientation may in-
crease over the lifespan as people become increasingly inclined to engage selectively with
self-congruent activities and social relationships (Carstensen, 2021). Such increases in selec-
tivity are likely to increase mastery experiences, which, in turn, may foster the person’s gen-
eral disposition toward action orientation (Kuhl, 2000a). Notably, after the 6th decade of
life, well-being no longer increases and may even decline for most people (Sliwinski & Scott,
2014). This reduction in wellbeing is also apparent in the final years of life (Gerstorf et al.,
2010). We are not aware of research on the development of action orientation in old age.
Nevertheless, in view the aforementioned findings, we would expect action orientation to
become reduced after the 6th decade of life and during the person’s final years. We return
to the question of how action orientation may be optimally fostered in the last section of
this chapter.
3.4 Summary
Individual differences in volitional action control have been mostly assessed with the de-
mand-related subscale of Action Control Scale (AOD). People who score high on the AOD
scale are referred to as ‘action-oriented people’, whereas people who score relatively low on
the scale are referred to as ‘state-oriented people’. The AOD scale appears to be reliable and
taps into a distinct aspect of personality. As a personality trait, action-state orientation dis-
plays both stability and change over the lifespan. In early adulthood, most people display in-
crease in action orientation, presumably because they gain more direction over their own
activities. Action orientation further tends to increase at least up to the 6th decade of life,
presumably due to gradual improvements in person-environment fit.
From Intentions to Action 41
4. Empirical Review
Over the last four decades, the action-theoretical perspective has inspired hundreds
of studies (for overviews, see Koole et al., 2019; Kuhl, 1984; Kuhl et al., 2021a). In this sec-
tion, we review this body of work as it pertains to the role of action versus state orientation
in intention-behavior relations. The present review is integrative, by considering the role of
action versus state orientation across traditionally separate sub-disciplines in psychology.
The present review is also selective, prioritizing studies that are methodologically stronger
and more theoretically relevant . Because of this selectiveness, the present review is not
suitable for deriving the strength of the examined empirical relations, which would require a
meta-analysis of all the available evidence. While we encourage such meta-analytic efforts,
they are beyond the scope of this chapter.
The present review is divided into four sections. In section 4.1, we review research on
the role of action-state orientation in enacting intentions in real-life settings. In section 4.2,
we review more controlled research on action versus state orientation and intention enact-
ment. The subsequent sections turn to research on some of the processes that may explain
the differences in intention enactment between action- versus state-oriented people. In sec-
tion 4.3, we cover research on the cognitive representation of intentions, which has been a
11 To prepare for the present review, we started by surveying the entire literature on action versus state orien-
tation (measured by the AOD-scale or an equivalent scale) and intention-behavior relations. We divided this
literature into four parts: 1) Enacting intentions in real-life settings; 2) Controlled research on intention enact-
ment; 3) Cognitive representation of intentions; 4) Affect regulation. Our original plan was to discuss all these
studies. However, the resulting narrative review was too long. The review was also hard to read because there
was much space devoted to relatively unimportant studies. We therefore chose to restrict the present review
to a selection of the most important AOD studies. For readers who are interested in the broader AOD litera-
ture, we created an overview of all the studies we found and their main findings. This overview can be accessed
From Intentions to Action 42
key focus of action-theoretical researchers. Finally, in Section 4.4, we consider research on
volitional affect regulation.
4.1 Enacting Intentions in Real-Life Settings
Researchers in the action-theoretical tradition have devoted considerable efforts to
volitional action control in real-life settings. Characteristic for real-life settings is that they
tend to be messy and involve rapid changes in the social context (see also section 2.1.3). As
such, maintaining access to intuitive behavior control will likely enhance the efficiency of in-
tention enactment in real-life settings. For many, if not most, real-life settings, ACT there-
fore predicts that action-oriented people will be more efficient at volitional action control
than state-oriented people. We refer to this as the volitional efficiency hypothesis.
Historically, the very first study on individual differences in action versus state orien-
tation was conducted in a real-life setting, among students of a German high school who re-
ported on their after-school activities (Kuhl, 1982). Education has since then become one of
the most investigated real-life settings in action-theoretical research, besides work and
health behavior. In what follows, we review studies on the volitional efficiency hypothesis in
these three important life domains.
4.1.1 Education
Education is one of the major arenas where people in modern society are expected
to form and enact difficult intentions. Because people differ in cognitive ability (Flaim &
Blaisdell, 2020), educational outcomes (e.g., school grades) are not fully under every stu-
dents’ volitional control. Of greatest theoretical significance are hence studies focusing on
12 The term ‘volitional efficiency’ originates from Kuhl and Kazen-Saad (1988).
From Intentions to Action 43
students’ study activities, particular those that are self-directed. According to ACT , action-
oriented people should be more efficient in implementing their intended study activities
than state-oriented people.
Consistent with the volitional efficiency hypothesis, various studies have observed
that action-oriented people are more efficient in realizing their study intentions than state-
oriented people (Boekaerts & Otten, 1993; Dahling et al., 2015; Doumen et al., 2014; Jara-
millo & Spector, 2004; Volet, 1997). One representative study was conducted among 275
Greek university students with varying levels of action versus state orientation (Papantoniou
et al., 2010) who answered questions about their self-regulated learning strategies. The
study was conducted in the context of an introductory course in psychology. Action-oriented
students, compared with state-oriented students, reported a greater willingness to monitor
the effectiveness of their learning, to manage their time and study environment more effec-
tively, and to exert more effort to learning, despite potential distractions. This difference in
self-regulated learning strategies statistically accounted for the better course grades that ac-
tion-oriented students achieved relative to state-oriented students.
In other studies, action-oriented students, compared with state-oriented students,
have been found to report procrastinating less (Blunt & Pychyl, 1998, 2005; Chowdhury &
Pychyl, 2018; Li et al., 2021) and missing fewer deadlines for class assignments (Beswick &
Mann, 1994) compared with state-oriented students. At the same time, action-oriented stu-
dents appear more inclined than state-oriented students to strategically use delays to opti-
mize performance and stress levels (Blunt & Pychyl, 1998, 2005; Chowdhury & Pychyl, 2018).
These findings fit with the idea that action-oriented students are flexible in how they meet
their academic goals. The latter is in contrast to state-oriented students, who are more
From Intentions to Action 44
prone to oriented themselves toward externally imposed study deadlines.
4.1.2 Work
Work is a vital part of people’s lives, not only for its material benefits, but also as a
source for social relationships, daily structure, and meaning in life (Ward & King, 2017). Dif-
ferent types of work obviously require different types of activities. Nevertheless, virtually all
jobs require some amount of planning and intentional action, often under demanding cir-
cumstances. Consequently, work settings provide a major arena for volitional action control.
For most people, work life begins with searching suitable employment. In a competi-
tive job market, this can be a grinding task, which requires flexibility and determination.
Given this context, ACT predicts that action-oriented job seekers will be more efficient in
job-seeking than their state-oriented counterparts. This hypothesis has been examined in
several studies (Song et al., 2006; van Hooft et al., 2005; Wanberg et al., 2010). The most
comprehensive investigation in this area examined 328 unemployed Chinese job seekers
over a two-week period (Song et al., 2006). Action-oriented job seekers -compared with
state-oriented people- were more likely to convert their positive attitudes toward job seek-
ing into job-seeking intentions. Moreover, action-oriented people were more likely to enact
their job-seeking intentions than state-oriented people, as indicated by self-reported job
search behavior over the last two weeks.
Once people find a suitable occupation, they have to meet a wide array of work de-
mands. On the basis of ACT , we can expect work demands to be managed more efficiently
by workers who are action-oriented rather state-oriented, especially when the work is self-
directed and demanding. Various studies examined the relation between action orientation
and job performance (Diefendorff et al., 2006; Jaramillo et al., 2007; Przepiorka, 2017; Sack
From Intentions to Action 45
& Witte, 1989). A landmark study in the area was conducted by Diefendorff et al. (2000)
among 247 employed American university students. Job performance, as rated by supervi-
sors, was higher for action-oriented workers than for state-oriented workers. Moreover, su-
pervisors observed that action-oriented workers -compared with state-oriented workers- en-
gaged in more organizational citizenship behavior, that is, voluntary work-related activities
that are not part of worker’s official job description, like helping colleagues or not complain-
ing about small issues. The association between action-state orientation and work behavior
remained statistically reliable after controlling for all Big Five personality dimensions and de-
mographic variables like age, sex, and organizational tenure.
4.1.3 Health Behavior
Healthy living requires behaviors that are often difficult to enact, especially in mod-
ern societies, where most people lead a sedentary lifestyle with easy access to high-calorie
foods and unhealthy drugs like cigarettes and alcohol. According to ACT , this means that
the enactment of appropriate health behaviors is likely to benefit from volitional action con-
trol. Several studies have examined the relation between action versus state orientation and
various health-related behaviors, like eating (Hennecke & Freund, 2016; Oginska-Bulik, 2005;
Palfai, 2002; Reese et al., 2016), alcohol use (Palfai et al., 2002), physical exercise (S. A. H.
Friederichs et al., 2013; Kendzierski, 1990), and bedtime procrastination (Kadzikowska-
Wrzosek, 2018; Kroese et al., 2014). Across these behaviors, action-oriented people have
been found to enact health-related behaviors more efficiently than state-oriented people.
One representative study examined a national sample of 347 Dutch people (S. A. H.
Friederichs et al., 2013). Action-oriented respondents displayed stronger correlations be-
tween intentions to go for a walk and self-reported walking behavior than state-oriented re-
spondents. Action-oriented respondents, but not state-oriented individuals, also showed a
From Intentions to Action 46
significant link between perceived behavioral control and actual walking behavior. By con-
trast, state-oriented individuals, but not action-oriented individuals, displayed a significant
link between social norms about walking and actual walking behavior.
4.1.4 Summary and Outlook
The role of action versus state orientation in intention-behavior relations has been
examined in various real-life settings. Our selective review focused on the domains of educa-
tion, work, and health. In each domain, action-oriented people have been found to enact
their intentions more efficiently than state-oriented people. As such, the volitional efficiency
hypothesis has been supported for a variety of meaningful real-life behaviors. Notable are
the diverse types of behaviors whose enactment is moderated by action versus state orien-
tation: Study behavior, work behavior, and health behavior each involve very different sets
of activities. This diversity fits with the idea that volitional action control is a general compe-
tency that cuts across specific domains.
At the same time, the evidence from action-theoretical studies in real-life settings is
limited in some important ways. First, with few exceptions (Diefendorff et al., 2000), studies
in real-life settings used mostly self-reports of behavior, which are susceptible to various bi-
ases, such as socially desirable responding (Paulhus & Vazire, 2007). Moreover, except for a
handful of studies (Diefendorff et al., 2006; Fuhrmann & Kuhl, 1998), action-theoretical stud-
ies in real-life settings have paid little attention to theoretical moderators of the effects of
action versus state orientation. Fortunately, as the next section shows, such moderators
have received more attention in controlled laboratory studies.
4.2 Enacting Intentions in Controlled Environments
A number of studies have examined the role of action versus state orientation in en-
acting intentions in more controlled environments. Most of these controlled studies have
From Intentions to Action 47
been conducted in a psychological laboratory, though some used other types of controlled
environments, like a gym (e.g., H. Heckhausen & Strang, 1988) or a shooting track (Landman
et al., 2016). Controlled environments are admittedly more artificial than studies in real-life
settings. Nevertheless, studying controlled environments offer some important methodolog-
ical advantages. First, controlled environments are better equipped to obtain objective
measures of intentional behavior, which is important to rule out self-report bias such as so-
cial desirability. Second, controlled environments allow researchers to systematically vary
the kinds of tasks that people perform and the conditions under which people do this. The
latter makes it more feasible to examine theoretical moderators of the effects of action ver-
sus state orientation. In what follows, we review research on two potential moderators of
the effects of action versus state orientation on intention enactment: Demand level and self-
direction.
4.2.1 The Demand Hypothesis
A first theoretical moderator of volitional action control is the degree to which action
control is demanding. When performing an action is easy, the person can simply rely on intu-
itive behavior control. Volitional processes -and thus, differences between action- versus
state-oriented people- should mainly come into play when action control is demanding
(though not to such a degree that it is beyond the person’s capability). We refer to the latter
as the demand hypothesis.
According to ACT , demanding conditions may arise from either the nature of the ac-
tion itself or its broader context. Performing an action becomes more demanding when the
person has to rely more on intention memory and less on well-practiced behavioral routines.
This occurs, for instance, when people have to suppress habitual response tendencies
From Intentions to Action 48
(Jostmann & Koole, 2007), receive coercive task instructions (Baumann & Kuhl, 2005), or are
exhorted to perform well (Heckhausen & Strang, 1988). In a related vein, the context of an
action becomes more demanding under conditions that lower positive affect, such as when
people are offered performance-contingent rewards (Koole & Jostmann, 2004, Study 1),
when people get bored (Blunt & Pychyl, 2005), when people reminded of an upcoming de-
manding task (Kazén et al., 2008) or of prior demanding experiences (Jostmann & Koole,
2006), or when people have to face multiple task demands (Mangos et al., 2007).
4.2.1.1 Task Demands
The most direct way in which demand levels can be manipulated is by varying param-
eters of the task that the person has to complete. According to ACT , a task becomes more
demanding to the extent that the person cannot rely on intuitive behavior control. Thus, any
aspect of the task that requires the person to override habitual response tendencies and rely
on intention memory potentially involves an increase in task demands.
A prototypical paradigm for studying task demands is the classic Stroop (1935) task,
in which the person has to inhibit overlearned reading tendencies while naming the ink col-
ors of color words (e.g., the word RED printed in blue ink). The amount of interference from
word-reading, also known as ‘the Stroop effect’ (MacLeod, 1991), can be taken as an index
of the effectiveness of intentional action control. There are also other ways of increasing
task demands, such as adding a second task to each trial (Jostmann & Koole, 2007, Study 2),
introducing a prospective memory load (Kazén et al., 2008), or changing task requirements
during the task (Jostmann & Gieselmann, 2014; Ruigendijk & Koole, 2014). From the per-
spective of ACT , these kinds of procedures have in common that they lead the person to
rely less on intuitive behavior control and more on intention memory.
From Intentions to Action 49
One representative study among 53 Dutch undergraduates found that, after perform-
ing a working memory task, action-oriented participants displayed less interference in the
Stroop color-naming task than state-oriented participants (Jostmann & Koole, 2007, Study
1). A similar pattern was observed in other studies using the Stroop task (e.g., K. M.
Friederichs et al., 2020; Jostmann & Koole, 2007) and with other types of tasks that include
increases in task demands. For instance, a study among 85 Dutch undergraduates examined
the Tower of Hanoi task (Kotovsky et al., 1985) in which participants have to move disks
across three rods towards a goal position (Jostmann & Gieselmann, 2014). Though the initial
trials could be solved with a simple strategy, later trials became harder and required a more
complex strategy. Action-oriented participants were found to adjust better to the new strat-
egy and solved the difficult trials in fewer moves than state-oriented individuals.
4.2.1.2 Contextual Demands
Besides immediate task demands, the broader context in which the task is performed
may also increase in demand levels. Examples of demanding contexts are prolonged task en-
gagement (Jostmann & Koole, 2007, Study 3), memory load (Kaschel et al., 2017), perfor-
mance pressure (H. Heckhausen & Strang, 1988; Landman et al., 2016), and demanding in-
teraction partners (Jostmann & Koole, 2006). According to ACT , the performance advantage
of action-oriented people -versus their state-oriented counterparts- should emerge espe-
cially when both the task and its broader context are demanding. This contextual version of
the demand hypothesis has been tested in the Stroop task (Jostmann & Koole, 2007), the
Tower of Hanoi task (Jostmann & Gieselmann, 2014), and related tasks (e.g., Ruigendijk &
Koole, 2014). Across these tasks, the performance advantage of action-oriented people has
From Intentions to Action 50
emerged most strongly and reliably in contexts that were highly (rather than low) demand-
ing.
In view of these contextual effects, Koole et al. (2012) speculated that action versus
state orientation may also moderate the effects of ‘ego depletion’ (Baumeister et al., 2007),
a theoretical state of reduced energy after prior acts of self-regulation. Subsequent studies,
however, have found mixed support for this notion. Some studies indeed observed smaller
ego depletion effects among action- rather than state-oriented people (Dang et al., 2015;
Gröpel et al., 2014). However, a large-scale study (N= 2,463) using multiple ego depletion in-
ductions found no effects of action versus state orientation (Vohs et al., 2021). What makes
this finding more ambiguous is that the study found no evidence for ego depletion effects
altogether, fueling debates whether ego depletion is a genuine phenomenon (Dang et al.,
2021; Forestier et al., 2022; Friese et al., 2019). The potential role of action versus state ori-
entation in ego depletion thus remains unclear.
4.2.1.3 Summary Demand Hypothesis
According to the demand hypothesis, the enactment advantage of action-oriented
people -as compared with their state-oriented counterparts- should emerge especially for
more (rather than less) demanding tasks and contexts. Consistent with this, most controlled
studies have shown that action-oriented people enact their intentions more efficiently than
state-oriented people when both task and contextual demands were high. An exception to
this general pattern appears to be ego depletion, which has yielded inconsistent effects of
action versus state orientation (Vohs et al., 2021). More work is hence needed to clarify
whether and how ego depletion -to the extent it exists- differs other types of contextual de-
mands.
From Intentions to Action 51
4.2.2 The Self-Direction Hypothesis
A second theoretical moderator of the effects of action versus state orientation is the
degree to which action control is self-directed. According to ACT , volitional control be-
comes strengthened to the degree that the person’s self is more engaged in forming and en-
acting an intention. We refer to this as the self-direction hypothesis. Self-direction can be
bolstered in several ways, such as by allowing people to choose a course of action (Kuhl,
1992), by providing autonomy-supportive rather than controlling instructions (Baumann et
al., 2005), or by orienting actions toward approaching a reward rather than avoiding a pun-
ishment (Kuhl & Koole, 2008). ACT predicts that any enactment advantage that action-ori-
ented people have over state-oriented people should be most pronounced for actions that
are self-chosen, motivationally congruent, and self-initiated.
4.2.2.1 Personal Initiative
Actions that people have to initiate by themselves rely more on self-direction than
actions that are prompted by external triggers. The degree to which intention enactment re-
quires personal initiative can hence be expected to moderate the effects of action versus
state orientation. To examine this prediction, action-theoretical researchers have developed
several methods to experimentally vary the amount of personal initiative required by a task
(e.g., Jostmann & Koole, 2007; Kazén et al., 2008; Kuhl & Eisenbeiser, 1986).
One elegant set of studies used a cueing paradigm to manipulate personal initiative
(Kazén et al., 2008). Participants - a total of 64 German undergraduates- had to enact a se-
ries of simple hand movements (e.g., snapping one’s fingers; Study 1) or make cursor move-
ments on a computer screen (Study 2). The required movements were either cued by a clear
signal, an ambiguous signal, or not cued. The results showed that action-oriented partici-
pants were faster to initiate movements that were either not cued or cued by an ambiguous
From Intentions to Action 52
signal, especially among participants who reported listlessness (Study 1) or who were told
they had to complete a demanding task later (Study 2). Listlessness and incomplete inten-
tions are both associated with low positive affect, and therefore require more self-motiva-
tion. Analogous effects of task cueing have been documented in other studies (Jostmann &
Koole, 2007; Kaschel et al., 2017).
Other studies of personal initiative have used variations of a task switching paradigm,
such switching between videos (Kuhl & Eisenbeiser, 1986), between labor and leisure activi-
ties (Algermissen et al., 2019), and task resumption after an interruption (Birk et al., 2020).
Overall, the findings of these studies have confirmed that action-oriented people are more
efficient at transitioning between tasks and activities, especially under demanding or frus-
trating conditions.
4.2.2.2 Autonomy Support
Social contexts vary in the degree to which they support self-direction. So-called ‘au-
tonomy-supportive’ environments acknowledge and respect the person’s agency and free-
dom, which leaves more room for personal initiative (Deci et al., 1994). By contrast, so-called
‘controlling’ environments impose various pressures and obligations on the person, which
constrain personal initiative. Autonomy-supportive environments may hence be more con-
ducive to intention enactment for action-oriented people, whereas controlling environments
may be more conducive to intention enactment for state-oriented people.
One of the first studies to examine autonomy support as a potential moderator of
the effects of action versus state orientation was conducted among 80 American undergrad-
uates (Baumann & Kuhl, 2005). Participants performed a visual discrimination task that con-
sisted of multiple trials (Kuhl & Kraska, 1992). On some trials, an attractive visual distraction
appeared in the corner of the computer screen, in the form of a race between two monkeys
From Intentions to Action 53
that determined whether participants would win or lose money. Half of the participants re-
ceived controlling instructions in which the task was presented as an obligation (e.g., ‘you
should’, ‘you must’) and participants’ performance was explicitly compared with that of
other students. The other half of the participants received instructions that emphasized au-
tonomy and personal choice.
The results showed that state-oriented participants became more distracted when
they had received autonomy-supportive instructions rather than controlling instructions. By
contrast, action-oriented participants were not affected by the instructions. Stated differ-
ently, the performance advantage of action-oriented participants over their state-oriented
counterparts only emerged in an autonomy-supportive context, which is consistent with the
self-direction hypothesis. This pattern was conceptually replicated in a follow-up study using
a different sample -120 Polish adolescents- and a different experimental task -moving a cur-
sor on a computer screen with a mouse (Kadzikowska-Wrzosek, 2013). Autonomy support
thus appears to be consistent moderator of the effects of action versus state orientation.
4.2.2.3 Summary Self-Direction Hypothesis
According to the self-direction hypothesis, the enactment advantage of action-ori-
ented people compared with their state-oriented counterparts should emerge most strongly
and consistently for self-directed actions. Consistent with this, studies have shown that ac-
tion-oriented people enact their intentions more efficiently than state-oriented people when
actions are self-initiated and the context is autonomy-supportive, but not when actions are
externally cued and the context is controlling. Self-direction thus appears to be a key moder-
ator of the effects of action versus state orientation.
From Intentions to Action 54
4.2.3 Summary Controlled Studies of Intention Enactment
Across numerous controlled studies, demand level and self-direction have emerged
as moderators of the effects of action versus state orientation in enacting intentions. These
findings indicate that action-oriented people do not always outperform state-oriented peo-
ple across every type of task and in every situation. The latter is consistent with ACT . Ac-
cording to ACT
y,
action-oriented people only have an advantage compared with state-ori-
ented people when it comes to actions that are volitionally controlled. Volitional control
does not come into play (or at least, not as much) for actions that are low-demanding or ex-
ternally imposed. The moderating effects of self-direction and demands are thus consistent
with ACT ‘s volitional account of action versus state orientation.
So far, however, our discussion only considered the effects of action versus state ori-
entation on intention enactment. A deeper understanding of these effects requires insight
into the cognitive and affective processes that are underlying the behavioral effects of action
versus state orientation. We consider some of these processes in the next sections.
4.3 Cognitive Representation of Intentions
Traditionally, theories of goal striving have assumed that goal-directed action is facili-
tated by forming and maintaining explicit cognitive representations of one’s goals and inten-
tions (Austin & Vancouver, 1996; Locke & Latham, 2006; Moskowitz & Grant, 2009). From
this perspective, we might expect action-oriented people to develop more explicit cognitive
representations of their goals and intentions, and to keep these representations more acti-
vated throughout their goal pursuits, than state-oriented people.
An action-theoretical perspective, however, provides an alternative way of under-
standing the role of cognitive representations of intentions in volitional action control (Kuhl,
2000a). According to ACT , merely thinking about an intention is not enough to ensure that
From Intentions to Action 55
the intention will become enacted. In fact, the mental act of thinking about an intention may
put off its behavioral enactment when thoughts of an intention activate the static mode,
which inhibits intuitive behavior programs. This sequence may undercut the efficiency of ac-
tion control when it fosters an enduring state of passive goal fixation (see section 2.2.2). Ac-
cording to ACT , passive goal fixation is more likely to develop among people who are state-
oriented (rather than action-oriented). We refer to this as the passive goal fixation hypothe-
sis.
ACT proposes that efficient action control requires thinking sparingly about one’s
goals and intentions: To be sure, a person should think about their goals and intentions just
long enough to form them. But once they are formed, the person should not dwell on their
goals and intentions all that much, because this takes up precious time and effort. In an opti-
mal scenario, the person should bring goals and intentions to mind only when these can be
readily implemented in the situation at hand.
From the perspective of ACT , action-oriented people can thus be expected to spend
less time and effort than state-oriented people in deliberating about their goals and inten-
tions, and in keeping their goals and intentions activated in working memory. Although ac-
tion-oriented people form explicit representations of their goals and intentions, just like
their state-oriented counterparts, action-oriented people use these explicit representations
more economically. Parsimonious use of explicit representations of intentions is thus one of
the key factors that allows action-oriented people to achieve a greater volitional efficiency
than state-oriented people.
In considering how action- versus state-oriented people cognitively represent their
intentions, it is helpful to distinguish different stages in the life cycle of an intention. First, an
From Intentions to Action 56
intention has to be formed. Second, once formed, the intention needs to be maintained in
memory until it can be enacted. Memory representations of intention-related information
may be explicit information that is activated in working memory. In addition, intention-re-
lated information may be represented in implicit memory, as behavioral skills or routines.
Third and last, when the intention is no longer relevant (e.g., because the person’s priorities
have changed), it has to be deactivated or erased from memory. Each of these stages has
been addressed in action-theoretical research.
4.3.1 Intention Formation
The first stage in the psychological life cycle of an intention occurs when an intention
is beginning to take shape in a person’s mind. The process of forming an intention can be un-
derstood as a form of decision-making, during which the person is weighing the pros and
cons of various courses of action (H. Heckhausen & Kuhl, 1985). A number of controlled
studies have examined the role of action versus state orientation in decision-making tasks
(e.g., bets with different odds of winning and losing). These decision-making studies provide
a window into how action- versus state-oriented people go about forming their intentions.
Several studies have observed that action-oriented people’s decisions are best pre-
dicted by simple heuristics, whereas state-oriented people’s decisions are better predicted
by more complex decision rules (e.g., Kuhl & Beckmann, 1983; Stiensmeier-Pelster et al.,
1991; for an overview, see Stiensmeier-Pelster, 1994). For instance, one study of 92 German
undergraduates (Stiensmeier-Pelster et al., 1989, Study 1) found that action-oriented partici-
pants in a series of gambles tended to decide on reward probabilities alone, whereas state-
oriented participants tended to use a weighted combination of reward probabilities and
amounts. These findings suggest that state-oriented people are more prone to extensive and
From Intentions to Action 57
even-handed deliberations during decision-making, whereas action-oriented people rely
more on cognitive shortcuts. This pattern is consistent with the idea that action-oriented
people are more parsimonious in forming their intentions than state-oriented people.
Various conditions appear to moderate the role of action versus state orientation in
decision-making. One such condition is time pressure: Decision-making differences between
action-versus state-oriented people have been found to become more pronounced under
high (rather than low) time pressure (Stiensmeier-Pelster et al., 1989, Study 1), presumably
because time pressure makes the task more demanding and thus calls for volitional action
control (see section 4.2.1 on the demand hypothesis). Another moderating condition is deci-
sion importance: As decisions become more important, action-oriented people tend to
switch from simple, risky, and fast decision strategies to more complex confident, and time-
consuming decision strategies (Stiensmeier-Pelster et al., 1991, Study 2). By contrast, state-
oriented people invest in complex and time-consuming decision strategies regardless of the
importance of the decision. The process of decision-making thus appears to be more guided
by efficiency considerations among action-oriented people than among their state-oriented
people.
Once action-oriented people have made up their mind, they tend to commit to their
decisions more fully than state-oriented people. Indeed, studies among a total of 724 Polish
university students found that action-oriented people displayed higher levels of confidence
in binary choices across task domains (i.e., perceptual judgments, semantic categorizations,
and value-based decisions), choice difficulty, time pressure, and deliberation period (Zajkow-
ski et al., 2022). Moreover, during difficult task conditions, action-oriented people displayed
greater metacognitive accuracy (i.e., knowing when their responses were correct or not)
From Intentions to Action 58
than state-oriented people. Action-oriented people were thus not blindly overconfident, but
still had insight into their own correctness. The overconfidence of action-oriented people
may be due to selective processing of confirmatory information (Beckmann & Kuhl, 1984;
Harmon-Jones et al., 2009). Moreover, action-oriented people may rely more on their own
judgment, whereas state-oriented are more prone to seek external validation of their deci-
sions (Zajkowski et al., 2022).
Taken together, decision-making studies found consistent differences between ac-
tion- versus state-oriented people. Action-oriented people are prone to simplify decision
problems, especially under time pressure and for relatively unimportant decisions. Moreo-
ver, once action-oriented people have made up their mind, they fully commit to their deci-
sion. By contrast, state-oriented people are inclined to use more time-consuming and elabo-
rate decision-making strategies. Moreover, even after they made a decision, state-oriented
people tend to remain even-handed and open to contradictory information. The decision-
making style of state-oriented people is in keeping with classical normative models of ration-
ality, which emphasize objective information processing (Gigerenzer, 2008). By contrast, the
decision-making style of action-oriented people is biased towards their prior decisions, pre-
sumably because this allows them to readily enact their decisions.
4.3.2 Explicit Memory for Intentions
Once an intention has been formed, the person often has to wait before the time is
ripe to act upon it. The second stage in the life cycle of an intention thus consists of mentally
storing the intention and maintaining it in working memory. Pioneering research on inten-
tion memory was conducted by Bluma Zeigarnik (1901-1988), one of Lewin’s students from
his Berlin years, whose experiments famously showed that recall is better for uncompleted
From Intentions to Action 59
rather than completed tasks. Unfortunately, the classic Zeigarnik (1927) paradigm was
plagued by replication problems (MacLeod, 2020b; van Bergen, 1968). Goschke and Kuhl
(1993) therefore designed a new intention memory paradigm in which participants have to
memorize pairs of scripts, one of which is to be enacted later on. Across four studies which
had a total of 140 German undergraduates as participants, words for the to-be-enacted
script were recognized faster than words from the neutral scripts. This intention-superiority
effect supports the privileged status of intentions in working memory (for replications and
extensions, see Badets et al., 2006; Grainger et al., 2017; Marsh et al., 2002).
According to the passive goal fixation hypothesis, state-oriented people are more
prone to become cognitively preoccupied with their intentions than action-oriented people.
Consistent with this, three out of the four studies by Goschke and Kuhl (1993) observed
larger intention-superiority effects among state-oriented participants than among action-
oriented participants. Action-oriented participants only displayed an intention-superiority
effect in the one study where the enactment of the script was self-initiated (in the other
studies, enactment was externally cued). These findings fit with the idea that state-oriented
people keep their intentions highly cognitively accessible, even when they are not ready to
act upon these intentions. By contrast, action-oriented people seem less inclined to keep
their intentions activated in working memory, only resorting to this strategy when intention
enactment is imminent.
13 Other studies have also examined implicit memory for intention-related information, such as word
fragment completions (Kuhl & Goschke, 1994b) or a lexical decision task (Penningroth, 2011; Penningroth et
al., 2012). These implicit memory tasks have shown intention superiority effects among action-oriented people,
even in externally cued tasks (Penningroth, 2011). However, the pattern of findings was complex and action-
oriented people did not display better implicit intention memory under all conditions. More research is hence
needed to clarify the role of implicit memory for intentional information for action- versus state-oriented peo-
ple.
From Intentions to Action 60
State-oriented people’s enhanced cognitive maintenance of intentions has been con-
ceptually replicated in studies using naturalistic, personally relevant intentions. For instance,
Penningroth (2005) asked 67 American undergraduates to list intentions they enacted over
the last year (retrospective memories) versus intentions they were still going to enact in the
upcoming year (prospective memories). State-oriented participants retrieved significantly
more prospective memories than retrospective memories, indicating an intention superior-
ity effect. No such effect was found among action-oriented participants. Another study
among 142 Dutch dieters (de Ridder et al., 2009) found that state-oriented dieters were
more likely than action-oriented dieters to form implementation intentions, that is, detailed
action plans about where, when, and how they would enact their dieting goals. The latter
fits with the idea that state-oriented people tend to maintain their intentions in a more rigid
format than action-oriented people.
4.3.3 Updating Intention Memory
The third and last stage in the life cycle of an intention consists of updating of work-
ing memory, discarding old, irrelevant intentions and replacing them with new ones. Accord-
ing to ACT , state-oriented people are prone to form more rigid cognitive representations of
their intentions than action-oriented people. Consequently, updating of intention memory is
likely to be more efficient for action-oriented people than it is for state-oriented people.
An initial study on the updating of intention memory was conducted among 74 Dutch
undergraduates (Jostmann & Koole, 2006, Study 1). Participants first completed a visualiza-
tion exercise. Half of the participants visualized a demanding person -a visualization associ-
ated with activating intention memory- and the remaining participants visualized an accept-
ing person – a visualization associated with deactivating intention memory. Next,
From Intentions to Action 61
participants completed a working memory task. Action-oriented participants had better
working memory after visualizing a demanding person than after visualizing an accepting
person. This pattern suggests that action-oriented people quickly update their working
memory in demanding conditions. State-oriented participants showed the opposite pattern:
They displayed worse working memory after visualizing a demanding person than after visu-
alizing an accepting person. The latter finding suggests that state-oriented participants were
unable to cognitively disengage from the intentions that were activated by visualizing a de-
manding person, and that this reduced their subsequent working memory capacity.
A more direct test of intention memory updating was provided by Ruigendijk and
Koole (2014, Study 2). In this study, a sample of 60 Dutch undergraduates completed a cate-
gorization task in which they had to categorize stimuli in a specific color while ignoring dis-
tracter stimuli in a different color. Half of the participants were instructed to strongly focus
on their intention, the other participants were instructed to weakly focus on their intention.
Halfway, the task goal was changed such that participants had to categorize stimuli in a new
target color, while distracters appeared in the color of the former target. To perform well at
the new task, participants had to mentally disengage from their old task goal. As expected,
action-oriented participants displayed less perseveration of their old task goal when they fo-
cused strongly (rather than weakly) on their intention. By contrast, state-oriented partici-
pants displayed more perseveration of their old task goal, especially when they focused
strongly on their intention. These findings suggest that state-oriented people have more dif-
ficulties than action-oriented people in mentally disengaging from their intentions.
Other researchers have used a prospective memory paradigm to investigate disen-
gagement from intentions (Walser et al., 2014). In one study, 51 German participants
From Intentions to Action 62
performed a task that consisted of a series of multiple trials in which the task goals for the
upcoming trials (i.e., participants’ intentions) were changed after a certain number of trials.
When a new task goal was introduced, the old task goal was completed and participants
could disengage from this intention. Incomplete updating of intentions was indexed by re-
sponse delays in an ongoing task on trials in which formerly (but no longer) relevant pro-
spective memory cues appeared. As expected, such aftereffects of completed intentions
were more pronounced among state-oriented participants than they were among action-ori-
ented participants. These findings yield further evidence that state-oriented are slower to
mentally disengage from their intentions.
In everyday life, difficulties disengaging from intentions may increase state-oriented
people’s susceptibility to experiencing an action crisis, a state of being torn between hanging
on to a goal versus letting go of it (Brandstätter et al., 2013; Brandstätter & Herrmann,
2018). Across four studies among 716 Swiss undergraduates, state-oriented people reported
more frequent action crises than action-oriented people (Herrmann et al., 2014; see also
Herrmann & Brandstätter, 2013; Holding et al., 2021). Moreover, among 198 Swiss under-
graduates, action orientation was a longitudinal predictor of decreases in action crises over
the course of a semester, even when controlling for self-efficacy (Wolf et al., 2018). Thus,
converging observations from real life studies and controlled laboratory experiments indi-
cate that state-oriented people find it harder than action-oriented people to update their in-
tentions.
4.3.4 Summary
Action-theoretical researchers have devoted considerable attention to differences in
the cognitive representation of intentions between action- versus state-oriented people.
From Intentions to Action 63
This research has been guided by the passive goal fixation hypothesis, which posits that
state-oriented people are -more than their action-oriented counterparts- inclined to become
cognitively fixated on their intentions while paradoxically failing to act upon these inten-
tions. Overall, a number of studies have shown that – compared with action-oriented peo-
ple- state-oriented people take longer to form their intentions, keep their intentions more
activated in working memory, and are slower to disengage from their intentions. These find-
ings lend converging empirical support for the passive goal fixation hypothesis.
4.4 Volitional Affect Regulation
So far, our review only addressed the ‘cold’ cognitive aspects of volitional action con-
trol, in terms of the mental representations of intentions and the behavioral enactment of
those intentions. According to ACT , however, volitional action control also has a ‘hot’ side,
one that speaks to people’s fire and passions during their goal pursuits and the struggles and
frustrations they have to endure along the way. The systematic attention to such affective
processes (Kuhl, 2000a) is perhaps the most important addition to the original formulation
of ACT (Kuhl, 1984). This aspect of the action-theoretical perspective seems the furthest re-
moved from social-psychological treatments of intention-behavior relations, which have paid
little or no attention to the volitional functions of affect (Fishbein & Ajzen, 2011; Ouellette &
Wood, 1998; Sheeran, 2002). Nevertheless, from the perspective of ACT , affect regulation
plays an essential part in volitional action control.
According to ACT , volitional affect regulation operates in the service of the person’s
extended motives, values, goals and intentions (Koole & Kuhl, 2008). This means that voli-
tional affect regulation is not aimed at merely making the person feel better. Rather, the
purpose of volitional affect regulation is to allow the person confront difficulties, tolerate
From Intentions to Action 64
frustrations, and expose themselves to challenges. Crucially, volitional affect regulation
helps the person to do this without becoming overwhelmed by these difficulties, frustra-
tions, and challenges.
Volitional affect regulation, as proposed by ACT , has three important characteristics.
First, volitional affect regulation uses efficient processes such as automatic counter-regula-
tion of attention (Rothermund et al., 2008). Counter-regulation rapidly and effortlessly di-
rects attention to information that is opposite to the person’s current affective-motivational
state. Counter-regulation is especially important in demanding situations, where it helps to
channel the person’s attention toward positive affective stimuli and thereby to avoid getting
stuck in difficulties and frustrations. By contrast, in low-demanding situations, counter-regu-
lation directs attention toward less positive stimuli or even negative stimuli, so that the per-
son is kept from indulging in positive daydreams (Oettingen, 2012) and remains ready to re-
spond to potential problems should they arise. Counter-regulation is a mechanism that war-
rants psychological flexibility, by preventing emotional escalation and perseveration of cur-
rent motivational orientations (Koole et al., 2015).
Second, volitional affect regulation is directed by the self. Within ACT , the self is de-
fined as a central executive system that integrates the person’s autobiographical experi-
ences, needs, values, motives, and emotional preferences (Kuhl et al., 2015). Volitional af-
fect regulation is hence expected to emerge more strongly and consistently for activities that
more strongly engage the self, such as self-initiated actions and actions that are connected
with the person’s values. By contrast, volitional affect regulation is likely to be weaker for ac-
tivities that are externally imposed. The self-guided nature of volitional affect regulation is
From Intentions to Action 65
thus analogous to the self-direction hypothesis, which pertains to the self-regulation of be-
havior.
Third and last, volitional affect regulation fosters enduring improvements in psycho-
logical health and wellbeing. In the short term, volitional affect regulation may increase neg-
ative affect, by leading the person to confront problems and frustrations. In the long term,
however, volitional affect regulation will generally increase emotional wellbeing. This is be-
cause volitional affect regulation supports goals that are congruent with the self, whose at-
tainment is most likely to yield long-term increases in wellbeing (Lyubomirsky et al., 2005).
Moreover, repeated experiences of meeting one’s goals and overcoming difficulties may al-
low the person to build ‘extended trust’ (Kuhl et al., 2017), an inner sense of stable assur-
ance that is rooted in intuitive positive feelings about one’s existence. According to ACT , ex-
tended trust is an important resilience factor that protects people from psychosocial stress.
ACT further posits that action-oriented people have better competencies at voli-
tional affect regulation than state-oriented people. The three signatures of volitional affect
regulation -counter-regulation, self-guidance, and long-term wellbeing- can hence be ex-
pected to be more prevalent among action-oriented people than among state-oriented peo-
ple. In what follows, we review empirical evidence that speaks to the three signature charac-
teristics of volitional affect regulation.
4.4.1 Counter-Regulation
A first prediction by ACT is that action-oriented people, more than state-oriented
people, will be inclined to counter-regulate the affective impact of demanding conditions
(Koole & Kuhl, 2008). To test this notion, various studies have examined how action-state
From Intentions to Action 66
orientation relates to automatic affective processing under high and low demanding condi-
tions (for a more extended overview, see Koole & Kuhl, 2008).
In a representative study, 71 Dutch undergraduates were presented with crowds of
faces with positive, neutral, or angry expressions (Koole & Jostmann, 2004, Study 3). Half of
the crowds contained one face with a different expression than the other faces; the task for
participants was to detect such discrepant faces. After visualizing a demanding person, ac-
tion-oriented participants were faster to detect happy faces among crowds of angry faces
than after visualizing an accepting person. This pattern is indicative of attentional counter-
regulation. By contrast, state-oriented participants showed a nonsignificant trend in the op-
posite direction, indicating an absence of counter-regulation. Thus, demanding conditions
elicited more counter-regulation from action-oriented people than from state-oriented peo-
ple. Similar findings were obtained using other measures of automatic affective processing,
including an affective Simon task (Koole & Jostmann, 2004, Study 2), an affective priming
task (Koole & Fockenberg, 2011), and a subliminal priming task (Jostmann et al., 2005).
4.4.2 Self-Guidance
A second prediction by ACT is that affect regulation among action-oriented people -
relative to state-oriented people- should be more guided by the self. One line of relevant ev-
idence comes from implicit motive tests. In an implicit motive test, people are asked to gen-
erate fantasy stories in response to ambiguous pictures. The themes within such stories are
known to tap into implicit memories of affectively charged autobiographical experiences
(Baumann et al., 2010; Woike, 2008). Action-oriented people, compared with state-oriented
people, tend to generate more themes of self-confrontational coping, in which need-related
threats are admitted and down-regulated in an integrative manner (Baumann & Kuhl, 2021;
From Intentions to Action 67
Hofer & Busch, 2011). Examples are themes of restoring relationships, mastering difficulty,
responsible leadership, and self-growth. Moreover, action-oriented people (more than state-
oriented people) cope with demanding life conditions by choosing more self-congruent goals
(i.e., goals that align with their implicit motives) and this pattern is associated with higher
emotional wellbeing (Baumann et al., 2005).
Other studies have used more cognitively oriented methods to operationalize self-
access. For instance, the aforementioned study using the face-in-the-crowd task (Koole &
Jostmann, 2004, Study 3) used briefer latencies in a self-evaluation task as a measure of self-
access. After visualizing a demanding (rather than an accepting) person, action-oriented par-
ticipants were faster to provide self-evaluations than state-oriented participants. Increased
demands led to better self-access among action-oriented participants than among their
state-oriented counterparts. Importantly, demand-related improvements in self-access
among action-oriented participants statistically mediated their demand-related increase in
counter-regulation in the face-in-the-crowd task. These findings support the idea that im-
proved self-access enables action-oriented people to increase affect regulation under de-
manding conditions.
4.4.3 Sustained Wellbeing
A third and last prediction by ACT is that volitional affect regulation should have
long-term benefits for the wellbeing and psychological health of action-oriented people;
benefits that are not enjoyed to the same degree by state-oriented people. This prediction
can be broken down into two more specific hypotheses. First, action-oriented people should
be better shielded -compared to state-oriented people- against stress and mental illness. We
call this the volitional shielding hypothesis. Second, action-oriented people can be expected
From Intentions to Action 68
to realize their personal potential more fully than state-oriented people. We call this the per-
sonal growth hypothesis.
4.4.3.1 Volitional Shielding
Various studies have examined whether and how action orientation may protect peo-
ple from adverse effects of a range of different demands and stressors. For instance, three
studies among a total of 971 American participants found that life demands -self-reported or
experimentally primed- were associated with lower body vitality among state-oriented peo-
ple but not among action-oriented people (Schlinkert & Koole, 2018). Action-oriented peo-
ple were thus psychologically insulated from the devitalizing effects of life demands.
Action-oriented people, compared with state-oriented people, have further been
found to display faster stress recovery and fewer adverse effects of stressors (Beckmann &
Kellmann, 2004; Gröpel & Kuhl, 2009; Jaramillo & Spector, 2004). Finally, action-oriented
people display better mental health than state-oriented people, both on global measures
(Kadzikowska-Wrzosek, 2012; Wojdylo et al., 2014) and specific indicators like sleep quality
(Kadzikowska-Wrzosek, 2018; Kroese et al., 2014), Facebook addiction (Błachnio & Prze-
piorka, 2016; Cudo et al., 2020), disordered eating (Blasczyk-Schiep et al., 2019), body image
distortions (Kazén et al., 2019) and pain-related experiences (Buchmann et al., 2021).
Other studies have shown that action-oriented people display lower prevalence and
symptom severity of depression than state-oriented people (Keller et al., 1994;Nielsen-Prohl
et al., 2013). Moreover, action orientation predicts recovery from clinical depression over a
period of several years (Kuehner & Huffziger, 2013). Beyond depression, action-oriented
people have better outcomes than state-oriented people when it comes to dealing with vari-
ous other psychological disorders, including attentional deficits and hyperactivity disorder
From Intentions to Action 69
(Edel et al., 2009; Elsässer et al., 2014), anxiety disorders (Geissner & Huetteroth, 2018;
Hartung & Schulte, 1994) and borderline personality disorder (Blasczyk-Schiep et al., 2016,
2018; Ward-Ciesielski et al., 2018).
4.4.3.2 Personal Growth
When people consistently confront and overcome difficulties over a longer period of
time, this will allow them to continually extend their boundaries, explore and nurture their
latent potentials, discover new resources, and gather experiences that deepen their insight
into themselves and the world. Consequently, according to ACT , volitional affect regulation
is instrumental for realizing personal growth (Koole et al., 2019).
Personal growth is a complex process, which is difficult to capture in any single em-
pirical study. Nevertheless, there are preliminary indications that action versus state orienta-
tion has some role to play in achieving personal growth. One study among 87 German adults
examined the relations between action versus state orientation, how much support partici-
pants recalled from their parents, and the perceived personal growth participants had expe-
rienced during childhood (Liesenfeld, 2018). Recalled parental support (especially from the
father) was associated with more action orientation, which was in turn associated with more
perceived personal growth during childhood. Although these findings are based on retro-
spective reports, they fit with the idea that promoting action orientation in children facili-
tates personal growth over the lifespan.
As noted in section 3.3, action orientation generally continues to increase in adult-
hood (Bettschart et al., 2021; Gröpel et al., 2004). People who did not enjoy a great deal of
parental support in childhood may thus still become more action-oriented in their adult
years. Once a person becomes relatively action-oriented, this may facilitate subsequent
From Intentions to Action 70
personal growth. The latter possibility was explored in a study among 181 German adults
that examined how identity formation (e.g., finding occupation, relations, lifestyle that fit
with one’s identity) was predicted by family childhood experiences (rated retrospectively)
and action versus state orientation (Hofer et al., 2006). Among state-oriented people, expe-
riencing family conflict during childhood was associated with lower levels of identity devel-
opment. By contrast, action-oriented people displayed high levels of identity regardless of
how much family conflict they recalled during childhood. These findings suggest that action
orientation can help people to overcome adverse family conditions in attaining personal
growth.
A final study (Busch & Hofer, 2012) was inspired by Erikson’s (1963) theory of identity
development. This theory suggests that people in middle adulthood achieve personal growth
through generativity, or the willingness and ability to transmit meaningful knowledge and
values to younger generations. Using a longitudinal design, action versus state orientation,
generativity, and purpose in life were jointly assessed over a period of 18 months among 163
German adults. Initial levels of action orientation were found to predict more purpose in life
18 months later, and this effect was statistically mediated by an increase in generativity
among action-oriented (versus state-oriented) people. Though preliminary, these findings
also fit with the notion that action orientation is conducive to personal growth.
4.4.4 Summary
Volitional affect regulation is a relative newcomer as a research topic in the action-
theoretical tradition. According to ACT , action-oriented people are likely to display more
efficient volitional affect regulation than state-oriented people. Consistent with this, action-
oriented people, more than state-oriented people, have been found to display: a)
From Intentions to Action 71
Attentional counter-regulation of negative affect, especially under demanding conditions; b)
More self-confrontational coping, in which need-related threats are admitted and then
down-regulated in a flexible, integrative manner; c) Better shielding against stress and men-
tal illness and display more personal growth than state-oriented people. Taken together,
there is converging evidence that links action versus state orientation to volitional affect reg-
ulation.
5. Conclusions and Outlook
Why do people frequently fail to enact their intentions? What leads some people to
be more effective than others in enacting their intentions? And why are the very people who
are thinking the most about their intentions often the least likely act upon them? Over the
last four decades, these and related questions have been central to action control theory
and research. The present chapter has provided an integrative review of this work.
In this concluding section, we reflect on the implications of the main findings to
emerge from this review. First, we compare the action-theoretical tradition to the social-psy-
chological tradition on intention-behavior relations. Second, we consider the applied signifi-
cance of action-theoretical research. Third, we discuss limitations of action-theoretical re-
search and avenues for future research. Fourth and last, we come full circle, by relating the
main conclusions of this chapter to the general observations we made in the opening.
5.1 Action-Theoretical and Social-Psychological Perspectives
The action-theoretical tradition has developed largely in parallel to social-psychologi-
cal research on intention-behavior relations (Fishbein & Ajzen, 2011; Ouellette & Wood,
1998; Sheeran, 2002). One of the most prominent theories in the social-psychological litera-
ture is the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB; Ajzen, 1991), which assumes that intentional
From Intentions to Action 72
action follows from a weighted combination of the person’s attitude toward a behavior, so-
cial norms, and perceived control over their behavior. The TPB does not explicitly address
volition as it is understood within the action-theoretical perspective (Kuhl, 1984). Neverthe-
less, the two theoretical approaches are compatible.
From an action-theoretical perspective, the TPB highlights expectancy-value consid-
erations, which speak to the problem of selecting between different courses of action (Kuhl,
1983, 1984). This selection process means that people implicitly or explicitly estimate which
outcomes they expect to result from different courses of action. From an action-theoretical
perspective, these estimates cannot be directly translated into intuitive behavior programs
and hence do not directly address the problem of enacting one’s intentions. Nevertheless,
deliberating about expectancy-value estimates may be time-consuming and hence indirectly
lower action readiness. Volitional processes may thus truncate (some of) the selection pro-
cesses proposed by TPB, to increase the person’s action readiness (Kuhl & Beckmann, 1983).
Other social-psychological approaches have emphasized factors that are translatable
in action-theoretical terms, like habits (Ouellette & Wood, 1998), implementation plans
(Gollwitzer & Sheeran, 2006), and goal striving processes, such as self-initiation, perfor-
mance control, and goal completion (Sheeran & Webb, 2016). Each of these factors relates
to processes whereby people enact their intentions, which form the mainstay of the action-
theoretical tradition. Habits and implementation plans may bypass the need for volitional
action control. State-oriented people can thus be expected to rely to a greater degree on
habits and implementation plans in achieving their goals (see de Ridder et al., 2009). By con-
trast, processes like self-initiation and performance control rely heavily on volitional action
control and are thus likely to be favored by action-oriented people (e.g., Kazén et al., 2008).
From Intentions to Action 73
Social-psychological models that emphasize action-control processes can thus be readily sit-
uated within the framework of ACT and, more generally, an action-theoretical perspective
(Baumann et al., 2017; Koole et al., 2019; Kuhl, 1984, 2000).
The action-theoretical perspective also has elements that have no counterpart in
mainstream social-psychological approaches. Specifically, these elements are: 1) A third-per-
son, functional-design analysis of action control; 2) The notion that affect regulation is in-
strumental to volitional action control; and 3) Recognition of the importance of individual
differences in intention enactment, in particular, as reflected in the dimension of action ver-
sus state orientation. In our view, each of these elements has the potential to enrich the so-
cial-psychological tradition. First, functional-design analysis may guide social-psychological
researchers towards basic cognitive mechanisms, such as prospective memory (Kaschel et
al., 2016; Kazén & Kuhl, 2005), that are implicated in intention-behavior relations. Second, in
a related vein, paying more attention to affect regulation may deepen social-psychologists’
insight into the ‘hot’ emotional and affective processes that are involved in people’s goal
pursuits.
Third, systematically considering individual differences may afford a range of new in-
sights into human behavior. From an action-theoretical perspective, action- versus state-ori-
ented people are likely to behave very differently in different situations. One implication is
that the same type of situation may have qualitatively different effects for action- versus
state-oriented people. For instance, increased motivational support may lead state-oriented
people to enact their intentions more effectively, while leading action-oriented people to
enact their intentions less effectively (Jostmann & Koole, 2006). State orientation may thus
be more beneficial within cultures that provide their members with ubiquitous
From Intentions to Action 74
emotional/motivational support, such as interdependent cultures (Kuhl & Keller, 2008).
These complexities are bound to remain hidden from view when researchers do not distin-
guish between action- versus state-oriented people.
Another implication of an action-theoretical perspective is that the same rates of en-
acting an intention may be produced via different pathways. For instance, action-oriented
people may better adhere to their diet by using self-reward, whereas state-oriented people
may better adhere to their diet by using self-punishment (Fuhrman & Kuhl, 1998). Again,
such psychological processes may be easily overlooked when individual differences in action
versus state orientation are omitted from the analysis.
Beyond the aforementioned aspects, the action-theoretical tradition entails a
broader shift in perspective. The action-theoretical tradition centers the efficiency whereby
the person can enact their intentions. By contrast, the social-psychological tradition has fo-
cused on people’s rates of intention enactment, regardless of efficiency. The latter may stem
from the fact that much social-psychological research on intention-behavior relations is an-
chored in a public policy perspective, which is mainly interested in achieving certain out-
comes (e.g., better public health). However, some ways of enacting one’s intentions may in-
voke much greater psychological costs on the person than others. For instance, coercive
methods may increase enactment rates among state-oriented people (Baumann & Kuhl,
2005; Fuhrman & Kuhl, 1998), but also drain intrinsic motivation (Baumann & Kuhl, 2005)
and increase vulnerability to choking (H. Heckhausen & Strang, 1988) and emotional exhaus-
tion (Wojdylo et al., 2017).
The action-theoretical tradition thus offers a person-centered perspective on inten-
tion-behavior relations. Whether or not an individual is capable of enacting an intention -be
From Intentions to Action 75
it studying for an important exam, meeting a work deadline, or exercising daily- obviously
has immediate consequences for that person -passing a course, getting a bonus, feeling en-
ergized. But that is not all there is to it. From an action-theoretical perspective, the enact-
ment of intentions is an integral part of personality functioning, which plays out over weeks,
months, and even years. For instance, how a person enacts an intention in a specific situa-
tion may be part of a broader pattern of more action-oriented or more state-oriented be-
havior. Over the course of the person’s life, these patterns are likely to be repeated, leading
to cumulative impacts on the person’s work, health behavior, close relationships, emotional
wellbeing, and personal growth. This extended person-centered perspective invites psy-
chologists to view intention-behavior relations in the broader context of the people’s per-
sonal development.
5.2 Applying Action-Theoretical Research
The efficiency with which people can enact their intentions is of obvious practical sig-
nificance. Indeed, the present review found consistent evidence that individual differences
in action-state orientation predict intention enactment in such real-life domains as educa-
tion, work, sports, personal finances, and health. It is therefore worth considering some ap-
plied implications of action-theoretical research.
An action-theoretical perspective is clearly compatible with person-centered applica-
tions, such as counseling and psychotherapy (Baumann & Kuhl, 2021; Kaschel & Kuhl, 2004).
Action-theoretical applications to counseling and psychotherapy have so far been developed
in the context of Personality Systems Interactions (PSI) theory (Kuhl, 2000b), which offers a
framework that encompasses the entirety of human motivation and personality functioning.
Within this framework, the psychological significance of action-state orientation is
From Intentions to Action 76
considered together with other personality dispositions, such as the person’s temperament,
motives, and preferred cognitive styles (Kuhl et al., 2006). Adopting such a comprehensive
approach will be helpful for practitioners who seek to develop applications of the action-the-
oretical perspective. Still, it is possible to offer some general recommendations on the basis
of the more circumscribed work that was reviewed in this chapter.
5.2.1 General Recommendations
Our first recommendation is a caution: We advise practitioners to keep in mind that
action-state orientation only matters for behaviors that are under the person’s volitional
control. For instance, when a student has low school grades, the practitioners should first
make sure that the student has the necessary academic skills and abilities to perform well in
school. Only after this has been established, it makes sense to consider the person’s voli-
tional and motivational tendencies.
Our second recommendation is that practitioners extend the scope of their analysis
beyond enactment rates. From an action-theoretical perspective, action-oriented people are
not always expected to enact their intentions at higher rates than state-oriented people. Ra-
ther, action-oriented people tend to be more efficient at enacting their intentions than
state-oriented people. By emphasizing efficiency, an action-theoretical perspective naturally
leads practitioners to consider potential tradeoffs involved in selecting one enactment strat-
egy over another. Accordingly, practitioners are advised to broadly consider the person’s
cognitive, affective, and motivational orientations and their social context, including the per-
son’s stress levels, whether the person’s actions self-motivated versus externally pressured
and the demandingness of the situation (Kuhl et al., 2006). Each of these factors should be
considered in tailoring support or advice to the person’s needs.
From Intentions to Action 77
Our third and last general recommendation is that practitioners recognize the funda-
mental importance of individual differences. From an action-theoretical perspective, the
same social-psychological intervention may have very different effects for different people
(Baumann & Kuhl, 2005; Fuhrmann & Kuhl, 1998). Practitioners will hence do well to adjust
their approach to the individual profile of the person they are seeking to help (see also
Storch et al., 2018, for examples). Notably, action-theoretical research has revealed mean-
ingful parallels in the relation between action versus state orientation and behavior in labor-
atory tasks versus real-life domains like education, work, and health. These parallels may as-
sist practitioners in bringing out the real-world significance of the results of controlled labor-
atory environments.
Action versus state orientation is only one of many individual differences that are rel-
evant to human motivation and control. An integrative framework for navigating these indi-
vidual differences is provided by PSI theory (Baumann et al., 2017; Kuhl et al., 2021). In this
chapter, we restrict the discussion to the question how support and advice may be tailored
to the person’s disposition toward action versus state orientation.
5.2.2 Recommendations for Action-Oriented People
Action-oriented people are inclined to rely on their own devices. Thus, action-ori-
ented people will be generally less prone to seek psychological assistance like counseling or
therapy. Still, like all human beings, action-oriented people will inevitably be confronted
with life problems. To some degree, action-oriented people will be psychologically protected
against the adverse consequences of these problems. Still, action-oriented people have to
face certain challenges that are distinctive for their psychological profile (Lomberg et al.,
2019). Practitioners will do well to heed these challenges in advising action-oriented people.
From Intentions to Action 78
5.2.2.1 Restrictive Environments
A first distinctive problem for action-oriented people arises in restrictive environ-
ments, that is, environments that leave little room for self-direction and personal initiative.
Examples are an education program with a mandatory around-the-clock study schedule or a
bureaucratic organization that subjects its employees to a seemingly endless array of strict
protocols and procedures. Such restrictive environments will minimize any advantages of vo-
litional action control, leading action-oriented people to experience difficulties in enacting
their intentions. Practitioners may help action-oriented people to identify this problem and
find ways to address it. One helpful approach could be to try and create more room for per-
sonal initiative. For instance, a student may request more freedom in her study schedule or
an office worker may work more from home, where bureaucratic regulations are less felt.
Another approach would be to change (elements of) the environment. For instance,
an action-oriented student could choose a different major or an action-oriented worker
could change employers. Furthermore, at an institutional level, an effort can be made to
provide action-oriented people may be with more unstructured environments that leave
ample opportunities for personal initiative. We are not aware of studies that systematically
examined the impacts of changing environments on action-oriented people, although such
work may be forthcoming (Siegenthaler, 2022). On theoretical grounds, it seems plausible
that changing (aspects of) the environment could help action-oriented people to optimize
their personal functioning.
5.2.2.2 Optimal Challenge
A second distinctive problem for action-oriented people is that they need a certain
amount of challenge to bring out the best in themselves. A consistent finding in action-
From Intentions to Action 79
theoretical research is that action-oriented people show their best performance when deal-
ing with more (rather than less) demanding tasks and in more (rather than less) demanding
situations (Koole et al., 2012; Waldenmeier et al., 2023). This pattern resonates with Ach’s
(1910) classic law of difficulty, which states that volition is selectively engaged when people
encounter difficulties in their goal pursuits. If they want to excel, action-oriented people
need to choose challenging goals and put themselves into challenging situations. Of course,
demands that are extreme or continuously high might be too much even for highly action-
oriented people. Action-oriented people thus need to strike an optimal balance between de-
mands and rest (Beckmann & Kellmann, 2004). Because this can be challenging, practitioners
may offer guidance to action-oriented people in determining what works best for them.
The notion that action-oriented people to some extent need demanding situations
may seem counterintuitive. Indeed, modern institutions have become increasingly inclined
to shield people from demanding situations. For instance, a growing number of educators
have implemented a variety of practices designed to protect students’ feelings, such as soft
deadlines and using warm language in feedback (Lukianoff & Haidt, 2015). Parallel develop-
ments have taken place at governmental and private organizations. Lowering demands may
have advantages for state-oriented people (though see the next section for some of the
complexities). But for action-oriented people, low demands can easily foster underperfor-
mance and motivation loss, while high demands have few adverse effects (Baumann et al.,
2005; Schlinkert & Koole, 2018). Action-oriented people are antifragile (Taleb, 2012): They
benefit from stress, difficult challenges, and frustration. Institutional policies should thus be
designed so that they ensure sufficiently demanding activities for action-oriented people.
From Intentions to Action 80
5.2.3 Recommendations for State-Oriented People
As we already noted in section 1.1, the failure to enact one’s intentions has histori-
cally been viewed as a moral shortcoming rather than a psychological issue. To the extent
that such failure is more common among state-oriented people, they are at greater risk of
being chastised by their social environment for their lack of moral fiber. Some state-oriented
people may internalize this moral judgment and come to regard themselves as lazy or, in re-
ligious terms, as sinful. Practitioners may offset these negative social dynamics by nurturing
more compassionate views of state-oriented people. Practitioners may point out that, com-
pared with action-oriented people, state-oriented people often tend to think more about
their intentions and are often more even-handed and objective in making decisions. Moreo-
ver, practitioners may advise state-oriented people to identify ways for optimizing their self-
regulatory performance.
Relative to action-oriented people, state-oriented people have more limited psycho-
logical resources for dealing with demanding situations and stress. Consequently, state-ori-
ented people may develop compensatory strategies that circumvent their self-regulatory
deficits. Such strategies may bring certain benefits, at least in the short run. However, these
usually come a price. Especially in the long run, the costs of compensatory strategies may
outweigh their benefits. It is therefore advisable for practitioners to be knowledgeable about
the tradeoffs that are connected with the compensatory strategies of state-oriented people.
5.2.3.1 Difficulty Avoidance
Sate-oriented people are least capable of self-regulating when they are faced with
difficulties in their goal pursuits, which necessitate planning and problem-solving. A first
compensatory strategy of state-oriented people may be to simply bypass this kind of
From Intentions to Action 81
situation by avoiding or ignoring difficulties. As a case in point, such difficulty avoidance has
been observed among unemployed German academics, who were found to refrain from
forming explicit intentions for difficult tasks, as indicated by objective tests (Kazén & Kuhl,
2005). Difficulty avoidance may explain why, in recent decades, growing numbers of young
men underperform in work and education settings (Baumeister, 2010; Bertocchi & Bozzano,
2020; David & Melanie, 2013; for preliminary evidence linking this sex difference to action-
state orientation, see Waldenmeier et al., 2023).
It is conceivable that difficulty avoidance protects state-oriented people -at least, in
the short term- against clinical depression, a condition toward which they have a particular
vulnerability (Kuehner & Huffziger, 2013). Thus, practitioners should be careful in how they
address difficulty avoidance. Overcoming difficulty avoidance requires that state-oriented
people are taught to tolerate low positive affect. One way of achieving this could be to make
use of the technique of mental contrasting (Wittleder et al., 2020), in which people start
with positive images and then confront these with difficulties, which are eventually resolved
into positive success imagery. Such mental contrasting exercises have been shown to foster
intention enactment in laboratory studies (K. M. Friederichs et al., 2020). More research is
needed, however, to develop validated interventions that can help state-oriented people in
overcoming difficulty avoidance in real-life situations.
5.2.3.2 Regulatory Outsourcing
The problems of state-oriented people emerge especially when they have to self-reg-
ulate their behavior. A second compensatory strategy of state-oriented people may there-
fore consist of outsourcing their behavioral regulation. There are various ways in which
state-oriented people may seek to accomplish this. A first way is to form implementation
From Intentions to Action 82
intentions, which render action initiation under the control of external cues (de Ridder et al.,
2009). A second strategy for regulatory outsourcing is to find someone who acts as an au-
lated strategy consists of using self-punishment to motivate oneself (Fuhrmann & Kuhl,
1998). In the latter case, state-oriented people internalize the commands of the authority
latter type of behavioral regulation is also known as ‘introjected regulation’ (Deci & Ryan,
2000) and represents an internalized form of obedience to authority.
Regulatory outsourcing may help state-oriented people to enact their intentions. In-
deed, this compensatory strategy can be relatively successful, at least in the short run. In the
long run, however, regulatory outsourcing invokes considerable costs for state-oriented peo-
ple. Laboratory experiments indicate that regulatory outsourcing undermines state-oriented
people’s intrinsic motivation (Baumann & Kuhl, 2005). Moreover, there is suggestive evi-
dence that regulatory outsourcing may alienate state-oriented people from their psychologi-
cal needs, rendering them more likely to pursue goals that bring no emotional satisfaction
(Baumann et al., 2005). Regulatory outsourcing may thus increase inner conflict and stress,
and lower wellbeing among state-oriented people (Baumann et al., 2005; Brandstätter et al.,
2016). Practitioners need to be mindful of such potential delayed, often hidden, costs of reg-
ulatory outsourcing for state-oriented people.
5.2.3.3 Social-Emotional Support
From an action-theoretical perspective, state-oriented people’s problems with action
control are ultimately due to their difficulties in regulating their own affective states (Koole
& Kuhl, 2008). A third and final compensatory strategy of state-oriented people therefore
From Intentions to Action 83
consists of seeking social-emotional support. Laboratory experiments indeed indicate that
state-oriented people respond highly favorably (and more so than action-oriented people) to
salient social-emotional support (Chatterjee et al., 2017). Social-emotional support can thus
have pronounced psychological benefits for state-oriented people.
There is a caveat, however. Preliminary evidence suggests that state-oriented people
are prone to form symbiotic relationships (Kuhl, 2000a), that is, relationships in which they
are unable to express their individuality and different needs (Mahler, 1974; Pine, 2004).
Symbiotic relationships often result in fixed roles, for instance, that of rescuer versus needy
partner, and are tied up with guilt and blurring of mutual boundaries (Mayseless & Scharf,
2009). These relationship patterns leave little room for flexibility and mutuality. Indeed,
symbiotic relationships tend to limit both partners in their freedom to be themselves and to
achieve personal growth. The relationship dynamics associated with action-state orientation
remain underexplored (Koole et al., 2006). Nevertheless, practitioners should be wary of
possible dysfunctional relationships among state-oriented people.
Under the appropriate conditions, however, interpersonal relationships can be a cat-
alyst for personal growth among state-oriented people. Interpersonal support can help a
person to tolerate frustration and difficulties long enough for the person to find ways of re-
storing positive affect (Kuhl, 2000a). To internalize the resulting affective changes (and
thereby strengthen volitional competencies), it is necessary that the state-oriented person
opens up the self to the provider of emotional support (Kuhl, personal communication, Oc-
tober 28, 2022). This opening up requires a trusting relationship in which the state-oriented
person feels fully accepted (Schimel et al., 2001). The development of trusting interpersonal
relationships may thus be vital for state-oriented people to improve their affect-regulatory
From Intentions to Action 84
competencies, and thereby, their capacity for volitional action control. Effective practition-
ers will find ways of guiding state-oriented people toward constructive relationship patterns
that foster personal development.
5.3 Limitations and Future Perspectives
The present review and, more generally, the action-theoretical literature, have limita-
tions, which warrant caution about the conclusions that can be drawn from the work.
Among the most important limitations are: 1) Methodological issues; 2) Neurobiological
foundations of action versus state orientation; 3) The development and implementation of
evidence-based action-theoretical interventions. We consider each limitation in turn.
5.3.1 Methodological Issues
Action-theoretical research has achieved much progress in developing systematic
methods for studying volitional action control. Nevertheless, some important methodolog-
ical issues remain unresolved. We identify some of the main issues here and offer sugges-
tions for moving beyond them in future work.
Standardization and Formalization of Methods. At present, there are relatively few
methods in action-theoretical research that are shared and standardized across different
teams of researchers. Indeed, the only standardized method that is widely used in the field
appears to be the Action Control Scale (Kuhl, 1994) that measures individual differences in
action-state orientation. Lack of standardization hinders scientific progress by making it
harder to integrate findings across domains and researchers, for instance, in a quantitative
meta-analysis.
From Intentions to Action 85
Action-theoretical researchers should hence work toward greater standardization of
methods and sharing of research protocols. For instance, for research in applied domains,
it would be helpful if researchers could assess intentions in a similar response format,
along with relevant action-theoretical variables such as self-direction, task demands, and
contextual demands (for an example, see Diefendorff et al., 2006). In laboratory research,
it may be possible to create standardized versions of tasks that measure intention enact-
ment (e.g., Kuhl & Kazén, 1999) and intention memory (e.g., Goschke & Kuhl, 1993) that
are widely used among action-theoretical researchers.
Along with standardization of methods, it would be useful to develop more precise
formulations of central action-theoretical constructs, particularly demand level and self-
direction. At least in principle, these are continuous variables, that can vary in a graded
manner. So far, however, demand level and self-direction have been only operationalized
as binary variables that are either high or low. In future work, it would be useful to de-
velop methods that allow researchers to study more graded changes in self-direction and
demand level. Such more refined methods would afford more precise quantitative model-
ing of action-theoretical hypotheses. Improved precision in modeling, along with increased
standardization, would allow action-theoretical researchers to build a more systematic
knowledge base for applied and basic research.
5.3.2 From Correlational to Experimental Designs
As the present chapter testifies, action-theoretical research has predominantly fo-
cused on individual differences in action versus state orientation. This focus on individual
differences is theoretically motivated, because the action-theoretical perspective holds
that volitional action control is inherently connected to personality functioning.
From Intentions to Action 86
Nevertheless, an individual-difference focus inevitably means that action-theoretical re-
search has relied predominantly on correlational designs. The present literature therefore
does not permit causal conclusions about the role of action-state orientation on action
control.
To test whether action-state orientation has a causal impact on action control, future
research should make more use of experimental designs. In this regard, a useful methodol-
ogy might be training in affective shifting (K. M. Friederichs et al., 2022). In this affect-fo-
cused intervention, people practice shifting between high and low positive affect. Prelimi-
nary studies indicate that training in affective shifting fosters both self-regulation of affect
and the enactment of self-congruent intentions. Such types of training, perhaps paired
with other theoretically informed interventions (e.g., Friederichs et al., 2020), may provide
a fruitful avenue for testing the causal effects of action versus state orientation.
5.3.2.1 Replicability
Over the last decade, psychologists have introduced an array of methodological im-
provements to increase the replicability of research findings. Among other things, these
include using larger samples to bolster evidential value (Lakens & Evers, 2014), preregistra-
tion of hypotheses and statistical analyses (Nosek et al., 2019), and conducting direct repli-
cations (Brandt et al., 2014). Most action-theoretical research has paid little attention to
issues of replicability, in part because the bulk of the work was conducted when aware-
ness of these issues was less felt than nowadays. Replicability nonetheless remains the
touchstone of scientific research (Koole & Lakens, 2012). Consequently, action-theoretical
researchers should invest in enhancing the replicability of their work. For novel studies,
this means ensuring that samples are large enough to have sufficient evidential value and
From Intentions to Action 87
systematically preregistering hypotheses and statistical analyses. Moreover, action-theo-
retical researchers should be encouraged to conduct direct replication studies, which have
so far remained scarce in the action-theoretical literature.
5.3.2.2 Neurobiological Basis of Action versus State Orientation
In the present review, our focus was on the psychological aspects of action-state ori-
entation, that is, its associations with intention enactment, intention memory, and affect
regulation. The neurobiological foundations of action-state orientation were thus beyond
the current scope.
This is not to say that neurobiological processes are irrelevant to action-state orienta-
tion. Roughly half of the variability in action-state orientation appears due to genetic fac-
tors (Gustavson et al., 2014). Moreover, a study among 264 German university students
found significant correlations between action-state orientation and variations in brain
structure and resting-state connectivity (Schlüter et al., 2018). Specifically, action-oriented
people were found to display 1) small amygdala volume; and 2) stronger functional-resting
state connectivity between the amygdala and the dorsal Anterior Cingulate Cortex (dACC)
(Shenhav et al., 2016). The amygdala is known to play a key role in supporting affective-
emotional processing (Murray, 2007; Phelps, 2006), and the interplay between the dACC
and the amygdala presumably mediates purposive behavior and self-regulation (Shenhav
et al., 2016). These and other findings substantiate the neurobiological basis of action ver-
sus state orientation.
However, it is less clear just which neurobiological mechanisms underlie individual
differences in action-state orientation. Researchers have proposed a variety of neurobio-
logical mechanisms, including differences in relative dominance of the left hemisphere
From Intentions to Action 88
(Düsing et al., 2016b; Harmon-Jones & Harmon-Jones, 2008), stress-dependent activation
of the hippocampus (Kuhl et al., 2021b; Radtke et al., 2020), dopaminergic circuits
(Jostmann & Koole, 2007), and interactions between the limbic system and prefrontal cor-
tex (Schlüter et al., 2018). Each of these neurobiological mechanisms has some plausibility,
but more work is needed to establish which (if any) of these mechanisms can explain the
observed behavioral and psychological differences between action- versus state-oriented
people.
Given the complexity of volitional action control, it seems likely that the relevant neu-
robiological processes will be similarly complex, involving dynamic interactions between
multiple neural circuits (Schlüter et al., 2018). Such complex neural dynamics would seem,
at least at a general level, compatible with the functional dynamics that are proposed by
PSI theory (Kuhl, 2000a; Kuhl et al., 2021) and its most recent offshoot, ACT . In view of
the continuing advances in neuroscience, unraveling the neurobiological basis of action-
state orientation constitutes a major avenue for future research.
5.3.2.3 Toward Evidence-Based Action-Theoretical Applications
As noted throughout this chapter, action-theoretical research has great potential for
real-life applications. Much of this applied potential, however, remains to be realized. Alt-
hough theoretical predictions have been examined in many applied settings, it often re-
mains unclear how the resulting findings, along with the broader action-theoretical frame-
work can be translated into validated solutions for real-life problems. Arguably closest to
real-life application is the action-theoretical model of motivational counseling, which
builds on a battery of personality tests and behavioral tasks (Kuhl et al., 2006). However,
From Intentions to Action 89
this model remains mostly informal and its practical utility has yet to be subjected to rigor-
ous empirical testing.
Moving forward, we see two main ways in which researchers may advance real-life
applications of the action-theoretical perspective. First, researchers may propose and test
action-theoretical explanations regarding the working mechanisms of established psycho-
logical interventions. For instance, meticulous content-analyses by Schulte et al. (1997)
suggest that the effectiveness of psychological treatments for phobias correlates with the
degree to which therapists foster action orientation in their patients. Theoretically, voli-
tional action control could be a hidden ingredient in any intervention that uses active be-
havioral engagement. Second, researchers may develop and test new types of interven-
tions that are based on action-theoretical principles. An example of the latter approach
would be the aforementioned training of affective shifting (K. M. Friederichs et al., 2022).
To more fully realize the applied potential of the action-theoretical approach, it will
be necessary to pay systematic attention to developing and testing action-theoretical in-
terventions. It will be of particular importance to evaluate empirically whether a) an ac-
tion-theoretical explanation of existing interventions offers insights over and above exist-
ing frameworks; and b) action-theoretical interventions have added benefits and/or fewer
costs than existing interventions. We wholeheartedly encourage such a more evidence-
based approach in the development of action-theoretical applications.
5.4 Concluding Remarks
We opened this chapter with Kafka’s short story about a man who failed to pass
through a gate that was meant just for him. Like this fateful individual, virtually everyone
knows what it is like to put off an intention until it is too late. Such painful moments of
From Intentions to Action 90
inaction do not mean that people are lazy. Indeed, action-theoretical research has shown
that the very people who are most preoccupied with their intentions are often the least
likely to act upon them. Fortunately, the gap between intentions and behavior can be
bridged. Through encouragements from others, people can learn to motivate themselves
and, in time, learn how to move more efficiently from intentions to action. We hope that
the insights covered in this chapter will allow ever more people to pass through the gates
that life presents before them.
From Intentions to Action 91