PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 1
When and Why do People Accept Public Policy Interventions?
An Integrative Public Policy Acceptance Framework
Sonja Grelle1 and Wilhelm Hofmann2
In press, Perspectives on Psychological Science
Manuscript accepted on May 05, 2023. The present accepted version may differ in minor ways from
the authoritative, published version.
Author Note
1 Faculty of Psychology, Ruhr University Bochum; Universitätsstraße 150, IB E4/69, Postfach 35,
44801 Bochum, Germany. E-mail: sonja.grelle@rub.de (corresponding author)
2 Faculty of Psychology, Ruhr University Bochum; Universitätsstraße 150, IB E4/61, Postfach 35,
44801 Bochum, Germany. E-mail: wilhelm.hofmann@rub.de
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 2
Abstract
The successful introduction of public policies to prompt behavior change hinges on the degree to
which citizens endorse the proposed policies. While there is a large body of research on
psychological determinants of policy acceptance, these determinants have not yet been synthesized
into an integrative framework that proposes hypotheses about their interplay. In this article, we
develop a review-based, integrative public policy acceptance framework that introduces the desire
for governmental support as a motivational foundation in public policy acceptance. The framework
traces the route from problem awareness to policy acceptance and, ultimately, policy compliance.
We propose this relationship to be mediated by the motivation to desire governmental support. We
integrate numerous key variables assumed to qualify the relationship between problem awareness
and the desire for governmental support, such as control attributions, trust, and value fit, as well as
the relationship between the desire for governmental support and policy acceptance, such as
perceived policy effectiveness, intrusiveness, and fairness. We exemplify the use of the proposed
framework applying it to climate policies.
Keywords: public policy acceptance, desire for governmental support, integrative
framework, policy-making
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 3
Why and When do People Accept Public Policy Interventions? – An Integrative Public Policy
Acceptance Framework
Everywhere we look, we find public policies designed to address societal problems by
adjusting human behavior – be it in the form of regulations, educational campaigns, incentives (e.g.,
taxations and subsidies), or, more recently, behavioral interventions like nudges (Thaler & Sunstein,
2021) and boosts (Grüne-Yanoff & Hertwig, 2016; Hertwig & Grüne-Yanoff, 2017). Public
endorsement plays a crucial role in successfully implementing public policies: Only public policies
accepted by a critical mass, at least in democratic countries, are politically feasible. Policymakers will
likely be hesitant to implement policies not supported by the majority of the public (Cullerton et al.,
2016; Howes et al., 2017; Steg et al., 2006). Measuring whether a policy has the backing of a critical
mass of the population is important feedback to determine whether the policy is ripe for
introduction. Moreover, in parallel to research on attitude-behavior consistency (e.g., Ajzen &
Fishbein, 1970; Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975; Fazio & Williams, 1986, Fazio, 1990; Kraus, 1995; Strack &
Deutsch, 2004), public policy acceptance may facilitate compliance with the encouraged behavior1,
which in turn affects the policy’s success. Acceptance drives peoples’ motivation to initiate and
maintain a desired behavior despite negative costs (e.g., giving up the freedom of choice). Thus,
measuring anticipated public policy acceptance is of interest to policymakers because, in addition to
determining the policy’s feasibility, it also gives an indication of whether people will comply with
that policy. In summary, understanding when and why people accept public policies is essential to
developing politically feasible and successful public policy interventions. This paper summarizes and
synthesizes relevant empirical work on psychological determinants for public policy acceptance
conducted so far and offers an integrative framework to predict policy acceptance.
The relationship between acceptance and compliance is likely to be more pronounced for measures that allow some
freedom of choice (such as incentives or nudges and boosts) compared with laws that legally mandate a particular
behavior.
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 4
Prior psychological research has proposed various relevant factors determining public
acceptance of public policy interventions. These determinants are multi-faceted, encompassing
sociological and psychological factors such as personal attitudes and beliefs as well as (socio-)
demographics (Hagman et al., 2015; Jung & Mellers, 2016; Loibl et al., 2018; Reisch & Sunstein,
2016; Steg et al., 2011; Sunstein et al., 2019; Tannenbaum et al., 2017). This body of literature
further indicates which policy qualities are associated with increased citizen acceptance. These
include the policy’s effectiveness in addressing the target problem (Bang et al., 2020; Bergquist et
al., 2022; Bos et al., 2015; Cornwell & Krantz, 2014; Djupegot & Hansen, 2020; Gold et al., 2023;
Mantzari et al., 2022; Petrescu et al., 2016; Promberger et al., 2012; Reynolds et al., 2020), and
transparency regarding the goal and the mechanisms eliciting behavior change (de Fine Licht, 2014;
Gold et al., 2023; Jung & Mellers, 2016; Sunstein et al., 2019), as well as the questions of how fair
and costly vs. beneficial (financially and psychologically) the desired behavior change is perceived by
the target person (Bergquist et al., 2022; Bos et al., 2015; Huber et al., 2020; Rodriguez-Sanchez et
al., 2018). Beyond psychology, research on policy instruments in the field of political science has
investigated and classified the different mechanisms of public policy interventions into different
policy types (Doern, 1981; Doern & Phidd, 1983; Hood, 1986, 2007; Howlett, 1991, 2019; Salamon &
Lund, 1989). These taxonomies (such as the influential Taxonomy of Substantive Policy Instruments
by Hood, 1986; see Howlett, 2004) provide orientation to policymakers regarding the policies’
effectiveness. However, these taxonomies are typically descriptive and do not include an explicit
psychological foundation regarding public policy acceptance from a citizen’s perspective. The
present article aims to help build a theoretical framework to provide such a foundation.
Whereas previous scientific work has mostly focused on a selected and diverse set of
psychological determinants when examining public policy acceptance, a few studies have structured
and related the determinants, including individual dispositions, personal attitudes, and beliefs, as
well as policy perceptions (Diepeveen et al., 2013; Hansen & Jespersen, 2013; Huijts et al., 2012;
Jung & Mellers, 2016). For example, Diepeveen and colleagues' (2013) review of public health
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 5
policies shows that public acceptance varies depending on the behavioral context (tobacco use,
alcohol consumption, diet, physical activity), type of intervention (classified by level of intrusiveness,
and stage of implementation), and characteristics of the target person (i.e., whether individuals
engage in the target behavior, gender, and age). They conclude that people accept interventions
more when they address others vs. themselves and show a trade-off with higher support for the
least intrusive policies (which are often less effective). Further review-based work on nudging
acceptance by Hansen and Jespersen (2013) offers guidelines for practitioners to facilitate the
responsible use and effective implementation of public policies. To understand and prevent
manipulation of customer choice, the researchers developed a theoretical framework demonstrating
the interrelations among the nudges’ transparency level and its mechanisms to elicit behavior
change, i.e., System 1 nudges and System 2 nudges, across various domains. Jung and Mellers (2016)
investigated whether acceptance of nudges as a public policy tool depends on individual dispositions
(i.e., individualism, conservatism, desire for control), nudge perception (e.g., autonomy-threatening,
paternalistic), nudge type (i.e., System 1 vs. System 2), and framing (personal vs. societal). Further
significant work has been conducted by Huijts and colleagues (2012), who elaborated and modeled
the relevant psychological factors influencing energy technology acceptance, including norms, trust,
control beliefs, and awareness of consequences and attitudes towards the technology. There is
limited scientific work that integrates key predictors of public policy acceptance across policy types
and decision-making contexts. Tackling this gap, we reviewed and synthesized the determinants
empirically studied so far.
Synthesizing the relevant policy-acceptance determinants, we identified a quintessential
motivational component underlying citizens’ acceptance of public policies that has not been
addressed with sufficient clarity or detail yet: Do people actually want support from the government
in a given problem domain of interest? We argue that to understand better when and why people
accept public policies, it is essential to differentiate between people's general motivation to seek
governmental support in a certain domain and their evaluation of specific policy intervention
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 6
proposals in that domain.2 Whereas the policy qualities relevant to policy acceptance have received
much attention in recent years, little explicit attention has been paid to people's general desire for
governmental support and its drivers. This is surprising, given that the desire for support appears to
be an essential signifier of and prerequisite for the acceptance of specific policies. For instance,
without a low motivation to seek governmental support, specific policy qualities such as
effectiveness or intrusiveness may not matter as much in determining people’s evaluations as when
the motivation to seek governmental support is high. For example, Arad and Rubinstein (2018) found
that some people opposed the automatic enrolment in a savings program that they otherwise would
have engaged in had it not been formulated by the government. One primary objective of this
review paper is to explicate the central, hitherto overlooked role of the motivational component
desire for governmental support3 in modeling public policy acceptance.
Methods
To identify the relevant predictors for public policy acceptance, we reviewed empirical
studies on Google Scholar and PsychInfo databases, entering the following search terms: “public
polic*”, “intervention*”, “measure*”, “nudg*”,“behavioral intervention*”, “support”, “accept*”,
“endors*”, “attitude”, “compliance”, “comply”, “behavior*” OR “behaviour*”, “decision” OR
“choice”, “seek*” OR “desire” , “help”, “intervention”, “government*”, “political”, “public”,
“determinant*”, “predictor*”. First, we screened the resulting abstracts to estimate the article’s
relevance regarding this paper's aim. Second, based on these results, we entered more specific
search terms to identify the determinants and their intercorrelations. In total, we selected 105 peer-
reviewed empirical studies to use for our review.
This distinction becomes apparent when drawing a parallel to everyday support-seeking: the more people are aware of a
certain problem, the more they should be motivated to seek help to address it (e.g., medical treatment), but whether they
accept a specific offer for help (e.g., a homeopathic treatment suggested by one’s doctor) is a different question.
We prefer the term governmental support in light of our framework's components, but note that the alternative term
"desire for governmental intervention" could be used interchangeably.
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 7
We then integrated the predictors conceptually into a concise framework that is easy to
communicate and expandable for future research. This framework is introduced next. In doing so,
we elaborate on the crucial role of people's motivation to desire government support in a particular
domain. Moreover, we categorized determinants into “support-seeking” characteristics, which
shape peoples’ general motivation to desire governmental support, and perceived “policy qualities,”
which shape peoples’ policy-specific attitudes. Finally, we illustrate the application of our framework
in the context of pro-environmental behavior and discuss how the framework can be optimally
tested with the help of powerful multilevel approaches.
An Integrative Public Policy Acceptance (IPAC-) Framework
The IPAC-framework, in a nutshell, seeks to explain people’s (or citizens’) acceptance of a
given public policy measure of interest from a set of psychological predictors and their interplay.
Hence the immediate focus here is at the level of concrete policy measures (and not entire programs
of policies or general beliefs regarding the optimal extent of governmental intervention). As
policy acceptance (and, ultimately, policy compliance) which is assumed to be mediated by the
desire for governmental support. Moreover, this main link is further shaped and qualified by various
support-seeking characteristics (such as the attribution of responsibility) and perceived policy
qualities (such as perceived effectiveness and intrusiveness).
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 8
The Integrative Public Policy Acceptance (IPAC-)Framework
Note. Problem awareness predicts policy acceptance (which, in turn, predicts policy compliance). The desire
for governmental support mediates the positive relationship between problem awareness and policy
acceptance. Support-seeking characteristics shape the link between problem awareness and the desire for
governmental support. Next to an averaged direct effect of support-seeking characteristics on the desire for
governmental support, we assume that support-seeking characteristics interact with problem awareness
predicting the desire for governmental support (depicted with ×). Perceived policy qualities shape the link
between the desire for governmental support and policy acceptance. Similarly, next to a direct averaged effect
of policy qualities on policy acceptance, we assume that policy qualities interact with the desire for
governmental support predicting policy acceptance (depicted with ×, see text for details).
In the next section, we outline the links described in the IPAC-framework and give examples
of support-seeking characteristics and perceived policy qualities. We begin with problem awareness
predicting policy acceptance (the attitudinal component) and, ultimately, compliance (the behavioral
component). Next, we describe the interplay of key concepts that determine and shape policy
acceptance. In doing so, we highlight the different strands of research on which our integrative
how to apply them to investigate climate policy acceptance.
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 9
Problem Awareness and Policy Acceptance (and Compliance)
Across decision-making domains, empirical research has shown that problem awareness in a
domain (e.g., greenhouse gas emissions, overweight, alcohol consumption, pandemics) is a key
predictor of policy acceptance (Kallbekken & Sælen, 2011; Karlsson et al., 2020; Österberg et al.,
2014; Poortinga et al., 2004; Stern et al., 1999; Stoutenborough et al., 2013; van der Pligt, 1996). For
example, a longitudinal study on changes in alcohol policies and public opinions in Finland
(Österberg et al., 2014) demonstrates that the more citizens became aware of the increasing alcohol
problem in their country, the stronger they favored restrictive policies. Policy acceptance and
compliance research in the domain of the COVID-19 pandemic also points to a crucial role of
problem awareness (Harper et al., 2021; Lewandowsky et al., 2021). Recent work by Lewandowsky
et al. (2021) on public acceptance of privacy-encroaching policies countering COVID-19 spread shows
the perceived risk of COVID-19 infections to predict greater acceptance of co-location tracking
strategies to monitor peoples’ distancing behavior. Similarly, a meta-analysis identified climate
change concerns, risk perceptions, and perceived seriousness as robust predictors of public opinion
about climate taxes and laws (Bergquist et al., 2022). Further evidence comes from a study on public
acceptance of environmental taxes by Kallbekken and Sælen (2011). They found beliefs about
consequences for the environment (followed by consequences for others and oneself) to be a
relevant predictor for the acceptance of fuel taxation. A large body of empirical evidence thus points
to the role of problem awareness in predicting public policy acceptance.4
Though not the focus of the present article on policy acceptance, our framework can be
policy acceptance is associated with higher compliance. This positive relationship derives from
established prior research on attitude-behavior consistency (see meta-analysis by Kraus, 1995), with
Problem awareness or awareness of consequences is also an upstream component in established psychological theories
such as the Norm Activation Model (Schwartz, 1977) or the Value-Belief-Norm Theory by Stern and colleagues (1999;
2000). These models spell out how people form personal norms as a psychological foundation for private-sphere (i.e.,
individual) behaviors but, when applied to environmentalism, have also been extended to include policy support and
activism behaviors.
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 10
stronger attitudes (here higher acceptance ratings) more accurately predicting compliant behavior
compared to weaker attitudes (e.g., Fazio & Williams, 1986). It is also consistent with a number of
more fine-grained models spelling out how and when attitudes predict behavior (e.g., Ajzen, 1991;
Fazio, 1990; Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975; Strack & Deutsch, 2004), including the influential socio-
psychological Theory of Reasoned Action by Fishbein and Ajzen (1975) and later the modified Theory
of Planned Behavior by Ajzen (1991) as well as the related Technology Acceptance Model by Davis
(1989). These models show peoples’ behavior to be predicted by their intention to perform the
behavior, which in turn is predicted by attitudes towards the behavior and subjective norms (and
perceived behavioral control in the Theory of Planned Behavior). In the IPAC-framework, policy
acceptance represents the attitude component, and policy compliance is the enactment of behavior
consistent with the policy.
However, we assume the relationship between acceptance and compliance is not perfect.
We know from attitude-behavior research that the degree to which attitudes predict behavior varies
widely and depends on boundary conditions (Wicker, 1969; Kraus, 1995; McEachan et al., 2011;
Sheeran et al., 2016). Applied to the present context, people may both show high acceptance but
not behave compliantly if, for example, barriers such as low accessibility prevent them from doing so
(e.g., protective face masks are hard to get and/or too expensive). The link between acceptance and
compliance may also be ambiguous because people sometimes comply despite low acceptance (e.g.,
due to coercion or strong social norms).5
Desire for Governmental Support
Our framework introduces a motivational, yet under-researched, component that we
believe is essential to study public policy acceptance: people’s desire for governmental support. We
For example, in cases with strong regulatory power (e.g., regulation implementation), compliance by a large part of the
population can often be the result of policy implementation based on the support of a sufficient majority. In fact, research
on social tipping points by Centola et al. (2018) shows that a sufficiently large minority group (with the share depending on
the social setting), referred to as a “critical mass,” can generate such social change dynamics. In other words, it may
happen that because a critical mass of the public favors a certain measure, even those who do not accept that measure will
ultimately comply. Thus, macro dynamics may result from implementing a particular policy. As our framework, however,
concentrates on the individual level, these dynamics are beyond the present scope but, at the individual level, may explain
non-perfect overlap between acceptance and compliance.
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 11
assume that the more aware citizens are of a problem in a particular domain (e.g., pollution,
poverty, homelessness, obesity), the more strongly they will want support from the government.
And the stronger their desire for governmental support, the more likely they will accept public
policies as supporting tools. Integrating people’s desire for governmental support as the connecting
link between problem awareness and policy acceptance raises new exciting research questions that
embrace when, why, and by whom people accept public policies. For example: Why would people,
aware and concerned about a particular societal problem, refuse the government to intervene?
What role does the identity of the support giver play? When will people who want the government
to act in a particular domain also endorse a specific policy addressing that domain?
Somewhat surprisingly, the question of whether people actually want support from the
government has been mostly overlooked in public policy acceptance research. Here, we argue that
people's motivation to seek governmental support may constitute a central, proximal predictor for
public policy acceptance. Considering this component more explicitly than before may, among other
things, help us to understand better (a) the conditions under which problem awareness translates
into policy acceptance, (b) the role of various support-seeking characteristics such as control
attributions or trust in the government, and (c) the conditions under which policy qualities such as
perceived effectiveness, transparency, or fairness may matter most. The central, relay-like function
reduced impact on policy acceptance if support-seeking characteristics are low, thus manifesting in a
low desire for governmental support. Likewise, without a general motivation to seek governmental
support for a particular problem, to begin with, specific policy qualities may not be as critical for
determining the level of acceptance. To understand policy acceptance, it, therefore, seems
important to differentiate between factors that impact people's more general motivation to seek
support and those that impact the acceptance of specific policies.
A series of empirical studies by Arad and Rubinstein (2018) suggests the relevance of the
desire for governmental support in policy acceptance. They report that several participants rejected
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 12
a governmental intervention embracing the automatic enrolment to encourage savings, even though
they would have engaged in the prompted behavior if the government had not formulated it. The
researchers interpret the finding as reactance effects in response to the pressure to behave in a
particular manner. They further indicate that 14 - 25% of the participants opposed any governmental
intervention. With variance by country and specific intervention, a commonly expressed opinion was
that it is not the government’s business to interfere in the private domain. The findings by Arad and
Rubinstein (2018) support our idea that linking problem awareness directly to the acceptance of
specific public policies misses one crucial component: Peoples’ general attitudes toward
governmental support. Interestingly, when the researchers compared policy acceptance with
presenting either the government or employers as the source of implementation, Americans and
Israelis indicated higher acceptance for the same policies when implemented by employers. Work by
Osman et al. (2018) further points to lower support for policies when the government is the source
of implementation compared to experts. Apparently, whether citizens accept a policy intervention
does not solely depend on their evaluation of the intervention itself. It also depends on the agent
behind the intervention.
Components Affecting the Main Link
Having introduced the desire for governmental support as a key component, we now outline
how the main mediation pathway in our model may be shaped by a set of support-seeking
research has mostly investigated support-seeking characteristics and policy qualities as proximal
predictors of policy acceptance. However, we believe that these proximal relationships sometimes
obfuscate a theoretically more interesting interplay between problem awareness, support-seeking
characteristics, desire for governmental support, and policy qualities in predicting policy acceptance.
such as trust in the government (in Panel A) or policy effectiveness (in Panel B), though positive, may
result from its interplay with the components from the main link in the model (problem awareness
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 13
and desire for governmental support, respectively). In the following, we outline the support-seeking
characteristics and the perceived policy qualities that the existing literature has shown to be
important in determining public policy acceptance. For each component, we describe how it
interacts with the main link in our framework.
Examples of the Presumed Interplay among Problem Awareness and Trust in the Government as a Support-
Seeking Characteristic (Panel A) and among the Desire for Governmental Support and Perceived Policy
Effectiveness as a Policy Quality (Panel B)
Note. Panel A: Trust in the government is assumed to show an overall positive relationship with the desire for
governmental support (the “direct effect”). However, trust in the government becomes a more decisive factor
when there is a high rather than low problem awareness in a given policy area of interest, with highest desire
for governmental support emerging from the combination of high problem awareness and high trust. Panel B:
Perceived policy effectiveness is assumed to show an overall positive relationship with public policy acceptance
(the “direct effect”). However, effectiveness becomes a more decisive factor in determining acceptance when
there is a high rather than low desire for governmental support in the area of interest, with highest acceptance
levels emerging for the combination of high desire for governmental intervention and high perceived
effectiveness.
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 14
Support-Seeking Characteristics
What aspects of people's thinking and feeling lead them to seek government support? Given
that prior research has paid little explicit attention to people's general desire for governmental
support and its drivers, we focus on identifying what we believe are the key candidates from the
reviewed literature. We propose a set of individual characteristics, i.e., personal and political
attitudes and beliefs, that affect people's motivation to seek support in a certain domain. These are
referred to as “support-seeking characteristics.” We now lay out the role of beliefs about control and
responsibility, political orientation, trust in the agent, and value fit and how they may affect the
relationship between problem awareness and the desire for governmental support.
Control Attribution. Weiner's (1995) theory of performance-related attribution and Rotter's
(1966) attribution of control emphasize the importance of attributing events to external or internal
causes and their perceived controllability. Rotter (1966) discusses how control beliefs determine
whether people view a particular event as within their control (internal locus of control) or subject
to control by external factors (external locus of control). Previous research suggests that control
beliefs play a significant role in determining when people seek government support. For example,
the Compensatory Control Theory (Kay et al., 2008) classifies the experience of personal control as a
central human motivation. It posits that formal social systems, such as religion and government, can
provide specific structures and rules by which individuals gain control. Kay and colleagues (2008)
showed that lower perceived personal control was associated with stronger support for
governmental control in a cross-national study. Wnuk et al. (2020) supported the assumptions of the
compensatory control theory. They found that a lack of personal control is positively associated with
the acceptance of COVID-19 tracking technologies.
Control beliefs also play a crucial role in predicting policy acceptance in the environmental
domain. Ajzen's Theory of Planned behavior (1991) incorporates individuals’ perceived behavioral
control or the degree to which they believe they are capable of performing a certain behavior, as a
predictor of behavioral intention and actual behavior. Botetzagias et al. (2015) applied the Theory of
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 15
Planned Behavior to predict recycling intention and found perceived behavioral control to be the
most important predictor. Similarly, Liu et al. (2016) investigated the effectiveness of driving
restriction policies to encourage commuters to use public transportation and found that perceived
behavioral control was a critical precondition for the policies’ success. Recent work by Kukowski et
al. (2023) reveals that people who struggle with controlling their meat consumption are more willing
to relinquish control to the government and accept government intervention to achieve their goal.
While these findings studied control beliefs as proximal predictors of policy acceptance, in
our framework, we propose control attribution to shape the relationship between problem
awareness and the motivation to seek government support, advancing the acceptance of specific
public policies. Thus, the extent to which higher problem awareness predicts a stronger desire for
government support depends on whether people attribute the control to solve the problem
internally or externally (i.e., to the government).
Responsibility Attribution. Closely related to the work on control beliefs in the context of
public policy acceptance is whether people feel responsible for a certain problem themselves or see
the responsibility with others instead (e.g., the government). For example, a recent online study by
Yun and colleagues (2019) found that Canadians who attributed the causes of physical inactivity
internally (vs. externally or both internally and externally) were less supportive of policies to address
this problem. Similarly, Mazzocchi and colleagues (2015) found that individuals who attributed
blame for high obesity rates to external factors, such as the excessive availability of unhealthy foods,
supported policies addressing such factors more. While most studies focus on the direct link
between responsibility attribution and policy acceptance, as argued above, we propose that the
desire for governmental support is an important factor that precedes policy acceptance. Research
suggests that individuals who attribute responsibility for their failures externally are more likely to
seek help (Tessler & Schwartz, 1972).
We suppose that responsibility attribution shapes the relationship between problem
awareness and the motivation to desire government support. To understand why and when people
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 16
desire government intervention in a certain context (e.g., overweight), researchers should consider
the extent to which people attribute responsibility for the problem internally (e.g., “I am too lazy to
prepare healthy meals regularly”; “I should do more exercise”), or externally (e.g., “proper
regulations should make healthy food more appealing and affordable”).
To whom people attribute control and responsibility for a certain event also depends on
individual factors like political orientation. There is substantial empirical evidence across various
decision-making contexts that political orientation needs attention in determining public policy
support (e.g., Gunarathne et al., 2020; Milner et al., 2019; Ramos et al., 2020; Yun et al., 2019). For
instance, in a series of studies on the support for environmentally-friendly airports, Milner et al.
(2019) found conservatives to be less supportive than liberals. Information about the political party
behind the airport proposal mediated this effect. Also, in the domain of physical inactivity, when Yun
and colleagues (2019) examined how political affiliation affects policy support, conservatives
(compared to liberals or centrists) showed less support. Importantly, the researchers found
conservatives who perceive the responsibility to solve physical inactivity as a private issue (internal
attribution) to show lower support regarding all proposed interventions. More conservative citizens
are more concerned about the state interfering with their decisions and privacy. As conservatives
generally tend to preserve traditional values and ideas and to be critical of new developments, it
seems plausible that they are more skeptical about governmental interventions and less willing to
give up control and responsibility to the government.
Trust in the Government. The relationship between problem awareness and desire for
governmental support may further be influenced by the extent to which people trust the intervening
agent, that is, the government. That is, how much do they believe that the government will act in a
way that promotes their welfare, even though the government’s actions are beyond their control
(see Schilke et al., 2021)? Compared to control beliefs and political orientation, which both generally
display characteristics shaping the proposed link between awareness of consequences and desire for
governmental support, trust in the intervening agent clearly depends on who the agent is. Across
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 17
decision-making domains and countries, empirical studies show trust in the government and
governmental institutions to be essential for successful policy implementation (Evers et al., 2018;
Eykelenboom et al., 2019; Harring & Jagers, 2013; Lewandowsky et al., 2021; Osman et al., 2018;
Rodriguez-Sanchez et al., 2018; Sunstein et al., 2018, 2019). For example, a mixed-method
systematic review and meta-analysis on the acceptability of sugar-sweetened beverages tax revealed
public distrust of the government – besides perceived effectiveness, economic and socio-economic
benefit – to be an essential predictor (Eykelenboom et al., 2019). Similarly, in a comprehensive
cross-country study on nudging acceptance by Sunstein et al. (2019), the authors found that
countries with higher trust in their government are more supportive of governmental nudge
interventions. Harring and Jagers (2013) applied the Value-Belief-Norm model to test factors
influencing support for pro-environmental policy and demonstrated improved predictive power by
supplementing factors, including political or interpersonal trust. Incorporating these empirical
findings into the IPAC-framework, higher trust in the government can strengthen the relationship
between problem awareness and desire for governmental support, promoting policy acceptance
desire for the government to intervene if they do not trust the government (and vice versa). Our
conceptual framework suggests that the coexistence of both problem awareness and trust is
necessary for the motivation for intervention to emerge.
Value fit. The extent to which people believe that the government will promote their
interests and values in a certain domain also depends on how well the intentions of the public
policies match the individual’s political views and personal values. Personal values shape our
attitudes and choices in everyday life, including our approval and disapproval of political action.
Schwartz (1994) defines values as “desirable transsituational goals, varying in importance, that serve
as guiding principles in the life of a person or other social entity” (p. 21). The Value-Belief-Norm
Theory (Stern, 2000; Stern et al., 1999) combines various theories and constructs, including
Schwartz's theory of universal human values (Schwartz, 1992, 1994), the Norm-Activation Model
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 18
(Schwartz, 1977) and the New Environmental Paradigm (Dunlap & Van Liere, 1978). Empirical
research based on the Value-Belief-Norm Theory confirms that values, compared to worldviews and
environmental concerns, predict personal norms, intentions, and policy acceptance the best (Steg et
al., 2011). For nudge interventions, citizens tend to reject those nudges they perceive as inconsistent
with the prevailing values and interests (Sunstein et al., 2018). As with trust in the agent, the degree
of value fit depends on who the agent is. The better the government's intentions in power match the
individual’s political views and personal values, the more willing the individual is to seek
governmental support. Value fit, as a support-seeking characteristic, strengthens the relationship
between problem awareness and the desire for governmental support. Problem awareness and
value fit need to coexist to some extent so that a desire for governmental support can emerge.
Importantly, citizens may perceive contradicting problems within the same domain, especially
when investigating policy acceptance in highly controversial contexts like social equality for LGBTQ
(lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer or questioning) people or abortion rights. Whether
people wish the government to intervene in a domain may then be shaped by how well people think
their values are reflected (i.e., “instantiated”; Maio & Haddock, 2010; Ponizovskiy, 2022) in the policies
proposed by the government.
Perceived Policy Qualities
In contrast to support-seeking characteristics, which are personal characteristics shaping
people's motivation to seek government support in a particular domain, policy qualities address the
specific qualities of a certain intervention. In the IPAC-framework, we propose that policy qualities
affect the relationship between the desire for governmental support and policy acceptance. Our
literature review revealed several policy qualities important for policy acceptance: effectiveness,
intrusiveness, transparency, and fairness.6 While previous literature has primarily studied these
6 Note that in our framework we give examples of and focus on what we believe to be the most central policy qualities. We
assume variability in those perceived qualities (e.g., high vs low perceived effectiveness) stemming from various levels of
analysis: the type of policy tool in question (e.g., nudge vs. law), the policy domain/problem of interest, dispositional
factors (e.g., political ideology) and possibly cultural and national factors (see our discussion on the multilevel approach to
public policy acceptance further below). Thus, each of the proximal policy qualities may, in turn, be shaped by further
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 19
qualities as proximal determinants of policy acceptance, we argue that there is a theoretically
important interplay with the desire for governmental support, such that the effect of positive
qualities (such as effectiveness and fairness) should be augmented. In contrast, the effect of
negative qualities (such as intrusiveness and costs) should be buffered with increasing levels of the
desire for governmental support.
Effectiveness. Across various decision-making contexts, including health, finances, and
environment, numerous studies show the perceived effectiveness of a policy to be one of the
strongest determinants for its acceptability (Bang et al., 2020; Bergquist et al., 2022; Bos et al., 2015;
Cornwell & Krantz, 2014; Djupegot & Hansen, 2020; Gold et al., 2023; Hagmann et al., 2019;
Mantzari et al., 2022; Pechey et al., 2014; Petrescu et al., 2016; Promberger et al., 2012; Reynolds et
al., 2020; Zverinova et al., 2014). For example, in a discrete choice experiment in the UK on public
acceptability of policies to reduce alcohol consumption, participants were randomly presented with
a choice set varying the type of policy (minimum unit pricing for alcohol, reducing the number of
alcohol retail outlets, or regulating alcohol advertising), the intensity of the policy (low, medium,
high), and the effectiveness of the policy (in terms of the expected outcomes of the reduced alcohol-
related crimes, alcohol-related hospital admissions, and heavy drinkers) (Pechey et al., 2014). When
participants considered information on the expected effectiveness of the policies, most of them then
chose any given policy over the status quo. Likewise, for the environmental domain, a systematic
review with secondary data analyses by Zverinova et al. (2014) concluded that people's willingness
to pay for a climate policy is strongly associated with its perceived effectiveness and probability of
success. In a recent systematic review of experimental evidence across policy domains, including
health, environment, education, and gun control, Reynolds and colleagues (2020) found that
communicating the evidence of policy effectiveness to the participants increased their acceptance
levels by approximately four percent, stressing the essential role of effectiveness in public policy
variables, allowing for extensions of our framework in these directions. For instance, trust in the agent, may also to some
extent shape fairness perceptions (Kim et al., 2013).
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 20
acceptance. As discussed, we maintain that the overall positive relationship between effectiveness
and acceptance should be magnified by the desire for governmental support, yielding a synergistic
Intrusiveness. The degree of government coercion or interference is an issue that has long
been studied and discussed in political instruments research (e.g., Doern, 1981; Doern & Phidd,
1983; Doern & Wilson, 1974). It is, furthermore, a central issue in major economic debates of the
last century (Hayek, 1978; Keynes, 1936). Preserving self-determined decision-making is an
important value for most people in Western countries. When interventions are perceived to
interfere with the public’s freedom of choice, they are likely to get rejected by the citizens
(Diepeveen et al., 2013; Djupegot & Hansen, 2020; Evers et al., 2018; Hagmann et al., 2018; Huber et
al., 2020; Jung & Mellers, 2016; Sunstein et al., 2018). Highly intrusive policies, i.e., policies that
strongly engage in the citizen’s daily life, can be easily perceived as a threat to the target's autonomy
and evoke reactance effects (Brehm & Brehm, 2013; Evers et al., 2018). Empirical research has
shown that policy intrusiveness is associated with significantly lower public acceptance across policy
types and decision-making domains (Diepeveen et al., 2013; Djupegot & Hansen, 2020; Evers et al.,
2018; Hagmann et al., 2018). For example, Hagmann et al. (2018) studied public acceptance of taxes,
labels, and nudges directed at reducing sugar consumption and found acceptance to vary depending
on the extent to which the measure interfered with the target’s everyday life. Taxes and portion size
reduction, which displayed the most intrusive policies, were accepted the least, while labeling and
public health campaigns were accepted the most. In addition, the review on health-related policy
acceptance by Diepeveen and colleagues (2013) also revealed lower public support for more
intrusive policies with lower support for taxation and restrictions and higher support for educational
campaigns.
Our framework suggests an interplay between the desire for governmental support and
intrusiveness. People should become more willing to accept policies of a more intrusive nature as
the desire for government intervention increases, resulting in rising thresholds for what is
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 21
considered unacceptable governmental action. In other words, the desire for governmental
intervention should exert a buffering effect on the overall negative effect of intrusiveness on public
problem such as climate change or social inequality may not go away easily and cannot be mitigated
through reliance on individual responsibility or free market forces alone may result in a stronger
wish for the government to actively step in with appropriate measures (e.g., higher taxes, more
severe product standards, bans and prohibitions, etc.). This hypothesis also provides a
temporal/longitudinal lens accounting for shifting calls for governmental action over time:
Specifically, increases (or decreases) in the desire for governmental support in a given policy area (as
induced, for instance, through political debate and agenda setting) may result in people becoming
more accepting of policies they previously considered intrusive (or less accepting of existing strong
government intervention, respectively).
Transparency. Across various decision-making domains, public policies receive higher
approval when the goal they pursue and the way they prompt behavior change are transparent to
the target person (de Fine Licht, 2014; Gold et al., 2023; Jung & Mellers, 2016; Sunstein et al., 2018).
Highly intransparent interventions that we cannot process consciously, such as visual illusions to
reduce speeding (Jung & Mellers, 2016) and subliminal advertising (Reisch & Sunstein, 2016), may
easily be perceived as manipulative by the public. Among nudges, those that prompt deliberative
processes (System 2 nudges), like educational nudges providing problem-specific information,
receive more support from the citizens as compared to nudges that elicit more automatic responses,
like default nudges (System 1 nudges; Jung & Mellers, 2016; Reisch & Sunstein, 2016; Sunstein et al.,
2018). Sunstein and colleagues (2019) conclude that „most citizens will disapprove of nudges that
have illicit motivations; violate rights; are inconsistent with the interests and values of most
choosers; that suffer from an absence of transparency; that count as manipulative; and that take
people’s property without their explicit consent.“ (p. 23). As with effectiveness, we assume the
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 22
average positive relationship between transparency and acceptance becomes stronger with an
increasing desire for governmental support.
Fairness, Costs, and Benefits. The perceived fairness of a public policy plays a central role in
anticipating its acceptance (Bergquist et al., 2022; Bos et al., 2015; Huber et al., 2020; Kim et al.,
2013). For instance, in a survey-embedded experiment (Huber et al., 2020), perceived fairness, next
to effectiveness and intrusiveness, emerged as a central predictor of public support for different
environmental policies implemented to reduce vehicle emissions. In fact, fairness has been found
among the key policy-specific predictors for policy acceptance in the context of climate change taxes
and laws (see meta-analysis by Bergquist et al., 2022). Moreover, fairness has been identified as the
strongest predictor of acceptance of policies aimed at promoting healthy food choices (see
conceptual framework by Bos et al., 2015). It is important to note that fairness judgments crucially
hinge on which distributive justice principle or norm (i.e., equity, equality, or need) is applied in a
given context (Deutsch, 1975). This may be the primary reason why the same public policy measure
may be viewed as fair by some and unfair by others, often along political divides. Distributive
fairness, which deals with the fair distribution of outcomes, needs to be distinguished from
procedural fairness, which refers to equality of the process generating the outcome, such as the
decision-making process of implementing the measure (Tyler & Smith, 1998). Ideally, then, a
sophisticated assessment of the perceived fairness component in the IPAC-framework would jointly
consider both the distributive and procedural aspects of fairness.
However, the subjective perception of fairness may be biased by self-interest (Rodriguez-
Lara & Moreno-Garrido, 2012) and personal costs. Unsurprisingly, policies associated with few
personal or collective benefits or high costs (financially or psychologically, e.g., effort) are more likely
to get rejected (de Groot & Schuitema, 2012; Hagmann et al., 2019; Rodriguez-Sanchez et al., 2018;
Schuitema et al., 2010). For instance, work by Hagmann and colleagues (2019) shows that public
support for carbon taxes was reduced when a low-cost green energy default nudge was introduced,
but this effect disappeared when the perceived economic costs of the tax were minimized and,
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 23
additionally, the lower effectiveness of the default nudge was highlighted. Studies further
demonstrate that policies prompting a particular behavior change receive less approval from
individuals who enjoy and engage in these behaviors (Sunstein et al., 2019). Here, the psychological
costs to change the behavior are obviously higher than stopping a less enjoyable behavior. Again, we
assume that the established overall positive effect of benefits becomes more pronounced and that
the negative effect of costs becomes alleviated as people harbor a strong rather than weak desire
for governmental support.
Conceptualizing Further Sources of Variation
Variation by Decision-Making Domain. Based on the literature review, we suggest that
considering factors such as problem awareness and support-seeking characteristics may help to
understand how the acceptance of policies varies by the decision-making domain they are
implemented in. For example, in the health domain, Diepeveen and colleagues (2013) found that
anti-smoking interventions received the highest public approval compared to similar interventions
addressing alcohol consumption, diet, and physical activity. The authors explain these findings, to
some extent, by citizens’ awareness of the serious consequences associated with smoking which
suggests that these results may be connected to problem awareness as the entry point in our
framework. Similarly, Reynolds and colleagues (2019) found that policy acceptance varied across
domains, with tobacco use interventions being more acceptable than alcohol and snack
consumption interventions. Whereas nudge interventions receive overall relatively high support in
the health domain (Reisch et al., 2017), they are less accepted in the financial domain (Gold et al.,
2023). Presumably then, people seem to hold varying beliefs regarding the extent to which various
spheres of life require policy support. From the vantage point of our framework, such variability
across domains (while keeping the policy constant) may best be understood as resulting from the
interplay of problem awareness, control beliefs, and possibly other factors in shaping the desire for
governmental support in a given domain. In any case, a more precise understanding of the proximal
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 24
and distal determinants of these domain-level differences (possibly also including political
socialization and culture-historical roots) seems an intriguing avenue for future research.
Variation by Policy Type. Policy acceptance further varies by policy type, with highest
approval for information-based interventions such as educational campaigns and significantly lower
approval for price-based interventions like taxation (Diepeveen et al., 2013; Hagmann et al., 2018;
Petrescu et al., 2016). Behavioral interventions such as nudges are generally well-accepted across
various countries (Bauer et al., 2021; Hagman et al., 2015; Jung & Mellers, 2016; Reisch et al., 2017;
Reisch & Sunstein, 2016; Reynolds et al., 2019; Sunstein et al., 2018), especially when compared to
traditional price-based interventions. The reviewed literature suggests that the different types of
policies can be assigned to certain combinations of policy-characteristics, which entail a trade-off
(e.g., Arad & Rubinstein, 2018; Diepeveen et al., 2013): Less intervening policies (such as nudges and
educational campaigns) are generally perceived as less intrusive and costly but also less effective
compared to more intervening interventions (such as taxations and regulations). From our
framework, the observed policy-specific variations in public policy acceptance can be best
understood as resulting from the interplay between people's desire for government intervention and
the policy qualities that affect the acceptance of a given policy.
The IPAC-framework allows us to compare differences in public policy acceptance across
domains and policies (see also the below section outlining a multilevel approach). Moreover, by
including policy-level measures of perceived qualities as well as domain-level measures of the desire
for governmental intervention, researchers can investigate the extent to which such variation at the
policy type or policy domain level may be parsimoniously accounted for (i.e., reduced to) by such
model components. For instance, are the observable differences between nudges, taxation, and law
mostly mediated by their different profiles regarding central perceived public policy qualities such as
effectiveness, transparency, intrusiveness, and fairness? To what extent can differences between
domains (Diepeveen et al., 2013; Gold et al., 2023; Reynolds et al., 2019) be accounted for by
differences in the desire that the government supports citizens in a given domain or with regard to a
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 25
given problematic behavior of interest? It is our hope that the proposed framework is one step
towards connecting these seemingly diverse areas of research more closely with each other.
Public Policy Acceptance as a Bridge Connecting the Individual and the System Level
A recent debate concerning the role of behavioral science in public policy by Chater and
Loewenstein (2022) criticizes a prevailing focus on solving political problems by introducing
interventions changing individual behavior (referred to as adopting an "i-frame") rather than
addressing the system in which individuals operate (referred to as "s-frame"; see Chater &
Loewenstein, 2022). In light of the relevance of this debate, we briefly situate the IPAC-framework
herein: In our perspective, policy acceptance is at the intersection of the individual level and the
political system, as citizens' demand for governmental intervention and the respective approval or
disapproval of certain policies may bring about systemic changes (e.g., the introduction of new
regulations). In other words, acceptance is an important bridge connecting the individual with the
system level because it assigns a political role to the individual for initiating and advancing system-
level change. Using the IPAC-framework to examine why and when citizens accept a particular policy
allows researchers to focus on this political function of individuals in driving systemic change while
also considering underlying psychological facilitators and barriers.
Our framework is useful for addressing that public policies should enable societal change
(e.g., toward sustainability) as it can model the determinants for accepting "s-frame" interventions
such as regulations and incentives. Moreover, it can help identify possible avenues for
communicating and promoting s-frame solutions for policy-makers. To give a concrete example:
Using the IPAC-framework, behavioral scientists could examine how support-seeking characteristics
and policy-qualities interact in shaping the acceptance of “i-frame” vs. “s-frame” interventions. As
laid out above, citizens usually perceive regulations (vs. nudges) as more restrictive for their
everyday life but also as more effective in solving the addressed political problem, presenting a
trade-off (e.g., Arad & Rubinstein, 2018; Diepeveen et al., 2013). Our framework holds that this
balance may tilt more strongly in favor of regulations to the extent that the desire for governmental
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 26
intervention increases (due to both the stronger weighing of differences in policy effectiveness and
the buffering against the negative effect of intrusiveness). Thus, raising problem awareness while
strengthening trust in the government next to other support-seeking characteristics may be
particularly important stepping stones for promoting the policy acceptance of s-frame type of
policies.7
Testing the IPAC-Framework
So far, the components of our framework are modeled based on carefully reviewed
empirical studies and established models on predictors of attitudes and behaviors. Most of the
reviewed empirical work is cross-sectional in design. Cross-sectional studies provide a useful starting
point to test the IPAC-framework, as they allow inferences about covariation among variables and
the strength of such relationships (Burkley & Blanton, 2008), often with high statistical power.
Simple cross-sectional studies, however, are limited in a number of ways. In the following, we
discuss alternative useful research designs for testing the hypotheses from the IPAC-framework (or
related questions regarding public policy acceptance): experiments, field experiments, longitudinal
studies, and multilevel designs. Each of these improves on the typical cross-sectional design in
unique ways while having specific advantages and limitations. We hence believe that public policy
acceptance research of this kind will advance fastest through the combination of such approaches.
Experimental Approaches, Field Experiments, and Longitudinal Designs
To further draw causal conclusions for specific proposed relationships in the IPAC-
framework, the determinant(s) of interest could be manipulated in an experimental setting. For
example, as outlined in limitations and future directions, Arad and Rubinstein (2018) manipulated
the degree of policy effectiveness to study its effects on the acceptance of behavioral interventions.
Focusing on our proposed main link (problem awareness predicts desire for governmental support,
In contrast, this line of reasoning would predict a comparative advantage for nudges (vs. regulations) at low to moderate
levels of the desire for governmental support under the assumption that nudges are generally perceived as more freedom-
preserving, but also less effective in reaching their policy goal. In this case, to promote acceptance, it might be more
important to transparently communicate how nudges work and for which specific policy goals they are useful.
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 27
which in turn predicts policy acceptance and compliance), one could manipulate problem awareness
by providing two groups with different sets of information on a certain issue (that is not obviously
concerning to most people; e.g., an article indicating that drinking one glass of red wine per day has
a positive effect on health, vs. an article indicating negative consequences for health, vs. a control
group without any intervention) and then test how the different levels of problem awareness affect
the desire for governmental support.
One limitation of this approach is that only one causal link can be investigated in a given
setting. To test the framework more comprehensively, a causal chain approach could be applied
(e.g., Spencer et al., 2005). For instance, a research program manipulating problem awareness in a
given setting would next attempt to manipulate the desire for governmental intervention with
suitable paradigms (e.g., presenting selective examples of how governmental intervention has
helped vs. harmed solving societal problems in the past) to establish mediation, or to jointly
manipulate a predictor (e.g., problem awareness) and moderator variable (e.g., control attributions)
in the framework to test for moderation.
A second limitation is the typical tradeoff of high internal validity (for drawing causal
conclusions) against aspects affecting the external validity of the research (e.g., artificial nature of
stimuli, lack of representativeness or relevance) (Campbell, 1957; Lin et al., 2021). One potential
remedy may lie in field experiments conducted in naturalistic settings. However, in light of the
nature of public policy, it may be challenging and often infeasible to manipulate the variables of
interest in real-world policy-making contexts involving political stakeholders such as city, regional, or
national governments or other political agents and institutions (Perhaps this type of field research
may be easier to conduct in organizational settings.)
A second promising (but also challenging) design to combine the potential for causal
inference with high external validity is given by longitudinal research designs. Longitudinal
approaches can be used to test causal-ordering assumptions by quantifying the over-time effects of
the key framework components (Burkley & Blanton, 2008; Roth & McKinnon, 2012). For instance,
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 28
research may track (changes in) problem awareness, desire for intervention, and policy acceptance
for a given issue over time. The cross-lagged effects from at least three (appropriately timed)
measurement occasions may be harnessed to examine the assumed mediation longitudinally.
Moreover, intensive longitudinal data (Bolger & Laurenceau, 2013), such as those collected via
experience-sampling can yield important additional insights. In a typical experience-sampling study,
participants are repeatedly asked to report their feelings, thoughts, and behaviors regarding a
certain research question right in their natural environments and over time (e.g., Conner et al., 2009;
Hofmann & Patel, 2015). This method has, for instance, been applied to study everyday dynamics in
political trust (Baumert et al., 2017) and may be particularly useful when wanting to study how
political processes (e.g., announcement of a new policy proposal; political scandal) interact with the
psychological variables in the IPAC-framework such as the evaluation of policy qualities or trust in
the agent.
Multilevel Approach
The above-mentioned approaches typically zoom in on a more narrow set of policy
measures and domains (e.g., manipulating awareness in one domain of interest; tracking public
policy acceptance towards one policy measure over time). They are, therefore, limited in terms of
comprehensiveness or generalizability. It may be useful to complement these approaches with a
powerful multilevel approach to studying public policy acceptance across policy types and domains,
as well as other sources of variability. Though correlational in nature, multilevel modeling allows
researchers to unite multiple levels of analysis (or sources of variability) relevant to the study of
public policy acceptance comprehensively within one statistical framework and with high statistical
power. These levels may include the policy level, the policy area or domain level, the
person/dispositional level, and even higher-order levels such as group/party membership and the
cultural or national level in which citizens are embedded. Specifically, the power of the multilevel
design stems from the repeated observations due to the combination of levels of analysis. A
multilevel approach takes care of dependencies among the clustered data and, among other things,
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 29
allows the researcher to gauge how much variability in the dependent outcome is due to each level
of analysis (e.g., type of policy measures, policy area, dispositional influences), and to determine the
joint influence of each predictor of interest as well as (cross-level) interactions on the outcome (e.g.,
Snijders & Bosker, 2011). The approach is highly flexible, so different hierarchical models of interest
may be the focus of interest.
We will use the example of climate policy to illustrate how the multilevel approach could be
harnessed to study variability in public policy acceptance. Starting with simple designs, a
straightforward two-level design may focus on various types of policy measures (e.g., information
campaigns, nudges, incentives, bans) in one given policy domain of interest (e.g., meat
consumption), nested in participants. In such a design, only variability at the concrete policy level
(Level 1) and at the individual level (Level 2) is implemented, but no variability between policy
domains (hence this level is skipped). Another version of a two-level design is one where one and the
same policy type (e.g., taxation) is examined across a large range of policy domains (e.g., meat
consumption, energy consumption, air travel, and so forth). Here, policy domains represent Level 1
and individuals Level 2, and no separate policy level of analysis is introduced. Needless to say, the
first design’s focus will be on how different public policy measures are accepted based on policy-
level determinants and (their interplay with) dispositional variables. In contrast, the second design’s
focus will be on how domain-related aspects (such as desire for governmental support in that
domain) and (their interplay with) dispositional variables shape the acceptance of taxation in those
domains.
From here, it is easy to see how a more complete design allows better integration of
questions pertaining to the specific policy level, the policy domain level, and the individual level. This
IPAC-framework to study the acceptance of various climate policies in multiple environmental
dispositional information (e.g., gender, age, political affiliation, general trust in the government). At
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 30
the domain-level (Level 2), participants indicate their concern about five different environmental
decision-making areas (eating meat, car use, electricity consumption, traveling by plane, water
consumption) and their problem awareness, desire for governmental support, and any further
domain-related measures. For each domain, participants are presented with statements
representing three different public policy interventions (nudges, incentives, and laws) at Level 1, and
asked to indicate the extent to which they would accept each policy (the dependent outcome). Also
at Level 1 are measures regarding the perceived qualities of each policy (e.g., effectiveness,
transparency, fairness). Multilevel analyses, including multilevel path analysis, can then be used to
test the mediation and moderation predictions of the framework (e.g., Preacher et al., 2010). As
mentioned above, a multilevel perspective allows extending the IPAC-framework toward even higher
levels of analysis, such as to address cultural or national level differences (e.g., country-specific
differences in political systems and culture). In summary, we believe that even more complex
frameworks of public policy acceptance, such as the IPAC-framework can be tested with a
combination of sophisticated experimental and correlational approaches.
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 31
Example of a Multilevel Design to Study the Acceptance of Climate Policies
Note. In this example, three different policy tools (incentive, law, nudge) are nested within each of the five policy domains in climate policy (e.g., meat consumption, car
use), and each individual provides information on all five domains. The italicized constructs provide examples for measures at each level of analysis. For instance,
participants evaluate policy qualities (e.g., perceived effectiveness) of each policy in a given domain and rate their acceptance of each policy (the DV). At level 2, they
indicate their desire for governmental support for each policy domain and indicate their (dispositional) political affiliation at the individual level. Note that only one
individual of the entire sample is shown in this example and that even higher levels of analysis (e.g., group, nation) are possible (see text for details).
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 32
General Discussion
The main objective of this review paper is to provide an integrative framework for
understanding when and why people accept public policies across different decision-making
contexts. Anticipating public policy acceptance is crucial to develop politically feasible and effective
public policy interventions. At the same time, explaining policy acceptance is a challenging task due
to the complex interactions of various factors jointly determining citizens' acceptance levels. We
sought to identify the most relevant psychological key determinants of public policy acceptance
empirically studied so far, to specify how they may be interrelated, and to integrate them into a
Moreover, we introduce a hitherto overlooked motivational component as an essential
proximal predictor of public policy acceptance: people's desire for governmental support. We
conceptualize it as the missing link connecting problem awareness with policy acceptance: All else
being equal, the more aware citizens are of a given societal problem, the more they should desire
the government to do something about it, and the more they desire governmental support, the
more readily they should accept policies targeting the problem. However, this is only the base of the
framework: We further posit that support-seeking characteristics, including control- and
responsibility- beliefs, trust in the government, and political orientation, shape the relationship
between problem awareness and people's motivation to seek support from the government.
Additionally, we assume that the (overall) positive effect of policy-specific qualities such as perceived
effectiveness, transparency, and fairness may depend on people’s desire for governmental support,
whereas the (overall) negative effect of policy-specific qualities such as intrusiveness or personal
costs may be buffered by it. In sum, knowing whether people are aware of a certain problem and
whether they are motivated to seek support from the government to address that problem may help
us better understand how further key psychological determinants shape public policy acceptance.
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 33
Extending the IPAC-Framework
The IPAC-framework is applicable to research questions on different levels of analysis:
Besides studying individual differences in policy acceptance at the micro level (e.g., differences in
how people respond to COVID-19-related restrictions such as mask mandates), differences at the
macro level, such as country- or cultural-specific influences can also be studied. Similarities within
social systems, like similar ways of responding to contexts, processing information, and interpreting
the meanings of events, evoke differences between social systems in values, beliefs, and behaviors,
thereby defining culture (Smith et al., 2013). Applying the proposed framework, cross-cultural
differences in the acceptance of and compliance with public policy interventions could be identified.
For instance, researchers may be interested in studying and comparing public policy acceptance in
societies that differ with respect to their collectivistic vs. individualistic views (as identified by
Hofstede, 2001) or in their political values and governmental structures (e.g., mask adherence in
Japan vs. the USA). Using the framework to study specific proposed interrelations for extremist
groups might further reveal fruitful insights for acceptance research. For example, when we think
about conspiracy theorists denying the existence of COVID-19, they probably oppose governmental
interventions in this context in such a generalized way that solely enhancing the interventions'
qualities (e.g., more transparent, effective, beneficial, and less intrusive policies) would not change
their reactant attitudes and behaviors towards COVID-19-related restrictions. One probably has to
intervene at earlier stages in the framework to elicit changes and tackle support-seeking
characteristics such as strengthening peoples' trust in the governance.
Depending on the research objective, this integrative acceptance framework allows future
research to add or focus on specific factors presumed to predict policy acceptance and compliance.
This also includes (field-)experimental tests of certain model pathways. For instance, scrutinizing the
proposed impacting role of control beliefs on the desire for governmental support, future research
could experimentally examine how the relationship between problem awareness and desire for
governmental support is shaped when experimentally highlighting high vs. low degrees of internal
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 34
control ascription or, relatedly, high personal self-efficacy vs. high collective self-efficacy (Fritsche et
al., 2018), for a given societal problem of interest.
The broader underlying argument regarding control beliefs may deserve some further
attention at this point. Internal attribution of control, personal autonomy, or self-efficacy are all
considered hallmarks of good psychological functioning and individual well-being (Bandura, 1982;
Ryan & Deci, 2000). However, when viewed through the lens of policy-making, (overly) high levels of
internal control and associated beliefs may get in tension with what may, according to our analysis,
be the optimal psychological basis for desiring and accepting effective public policy: realizing that
one cannot solve the problem on one’s own; realizing that, instead, the best solution to many vexing
problems (such as climate change, the obesity epidemic, inadequate retirement savings, and so
forth) may lie in substantive public policy-making that tackle the structural roots of these problems.
For many members of our discipline, this message regarding some of our most-established
constructs and interventions may not be digested easily. As has been repeatedly argued (e.g., Chater
& Loewenstein, 2022; Shove, 2010), however, psychology’s (overly) strong focus on individual-level
solutions and interventions, including those aimed at strengthening control, self-efficacy, and
advocating individual lifestyle changes, may, somewhat ironically, undermine support for more
intrusive, but also more effective and transformative public policy solutions at the systems level
(Chater & Loewenstein, 2022; Hagmann et al., 2019). The present framework helps to interlink the
individual- and the system frame of analysis by providing several clues as to the psychological
foundations for a strong desire for strong governmental intervention (with potentially
transformative effects). From this perspective, helping citizens and public-policy makers gain a well-
calibrated sense of the things that lie within citizens’ own possibilities and those that may be better
addressed at a structural level may provide an important asset in the struggle for societal welfare
and crisis-solving.
Though speculative at this point, further insights regarding the desire for governmental
support may be gleaned from translating some insights from attachment research (e.g., Bowlby,
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 35
1978) to the quality of people’s “relationship” with the state. Perhaps, there are parallels to what is
known about interpersonal attachment styles (e.g., secure, preoccupied, dismissing, disoriented),
which undergird or go beyond the trust component in our framework. In a study on mobility and
security of citizenship for resettled young people from refugee backgrounds, Nunn and colleagues
(2016) conclude that stable citizenship increases the individual's feeling of security by offering a
secure base that allows them to participate in social and political situations. Individuals with a more
secure attachment to the government might be more likely to wish for and endorse political
interventions than individuals with a more dismissing attachment style. Furthermore, we believe
there are many useful threads with regard to certain areas in organizational psychology. Applying
the framework to organizations by swapping “citizens” with “employees” and “the government”
with “the management” may reveal not only interesting parallels between areas but also stimulate
new questions and answers regarding, for instance, the factors determining whether employees
accept a newly proposed company policy as part of its organizational change process.
Finally, thinking of policy acceptance as a more dynamic process, people's experiences with
certain policies might reflect back on earlier stages of the IPAC-framework, i.e., on the trust in and
desire for government interventions. Here, (unexpected) positive experiences with implemented
policies may increase people's trust in the government, while (unexpected) disappointing or even
frustrating experiences may generate distrust. Suppose free public transport was introduced to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, but unexpectedly led to high burdens for individuals (e.g.,
crowded trains, long delays, missed appointments). In such instances, people might perceive the
government as incompetent or too hasty, thus reducing their desire for further government
intervention. Thus, the IPAC-framework could be extended by drawing a feedback loop from
compliance to support-seeking characteristics and the desire for government intervention. Future
research is needed to test such feedback mechanisms.
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 36
Limitations
The reviewed empirical studies focused mainly on a selected set of policy-acceptance
determinants in specific behavioral contexts, dominantly in the health and environmental domain.
Above, we have outlined various methodological approaches on how this may be achieved in a way
that balances internal and external validity by relying on a combination of experimental methods,
field experiments, and longitudinal designs. Regarding generalizability, since policy acceptance varies
depending on the decision-making context and the policy type (Diepeveen et al., 2013; Gold et al.,
2023; Reynolds et al., 2019), the framework should be applied across various decision-making
contexts and public policies. The multilevel approach may provide an ideal basis for accomplishing
this even within one and the same undertaking.
Moreover, the framework provides only a first step for categorizing the key determinants of
public policy acceptance research into support-seeking characteristics and policy qualities. Given
that we are the first to explicitly ask which variables may shape the desire for governmental support
(such as trust in the government) and how the desire for governmental support may, in turn,
interact with policy qualities, we centered our discussion on those constructs from the literature for
which a compelling case can be made while attempting to suggest potential for integration for other
factors such as policy-domain level effects. Future research is needed to scrutinize and advance this
suggested distinction and to clarify potential overlap and redundancies among constructs.
Conclusion
An integrative, review-based framework is offered to facilitate the investigation of
predictors for the acceptance of public policy interventions, as well as their interrelations, across
intervention types and decision-making domains. The framework introduces the desire for
governmental support as an integral motivational component linking problem awareness and policy
attitudes. The novel link evokes new exciting research questions on when, why, and by whom people
endorse public policies. Capturing these questions, this framework demonstrates how support-
seeking characteristics and policy qualities may shape the relations between awareness, desire for
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 37
governmental support, policy acceptance, and, ultimately, compliance. The illustrated insights may
enrich existing evidence-based guidelines on the development and public communication for
successful policy implementation.
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 38
Definitions of the IPAC-framework’s Key Components and Examples of its Application to the Acceptance of Climate Policies
Components Definition Example: Climate Policies
Problem Awareness The extent to which people are aware of or concerned about The extent to which people are aware that the rising greenhouse gas emissions have severe
a certain politically relevant problem (e.g., greenhouse gas consequences for the environment and society.
emissions, overweight, alcohol consumption, pandemics).
Support-Seeking Personal characteristics, i.e., personal and political attitudes The extent to which, people…
Characteristics and beliefs affect people's desire for governmental support in … trust the government that it will act in a way that promotes one's interests and values in the
a certain domain. context of climate change.
… attribute control and responsibility to mitigate climate change to the government (vs. oneself).
Desire for The extent to which people are motivated to seek support The extent to which people are motivated to desire governmental support to reduce greenhouse
Governmental Support from the government in a certain politically relevant domain. gas emissions.
Policy Qualities How people evaluate a specific policy regarding certain The extent to which, people perceive…
qualities, including the policy’s effectiveness, transparency, … the goal and techniques of the climate policy as transparent.
intrusiveness, perceived fairness, costs and benefits attached … the climate policy as effective in reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
to the policy. … the climate policy as fair (e.g., higher fuel taxes for people relying on using the car to get to
work).
… the climate policy as intrusive (e.g., vegetarian food as default interferes with people's eating
habits).
Policy Acceptance The extent to which people accept the introduction of a The extent to which people accept specific public climate policies promoting behavior that
specific public policy addressing a certain politically relevant reduces greenhouse gas emissions (e.g., setting vegetarian food as default in public canteens,
problem (attitudinal component). nudging people to bring their own reusable cups to their favorite coffee shop, increasing fuel
taxes, subsidizing public transport).
Policy Compliance The extent to which people comply with the behavior The extent to which people comply with specific public climate policies (e.g., choosing vegetarian
promoted by a specific public policy (behavioral component). food in public canteens, bringing reusable coffee cups to one's favorite coffee shop, commuting
by public transport to work).
PUBLIC POLICY ACCEPTANCE FRAMEWORK 39