A version of this paper has been accepted for publication at
Psychological Research.
Scientific articles usually undergo a peer-review process, wherein independent researchers
evaluate the quality of the work, make suggestions, and speak for or against publication of
the work in a specific journal. The present article has been through this process. Note that
this version may only slightly differ from the published version.
The Effects of Emotion on Retrospective Duration Memory using Virtual Reality
Omran K. Safi1, Yiran Shi1, Christopher R. Madan2, Tyler Lin1, & Daniela J. Palombo1
1 University of British Columbia (Psychology)
2 University of Nottingham (Psychology)
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Emily Wang, Isabel Wilson and Noam Jacob for assistance with checking
references. The authors thank Alessandra Te for assisting with analysis checking. The authors
thank Theodore Yu, Akash Grewal, Jasneet Sabrao, and Christy Wong for assistance with
data collection.
Abstract
Our memories for temporal duration may be coloured by the emotions we experience
during an event. While emotion generally enhances some aspects of memory, temporal
duration has been shown to be particularly susceptible to emotion-induced distortions.
However, prior work has faced difficulty when studying this phenomenon, having to make
some trade offs on ecological validity or experimental control. Here, we sought to bridge this
gap by studying the effects of emotion on temporal duration memory using virtual reality. In
the present study, a final sample of 69 participants experienced a series of negative-emotional
and neutral worlds within virtual reality. Following this, participants provided ratings of
emotionality (arousal, valence, pleasantness,) and retrospective duration estimates (i.e.,
remembered time). We hypothesized that negative events would be recalled as having a
greater duration than neutral events (H1). We additionally hypothesized that negative, but not
neutral, events would be recalled as being longer than the true duration (H2). The results
supported H1 while failing to provide evidence in support of H2. Together, the results bolster
the importance of emotion, especially negative emotion, in shaping how we remember the
temporal unfolding of the past.
Keywords: Emotion, Episodic Memory, Negative Emotion, Duration Memory
Introduction
Time is the thread that binds the disparate experiences of our lives into a coherent story.
It is a crucial component of our episodic memories, defined as our memories for specific
events from a particular place and time (Tulving, 1972). Despite such importance, our
recollection of time can be distorted and dissociated from our veridical experiences. A major
factor influencing our memory for time is emotion – the focus of this paper. Herein emotion
is defined as states that vary on dimensions of arousal and valence (e.g., Todd et al., 2020)1.
Within this definition, arousal refers to the degree or amount of physiological and/or
subjective stimulation evoked by particular events or stimuli (i.e., calmness to excitement)
while valence is conceptualised as the degree to which a particular event or stimuli is positive
or negative (see review by LaBar & Cabeza, 2006 also see Todd et al., 2020). As detailed
below, a broad literature has examined the influence of emotion on time and has shown that
emotion distorts some aspects of time, while preserving others. The present study focuses on
the role of negative emotion in temporal distortion, specifically in the context of retrospective
duration memory (i.e., wherein time is incidentally encoded and probed in a later memory
assessment).
Effects of Emotion on Temporal Duration
Studies examining memory for temporal duration have traditionally employed the use
of unfolding stimuli such as real-life events, videos or music clips (with a minority of work
using words). Such work has generally found that emotional events–particularly when they
Note that other definitions of emotion also focus on discrete states (e.g., anger, fear, happiness) or the extent to
which approach/avoidance behaviours are activated (see Todd et al., 2020, for discussion).
are negative–are recalled as being longer in time than neutral events, although not
unequivocally.2 We discuss this work below.
In a unique study examining real-life events, Campbell and Bryant (2007) found that
fear was associated with an increase in remembered time in a study of novice skydivers;
excitement showed the opposite pattern. In another study, Frederickx et al. (2013) asked
participants coming off an amusement park ride to provide ratings of arousal, valence, and
duration. They found that only increased arousal was associated with increased duration
estimates–also see results reported in Bailey and Chapman (2023). Notably, the increased
arousal observed in Frederickx et al. (2013) was associated with a positively valenced event.
Other studies have also examined retrospective judgments of event durations from real-life
stressful events (Noyes & Kletti, 1977; Cardena & Spiegel, 1993; Ursano et al., 1999).
Some studies have been conducted using laboratory procedures. Anderson et al.
(2007) found that participants estimated longer durations for clips of the 9-11 terrorist attacks
compared to control clips. A similar effect was also observed by Johnson and MacKay (2019)
who found that participants judged duration for taboo words to be greater than neutral words.
In a study examining happy and sad musical excerpts, Bisson and colleagues (2008) found
that sad musical excerpts were associated with longer remembered duration than neutral
excerpts.3 Similarly, Pollatos et al. (2014) found that fearful film clips were associated with
an increase in time dilation in memory, while Ozgor et al. (2018) found this pattern both for
positive and negative (versus neutral) video clips. In an older study by Loftus and colleagues
(1987), participants overestimated the remembered duration of bank robbery clips and the
degree of overestimation was related to the level of stress of the clip such that more stressful
Some studies exist which use prospective designs (i.e., where tracking time is a task demand) and these will be
considered further in the discussion.
Note that this effect was observed for a relative and verbal estimation task but not a less conventional
“standard” estimation task. See Bisson et al., 2008 for details of this task.
clips led to greater overestimation. Hence, a series of studies show that emotion tends to
dilate retrospective time duration, an effect that seems to track with the arousing nature of the
event in some studies–albeit more work is needed to tease apart valence and arousal effects.
Still, not all studies have found this pattern of results. Dev et al. (2022) found no
difference in remembered duration estimates for a single video clip either eliciting high
versus low negative emotionality, although they did observe overestimation of duration
overall, consistent with some literature (also see Grondin et al., 2014; see Petrucci &
Palombo, 2021 for a review). Other studies, particularly those using musical stimuli (albeit
not exclusively), have also failed to show an effect of emotion on retrospective duration
estimates (Kellaris & Kent, 1992; Verduyn et al., 2013; but see Bisson et al., 2008). Finally,
one study wherein participants were asked to cross a bridge and then judge the duration of the
walk afterwards, showed that the effect of arousal on retrospective duration memory was
conflated by differences in walking time of the to-be-remembered event (Castellà et al.,
2017). Collectively some, albeit not all, of the literature shows that memory of time for
emotional events are distorted.
Some researchers have asked whether the observed retrospective temporal distortion
(when observed) is a product of emotion’s impact on perception during the experience versus
a retrospective effect of emotion on memory. In a cleverly designed study, Stetson et al.
(2007) asked participants for duration estimates after a free fall experience while measuring
their temporal resolution (i.e., perception) during the fall. They found that participants
experiencing the free fall retrospectively overestimated the duration of their fall despite there
being no evidence for an increase in temporal resolution during the fall itself. This study thus
suggests that the dilating effects of emotion on temporal duration may be due to memory and
not due to a time dilation in perception (but see Johnson & MacKay, 2019).
If emotion dilates temporal duration memory, why might it do so? Some theoretical
models have been proposed within the literature that might help explain this phenomenon.
Ornstein (1969) introduced the idea that retrospective duration estimates are dependent upon
the contents of memory—specifically, the greater the contents of memory the longer the
associated duration estimate. One popular model, the contextual change model, furthers this
idea by stating that elements within memory which represent contextual change are
particularly important when making duration estimates (Block, 1990; Zakay & Block, 2004).
Within this model, emotional information has been proposed as one such contextual change.
The presence of emotional information provides additional content which may subsequently
be drawn upon when retrieving an event while making a duration estimate, thus dilating the
remembered duration. Another influential model, the Arousal Biased Competition (ABC)
model posits that arousal is responsible for the modulation of competing mental
representations thereby enhancing memory for certain items (Mather & Sutherland, 2011).
Albeit speculative, the ABC model could also provide an explanation for the role of emotion
enhancing particular elements within memory, with arousing content providing such a
contextual shift. Together, various models may lend themselves to the prediction that
emotional events will be recalled as having a greater recalled duration than neutral events,
due to the prioritization of emotional information providing crucial content to be drawn upon
in memory when making a retrospective duration estimate.
Current Study
Although there have been a number of studies to date examining the basic effects of
emotion on temporal duration, the results are equivocal and more work is needed to build
confidence in the prior findings and support subsequent investigation into mechanisms. Yet,
the literature has faced methodological challenges. Specifically, studies to date have had to
deal with a trade-off between ecologically validity and experimental control. This has made it
difficult to simultaneously provide a naturally unfolding experience while attempting to
control aspects of the experience. As such, most studies to date have opted to choose one side
of this pendulum. While some research has focused on capturing an authentic experience,
which bolsters ecological validity (Campbell & Bryant, 2007; Bailey & Chapman, 2023;
Frederickx et al., 2013), those studies are more challenging to conduct and compromise some
degree of experimental control. Other work has strived to retain experimental control (Özgör
et al, 2018; Johnson & Mackey, 2019) but seldom reflect how time and emotion are
experienced in the real world. While both lines of work have offered valuable insights into
the effects of emotion on temporal duration (and the effects of emotion on memory more
broadly), difficulties arise when trying to unify their findings due to the limitations of each
respective paradigm.
In the present study we sought to bridge the gap between ecological validity and
experimental control in studying the effects of emotion on temporal duration memory by
using virtual reality (VR). Previous work has demonstrated the utility of using VR to study
mnemonic phenomena (e.g., Cadet et al., 2022; Quezada-Scholz et al., 2022; McCall et al.,
2022). Although VR is not akin to the real-world, it can provide highly immersive naturally
unfolding life-like events while retaining high experimental control (e.g., controlling for the
time spent in an experience, or the stimuli presented). To achieve the goal of examining the
effects of emotion on temporal duration, a novel paradigm was developed to elicit emotional
responding. Participants were brought into the laboratory, where they navigated a series of
negative and neutral “worlds” in VR (“micro-events”). Afterwards, in a memory test, they
provided a retrospective duration estimate for each of the worlds, in addition to ratings of
emotionality (as a manipulation check). In our study, negative stimuli were used due to the
ease of eliciting arousal (relative to positive stimuli, which tend to produce more variable
responding and thus mixed findings in the literature). We hypothesised that negative worlds
will be associated with greater recalled duration than neutral worlds. Based on some prior
work, we additionally hypothesised a time dilation effect such that negative, but not neutral
worlds, would be recalled as having a greater duration than the true amount of time that
elapsed.
Methods
Ethical statement
This study took place at the University of British Columbia with approval from the
UBC Behaviour Research Ethics Board (H22-01559). All participants provided informed
consent. This study was not preregistered.
Participants
Data was collected from a total of 91 undergraduate students at The University of
British Columbia who were recruited through the Department of Psychology’s Human
Subject Pool. All participants were between the ages of 18-35 and had normal or corrected to
normal vision. The first 12 participants were discarded from the study due to an experimental
change in which we clarified the task instructions so it was clear that we were asking about
the duration of the entire micro-event. At this stage we restarted data collection (without
analyzing the initial data).
Within the new sample of 79 participants, a total of 10 participants were excluded
from the final sample. Three participants were excluded due to program malfunction (i.e., VR
crashing or controller glitch during testing) and one participant was excluded due to not
following instructions (i.e., did not comply with experimenter instructions and used their
phone during the task). Two participants were excluded due to a walking time or rating time
which deviated strongly from the group mean (i.e., greater than three standard deviations
from the mean). Two participants were excluded for having mean duration estimates which
deviated very strongly from the mean (suggesting poor task compliance). Two participants
were excluded due demonstrating a systematic response pattern (i.e. putting the same
duration value of “0” across all events).
The final sample consisted of 69 participants (M = 20.43, SD = 2.82, 1
age age
genderqueer/gender non-conforming, 2 non-binary, 49 women, 17 men). Notably, there were
no instances of excessive motion sickness; consequently, no exclusions were necessary on
that basis. Critically, all exclusionary decisions were made prior to data analysis pertaining to
testing our hypotheses. In considering power, for our first hypothesis, some prior studies that
have explored the effect of emotion on duration memory have reported medium (Johnson &
MacKey, 2019; Campbell & Bryant, 2007) to large effect sizes (Anderson et al., 2007). Using
a medium effect size of d=.50, we would need 54 participants to achieve .95 power for a
paired t-test (N=57 for a Wilcoxon sign-ranked test) as calculated via G*Power (Faul et al.,
2007). Thus with our final sample of N=69, we are well-powered to detect an effect of
emotion on retrospective duration memory if one exists. We do not believe the literature
affords enough information to calculate power for our second hypothesis.
Materials
Surveys
Participants completed a series of questionnaires throughout the study which were
administered via Qualtrics. Specifically, participants completed a demographics and health
questionnaire developed by the Memory and Imagination lab for the purpose of
characterising our sample. Participants also completed the Center for Epidemiologic Studies
Depression Scale (Radloff, 1977), the Psychometric Properties of the Posttraumatic
Diagnostic Scale for DSM-5 (PDS-5; Foa et al., 2016), and the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory
for Adults (STAI; Spielberger et al, 1983). These surveys were not used in the analysis of this
study and will not be discussed further.
Stimuli
The stimuli used in this study were collected online from the Unity Asset Store,
Sketchfab, and the OpenVirtualObjects database (Tromp et al., 2020). A total of 80 objects
were selected to be used in the study. The objects were separated into “unconditioned” (US)
and “conditioned” (CS) stimuli. A US is a stimulus that evokes an emotional or neutral
response without any prior learning. A CS is a stimulus that evokes emotional or neutral
responding via association with the US. Such nomenclature is taken from the classical
conditioning literature and is used here only for ease in describing the stimuli employed in
this study and because our paradigm was used to examine ancillary hypotheses about learning
(planned for a separate report but not included here). Thus, for continuity and transparency
we use this naming convention in this document but we additionally reference “Negative”
(i.e., a negative US paired with a CS) and “Neutral” (i.e., a neutral US paired with a CS) Pairs
for ease of readability.
There were 20 negative US (US-Negative), 20 neutral US (US-Neutral), and 40 CS,
which were randomly co-paired into Negative and Neutral Pairs (to be used in the VR worlds,
stimuli did not originate from a standardised database, we conducted an independent norming
study (N = 50; across two phases of norming; Phase 1: N=30 and Phase 2: N=20) prior to the
beginning of the current study to ensure the validity of these stimuli. A total of 96 items were
used in the second phase of the norming study (4 extra in each of above-mentioned
categories) from which our final 80 were derived.4 Participants provided ratings of arousal (0
to 100), valence (-5 to 5), complexity (0 to 10), and pleasantness (1 to 10) for all the items
and a rating of relatedness (1 to 5) for all object pairs, with higher numbers denoting a higher
rating on a given scale. In addition, we conducted an image analysis to assess the low-level
visual properties of our stimuli. Following these analyses, we made exclusions yielding the
Analyses reported below, which pertain to the norming data (Phase 2), include both
parametric and non-parametric comparisons; the latter were used when significant normality
violations were present in the data.
US-Negative (M = -2.90, SD = 0.87) items were rated as more negative than US-
Neutral (M = 0.36, SD = 0.86), (t(38) = -11.92, p <.001, d = 3.77, 95% CI [-3.81, -2.71]), US-
Negative items (M = 70.55, SD = 7.93) were rated as more arousing than US-Neutral items
(M = 35.89, SD = 10.41), (t(38) = 11.85, p <.001, d = 3.75, 95% CI [28.74, 40.58]), and US-
Negative items (M = 2.42, SD = 0.70) were rated as less pleasant than US-Neutral items (M =
5.49, SD = 0.93), (t(38) = -11.81, p <.001, d = 3.73, 95% CI [-3.59, -2.54]). For complexity,
we observed significantly higher ratings for US-Negative (M = 6.54, SD = 1.09) versus US-
Neutral (M = 5.50, SD = 1.14) (t(38) = 2.93, p = .006, d = 0.93, 95% CI [0.32, 1.75]),
however this complexity was not reflected in our image analysis of objective measures of
our CS items we found no significant differences between CS-Negative and CS-Neutral
suggesting random assignment of these items to the two conditions was successful. We
To achieve a normed set, some items were dropped and replaced in phase 1 and further norming was
conducted in Phase 2 to select the final set of 80 items.
Indeed, prior work suggests that emotional stimuli are rated as more complex, even when several low-level
image characteristics are well matched (see Madan et al., 2018).
additionally observed no significant difference for the relatedness between the negative (M =
1.36, SD = 0.33) and neutral pairs (M = 1.47, SD = 0.31) (W = 152, p = .20).
Within our final sample of norming stimuli selected for the study, our US-Negative
items had a range of 55.5 to 86.5 for arousal and a range of -4.2 and -1.5 for valence. Our
US-Neutral items had a range of 17.8 to 53.4 for arousal and a range of -1.4 and 2.0 for
between 14.5 to 45.0 for arousal. These norming data are available on the Open Science
Virtual Worlds
We created a total of 10 virtual worlds for this study. Each of the worlds was
designated as negative or neutral in valence (5 per condition, repeated 4 times each; see
below). “Worlds” can be conceptualised as the virtual episodes (defined as a “micro-events”;
as discussed later) that participants experience (e.g., exploring a library, an office).
Conditions were balanced in terms of indoor or outdoor worlds, and on the complexity of the
world. The virtual worlds used in the present study were created using Unity (v.
2020.3.18f1), a video-game development engine (Unity, 2020). Participants experienced the
worlds using a Vive Cosmos (HTC Corporation, Taipei, Taiwan) headset alongside the right-
Procedure
The experiment was conducted in person at the Department of Psychology building
on the University of British Columbia Vancouver campus. Participants began the study by
providing informed consent. Participants were then provided with a brief overview of the
experiment and subsequently completed the demographics and health questionnaire while the
experimenter waited outside. Next, the participant was shown the virtual “play area” and
trained on how to use the VR headset (see supplementary information for detailed
instructions).
Before entering the virtual worlds, participants were oriented on how to use the
headset and controllers. Participants were first shown how to adjust the interpupillary
distance of the headset so that all visual stimuli would be clear. After this was set,
participants were shown how to use the controller to move within the virtual worlds and
provide ratings and make selections when prompted. Participants stood in the center of the
testing room and used the joystick on the controller to walk around the virtual environments.
Participants then entered the virtual world and began the tutorial portion of the experiment.
The tutorial was split into two stages, a VR tutorial and an experiment tutorial (Fig. S1).
In the first phase, participants were taught how to navigate in the virtual world and
make selections on slider scales when presented. The purpose of this stage was to make sure
participants were comfortable navigating in virtual reality prior to beginning the experiment.
At the beginning of this stage, participants also had an opportunity to double check that
everything was visually clear and were allowed to re-adjust the headset if needed.
Participants also received verbal instructions from the experimenter as they navigated this
stage (e.g., on how to use the slider scales). In the second phase, participants received
instructions for the experimental task. At the beginning, participants were informed that they
will be receiving instructions for what they will be doing in the experiment and to ask
questions if they are unclear on anything. At the end, they were asked to repeat the
instructions back to the experimenter to ensure that they were clear on what they would be
doing.
Encoding
Participants navigated micro events (i.e., individual “episodes”) where their goal was
to approach a red circle with a white dome around it. Specifically, they were instructed to
approach the circle where they would find two objects and they would have 10 seconds to
examine the objects once they entered the red circle (Fig. 1; Fig. S2). Such a design ensured
that all participants had the same goal on each trial (i.e., to engage the stimuli) and were not
left exploring the worlds with no purpose in mind. After this, participants were moved to a
rating screen and provided a rating for how easy it is to remember the object pair (Fig. S3;
not analyzed).
The stimulus pairs were randomly assigned to each world within condition prior to
beginning the experiment but fixed across participants. As noted, the 10 worlds (i.e., the
background context) were each presented a total 4 times (once per block). The order in which
the worlds were presented was randomised within each block and were unique to each
participant. After completing a block, participants received a 30-second break during which
they kept the headset on. Once they had completed all the blocks, the headset was taken off
and the participant was given a 10-minute break. Participants completed a colouring task
during this break to prevent rehearsal of the stimuli encountered in the encoding portion.
Participants remained standing throughout all of encoding including during the 30-second
breaks between blocks but were seated during the break between encoding and retrieval (i.e.,
during colouring).
permission.
Retrieval
After 10 minutes had elapsed, participants re-entered the virtual world to provide
pleasantness ratings for the items encountered during encoding. The CS stimuli were
presented before the US stimuli and the order of presentation was randomised within each
respective CS/US category. The objects were presented in succession and participants were
asked to provide a pleasantness rating on a 1 (not pleasant at all) to 10 (very pleasant) scale
(Fig. S4). The purpose of this task is ancillary to the present work although the pleasantness
ratings of the US stimuli were used as an additional manipulation check in the present study
(see below).
Next participants took off the headset and completed a series of tasks via PsychoPy
(v. 2022.1.1; Peirce et al., 2019) on an MSI GP75 Leopard laptop with a 17.3-inch display.
These included a cued recall task, a retrospective duration task, a source memory task, and
ratings of arousal and valence for the micro-events. The retrospective duration task and the
arousal and valence ratings were the main focus of this paper and are discussed below.6
Retrospective Duration Memory
During the retrospective duration task, participants were randomly presented with an
image of a micro-event and asked to provide a retrospective duration estimate. The image
presented showed the object pair and the associated world to differentiate the different micro-
events (Fig. S5). All the images were captured such that the objects occupied the same
amount of relative space within the frame. All images were displayed in the center of the
screen with each image measuring 8.5 inches by 4.5 inches. Images from the micro-events
were presented in succession and participants entered a single number while responding to
the question “Please rate how long this event was from the moment you entered the world to
the moment you moved to the rating screen. Enter a number in seconds.” There was no time
limit for responses. The retrospective duration task was presented immediately after the cued
recall task so that participants would be seeing the images of the micro-events for the first
time to prevent any influence of exposure on duration estimates.
6At the time of this report, we have only analyzed (1) the data reported in this paper and (2)
the object ratings of the CS items, which are intended for a separate manuscript; thus those
data are not reported here. None of the questionnaire data have been analyzed. The cued
recall and source memory data have not been analyzed.
Arousal and Valence Ratings
After completing all the aforementioned tasks, participants provided ratings of arousal
and valence for each micro-event (as a manipulation check; detailed below). Just as in the
retrospective duration task, participants were presented with an image for each micro-event.
The image was identical to the images used in that task which displayed the object pair and
the associated world. The images (measuring 8.5 inches by 4.5 inches) were randomly
presented in succession at the top of the screen with the arousal and valence rating sliders
below. For each micro-event, participants provided an arousal rating on a scale from 0 to 100
and a valence rating on a scale of -5 to 5. The arousal rating asked, “On a scale of 0 (no
arousal) to 100 (extremely arousing), how arousing did you find this event?” and the valence
rating asked “Please rate how positive, negative, or neutral you found this event from -5 (very
negative) to 5 (very positive)” (Fig. S6).
Results
Manipulation Checks.
As we were working with a novel set of stimuli and worlds, we wanted to confirm (in
addition to our norming) that our intended emotional manipulations had been successful. To
this end, we examined participant ratings of arousal and valence for the different micro-
events. As an additional manipulation check, we examined participant ratings of pleasantness
for the items they encountered while going through the worlds (as noted, the pleasantness
rating was originally included for ancillary hypotheses). In what follows, paired-samples
Wilcoxon tests were used when the data were non-normal; otherwise paired t-tests are
reported. Note that we expected that our ratings could be somewhat diluted as a result of the
repeated presentation of the stimuli as they were seen during encoding and again during the
various ratings and tests (i.e., potentially dampening the emotional response to stimuli), yet as
detailed below, we still observed the expected differences between conditions.
Arousal and Valence Ratings. For arousal, we found that participants rated negative
micro-events (M = 48.16, SD = 18.36) as significantly more arousing than neutral micro
events (M = 26.62, SD = 15.01) (V = 2352, p < .001, r = 0.82) (Fig. 2). For valence, we found
that participants rated negative micro-events (M = -1.83, SD = 0.97) as significantly more
negative than neutral micro-events (M = 0.2, SD = 0.58) (t (68) = -17.39, p < .001, d = 2.09)
(Fig. 2). Together, these results demonstrate that negative micro-events were rated as more
arousing and more negative than neutral micro-events, as intended.
Fig. 2. Mean ratings of arousal and valence and pleasantness (the y axis displays the range of
the scales) for negative and neutral conditions for each participant (black filled circles).
Distributional information for each condition is shown via violin plots.
Pleasantness Ratings. A paired-samples Wilcoxon test demonstrated a significant difference
such that participants rated US-Negative items (M = 2.89, SD = 1.03) as less pleasant than
US-Neutral items (M = 5.81, SD = 0.85) (V = 1, p < .0001, r = 0.87), as expected (Fig. 2).
Retrospective Duration Estimate
Once we had established that our negative emotion manipulation was successful, we
examined participants’ retrospective duration estimates for the micro-events. In addition to
the participant level exclusion noted in the participants section, we examined individual trials
for possible exclusion for each participant. We first examined time spent in negative versus
neutral micro-events to rule out a potential confound for subsequent duration estimates. First,
we z-transformed each participant’s trial level time spent in the micro-events and excluded
trials which were plus or minus three standard deviations from the mean. This resulted in a
total of 35 trials being removed across all participants. Of these trials, 19 were negative trials
and 16 were neutral trials. No single participant had more than two trials removed. We then
removed the corresponding duration estimate provided for these trials on the basis that an
extreme “walking time” could distort duration estimates.
We found that there was no significant difference in the objective amount of time
participants spent in negative (M = 31.55, SD = 2.65) compared to neutral micro-events (M =
31.37, SD = 2.61) (V = 1504, p = .08) (Fig. S7). We further conducted a Spearman
correlation and found that the time spent in the micro-events was not predictive of subsequent
duration estimates for both negative (r = 0.14, p = 0.25) and neutral (r = 0.18, p = 0.14)
conditions.
Considering our critical assessment, namely, retrospective duration estimates
(measured in seconds), our results show that participants recalled negative micro-events (M =
23.21, SD = 52.52) as having elapsed for a longer amount of time than neutral ones (M =
21.15, SD = 50.72) (V = 1698, p < .001, r = 0.42) (Fig. 3), as predicted. Note that we were
conservative with outlier removal in the retrospective duration estimate analysis. Although
non-parametric statistics were used, we note that removal of two deviant participant
observations notable in the data (Fig. 3; left panel) did not change the pattern of results
(results are reported with those participants included). These data are available on the Open
Next, we examined the relationship between participants’ duration estimates and the
actual time spent in each of the micro-events.7 For negative micro-events, we found, contrary
to our second prediction, that participants’ duration estimates (M = 23.21 s, SD = 52.52) were
significantly lower than the actual time (M = 31.55 s, SD = 2.65) spent in the worlds (V =
2191, p < .001, r = 0.71) (Fig. 4). This pattern was also found for neutral micro-events where
participants’ duration estimates (21.15 s, SD = 50.72) were significantly lower than actual
time spent in the micro-events (M = 31.37 s, SD = 2.61) (V = 2208, p < .001, r = 0.72) (Fig.
4). The difference between actual time spent in the world and duration estimates was 8.34 s in
the negative condition and 10.22 s in the neutral condition. Therefore, although duration
estimates were extended in the negative condition, there was still an overall underestimation
of time in both conditions.
Fig. 3. Mean recalled duration estimates for negative and neutral worlds for each participant
(black filled circles). Distributional information for each condition is shown via violin plots.
illustrative.
Time spent in each micro-event (“actual duration”) was calculated as the time it took the participant to ‘walk’
to the circle (which was variable across participants) plus the 10 seconds they had to look at the objects (i.e., a
fixed time across participants).
Fig. 4. Mean recalled duration estimates versus actual time spent in worlds for negative (A)
and neutral (B) for each participant (black filled circles). Distributional information for each
condition is shown via violin plots. A portion of the figures have been magnified for
readability. Dotted rectangle overlay is illustrative.
Discussion
The present study employed a novel VR paradigm to explore the effects of negative
emotion on retrospective temporal duration memory using naturally unfolding events. As
indicated by our results pertaining to stimuli and world ratings, this paradigm successfully
elicited negative emotional responses. In line with our primary hypothesis, the results show
that negative events were recalled as having elapsed for a greater amount of time than neutral
ones. Importantly, this difference is not a product of differential time spent in each type of
world as there was no significant difference observed between time spent in negative versus
neutral worlds. However, contrary to our second hypothesis, participants recalled the duration
of both negative and neutral events as shorter than the true duration of the experience.
The finding that negative emotional events were recalled as having a longer recalled
duration than neutral events is line with some literature (Loftus et al., 1987; Anderson et al.,
2007; Campbell & Bryant, 2007; Bisson et al., 2008; Pollatos et al., 2014; Johnson & Makay,
2019; recently reviewed in Petrucci & Palombo, 2021). Yet, given that there have also been
studies with null results (Dev et al., 2022; Kellaris & Kent, 1992; Verduyn et al., 2013;
Grondin et al., 2014; Bisson et al., 2008 - mixed results), our finding holds significance as it
provides further evidence in support of an effect of negative emotion on retrospective time
estimation. It is unclear what might account for discrepancies in the literature (i.e., why some
studies observe this effect and others do not), although it is notable that the pattern of results
tends to be less stable in studies using music clips (but also see Dev et al., 2022). Our study,
which employs a first person immersive experience, aligns with other more naturalistic or
autobiographical approaches (see Introduction). Yet more work is needed to determine the
boundary conditions for the effect in question.
As noted in the introduction, prior work points to the role of arousal in driving the
relative temporal lengthening of remembered durations for emotional events. Given the
strong ties between arousal and attention, it is conceivable that attentional mechanisms play a
role in the current results. The notion that arousal and attention influence temporal
judgements has been discussed both at the level of perception and memory. At the level of
perception, prior work has pointed to arousal’s role in guiding attentional resources towards
particular features of an event which in turn affects the encoding of temporal information,
particularly in prospective tasks (i.e., when participants are told in advance that they need to
estimate time). Droit-Volet et al. (2020) found that perceived duration was lengthened as a
function of level of arousal, such that as arousal increased so did the magnitude of the
temporal distortion. In a review of this literature, Lake (2016) highlights the role of arousal
and attention in different time-keeping mechanisms within pacemaker-accumulator models.
Within such models, the idea is that arousal speeds up the internal time-keeping mechanism
leading to an overestimation of time. Yet, some argue that attention, on the other hand,
affects the collection of the information being emitted (Lake, 2016; Lake et al., 2016). The
latter formulation would predict that when attention is significantly diverted away from
timing information (e.g., when attention is captured by an emotionally salient distractor
stimulus), an underestimation of duration could be observed (also see Lui et al., 2011). Thus,
these models make nuanced predictions about how arousal and attention might together or
independently affect the encoding of temporal information. Still, it is important to keep in
mind that such models apply more readily to prospective tasks, where tracking time is a
specific task demand. While the attentional account proposed above might predict more
temporal compression for negative relative to neutral events, we did not observe such an
effect in our retrospective paradigm. Rather, we found that the negative micro-events were
recalled as being longer than the neutral ones suggesting less compression for negative
compared to neutral events. Thus, prospective models, particularly those that focus on
attention, cannot easily explain our findings.
In contrast to the often-used prospective designs, retrospective designs (such as the
one used in the present study) require temporal judgements to be inferred later using the
information stored in memory. Indeed, Martinelli and Droit-Volet (2022) directly compared
prospective and retrospective time estimation tasks and found that the level of attention paid
to time was lower in the retrospective group. As time is not an explicit demand at the moment
of encoding, non-temporal information may be used when later making such judgements.
Whereas prospective models sometimes tie attention and arousal to the interference of
encoding temporal information, memory-based models view them as providing the
information needed in retrospective judgements of time. Indeed, Ornstein (1969) argues that
retrospective designs require a reconstruction thereby making duration judgments dependent
on the availability of the contents of memory. Similarly, the contextual change model posits
that retrospective duration judgements are made using elements available in memory,
specifically elements which entail a contextual change (Block, 1990; Zakay & Block, 2004).
Considering an additional popular memory theory, the Arousal-Biased Competition (ABC)
theory, arousal selectively modulates competing mental representations which in turn
enhances memory for certain items (Mather & Sutherland, 2011)8. The present finding that
negative micro-events were recalled as having a greater duration than neutral ones can
possibly be explained by combining these theories. While temporal information was not an
explicit demand at the time of encoding (i.e., when stimuli were first perceived), the effect of
arousal and attention may have led to the emotionally salient events receiving a ‘boost’ in
memory. When information was subsequently needed for a duration judgement, it was more
readily available for the negative events compared to the neutral ones. That is, in line with
some aspects of the ABC theory, the presence of increased arousal within negative micro-
events may have led to greater attentional prioritisation leading to subsequent enhancement of
It is important to note that both Mather and Sutherland (2011) and the broader literature emphasise a trade off
in memory under some conditions, wherein only certain content is enhanced by emotion (e.g., the item eliciting
emotion versus the background context). Albeit speculative, we postulate that the boost for emotional content
per se may be important for driving the longer duration estimates. Such a hypothesis will be tested in later
studies.
memory for emotional content. Consistent with predictions of the contextual change model,
such emotional information then represents a contextual shift adding to the lengthening of the
duration for the negative micro-events. Together, these models provide an avenue through
which the contents of memory may have been greater for negative micro-events compared to
neutral ones even when the world contained similar amounts of content9. Direct measures of
attention and emotional enhancement of memory will be important in future work to shed
light on its role in contributing to our findings and testing some of the aforementioned
theories.
The second set of results were contrary to our hypothesis. Whereas we had
hypothesised that negative events would be dilated, the results show that both negative and
neutral events were recalled as being significantly shorter than the actual duration. Although
there are instances of compression within the literature, studies examining retrospective
duration have seldom observed unilateral compression across emotional and neutral
conditions. Among the aforementioned studies, Johnson and MacKay (2019), Pollatos et al.
(2014), and Bisson et al. (2008) all observed compression but only Bisson et al. observed
compression across the board whereas the other studies only showed compression in the
neutral condition and dilation in the emotional condition. One way in which our paradigm
differs from previous ones is the use of VR. The use of VR may have implications for the
manner in which time is remembered overall. Yet, the literature is equivocal on the role of
VR in altering time estimation more broadly. Some studies, particularly those using
prospective designs, have shown VR to be associated with time compression. For instance,
Schneider et al. (2011) and Chirico et al. (2016) both report observing time compression
when VR was used during chemotherapy. However, other work from Tobin et al. (2010)
The negative and neutral environments were designed to be well matched in terms of the complexity of the
worlds with respect to the “richness” of the environments (number of objects placed in the backgrounds, varied
use of colours, etc).
examining prospective and retrospective estimates has conversely found that both involved
an overestimation of time. Moreover, van der Ham and colleagues (2019) directly tested
whether the medium of delivery (VR versus the real world) affected duration estimates and
found there to be no effect of VR. These studies raise uncertainty about the role of VR per se
in driving our compression effects, but a direct comparison of our task within versus outside
of VR would be needed to rule out this factor.
While the observed compression is not consistent with some prior work, the finding
on its own may not be surprising from a memory perspective. Our episodic memories do not
retain veridical reproductions but rather represent summary reconstructions and are therefore
compressed versions of experienced events (Conway, 2009; Jeunehomme et al., 2018). Thus,
it should not be surprising that the recalled duration for these events also demonstrates
compression. Albeit highly speculative, our observed compression may be reflective of past
work showing that our episodic memories are temporally compressed replays of the events
we experience (Jeunehomme et al., 2018; Jeunehomme & D’Argembeau, 2019;
D’Argembeau et al., 2022). Within this reproduction, compression is measured using
experience units which are defined as recalled moments of experience. Jeunehomme et al.
(2018) shows that compression is related to the density of experience units recalled.
Crucially, Jeunehomme and D’Argembeau (2019) found that the density of recalled
experience units was predictive of duration estimates for events in memory. Specifically,
duration estimates significantly increase as the density of experience units increases.
Jeunehomme et al. (2018) identify that events with more goal-directed actions and spatial
displacements are accompanied with a higher density of experience units. As our paradigm
involved a relatively simple task of finding and walking towards a dome it may be that a high
density of units was not present when participants recalled the event (particularly given that
the trial unique stimuli occurred at the latter part of the trial).
Limitations and Future Directions
In considering limitations of the present work, first, we only collected subjective
ratings of arousal and valence as our measure of emotion and this was done retrospectively.
This paradigm would benefit from the incorporation of psychophysiological measures such as
skin conductance and heart rate, which can allow for a moment to moment measure of
arousal throughout a micro event. Moreover, having such data will provide an objective
measure to corroborate the subjective account provided by participants. Second, although the
goal of our study was not to examine mechanisms, given the importance of attention to both
emotion and temporal duration the implementation of eye-tracking would be an important
next step. Using eye-tracking data as proxy for attention, along with the above-mentioned
emotion measures, will allow a more nuanced understanding of the relationship between
these factors and could help adjudicate between the claims made by different models of
emotional memory that pertain to retrospective time. Next, future work should strive to
extend this paradigm by adding longer and more varied events to even better reflect the types
of events we experience in everyday life. Finally, while VR provides utility as a medium for
creating immersive, unfolding experiences, it also comes with its own challenges. As the
effects of VR on human experience are still being explored, future work should be vigilant in
its use.
Conclusion
The present study examined the effects of emotion on temporal duration memory
using VR to bridge the gap between the lab and the real world and in doing so sought to
extend prior literature by further investigating an emotion-induced mnemonic time dilation
effect observed in the literature. Our results contribute to a larger body of work seeking to
understand the effects of emotion on temporal duration. While VR cannot fully capture the
nuance and complexity of the real world, representing an approximation at best, this study
demonstrates (in an initial paradigm) its potential to induce emotionally salient experiences
while affording a degree of flexibility not present in the assessment of real-life events or in
laboratory paradigms.
Declarations
Ethical Approval
This study took place at the University of British Columbia with approval from the UBC
Behaviour Research Ethics Board (H22-01559). All participants provided informed consent.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
CRediT: Conceptualization: [Omran K. Safi, Daniela J. Palombo, Christopher R. Madan];
Methodology: [Omran K. Safi, Elaine Shi]; Formal analysis and investigation: [Omran K.
Safi, Tyler Lin]; Writing - original draft preparation: [Omran K. Safi]; Writing - review and
editing: [Omran K. Safi, Daniela J. Palombo, Christopher R. Madan]; Funding acquisition:
[Daniela J. Palombo]; Resources: [Daniela J. Palombo]; Supervision: [Daniela J. Palombo,
Christopher R. Madan].
Funding
This work was supported by an NSERC Discovery Grant (RGPIN-2019-04596) and the John
R. Evans Leaders Fund from the Canadian Foundation for Innovation (38817).

Availability of data and materials
instructions provided to participants are provided in the supplementary information (SI).
Additional materials are available upon request.