Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 75 (2024) 101605
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Anthropological Archaeology
Violence as a lens to Viking societies: A comparison of Norway
and Denmark
a,* b c d
Jan Bill , David Jacobson , Susanne Nagel , Lisa Mariann Strand
Museum of Cultural History, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 6762 St. Olafs Plass, Oslo 0130, Norway
Department of Sociology, University of South Florida, 4202 E. Fowler Avenue, Tampa, FL 33620, USA
c ¨
Deutscher Verband für Archaologie, Geschwister-Scholl-Str. 6, Berlin 10117, Germany
NTNU University Museum, Department of Archaeology and Cultural History, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim NO-7491, Norway
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Comparing Viking Age Norway and Denmark, the article examines the primary proposition that as centers of
Violence
authority become progressively more robust, violence will be proportionately contained. The article introduces a
Social pyramid
new approach in using indications of violence as a focal point to elicit broader social practices. The disciplines
Civilianization
– –
employed in this study archaeology, osteology, philology, and sociology are used together in the study of
Viking Age
covariance of different indicators across a societal range. The indicators for assessing violence include skeletal
Norway
trauma and weapon frequency. For assessing the steepness of the social pyramid, we use runestones, indicating
Denmark
variations in social stratification, and monumental constructions as a measure of power to command labor.
Skeletal trauma
Among the findings: weapons and interpersonal violence in Norway was much more widespread than in
Weapons
Earthworks Denmark, and the social pyramid in Denmark was progressively steeper and more complex than in Norway.
Runestones “ Official ” executions accounted for the preponderance of violence in Denmark, while rare in Norway. Denmark
“ ”
was evidently a more civilianized society than Norway. The comparative research supports the primary
proposition. The research, furthermore, suggests that Denmark and Norway were sociologically distinct societies,
which accords with recent findings that the respective regions displayed distinct, though still similar, genetic
profiles.
1. Introduction: Why this study world (Hultgård, 2020). This bow of violence cuts through the my-
thology, beginning with a killing and ending with the inhabitants of the
Violence is a key aspect of human behavior, and one that socio- world dead. The Vikings idealized their warrior gods or (Thor), Týr and
— —
logy along with other disciplines strives to understand (see discus- Oðinn. The most honorable way to die was to die violently. Fallen
sion in Ray, 2018). In this article, we use sociology in combination with warriors were transported to the afterworld of Valh ll (Valhalla).
archaeology, osteology, and philology, to contribute to this scholarly Viking poetry well reflects this martial ideology, such as in the
´ ´
engagement. We do so by studying internal violence in Scandinavian Heimskringla s Hakonarmal about the Battle of Fitjar in 961 (Fulk, 2012,
— —
societies in a historical period the Viking Age in which they were to 180 [line breaks inserted by current authors]):
become more renowned for their export of violence.
Shields [and] Norwegians skulls were trampled
The belief system of Viking Age Scandinavians was riven with
under the hard feet of hilts [swords]
violence. In Norse mythology the beginning of the world and the end of
of the Týr [god] of rings [man].
the world are both presented as extremely violent. Three brothers, Vili,
Battle arose on the island;
Ve and Oðinn (Odin), kill and tear apart the giant Ymir s body to create
kings reddened
the world, using his blood to create the sea and his skull to make the sky
gleaming shield-fortresses
(Nordvig, 2020). The final battle Ragnarok brings a violent end to this
in the blood of men.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: jan.bill@khm.uio.no (J. Bill), djacobson@usf.edu (D. Jacobson), susanne.nagel.berlin@gmail.com (S. Nagel), lisa.strand@ntnu.no,
lisastrand83@hotmail.com (L.M. Strand).
Received 22 January 2022; Received in revised form 28 May 2024;
0278-4165/© 2024 University of Oslo. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
Numerous entries in European annals attest to the actual malevolent The extent of violence against women can be particularly revealing
deeds of Scandinavians from the 8th to 11th century CE. Thus, it is in interpreting violence and social data more generally. In that light, we
almost tautological to say that Vikings were violent, even if their also pay attention to matters such as women s status and the extent to
peaceful entrepreneurship is well attested (Roesdahl, 1998, Brink, which women are apparent targets for violence in Viking Age Norway
2008). Still, it came as a surprise to observe the extraordinary extent of and Denmark. Cross-historical and contemporary (modern) data on
trauma revealed in an osteological analysis of 30 human skeletons from patterns of violence highlight the key importance of women. For
across Viking Age Norway. Why did this selection of skeletons, origi- example, higher women s status is generally associated with lower levels
nally chosen for their good prospects of DNA preservation, show such an of violence. Suggestive evidence points to women benefiting from
excessive presence of violence? More specifically, what can we learn of civilianized environments that, in turn, tend to follow from more robust,
the societies fostering the Vikings through the lens of violence? centralized authority (see Eisner, 2003, Pinker, 2011, Jacobson, 2013,
This study addresses these questions from an interdisciplinary and Santos et al., 2021). Eliciting the gender dimension in the context of
comparative perspective, drawing on the examination of injuries violence may also allow us to bring out the extent to which we are
resulting from violent actions within a population sample. This observing cross-historical patterns.
approach seeks to reflect societal, rather than solely individual, rela-
tionship with violence. 1.1. Violence as a lens
The goal is thus to learn more about Viking Age societies here
1—
comparing Norway and Denmark using violence as a lens to do so. The emergence of the state from early modern Europe is associated
Our basis will be extensive studies of how violence was expressed in with, by a range of key sociological theorists, growing pacification of
society, and how different aspects of society notably in the complexity their domestic space (as distinct from the projection of force externally).
and steepness of the social pyramid make themselves manifest in Though their explanations for the drivers of internal pacification dif-
patterns of violence. We will apply novel approaches to violence on a fer — from a transnational states system to the threat of external enemies
thousand year old material. To do this, we will contrast the skeletal to a “ civilizing process ”— Max Weber, Charles Tilly, Anthony Giddens,
material with other materials and sources relating to violence and social and Norbert Elias describe a similar association of a centralization of
stratification from Viking Age Scandinavia. authority with a decline in domestic violence. Domestic life became,
Our primary proposition is that levels of violence are associated with over time, civilianized.
the steepness of the social pyramid: the steeper the social pyramid the From Weber ’ s perspective, the starting point is that politics is
“ ”
lower the levels of violence. By social pyramid steepness we are grounded in violence. Politics is about the contest over power. Social life
referring to, concomitantly, the degree to which authority is centralized is also characterized by conflict, through competition over economic
and the extent to which society becomes more stratified. As a correlate resources and cultural dominance (Weber, 2019, 1994; see discussion in
of the growing steepness of the social pyramid, social relations are Malesevic 2017, 21 – 27). The state is a coercive body striving for a
“ ”
civilianized. Civilianized space is where direct force is moderated by monopoly of violence. The formation of the state was associated with
“ ”
practices of legitimate political authority, based in part on covenantal processes of discipline and rationalization, from the bureaucracy to the
or contractual understandings, not solely dominance. In this way, we military to the economy. Organized violence gave ballast not only to
will be able to delineate distinctions between Viking Age societies in the rationalization; through the threat and practice of warfare humans
ˇ ´
regions of Denmark and Norway. developed intense collective emotional attachments (Malesevic, 2017,
This proposition builds on Weber (2019), Tilly (1985, 1992), Gid- Malesevic cites Weber, 2004). State monopolization of violence reduced
dens (1985) and Elias (1994) seminal work in the sociology of violence; overt bodily violence domestically and created the conditions for the
all show, in varying ways, that the emergence of centralizing authority emergence of the nation-state. The symbolism and trappings, as well as
from early modern Europe was associated with the pacification of the instruments, of violence were increasingly concentrated in central-
violence domestically. One can go back to Hobbes (2012 [1651]), who izing authorities and away from localized groups like clans — ultimately
argued for the social contract and rule by an absolute sovereign as expressed in the organized militaries of nation-states.
“ ”
necessary to overcome the violent state of nature. While all these Charles Tilly (1985, 1992) placed war-making at the center of state
theorists pointed to the essential role of state formation in containing formation and, ironically, in the pacification of internal violence. Orga-
violence, Elias notably also highlighted the self-regulation of emotions nized crime and the state were similar enterprises: “ War makes states, ”
in this regard. Tilly (1985, 170-72) argued. “ Banditry, piracy, gangland rivalry, policing,
In this article, these insights from the “ lens of violence ” are assessed and war making all belong on the same continuum. ” Early in the (Euro-
in the cases of Viking Age Denmark and Norway. Further, we ask how pean) state-making process, in Tilly ’ s argument, many parties pursued
such a lens may be revealing of these respective regions and their violent strategies from regional power holders to kings. What distin-
development, including the extent to which Denmark and Norway in guished “ states ” was the scale of violence, its effectiveness, and its
this period differed from each other. This involves examining indicators growing bureaucratic capacity. States pacified internal violence as they
of violence and the character of authority and rule in a different gained an effective monopoly on the means of violence. The state eradi-
era some centuries before the emergence of the early modern state- cated its internal rivals from landlords, armed retainers, to churchmen.
and in the different social contexts of the Viking Age. Even though we When ordinary people resisted, the state made concessions: extension of
draw on the European context, it is important to note that this pattern of rights, representative institutions, courts — in effect, laying the ground-
a steeper social pyramid and its association with less violence goes well work of citizenship. The state also needed the support of its own subjects
beyond Europe and deep into human history. This does not mean the (including taxes) in its war making beyond its borders, which also
— —
relationship is invariant few, if any, social patterns are but research incentivized developing symbiotic ties with its populace. Tilly describes
suggests it is widespread across time and space (Keeley, 1996, Pinker, this as a European phenomenon. In developing countries, he argued,
2011, Arkush and Tung, 2013). militaries had a prominent role from the beginning, unlike in Europe.
“ ” “
Anthony Giddens (1985) contrasted national states with tradi-
” —
tional societies the latter characterized by constant war, internally
and externally. Modern, national states are in contrast internally
1 “ ’’ “ ’’
Norway and Denmark are used here to describe geographical regions,
” ’
pacified. Gidden s argument thus parallels that of Tilly in that he sees
not political entities. Spatially, the former encompasses present-day Norway
this duality of external war and internal pacification. Violence is extri-
without Svalbard and Jan Mayen, while the latter is congruent with present-day
cated from daily life, at least relative to previous experience. Modern
Denmark without Bornholm, the Faroes and Greenland, but including Northern
Germany north of Dannevirke. states, Giddens further argued, have always existed in a system of states.
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
This system is not just a function of inter-state warfare but expresses descriptive data, notably from the sagas. However, the sagas are limited
transnational culturally situated understandings as to the proper char- to or partly represent periods that are at the margins of the Viking
— –
acter of a state, including its purportedly sovereign status and norms of era the Samtíðarsogur only covers later events, from c. 1115 1264 CE,
mutual recognition between states. and while the Islendingasogur indeed is about the time from the first
Perhaps the richest vein of literature on the historical association settlement to Christianization (c. 870 1000 CE), its value as a source to
“ ”
between centralized political authority, civilizing norms and declining Viking era Iceland is debated (Firth 2012, 142-147; see also Nordal,
rates of homicide, is that of Norbert Elias (1994 [1939]) in his book, The 2000, 221-2 on the Samtíðarsogur). Furthermore, Iceland is distinct. As
Civilizing Process, Elias saw a dual process in which the state progres- Miller (2009) observed, Iceland was isolated, relatively free from the
sively centralized control over the means of violence, in combination direct influences of other European societies, and as such in a unique
with a cultural shift of increasing individual self-restraint, which over political situation during that period.
“ ”
time dramatically reduced rates of homicide. The civilizing process Firth (2012) argues that, based on the Samtíðarsogur, early 13th
developed over centuries from the Late Middle Ages. The impact on century Icelandic rates of homicide were not exceptional, and compa-
homicide has been quantitatively compiled by Eisner (2003, 2014), rable to late 12th century rural European rates, when killings from
indicating an extraordinary decline in the homicide rate, from an battles are excluded. He also notes a transition from how, in the
average of 27 per 100,000 population in the 15th century CE to 1 per Islendingasogur, lethal attacks more often turned into feuds, whereas by
100,000 at the beginning of the 21st century CE. This is accompanied by the time of the Samtíðarsogur (when authority was consolidating) lethal
normative changes of restraint, from declining capital punishment and vengeance following homicide was less common. Though written at the
¨ ¨
growing emphasis on etiquette, as well as the well documented same time as the Samtíðarsogur, the Islendingasogur does appear to show
— —
centralization of state power in this period (Elias, 1994; Pinker, 2011; that the goðorðsmenn the chieftains were overrepresented among the
2 “ ”
Eisner, 2014). The civilizing process began in the Court and among perpetrators, but not usually punished for it (Firth, 2012, 159); as such
the aristocracy. The concomitant monopolization of violence by the king the Islendingasogur does give us insight into the violence of a clan-based
progressively ended medieval civil wars between local nobility. Thus, it society with a relatively flat pyramid.
is important to note that the pacification of violence was top-down, However, Firth (2012) also argues that while vengeance was legiti-
moving through the ranks of society over centuries (see also Ray, 2018). mated by the language of the feud, it was an expression of competitive
Evidence for such a relationship between levels of violence and po- behavior seeking superiority, not parity. Firth thus contests Miller s
’ “
litical complexity exists for much earlier periods as well. Research on (2009) traditional feud argument where, in Miller s words, vengeance
warfare in the Andes from the Archaic to Late Horizon periods, for [was] one of the key constitutive ideas of power and truth in this [honor]
example, shows that the highest trauma rates were where there was little culture. Firth states that women appear to have rarely been targets for
political centralization, and less pronounced in regions with the largest homicide. The commonest reasons for initial vengeance homicide were
fortifications. Decentralized groups were characterized by tensions be- not resources but were for sexual or physical insult. Palmstierna et al
tween small factions or ethnic groups (Arkush and Tung, 2013). Keeley (2017) argue that, based on the Icelandic sagas, vengeance was highly
’’ ’’
(1996) noted that in comparing ‘‘tribal and ‘‘chiefdom/state warfare calculated; on average killers had twice as many relatives (biological
more broadly the evidence suggests that decentralized societies expe- and affinal) than their victims.
rienced significantly higher frequencies of violence over time. Direct evidence of violence has been assessed in studies of trauma on
Research suggests high levels of homicide, in the aggregate, in non- skeletons from Swedish and Danish Viking Age burials. From Sweden,
¨ ¨
— “ ”
state and pre-state societies overcoming an earlier Rousseauian view Arcini (2018, 60-64) studied remains from Lund, Vannhog, Fjallking,
of peaceful pre-state societies (see overview in Gat, 2015). Skeletal evi- Kopparsvik and Slite and found weapon wounds in 0 6 % of the skele-
dence suggests that violent trauma had a broad range, from largely pacific tons from each site. She concluded that, [t]races of weapon injuries
groups to highly violent groups. But on average the skeletal evidence were thus fairly rare in a time that is known for its violence. The ma-
shows very high rates of trauma (Walker, 2001; see also Standen et al., terial represents, however, very different societies. Lund was one of
2021; Allen and Jones, 2014; Guilaine and Zammit, 2005). For example, Denmark s first episcopal seats (the province of Scania being Danish up
surveys of North American non-state peoples also reveal very high aver- to 1658) and the skeletons, dating to c. 990 1050/60 CE, are from a
¨ ¨
– —
ages of violent skeletal trauma in the period 3500 1500 BCE about 21 Christian graveyard inside the city. Vannhog and Fjallking are likewise
percent on average (Lambert, 1997; Gat, 2015). Across history, put in in Scania but are mainly pre-Christian and date to c 700 1000 CE (Arcini
contemporary metrics of homicide, estimates of non-state and pre-state 2018, 9-17). The Kopparsvik and Slite pre-Christian cemeteries are sit-
homicide range from less than 2 per 100,000 per year in parts of Africa uated on the island of Gotland in the Baltic and were in use roughly from
to as much as 1000 per 100,000 in New Guinea. But on average, though, 900 to 1100 CE (Arcini 2019, 20 21). A more extensive study by Baten,
non-state and pre-state societies had homicide rates far above those of Benati and Kjellstrom (2021) came to the same conclusion, finding
even the most violent societies today (Oberwittler, 2019; Oberwittler cites cranial traumata ranges from 0.7 % to 2.4 % when examining more than
Nivette, 2011; UNODC 2014; see also Pinker, 2011; on New Guinea, see 700 skeletons from Viking Age rural settlements in the Malaren Valley
Knauft, 1985; on Amazonia, another key case, see Clastres, 2020 [1987]). and from the early and the late Viking Age urban settlements Birka and
Sigtuna, situated in the same region. Baten, Benati and Kjellstrom
compared these values to an extensive European data set and found
1.2. Previous research on Scandinavian internal violence
them to be extraordinarily low, a phenomenon they explained as
reflecting a high degree of gender equality in an economy dominated by
Research on the Viking Age Scandinavians patterns of violence,
milk production and trade. From Sigtuna, however, 19 individuals,
from a sociological perspective, is limited in scope. That work is mostly
including two women and a child were omitted from the analysis
restricted to diasporic Iceland and that is a function of the available
because they were deemed to originate from a military context (they
— –
were found in a mass burial see Kjellstrom, 2013, 239, 246 247).
Including these would raise the Sigtuna rate significantly above the
2 ’
See also discussion in Pearce (2020). Elias argument, and that of those who
suggested 2.4 %.
followed him, has been critiqued (see, e.g., McMahon, 2016; Spierenburg,
“ ”
2011). Regarding the Viking Age, we focus less on the civilizing process, in
2. Method and sources
’ “ ”
Elias terms. Instead, we refer to civilianization, a different if related concept.
“ ”
Self-restraint, suggests subjective qualities which are difficult to measure
´ ´ The main methodological approach in this study is, first, a pairwise
directly in the Viking Age cases. On civilianization, see Arevalo de Leon (2018)
and Ray (2018). comparison of different types of data gathered from the two
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
“ ” “ ”
Scandinavian regions, Denmark and Norway (see footnote 1 for the mass graves from Salme, Estonia, and Repton in England (Price et al.,
specification) and, subsequently, the contrasting of the outcomes in the 2016; Jarman et al., 2018). This suggests that immediate burial near the
light of the main proposition of the study. Four subsets of data are place of death was the dominant practice among the Scandinavians, and
investigated as proxies for, respectively, the readiness to use violence we may thus assume that perimortem damage on skeletons from
(proxies 1 and 2) and the steepness of the social pyramid (proxies 3 and Denmark and Norway was caused domestically and implies internal
4). These proxies are as follows: violence. Antemortem injuries cannot be fixed geographically and the
violence causing them thus cannot be categorized as internal or external
1. The frequency of weapon-related trauma on skeletal remains. to society. Some apparent perimortem trauma may, however, be post-
2. The frequency of Viking Age weapons, especially swords, in graves. mortem. There are many examples of possible ritual mutilation of bodies,
3. The frequency, size, and types of earthworks. especially decapitation, from Early Medieval Europe (see, e.g., Rey-
ł &
4. The frequency and character of social hierarchies indicated in nolds, 2009, Garde a Kajkowski, 2013); weapon-related trauma thus
runestone texts. may in rare cases be subscribed to mortuary praxises. We have, however,
no indications that this is the case in the skeletal material analyzed in
The key question across each of these dimensions is as follows: does this study.
the data display clear differences across the two regions regarding the A further caveat is that evidence of weapon related trauma may not
readiness to use violence, or in the steepness of the social pyramids? manifest itself on the human skeleton. A trauma may have been local-
Different disciplinary approaches are required to answer these questions ized on the flesh only, causing infections and consequently death.
and each comes with its own methodologies and challenges. These Although this is an important aspect to consider in studies of physical
challenges, in their general form, are addressed here; source-critical violence, death following infection may have been caused by several
aspects of the specific datasets will be discussed prior to each analysis. other health determinants. Thus, rendering such a death as caused by a
Proxies have intrinsic limits and will be unlikely to capture all the chain of actions starting with violence would be theoretical. In contrast,
elements of, in this context, the social hierarchy. However, regarding death identified through violent injuries on the skeleton caused by
social hierarchy, the noted proxies do address the two elements of which weapons is readily visible and comparable. As the lethal weapon set in
we are most concerned–the centralization of authority over labor force the two Viking Age areas in this study, Norway and Denmark, is
(the built environment) and stratification (from social roles communi- considered similar concerning swords, axes, spears and arrows–the
cated via runestones). skeletal injuries identified in both the Norwegian and Danish remains in
this study are compatible.
2.1. The representativity of burials The second investigation on indicators of violence is trying to
establish if there were significant differences in the availability of
Graves play a prominent role in this study as they, entirely or weapons among the population in Norway and Denmark. This is based
partially, form the basis for several of the investigations. It is a funda- on the observation that in modern societies, a high presence of lethal,
mental challenge in burial archaeology to draw conclusions about the non-hunting weapons among civilians correlates with high homicide
living society from grave material. An important reason for this is that in rates (Marsh, 2020). It may therefore be suggested that a similar situa-
many societies, among which we may count the Scandinavian Viking tion could exist also in earlier societies, so that a high frequency of
Age ones, not all categories of individuals are given archaeologically mortal weapons among the populace would lead to more frequent
visible funerals (see, e.g., Weiss-Krejci, 2013). Certainly slaves (or violence than in a society with less weapons around. We use the fre-
thralls/ þ ræl), and perhaps also other powerless members of society, quency of weapons, in particular swords in graves, as a measure of the
seem to be almost absent in museum records and collections (Raffield, general frequency of weapons in society. This method has its pitfalls. In
2019). However, we will argue that this bias is not critical in the present Norway, many Viking Age graves are furnished and include swords and
study, because the Danish and Norwegian populations that we study are other weapons along with other personal belongings, while in Denmark
comparable and broadly representative of the dominant Scandinavian the great majority show none or very few and small grave gifts (Peder-
class of the Viking Age, the landowning farmers. Potentially, notably sen, 2014, 44). This is clearly part of a wider difference in the mortuary
distinctive groups like those found in military mass burials or at rituals in the two regions, which is also expressed in, as we shall see
specialized sacrificial or execution sites, are only marginally represented below, the use of grave markers. Thus, differences in the frequency of
in the material. Consequently, we expect the great majority of these weapons in the graves between Norway and Denmark does not neces-
(cid:0)
graves to represent the landowning class which is, in itself, a rather sarily document differences among the armament of living people.
wide category, as illustrated by the varied funerary investments docu- Indeed, it does not exclude such differences either, and there are finds
mented in the graves included in this study. that call for a more nuanced consideration of this issue.
Elias (1994) states that pacification of the population starts from the First, not all Norwegian male graves are furnished with weapons, but
top ranks of society. This is in accordance with early medieval, Scan- some Danish graves are, often in conjunction with horse equipment and
´ ´
dinavian law, e.g., Gragas, which prescribes much stronger punishments other items. These graves are being ascribed to a wealthy, mounted
for bodily harm directed against free men than against slaves or servants warrior elite, which is also visible in parts of Norway in the shape of
(Dennis et al., 1980, 146, 172 – 173). We may thus hypothesize that extraordinarily rich mounted warrior graves (Pedersen 2014, 206).
skeletons from the lower strata in society would display, if found, higher Thus, abstaining from furnishing graves was a matter of choice, not an
frequencies of injuries than those found on the examined individuals. imperative, in both countries. Second, although the differences between
This does not, however, invalidate a comparison between regions, as Norwegian and Danish graves are visible through ritual expression, they
long as it is plausible that the individuals compared are from the same, may well have been caused by economical drivers. Due to geological
higher social strata. It may be added that none of the compared in- conditions, iron ore in Denmark and Norway differs in chemical
dividuals, not from Norway, nor from Denmark, originates from obvious composition, as the Danish bog ore contains rather high proportions of
elite burials.
A general challenge when studying frequencies of weapon-related
trauma is to establish which trauma results from internal violence in
3 “ ”
Internal violence is here defined as violence that takes place within the
society and which may rather be attributed to, for example, Viking ac-
populations of Norway and Denmark respectively, without differentiating be-
tivities abroad? There is to our knowledge no archaeological evidence
tween different socio-political and possibly competing groups. Violence caused
that deceased Vikings were brought back to their Scandinavian home-
by such competition constitutes part of the specter of violence that we seek to
lands for burial, but solid evidence for burial abroad, as demonstrated by register.
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
phosphor (Lyngstr m, 2011, 143; 2013, 120). Phosphor makes iron 3.1. Weapon related traumas
brittle (see, e.g., Abbasi et al., 2007). Although it has been suggested that
a surprising lack of known Viking age iron production sites in Denmark 3.1.1. The Norwegian material
can be explained by the transition to a new, archaeologically invisible The largest Norwegian skeletal collection, the Schreiner Collection,
furnace type, import has also been suggested as an explanation has 141 skeletons dating from the Late Iron and Viking Age (550 1050
ø – 4
(Lyngstr m, 2008; Larsen 2009, 193 4). Imports of other goods from CE). Thirty of these were included in an international aDNA-study
Norway to Denmark became archaeologically visible during the 8th (Margaryan et al., 2020) and are now being investigated in a multidis-
century (Baug et al., 2018; Rey-Iglesia et al., 2023) this trade may well ciplinary project on integrating aDNA and other biomolecular data in
have included iron of a better quality than what was possible to produce mortuary archaeology (Strand et al., 2022). As part of this work, weapon
in Denmark. related traumas were recorded.
A recent technological study of 21 swords from a region in Norway, The selection of the skeletal material for our study was made for the
Telemark, shows a very different situation. The great majority of the aDNA project. Two of the current authors were involved in this research,
swords had been produced locally only one could be shown to be made assisting with the selection of material. The primary criteria for selection
with an imported blade (Martens Astrup 2021, 122-123). Apparently, included the estimated level of DNA preservation assessed through the
the blacksmiths in Telemark were not only capable of producing iron in conditions of cranial and dental preservation, as well as the sex, spatial
large quantities, but also of converting it into swords, a rather distribution, and chronological context of the Norwegian burials.
demanding object to produce because of the extensive welding and the Contextual information (burial type and grave goods) were used for
mastery of tempering that it required. If the Telemark study is repre- dating, but only into very broad chronological categories, and richly
sentative for all of Norway, we should expect a relative abundance of furnished graves were not given preference.
iron swords here, compared to Denmark. In a wider perspective, this Representativity is, as is often the case with archaeology, limited. We
would also explain a similar abundance of other iron objects in Nor- adhere to the cautionary approach that samples are inherently biased to
wegian graves, compared to Danish ones. some degree. In our study, not all groups of individuals living during the
Less challenging from a methodological point of view is the com- Viking Age are represented, nor are individuals who were affected by
parison of the earthwork construction activity in Norway and Denmark. types of violence that did not leave any visible skeletal injuries. Most
“ ”
With earthworks we are here thinking of constructions made of, pri- significantly, neither individuals who were cremated, nor such ones that
marily, earth and stone, and the term therefore includes not only were not buried at all, are represented in the study, and it is not known if
defensive structures like fortifications, but also burial mounds and even the selection of inhumated individuals skews the outcome of the trauma
artificial navigational channels. What they all have in common is that investigation. There seems to be no visible differences in the furnishing
they require large investments in terms of physical labor, and the of cremation and inhumation burials that could reflect differences in
earthworks are therefore a measure of the degree of coordination of social status associated with either burial form (see, e.g., catalog over
— —
labor investment voluntarily or forced that a given society could Kaupang burials, Stylegar 2007, 103-128). What is clear, however, is
achieve. The comparison is hampered by the lack of published volume that there is a geographical dimension to this bias. Sj vold (1962, 1974,
data, especially from the Danish examples, which already from the start see also Stylegar, 2007) states that inhumation was the prevailing burial
is sparsely represented simply because they are few in numbers. The ritual in northern Norway, and partly in central Norway, while crema-
data points from Denmark in this study are therefore only examples, but tion practices were the main mode of burial practice in southern and
nevertheless striking. The Norwegian material provides many more data eastern Norway, resulting in a sparsity of well-preserved skeletons from
points, but often with rather low quality chronological definition. these areas. For those individuals who did not receive any burial, it is
Despite these limitations, the comparison of earthwork building activity highly likely they belonged to the less influential sectors of soci-
’ —
in Norway and Denmark indicates very clear differences in the societies ety slaves, perhaps servants and workers, and criminals. The impact of
capability of coordinated labor investment. the selection according to the inhumation criteria is thus that the lower
The last comparison in the study, between Danish and Norwegian levels in society are likely to be extremely underrepresented. The study
runestone inscriptions, is the least challenging. Thanks to the Scandi- is thus unable to address differences in the exposure to armed violence
navian Runic-text Database and the Danske Runeindskrifter database, both between different levels in society.
curated by Scandinavian rune scholars, the data about runestone texts The geographical distribution of the 30 included skeletons (from 27
are easily accessible. Though the texts mentioning the offices, or roles, of different burials, Fig. 1) shows that the sample has its main coverage in
different persons can easily be identified, the actual meanings of the the northern parts of Norway, and in the area around and north of the
various appellatives is mostly unknown and a matter of debate. How- Oslo Fjord. Southern and Western Norway and the northernmost area
ever, since it is not the aim of this article to define the different com- are not represented; as such, the study cannot illuminate the frequency
ponents in the social pyramids, but simply to estimate their relative of weapon related trauma in these areas. For the areas covered, which
steepness, this is not a hindrance for the study. roughly corresponds to the historical districts of Viken, Opplandene and
Hålogaland, the sample can be considered reasonably representative for
3. Regional and temporal differences in levels of violence those people given a burial. The chronological distribution, based on
archaeological context, shows that the material primarily illuminates
This section engages two indicators the type and frequency of the 9th and 10th centuries, and less so the beginning and end of the
frequency of weapons occurring in graves. These indicators will be used is thus correct to consider the sample representative for the middle part
to illuminate levels of violence in the two compared regions. We begin of the Viking Age in particular.
with an overview and comparison of the weapon-related trauma iden-
tified on 30 skeletons from Norway that we investigated, and 82 skele- 3.1.2. The Danish human remains
tons from Denmark that were investigated by the Danish osteologist Pia The data for the investigation of the Danish sample comes from Pia
Bennike in 1985 (Bennike, 1985). Next, in this section, we turn to dis- Bennike s doctoral thesis, Paleopathology of Danish Skeletons, translated
cussing the frequency of weapons in graves in Norway and Denmark
respectively.
Access to the database can be granted through the Schreiner Collection
or through the Museum of Cultural History, University of Oslo.
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
Fig. 1. Overview of the location of the inhumation burials in this study. Norway is shown to the left, Denmark to the right. Asterisks indicate that the buried in-
dividual shows weapon related trauma. Danish finds without weapon trauma are shown with dots but have not been labeled in the map. Large dots indicate sites that
have produced 10 or more Viking Age skeletons. Map: LMS JB.
overview of the Danish archaeological skeletal material; its pathology Norwegian individuals; Danish individuals without such trauma are not
provides good comparative material to the Norwegian investigation. listed, as those are not identifiable in Bennike (1985).
Bennike s Viking Age sample consists of 175 individuals, of which only
82 have a preserved cranium, and therefore were included in her 3.1.3. Methods for osteological examination
pathological investigation (Bennike, 1985, 21, 33 34). Consequently, The osteological examination of both the Norwegian and Danish
only these 82 individuals were admitted into the present study. human remains was based on ocular analysis, with the exception of the
In terms of representativity, the Danish sample shows some simi- use of aDNA for sex determination of the Norwegian material (Mar-
larities to the Norwegian material. It consists of skeleton finds with garyan et al., 2020). An overview of the age at death categories for the
crania, originating from different parts of the country (see map in Fig. 1), Norwegian human remains in this research is located in Margaryan et al.
and collected over many decades. Further, in Denmark, inhumation (2020); for the Danish human remains, see discussion in Bennike
burials were, like in Northern Norway, the most common burial type in (1985:36-37).
the Viking Age (Bennike 1985, 20-21). Datings of the Danish individuals The ocular analysis performed on the Norwegian human remains in
are generally wide, and range from, possibly, as early as in the 8th this study uses the concept of trauma according to the following defi-
century to the early 11th century. A notable difference is that some of nition: trauma is used in its broadest sense to mean any event that re-
the Danish individuals have apparently been executed. The burial ritual sults in partial or complete discontinuity of a bone (Redfern and
of these individuals may have deviated from common practice and can Redfern, 2019, 212). Due to disparate conditions and historic conser-
be assumed to reflect social position differently. Danish individuals with vation attempts on the human remains, some weapon related injuries
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
Fig. 2. Cumulative dating of the examined Norwegian skeletons. The horizontal axis represents 25-year dating intervals CE, vertical axis the number of individuals
that may be expected to date from each interval. Every individual counts as 1 in the histogram, and this value has been distributed evenly over dating intervals that
“ ” – – –
the individual may belong to. So, a burial dated to 10th century has been assigned the value 0,25 for each of the 25Y intervals 900 924, 925 949, 950 974 and
975 999. After 1075 Christian burial rites had almost completely replaced Viking Age burial rituals; hence the last quarter of the 11th century is not included in the
calculation. The tail in the left of the diagram reflects a small number of skeletons dated only to the Late Iron Age. Graphics: LMS, JB.
which may have been present were not possible to record by ocular The 30 Norwegian skeletons included 12 biological females and 18
methodology. The analysis focuses on sharp, blunt, and penetrating biological males (40 % females, 60 % males; Margaryan et al., 2020).
— —
antemortem and perimortem injuries. The latter are categories, together Eighteen individuals 60 % display sharp, blunt or penetrating in-
with postmortem, that are widely used to classify identified bone alter- juries, of which 14 individuals have injuries on the cranium; 4 are fe-
— —
ations and taphonomic processes (Lyman, 1994). A thorough descrip- male and 10 are male. Four persons one female and three males had
tion of how to differ between ante- and perimortem bone remodeling is only injuries on other parts of the skeleton. One female with a cranium
that the sign of fracture healing separates ante and perimortem injuries, not considered a victim of violence in this study, although the reason for
and that postmortem damage and perimortem trauma have to be sepa- the trephination is unknown.
rated by fracture color, surface, and pattern. Thus a minimum of 18 individuals 60 % of the total
Other distinguishing elements used in this study are the separation of group suffered weapon-related trauma. Five of these are females and
injury types, which also serve as indicators of which type of weapon was 13 males, meaning that 42 % of the examined females and 72 % of the
used by the perpetrator. Injuries are commonly separated by the iden- examined males were identified with weapon-related trauma. The
tification of morphology. Redfern and Redfern (2019, 220 221) presents traumas were either ante- or perimortem. Seven individuals showed
an efficient overview over the different categories of injuries, sharp- antemortem injuries only, eight perimortem only, and three both. The
force trauma, blunt-force trauma, and penetrating-force trauma. Also, distribution does not seem to be influenced by sex.
distinctive features for weapon related injuries are the identification of Looking into the types of injuries, some individuals had several.
cut mark walls, sides and kerfs (Lewis, 2008). Penetrating injuries were rare, with only two perimortem instances (one
To distinguish between blunt and sharp-force trauma the osteologist male and one female). Blunt force trauma was only identified in five
on the team observed the contact morphology on the bones. The impact cases, four being antemortem (three male, one female), and one peri-
of a blunt object often produces a linear fracture line, or multiple, mortem (female). Sharp force trauma was the most common and eight
comminuted fractures. Other types of weapons, such as axes and swords, individuals (two of them females) were found with antemortem injuries
often create distinct straight or elliptical lines, and a defined edge or of this type, while ten persons (including two females) had suffered such
margin, contrary to those of a blunt instrument. The penetrating-force injuries perimortem. Taken together, 11 of the 30 studied Norwegian
trauma is often caused by projectiles such as arrows and spears; such individuals, or 37 %, suffered violent deaths, all when being assaulted
traumas can generally be identified through their resemblance to the with bladed and/or pointed weapons.
weapons that caused them (Redfern and Redfern, 2019, 221). Of the 82 Danish skeletons examined and sexed by ocular meth-
ods 41 are female, 33 male and 8 undetermined (Bennike, 1985, 22,
3.1.4. Results of the osteological examination 33). Five individuals four males and one undetermined, making up 6 %
In addition to weapon-induced trauma, the osteological examina- of the total number show perimortem sharp or penetrating force
tions of the Danish and Norwegian skeletons include sex and age, trauma. One further male individual shows trauma consistent with
important to provide insights into who were, or were not, affected by hanging. Interestingly, this individual was found in a double-grave
violence. Bennike s publication does not identify the individuals who together with his mother, who did not show signs of unnatural death
were not found to have experienced violence, as we previously noted, (Kastholm Margaryan, 2021). In total 7 % had thus died violently.
largely excluding the Danish material from this part of the examination.
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
Two instances of ante or perimortem blunt force trauma are reported result of violence in Bennike s study of the Danish skeletons. The pro-
but without Bennike associating them with violence (Bennike 1985, 99- portion of killed individuals in the Norwegian group was, as stated
100). The individuals are not identified by Bennike, and have not been above, 37 %, while it among the Danish group was only 7 %. The
— —
counted as having weapon-related injuries in the present study. numbers of skeletons investigated 30 Norwegian and 82 Danish is
not large, but the differences between the two samples are so marked
skeletons between the two groups becomes even more pronounced when the
The frequency and characteristics of the injuries found on the 18 character of the killings are considered.
individuals with trauma from Norway can be compared to those recor- In the Danish material, five of the six killings are executions; in the
The injuries are similar across the two groups in the sense that per- Although not part of this research, examples of decapitations are found
imortem injuries have been caused by bladed and, to a much smaller in Flakstad in Northern Norway where 4 individuals from the Viking Age
degree, pointed weapons. This is, however, more or less the only simi- display signs of decapitation (Naumann et al., 2013, 533), and a further
larity that can be found between the two groups in terms of violence- Danish example may be found at Bog vej on Langeland, not far from
induced trauma. The scale of the violence differs vastly, both when Stengade. Here human remains in burial P shows possible violent
looking at ante- and perimortem violence. Ten of 30 Norwegian skeletons trauma consistent with sharp force decapitation (Gr n et al., 1994:14-
(33 %) showed healed trauma, which were in four cases related to the 15). Executions are thus neither unique to the Danish material, nor
use of a blunt instrument; no blunt force traumas were considered the limited to what has been included in the present study the remarkable
fact is that they are making up such a dominant proportion of the
observed killings in the Danish material. Killings seem to be highly
dependent on the socio-political framework in which they take place.
3.1.6. Situating the weapon related trauma in the political landscape
Clearly, the recorded signs of violence vary markedly between the
two investigated populations. Can we situate this violence socially and
politically? Violence and death is individual and needs to be understood
in its own context. Still, there are more general observations that can be
made. Two of the Norwegian graves containing slain persons (Fig. 1,
seated. A3709 were found at a farm carrying the name Hov, which is
indicative of cultic activity. It is situated near D nna, a cultural land-
scape with many prestigious archaeological objects and Viking Age
burial mounds (Bratrein, 2018, 158). A1520 is likewise associated with
a Hov farm (Berglund, 1996, Hosar, 1994, Kjelland, 1996, Lillevold,
1971, Qvisling, 1921). Thus, these two burials may be associated with
the presence of local political power, the social standing of the victims
themselves untold. But the large majority of burials with traumatized
skeletons are in areas considered peripheral during this period and may
rather represent violence among peers.
A plausible interpretation of the relationship between central areas
and weapon burials located in peripheral areas is given by Berglund
(1996, 322) in her research on Viking Age Helgeland, a part of northern
Norway. The peripheral farms were likely organized under, or con-
nected to, the central farms during this period, with all associated ob-
ligations and privileges, such as military service, and rights. These may
have included the sharing of goods where local chieftains and petty
Fig. 3. Overview of counts of weapon-related trauma from Norwegian and
kings competed for subjects loyalty and resources.
Danish human remains, per country. For Norway: 15 cranial injuries, 2 injuries
In Denmark, being a much smaller and more densely populated re-
on femur, 4 injuries on tibia, 2 injuries on humerus, 1 injury on scapula, 1
gion than Norway (see discussions in Sigurðsson, 2011, 62 and Jensen,
injury on sacrum, 1 injury on coxae, 1 injury on spine, 1 injury on ulna, 1
1979, 189), center and periphery may have been physically closer.
trephination, 2 injury on fibula. For Denmark: 4 decapitations, 1 hanging and 1
Nevertheless, some of the human remains which Bennike (1985) iden-
tified with weapon related injuries are clearly associated with known
are listed as separate categories of trauma because they represent a funda-
— — central settlements. The Kalmargården burial site in Western Zealand,
mentally different type of trauma execution where the perpetrator has taken
Statistical analysis of weapon-induced skeletal trauma and executions from Norway and Denmark. Differences in whole body skeletal trauma, antemortem and
perimortem cranial trauma, and apparent executions by beheading/hanging were analyzed with two-sided Fisher s exact test. Odds ratios and 95% confidence in-
tervals were calculated using the Baptista-Pike method. All properties displayed statistically significant differences between the countries, except for executions.
Significance was determined with Fisher s exact 2-sided test in Graphpad Prism, version 10.2.0.
Property Norway Denmark P-value Odds ratio 95 % confidence interval
¼ ¼
(total n 30) (total n 82)
< –
Skeletal trauma (all) 18 6 0.0001 19.0 6.2 60.9
< ∞ –∞
Antemortem axial trauma 10 0 0.0001 10.5
Perimortem axial trauma (without executions) 5 1 0.0051 16.2 2.0 192.6
Executions/hanging 0 5 0.32 0 0 1.9
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
SM2), is located at the royal Tiss manor from the Viking Age We do so as swords are abundant; usually, a warrior carries only one (in
(J rgensen, 2002, 2009; Henriksen et al., 2017). Lejre near Roskilde is contrast to, for example, arrows); and, finally, swords had no secondary
the old royal seat of the Danes, according to written sources. The functions as tools or for hunting. The five databases contain all the
importance of Lejre is also evident in the presence of, as in Tiss , several registered archaeological objects in Norwegian museum collections and
very large, excavated hall buildings (Christensen, 1991). It is note- thus also all Late Iron Age swords, but the quality of data is varied in
worthy that three instances of decapitations have been found at two part because many finds originate from the early days of Norwegian
burial sites in Lejre and Tiss respectively, pointing to possible examples archaeology and lack contextual information. We have therefore looked
of the exertion of royal authority (Carver, 2005). This is especially true for all swords unambiguously dated to the Viking Age or to the Late Iron
(cid:0)
for the Kalmergården burials, where the decapitated persons killed on Age at large, without requiring them to be recorded as found in graves.
two different occasions, and inhumated at a fjord giving access to the Given that other types of depositions of swords, e.g., in wetlands, were
ø (cid:0)
Tiss complex from the south were buried with their heads between rare in Norway in that period (see Lund 2009, 155-65 for examples), we
their thighs (Bennike Christoffersen, 1981). In the Lejre burial, the consider this to be a safe assumption.
decapitated person was found in a double burial with another person Altogether 2095 found swords are unambiguously dated to the
who was equipped with relatively elaborate grave goods; the burial has Viking Age. A further 242 swords are dated to the Merovingian Period,
been interpreted as that of a master with a thrall (Andersen 1995, 95- and 975 only to the Late Iron Age. The databases thus contain at least
96). 3312 swords from the Late Iron Age. The numbers are broken down on
the quite large number of skeletons, thirty, excavated there. There are no small region in Southwest Norway characterized by fertile, agricultural
known Viking Age settlements of a character indicating a central au- soil; here, on average, one Late Iron Age sword has been found for every
ø ø
thority on the island where the Stengade I, II and Bog vej burial fields 33 km2. Tr ndelag in Central Norway (Trondheim museum region) and
are situated; however, there are numerous medieval buildings and cas- the Southeast regions of Norway (Oslo) both consisting of extensive
tles in the area (Skaarup, 1995). The strategic importance of Langeland agricultural areas as well as forests and mountains have produced one
likely goes back to the Viking Age, and the executions may relate to rigid sword per 47 km2 and one per 60 km2 respectively, while the region
— —
political control of the frontier island. Current Late Iron and Viking Age around Bergen in West Norway poor in fertile soils shows only one
genetic studies indicate a higher degree of mixed population, and sword per 215 km2. This latter, low value is partly explained by a high
thereby influx of people from the outside, in Langeland compared to the number of swords 189, or 48 percent of swords in the Bergen museum
rest of Denmark (Margaryan et al., 2020, 392). The executed person collection that are undated; however, many are known to be from the
from the Stengade II site, however, was found in a double-grave, as in Late Iron Age period. The extensive northern regions, Nordland, Troms
Lejre, and may be explained as human sacrifice (Skaarup 1976, 56-58; and Finnmark, where Norse settlement was sparse and concentrated in
Skaarup, 1989). Nonetheless, human sacrifice, just as in the exercise the coastal zone, are represented with the astonishingly low rate of one
2016). strongly modified, however, in the light of the regional study presented
The similarities and differences between parameters such as below.
contextual location of burials and weapon related trauma, between and Storli s (2006) overview of Viking Age weapon burials in the Norse-
in Norway and Denmark, reveal likely connections between the amount settled parts of Northern Norway identified 212 Viking Age weapon
of weapon-related violence and the organization and strength of the burials (8th to 11th century); they contained 162 swords, 115 spears and
central or local power. 23 shield bosses (ibid. 219 224). This is in sharp contrast to the 49
ø ’
swords unambiguously dated to the Late Iron Age in Troms Museum s
database. The difference seems partly to originate in different assess-
3.2. Weapons as indicators of violence
ments of dates. The Troms database reflects a very cautious assessment,
with no less than 78 swords being assigned only to broad dating intervals
The presence of weapons in archaeological contexts is another, in-
encompassing both Early and Late Iron Age periods. Storli s study,
dependent source to understand the level of violence in past societies. In
which assigns narrower dating intervals to more swords, suggests that
Scandinavia, weapons from the Late Iron and Viking Ages are primarily
the density of weapon graves with swords in Northern Norway is five
found as grave goods. Though grave goods may be deposited for a va-
¨ times as high as in our probe of museum collections. Importantly, the
riety of reasons (Harke, 2014), they are usually considered indicators of
study also shows that about a quarter of the weapon graves did not
identity and of the societal role and importance of the buried individual
contain a sword, making the density of weapon graves even higher. In
(Pedersen 2014, 254). Even though there would have been some cir-
contrast, Ystgaard s study of weapon graves in Central Norway (2014,
culation of prestige items such as specific types of swords, these types
345 367) examined 35 burials from the Merovingian and Viking periods
are not found in the burials investigated osteologically as part of this
and finds that only three of these did not have a sword. Thus, Storli s
study (see below). Subsequently, the weapons in the Norwegian burials
proportion of weapon graves without swords in Northern Norway is not
should be viewed as personal. A direct correlation between the fre-
necessarily representative of the situation in other Norwegian regions.
quency of organized warfare and of weapons in graves seems not to exist
Another approach that can illuminate the frequency of weapons in
(Ystgaard 2014, 70-71). The extent to which weapons were widespread
Norwegian graves is to look at the proportions of weapon graves to
among the Scandinavian population is unknown, but in Norway
graves without weapons in individual cemeteries. Three Late Iron and
weapons from the Late Iron Age have been found frequently, while they
Viking Age sites with burials located in the southern part of Norway can
are less common in Denmark. In contrast to Denmark, however, a
serve as examples. Gausel near Stavanger in Rogaland County has,
countrywide overview for Norway is missing.
during successive excavations, yielded six burials, five of which con-
In order to get an impression of the frequency of weapons in Norway
tained one or more weapons (B rsheim et al., 2001, 162-223). In Gulli,
in the period, we have consulted the databases of the five archaeological
5 in Vestfold at the Oslo fjord, seven out of 20 burials featured one or more
museums in Norway. We searched for one type of weapon only–swords.
weapons, including five with swords; as several of the burials had been
reopened, the original number of weapon graves and of swords may
5 have been slightly higher (Gjerpe 2005, 27-104). Moving to Kaupang, an
urban settlement dating from c. 800 950/1000 CE and likewise located
’ in Vestfold, Stylegar noted weapons in 79 out of 237 excavated graves,
bases professional interfaces available through the Unimus organization.
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
Swords in the collections of the five regional museums of Norway, according to the MUSIT collection management database (top) and average area per sword found in
the museum districts (map below). Different dating practices influence the picture, and the generally low frequency of sword finds in the Troms museum district is
exaggerated for dated swords due to the large proportion of undated ones from this region.
University Museum (city)
Dating Oslo Stavanger Bergen Trondheim Troms Total
Viking Age swords 1559 7 36 479 14 2095
Merovingian Period swords 109 0 19 109 5 242
Late Iron Age swords 181 278 169 317 30 975
Dated swords, totals 1849 285 224 905 49 3312
Possibly Late Iron Age/Viking Age swords 122 2 6 40 78 248
Certain and possible Late Iron/Viking Age swords, totals 1971 287 230 945 127 3560
Density of sword finds
Museum district area (km ) 110.998 9.378 39.315 68.769 96.022 324.482
Area per sword dated with certainty to the Late Iron Age (km ) 60.0 32.9 175.5 76.0 1959.6 98.0
Area per sword, all possible Late Iron Age (km ) 56.3 32.7 170.9 72.8 756.1 91.1
Fig. 4. Heatmaps comparing the density of sword finds in Denmark and in each of the five Norwegian museum regions. The upper map includes only Norwegian
swords that are confidently dated to the Late Iron Age, while the lower includes Norwegian swords with an uncertain dating to the same period. Maps: LMS, JB.
or in every third grave (Stylegar 2007, 75-84). Swords were found in 45, weapons, or 74 % if we include those buried with arrows. Of the 11
or only 57 % of the weapon burials (ibid. 104 127). individuals without injuries, nine were found in single graves without
If we consider the 30 Norwegian individuals that were selected for weapons, while one was from a grave with weapons, and one from a
SM3). Among the 19 skeletons with weapon-induced trauma, 12 origi- the uninjured individual. Thus, 14 graves out of 30 (47 %) contained
nated from graves where either a sword, an axe, or a spear (or a com- weapons. The high value may be due to the selection of graves with well-
bination of these) were found, while two graves with injured individuals preserved skeletal remains, as conditions preserving skeletons also favor
contained arrows. Thus, of those with trauma 63 % were buried with the preservation of iron (Kibblewhite et al., 2015). The strong affinity
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
Fig. 4. (continued).
between being buried with weapons and its association with weapon altogether 499 burial sites. The 305 securely dated cemeteries have held
injuries is not, however, explained by this and it is a significant indi- a minimum of 5100 burials alone (ibid. 39 40), but with big variations
cation that weapons in graves are indeed associated with individuals in numbers of graves, from one to several hundreds. Thus, the Danish
connected with violence. burial material from the Viking Age is extensive.
Pedersen s study encompasses pre-Christian burials from 800 to
3.2.1. Comparison of Denmark and Norway on weaponry 1000/1050 CE known in 2005 and dates the weapon graves among them
The enquiry into the weapon finds from the Norwegian Late Iron Age mainly to the 10th century, with approximately 19 percent being earlier
demonstrates that sword finds indicating weapon graves are frequent all and approximately 10 percent later (Pedersen 2014, 15 16, 146, 150).
over the country. Furthermore, the sword finds are more numerous in For the preceding centuries, she states that the numbers are negligible
ø ø
the regions expected to have the densest Norse settlement. The museum and refers to N rgård J rgensen, who includes two weapon graves from
databases list more than 3000 swords from the period. However, based the 7th or 8th century CE from Denmark (outside Bornholm) in her study
on the number of weapon graves represented in the archaeological of the Scandinavian weapon graves from the 6th to the 10th century CE
ø ø
collections, from regional and local studies, the number of extant swords (N rgård J rgensen 1999, 35, 236).
ø ’
is likely higher. Sites such as Gausel in Rogaland county (B rsheim et al., Our analyses of the Danish weapon graves are based on Pedersen s
2001), and Gulli and Kaupang in Vestfold County (Gjerpe et al. 2005; Catalogue 2 on graves with weapons and horse or wagon equipment
Stylegard et al. 2007) attest that in selected contexts the percentage of (Pedersen 2014a, 68-114), but we exclude finds from Scania. In direct
weapon burials may well exceed 30 percent of all burials. This is also comparison to the number of swords in Norwegian graves, we find 80
reflected in the burials selected by skeletal state of preservation for ge- swords (85 if uncertain registrations are included) distributed in 77 (82)
netic analysis, where up to 45 percent of the individuals were found with different graves. To check for differences in furnishing practices, we
weapons. have also recorded the number of graves with axes and spears. Axes
For Denmark, Anne Pedersen has analyzed the Viking Age burials numbering 113 were found in 110 graves, while 68 spears were found in
and finds that they, as in Norway, are most frequent in fertile areas 66 graves. In 44 cases, swords, axes, or spears were found in combina-
(Pedersen 2014, 53 55). From the territory of modern-day Denmark, tion, and the total number of weapon graves with one or more of these
Scania, and Schleswig in Germany, but excluding Bornholm, she records three weapons is 204 (209). Pedersen detected a further eight burials as
305 securely dated Viking Age cemeteries, further 109 burial contexts weapon graves based on shield bosses, and 12 (14) based on arrows
indicated by Viking Age finds in the collections, and 85 undated graves alone. Pedersen thus identified 224 (231, if uncertain cases are included)
or cemeteries of probably Viking Age origination, representing weapon graves within the Danish part of our research area.
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
Estimating the relative frequency of weapon ownership through a such undertakings can be used as a measure for the steepness of the
direct comparison between the numbers of swords and presumed social pyramid. The kind of undertakings that can be investigated
weapon graves in Norway and Denmark is biased by several factors. archaeologically are such ones that leave resilient traces in or above the
Antiquarian practice is perhaps one of the lesser biases, since both in ground. In Scandinavia, earthworks in the shape of monumental burial
’ 6 –
Pedersen s and in our study, poorly documented weapon finds are likely mounds and fortifications either as fortresses, or as linear ramparts
to represent weapon burials; most swords in the Norwegian museums, protecting larger areas, towns, or regions are such archaeologically
and most weapons in the Danish ones, have thus been included as grave visible products of large investments of labor. When excavated, chro-
finds. Nor should chronological differences play any important role, nological phases in their construction can be determined and mostly also
given the lack of pre-Viking Age Danish weapon graves. But the focus on dated. Artificial canals are another, if rare, type of construction that
swords alone in the Norwegian material is clearly reducing the Norwe- could only be realized through the concerted and temporally concen-
gian numbers in comparison to the Danish by omitting burials with trated effort of many people.
weapons other than swords. Finally, and perhaps most important, we do Though the labor investment in large earthworks can be compared
not know with certainty the differences in Viking Age population across regions, the objects in which the labor was invested cannot in
numbers in Norway and Denmark. It has been suggested that Norway themselves be taken as a comparable measure, since societies in
only had a population of around 80,000 at the beginning of the Viking different regions may have had differing demands, be it of military,
Age (Sigurðsson, 2011, 62) and 155,000 around 1000 CE when only the economic or symbolic character. For example, in our study area, mounds
area of modern Norway is considered (Benedictow 1996, 180-181). The are primarily found in Norway, while linear fortifications and fortresses
Danish population has been estimated to be 700,000 to 800,000 at the primarily occur in Denmark. This makes clear that differences in labor
end of the Viking Age (Jensen, 1979, 189). Thus, not only are the Nor- investment in earthworks can only be a tentative, not an authoritative,
wegian weapon burials likely underreported in our figures, their larger indicator of differences in the social pyramid between regions; only their
number would have been distributed among an almost certainly much presence, not their absence, can indicate the scale of social stratification.
smaller population. In the following we shall examine the distribution of these different
With well over ten times as many weapon graves in Norway as in types of earthworks across the study area to detect variations that are
Denmark, and a population perhaps only one fifth of the Danish, we can likely to indicate differences in the social structure, starting out with the
conclude that weapons were much more perhaps fifty times mor- most frequent phenomenon, mounds.
e common as burial furniture in Norway compared to Denmark. Where
in Norway, a large proportion of the population chose to place one or 4.1.1. Mounds
more weapons in the grave, this was a rare thing to do in Denmark, Mounds from the Scandinavian Iron Age are primarily found in
especially outside the 10th century CE. This is not proof that weapons Norway and Sweden where they are recorded in the thousands, with the
per se were more common among the Norwegian population than among oldest dating back to the Migration Period. From Denmark, mounds
the Danish, but nevertheless a strong indication that carrying weapons from this period are much rarer (see chronological overview in Holst
was a more important part of identity in Norway than in Denmark. 2013, 53-60), and only 118 mounds are known from a total of 409 burial
sites from the Viking Age (Pedersen 2014, 42, 49, 62). They were mainly
4. Tracing regional and temporal differences in the steepness of constructed as part of a burial ritual and acted as memorials through
the social pyramid which memories and narratives about origins, rights and ownership
were made manifest and durable; the size of mounds is commonly
What were the differences in the steepness of the social pyramid thought to reflect their political importance (Bratt, 2008; Bill, 2020).
along our axis through Scandinavia s western rim? What were the Older mounds could be reused, sometimes in combination with an
changes in that regard, across that axis and across Viking Age history? enlargement of the existing structure, but in most cases they were built
To answer these questions, we have chosen two categories of evidence, on one occasion. In our study, we shall not only use mounds in the
which we argue have the capacity to reflect social stratification and comparison between Denmark and Norway, but also to study possible
centralizing authority, and from which occurrences are datable and variations in social structure within Norway. Since Norway did not
found across our research area. These are various types of large earth- consist of a single polity until late in the Viking Age, knowledge about
works, and monuments that include standing stones with runic in- such variations will be important for the larger comparison. For that
scriptions, of which often only the runestones are left today. Runestones reason, we shall first look at burial mounds of all sizes in Norway, not
are clear visual markers of a certain type of power or dominance in the only those which are expressions of a highly stratified society.
landscape; earthworks generally are too, but many of them have utili- Modern Norway measures more than 1500 km from north to south.
tarian purposes that probably were of more importance for their genesis. The Norwegian State Antiquarian s administrative database for pro-
tected monuments, Askeladden, reports more than 40,000 mounds in
4.1. Earthworks as evidence for the social pyramid Norway, the overwhelming majority of which are considered to be from
the Iron Age (500 BCE to 1050 CE). These are found in all parts of the
While communal action in the shape of large construction works for country, except for in the extreme north. However, the majority are
the benefit of entire communities do not necessarily indicate hierar- poorly dated, and only about a thousand of them can be dated with
chical structure (Arkush et al., 2019; Kaptijn, 2010), it is more likely varying probability to the period of interest here, the Late Iron Age (ca.
than not that complex, rapidly built and vast, labor-intensive construc- 550 1050 CE). This can be broken down to 30 mounds datable to the
tions are a result of the “ command-and-control ” ability of highly strat- Merovingian Period (550 – 800 CE), 440 to the Viking Age (800 – 1050
ified societies (Abrams and Bolland, 1999). Such structures, both CE) and 541 to the Late Iron Age in general. The Migration Period
utilitarian (e.g., defenses), religious (e.g., temples) and political (e.g., (400 550 CE), which is the last part of the preceding Early Iron Age, and
mausolea) are an ingrained part of European antiquity and early history, the only Early Iron Age period producing mounds, is represented with
much of it due to the Roman Empire ’ s military and artistic aspirations 228 mounds in the database.
(see, e.g., Thomas, 2007), but also by subsequent building programs of Analyzing this material, we have established that information about
Germanic kings and emperors. Both the Roman, the Carolingian and the the diameter of round mounds is reported in 60 cases from the Migration
Ottonian Empire extended their borders to, or close to, southwest Period, 9 Merovingian cases, 214 Viking Age cases, and 237 cases only
Scandinavia. Although on a less prominent scale, Denmark and Norway
in the Viking Age also featured monumental constructions. Therefore,
we consider that the frequency and extent of archaeological traces of Here defined as mounds measuring over 40 m in diameter.
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
Fig. 5. Diameters (horizontal axis) and latitudes (vertical axis, UTM 32V) of Migration Period and Late Iron Age mounds recorded in the Norwegian administrative
no]). Spots represent mounds dated to the Migration Period, crosses mounds from the Late Iron Age. Spots/crosses with identical diameters and latitudes will overlap.
Graphics: JB.
datable to the Late Iron Age altogether 520 cases. With a few excep- being a region-wide phenomenon, it is much stronger in the south than
tions due to missing data, these are plotted on Fig. 5 according to their anywhere else. Mounds of 40 m or more in diameter are five times as
— –
important observations. First, dateable mounds from the Late Iron Age Bergen at c 6700000 (UTM 32V) than further north. It can thus be
are found continuously from southernmost Norway to Narvik and Senja concluded that although the competitive use of mound construction is a
in the north, despite significant environmental variation along the phenomenon found across Norse-settled Norway, the scale of competi-
length of Norway. Their northern delimitation coincides with the cul- tion is much higher in southern Norway.
tural border between what was through later parts of the Iron Age Norse A third observation that can be made is that in the Migration Period,
and Saami lands (Hansen and Olsen 2004, 78-79). Burial mounds thus a couple of mounds were constructed that dwarf even the largest of the
seem to have been used for competition internally among the Norse Late Iron Age mounds. Albeit few, it is probably significant that also
population only. these mounds are found in the southern parts of Norway. With that in
Secondly, social competition through the construction of mounds mind, we shall now focus on the entire study area and only on these
exists throughout the area. Although mounds are fewer in the north- mounds that are monumental, before turning to other types of large
which can be explained to a large degree by Norse settlements being earthworks.
sparse and concentrated on narrow, coastal strips of land in the north, As the volume of mounds is increasing exponentially with both their
while more extensive lands were settled in the south we still see a very diameter and their height, differences in size are highly revealing of the
significant variation in the sizes of mounds even in the far north. And amount of labor invested in their construction. In the comparison be-
finally, it is very clear that despite competition through mound building tween Norway and Denmark, we focus only on mounds of 40 m in
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
diameter or more the truly monumental ones. These show a clear occur in Denmark only. Here, they are built with circular ramparts of soil
spatio-temporal pattern (Figs. 5 and 7): Over time, the size of the and timber, and the consumption of materials can be roughly calculated
monumental mounds built in Norway is decreasing from its apparent from their diameter, width, and average height, with the subtraction of
maximum with the Migration Period Raknehaugen (Skre, 1997, 26 31), gate openings (Sindbæk, Pedersen and Roesdahl 2014, 230-242). The
while the opposite is the case for the few Danish mounds even if the construction of these large fortresses seems almost exclusively to take
poorly dated Norwegian Herlaugshaugen (Stamnes 2015, 75-76), here place during a short period in the late 10th century, where 5 10 circular
assigned a date to 750 CE, may have been considerably younger or older. fortresses were built with a uniform design within Denmark and Scania
Among the monumental mounds of the Viking Age, we find the ship (Stott et al., 2019). However, a few further circular fortresses from the
burial mounds Oseberg, Gokstad and Tune ranging from 40-60 m in Viking Age are found on the Frisian-settled islands in the northernmost
ø –
diameter. (Br gger 1917, 187; Cannell et al., 2020, 1282 1283; Nic- parts of the Waddensee and may represent Danish rather than Frisian
olaysen 1882, 3; Bill 2017, 93). In Denmark the rather small Grydeh j, powers; these were in use throughout the Viking Age (Majchczack 2020,
next to the royal seat in Lejre, is the only known, monumental burial 271-273). Of the Danish ring fortresses, the three best preserved
— —
mound constructed from scratch before the Viking Age (Christensen ones Aggersborg, Fyrkat and Trelleborg have been included as ex-
et al., 2015; Andersen, 1995, 113); the monumental, 50 m wide Galgeh j amples, and estimates of their soil consumption based on rampart length
– 3
from around 600 CE is the cumulative result of several mound con- and profile show that they consumed 12,000 20,000 m of soil each
structions through more than a millenia (Jensen 2006, 191-192). It is (Sindbæk 2014, 230; Olsen Schmidt 1977, 53-71).
not until the late Viking Age, during the reign of Harald Gormsson (c. Earth ramparts were little used in Norway, where the natural
950 985 CE), that we see monumental mounds built again in topography often offered possibilities to construct well-protected hill-
Denmark by Harald, at his royal monument in Jelling (Holst et al., forts with a minimum of artificial fortifications. Fortified hilltops with
2013a, 2013b). The association of monumental mounds with royal sites dry stone walls are thus frequent, but the main bulk of them seem to date
in Denmark can also be seen in Norway in the cases of Borre and Jell- from the Roman and Migration period, with fewer, smaller, and
haug (Tonning et al., 2020; Draganits et al., 2015; Gustavsen et al., peripherally positioned hillforts being constructed in the Viking Age
2020; Pedersen et al. 2003, 310). Part of the reason for the lack of earlier (Ystgaard, 2014, Thuestad et al., 2016). These constructions being of a
monumental mounds in Denmark might be that another monumental much smaller scale than fortifications found in Denmark renders them
expression, the construction of very large ship-shaped stone settings, unusable for the current purpose.
fulfilled the same function (Bill 2020, 340-345).
4.1.4. Linear fortifications
4.1.2. Artificial canals It is the linear fortifications in the shape of ramparts or walls pro-
Artificial canals are a limited but interesting example of large-scale tecting larger areas that most clearly distinguishes Denmark from Nor-
construction projects. They did not appear much in the landscape and way in terms of labor investments in monumental constructions. These
thus formed a less visible symbol of power. But for their users they can be divided in defensive constructions around towns, and across
carried real-life advantages, improving safety and saving time by landscapes. Among the Danish Viking Age towns, at least Hedeby,
Å Å
avoiding lengthy and dangerous sailing routes around headlands; they rhus, and Ribe were surrounded by moats and ramparts. lborg may
may also have served military functions. Two examples are known, one be another such case. The date for the first fortifications at Hedeby and
of which is the poorly dated Spangereid Canal, placed at what was rhus is believed to be shortly before 960 CE; a similar building time
probably a regional power center throughout large parts of the Iron Age seems to apply also for Ribe, although the evidence here also allows for
(Grimm 2010, 117-121). The canal made it possible to get safely from an earlier construction (Croix, Gundersen et al., 2019, 2). Estimates of
the southern to the western coast of Norway. Constructing the canal their volumes are difficult due to limited knowledge of their construc-
probably required the digging and removal of more than 4000 m of soil tion, but the minimum 800 m long Ribe fortification required the con-
3 Å
under difficult conditions and securing its sides with timber. The only sumption of c 6400 m of turf; the rhus fortification measured a
other known canal in the research area is the Kanhave canal from Sams minimum of 900 m (Jantzen, C. 2013, 31), and the Hedeby one 1300 m
ø ø –
in Denmark (N rgård J rgensen 2002, 125 158). Being about 500 m (Fig. 6; Andersen 1998, 146-47). Based on Kurgaeva et al., 2022, the
3 3
long, it required the removal of almost 6500 m of soil, plus the appli- volume of this rampart can be calculated to more than 100,000 m .
cation of the necessary woodwork to secure its sides. It was constructed These investments in securing towns and trade are thus comparable in
in 726 CE and made possible the control of access to the southwestern size, or exceeding, those of the fortresses mentioned above.
part of the inner Danish waters. Linear ramparts, protecting larger areas or entire landscapes, are
Artificial roads and bridges are very similar types of constructions of well known from Iron Age Denmark, where they daters from the Roman
monumental character. From Ravning Enge near Jelling in Denmark, a Iron Age onwards. Early on they are mostly found on Jutland, but later
large wooden bridge, contemporary with the Jelling monuments, exists they are concentrated in the border regions to the south, at the narrow
(Schou J rgensen 1997) while a large artificially constructed road from land bridge connecting the Jutland Peninsula to the Continent, and on
the 8th century has been investigated at Nybro in Western Jutland the islands of Lolland and Falster in the southeast corner of present-day
(Ravn, 1999, Frandsen, 1999). These are, too, evidence of large con- Denmark. The defense of Jutland, the Dannevirke wall, was created in
struction efforts, but being mainly based on timber, they have not been several successive steps, starting perhaps as early as in the 5th century
included in the analyses; nor has timber-built sea route blockages, a CE, but with clear phases of development in the 8th and the 10th cen-
well-known phenomenon in Denmark already from the Roman Iron Age turies CE, respectively (Tummuscheit Witte, 2018, 70). Only three
ø ø
onwards (N rgård J rgensen 2002). selected sections and building phases are included in this study to
exemplify the scale of the works, as there are many open questions
4.1.3. Fortresses concerning the construction history of this complex. These constructions
Fortresses are likewise large constructions, dictated by function. dwarf those of most other earthworks, with volumes used in the indi-
Fortresses are offensive as well as defensive structures since they can be vidual phases ranging from over 30,000 to an astonishing 450,000 m in
used to control as well as to protect landscapes. More recently, re- individual building phases.
searchers have increasingly emphasized the fortresses role as evidence On Lolland the Hejrede Rampart, with a total length of c.1.5 km,
of the establishment of centralized power, rather than of local defense together with lakes and wetlands, protected a 5 km large area at the
(Olausson, 2009, 37). As with the mounds, they are highly visible ob- center of the island. The volume of the earthworks can be estimated to c.
jects, well suited to project power. In our study region large fortresses 20,000 m from the available description and finds indicate that it was
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
Fig. 6. Section through the rampart surrounding the Viking Age town of Hedeby, as recorded through LiDAR and coring. Sections, in combination with length, allows
for the approximate calculation of volume, and do also allow for the identification of different building phases. The major construction phase for the Hedeby rampart
possibly erected in the mid-6th century (Poulsen 1999, 9-14). outproduced them in terms of the scale of the projects, but it is notice-
Further east a fortification called Virket is found centrally on the able that they mainly invested in linear fortifications, not mounds. These
island of Falster. It is undated but is believed to be from about 500 CE. A fortifications are situated in the southern parts of Denmark, bordering
semicircular rampart, with a length of c. 1300 m, encloses together with the Continent. This indicates that rather than internal competition it was
2 &
lakes and wetlands an area of c. 1 km (Rasmussen Lindegaard Ras- external threat that motivated earthwork investments in Denmark. This
mussen 2019, 273-277). The amount of soil in its construction can be parallels, and accords with, Charles Tilly s (1985, 1992) argument that
3 ’
calculated to a modest 6000 m . It lies, however, in close proximity to a external threats motivated the early modern state s internal pac-
large fortress, Trygge slot, the earlier phases of which recently have ification domestic support and resources were needed to address the
provided radiocarbon dates from the period 900 to 1200 CE. If the two threat of an external enemy.
earthworks are combined, they would form a very substantial The evidence thus points to more workforce invested locally on a
– –
construction. small scale in mound construction in Norway in the Viking Age than in
Linear fortifications are almost as absent in Norway as fortresses. The Denmark and of more workforce invested regionally on a large scale in
only known example dating back to Viking Age or earlier is a rampart Denmark in the Viking Age than in Norway. The extraordinary activity
constructed in the first half of the 11th century CE to protect the town during the reign of Harald Gormsson (c. 950 985 CE) is unusual not so
and stronghold Sarpsborg (Johannesen and Eriksson, 2015, 140; Buck- much in its volume because exponential growth of construction vol-
3 —
holm, 2003). Its volume can be estimated to be 8450 m . umes is the trend in Denmark but in its variance. Although the
improvement of the Dannevirke fortification dominates the construction
4.1.5. Discussion on earthworks and the social pyramid activity, Harald also commands resources being invested in fortresses
In Fig. 7, the volumes of the selected major earthworks from the and town fortifications (more than shown here) and even in mounds,
Migration Period and Late Iron Age Norway and Denmark are shown which at his time are almost anachronistic. Harald, who claims his
against a time axis. The comparison, which is using an exponential scale uniqueness on his own runestone ( the Harald who won all of Denmark,
for the volumes, clearly demonstrates a decreasing trend over time in and Norway, and made the Danes Christian ) also appears to be of a new
Norway for investments in monumental earthworks, while the opposite order in terms of his ability to command workforces for large con-
is the case for Denmark. From showing a significant capacity to build struction projects.
monumental mounds in the early part of the period, Norwegian con-
structors ceased to initiate large scale works from around 700 CE, as far
as preserved remains can attest. Their Danish counterparts continuously
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
4.2. Runestones: Contemporary written evidence of the social pyramid Searches identified 124 relevant stones in Denmark and 49 in Norway
(Tables SM5). Of these, however, 13 stones from Denmark and 3 from
Runestone inscriptions in Viking Age Scandinavia provide the only Norway present insufficient information to be used in the analyses but
extensive textual source prior to 1050, and variously provide details on, are included in the tables. This is because only runestones in which at
inter alia, the sponsors of the stones, reasons for their commission, who least a sponsor or a dedicatee was indicated are taken into further sta-
they were dedicated to and in which region they were erected. Because tistical account.
of the robustness of the material, critical inscribed information has The chronological distribution is broadly similar in both regions,
survived for centuries, to our present day, unlike many other written with the main bulk of runestones being erected in the decades around
sources. Furthermore, since the runic inscriptions in stones could not be and shortly after 1000 CE (Fig. 9). There are some differences, however.
changed or adapted by various authors through rewriting, they are less In the more numerous material from Denmark it is clear to see that the
prone to bias. Linguistic, legal, and literary scholars have turned to the rise of memorial stones started already around 900, something not
runestones for information and insight into [the] intellectual culture, visible in the Norwegian material. Furthermore, the runestone tradition
mentalities and society (Williams, 2008, 281; see also Barnes, 2008, seems to have a slightly longer life in Norway, compared to Denmark.
and Friðriksdottir, 2020). In particular, runestones with personal com- This might, however, rest more on dating issues than on a true difference
memorations are a rich sociological source as they provide names, re- between the two regions.
lationships, and social positions. The runestones indicate the presence of hierarchies, and degrees of
The runestones were a significant investment of resources, centralized control, particularly when considered in tandem with our
demanding skilled craftspeople, and thus an important statement and findings on the growing extent of control and coordination over exten-
signifier of the sponsors considerable wealth and status. Looking sive human labor (discussed above). This can be traced by looking at the
through the prism of eliciting the character of the social pyramid, in language used on the stones. More usage of different ranks or even the
“ ”
comparing Norway and Denmark, the runestones are revealing. title king hints at a more stratified society, in which such words were
Here we draw on Late Iron Age runestones with readable inscriptions deemed necessary to use. Furthermore, we suggest that the runestones in
that include information about the sponsor and/or the dedicatees, Denmark provide further evidence of loyalties that transcended kinship
registered in the Scandinavian Runic-text Database for the Norwegian as the organizing principle of social relations. This is reflected in the use
stones and the Danske Runeindskrifter database from the University of of, in addition to kinship relations, hierarchical as well as peer-oriented
Copenhagen for the stones situated in Denmark. The spatial distribu- social labels on the Danish runestones. Conversely, Norway is shown to
tion of these stones which do not deviate significantly from the dis- be a more decentralized, clan-based society, with kin relations almost
tribution of all Late Iron Age runestones from the two study areas is the sole basis of runestone dedications. Less definitive, and more in the
mapped in Fig. 8. Dating runestones is a delicate and still highly debated way of suggestive findings, we can observe hints of wealth differences,
topic (see Stoklund, 1991; Imer, 2015). Since archaeometric methods, and differences in women s status, between Denmark and Norway.
such as radiocarbon dating, do not work on runestones, their production
time is determined by links to mentioned historical events (relative 4.2.1. Social status and runestones
chronology, see Sawyer, 2000, 28f) or typology like language or style. Though the use of runestones is varied, three primary purposes are
apparent, depending on the stone: the remembrance of a person; the
presentation of status of the noted individuals; and the documentation of
8 =
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
Fig. 8. (A) Norwegian runestones included in the study. Those relating the family roles of the sponsor/commemorate are marked with red. Those relating no in-
formation about any roles are marked with black. Map: LMS, SN, JB. (B) Danish runestones included in the study. Those relating the family roles of the sponsor/
commemorate are marked with red, those relating any other role are marked with blue. Lilac marks inscriptions both mentioning family and other roles, while those
relating no information about any roles are marked with black. Map: LMS, SN, JB. Note: not to same scale as Fig. 8A.
The Norwegian cases display dedications based almost entirely on The Danish material is quite different: along with kin affiliations like
kin relations. There are no titled individuals, be it lord, lady, thegn or mother, father, brother, son, husband, and cousin, we also observe sig-
“ ”
otherwise appearing on Norwegian runestones. This is significant, as nificant numbers of titles. These include, Lord ( drotinn ), Lady
“ ” “ ” “ ” “ ”
these stones represented an important status symbol, and titles pre- ( drottning ) and King ( konungr ). The title helpmate or ON brytja
“ ” “ þ ”
sumably would have been expressed if they had been of core impor- is found on one stone (Sjy 14) and retainer or heim egi on two (Sl 1,
“ þ ” “
tance. Almost certainly, Norwegian Scandinavians saw kinship ties as Sl 3). The word heim egi can be translated as a follower or home-
” 10
preeminent and more important than loyalty to any rulers such as they receiver, meaning someone who received a home from someone else.
may have existed. The terms that appear on these Norwegian runestones There is as well the title of captain to be found in Denmark (Sl 1,
“ ” “ ”
are father, mother, brother, son, daughter, nephew, husband, and wife. stýrmaðr ) as well as seaman (Mjy 23, skipara ), also illustrating hi-
“ ”
It is revelatory that only kin-blood ties, redolent of a clan society, erarchy, and goði (Fyn 2, Fyn 26) which implies a person having a role
appear. as religious specialist (Sundqvist, 2020: 796).
“þ ”
Of particular interest is the title egn (thegn) which appears
frequently on the stones from Denmark, some 12 times and in
geographically dispersed ways. The first mentions of thegns are on
The Galteland runestone, from Evje in South Norway, is a partial exception;
– –
runestones dated to the period 900 950 CE (Fyn 26) and 900 965 (Njy
translated it reads as, "Arnstein raised this stone in memory of Bjor, his son; he
died in the army when Knut attacked England. God is one." The stone does not
mention a title but does allude to one, namely Knut the Great, who invaded
England in 1015 CE. Apart from being king of Denmark and England, he was
10 “ ” “þ ” “ ”
also the overlord of Norway from 1028 to his death in 1035. It is also possible Based on the Icelandic word heim for home and egi for receiver. See:
= & =
became ruler also of Norway. 2001.
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
Fig. 8. (continued).
∑ ∑
= =
Fig. 9. The cumulative, chronological distribution of runestones from Denmark ( 124) and Norway ( 49) in the study. The horizontal axis represents 20-year
dating intervals CE, vertical axis the number of runestone inscriptions that may be expected to date from each interval. Every inscription counts as 1 in the
histogram, and this value has been distributed evenly over dating intervals that the individual may belong to. See also Fig. 2. Graphic: SN.
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
46) respectively. The title is translated from Old Norse as tributary, labels that are describing an equal relation between the sponsor and the
— —
retainer, liegeman, and freeman. According to Anglo-Saxon sources, in commemorated and includes the substantives felagi companion and
England the thegn ranked between a freeman and a hereditary noble. frændi, meaning friend, companion, or family member.
“ ” ’
The word drengr (dreng) has possibly a similar meaning to thegn but is Women s status vis-a-vis men in Scandinavian societies is revealing
not as frequently found on West-Scandinavian runestones. It appears six of the structure of the social pyramid. When we consider the question of
times on stones all over Denmark and can be translated from Old Norse comparative women s status across Norway and Denmark the rune-
¨ 12
(Zoega 2004) as bold, goodhearted or a young unmarried man. Ac- stones can be suggestive of a somewhat higher status for women in
cording to Sawyer (2000) thegns were mostly commemorated by their Denmark compared to the southwestern part of Norway, though clearly
sons, whereas drengs, for example, were more often commemorated by tentative. If we consider the numbers of sponsors of runestones who are
their parents or brothers. This could indicate that thegns were older women or jointly female and male sponsorship being a marker of
— ’
persons. The text on runestones, regarding thegns, generally includes agency, as well as of wealth and status women s presence is propor-
“ þ ”
the title in a positive context, such as he was a very good egn (see, for tionately more marked in Denmark than in Norway.
example, stones Njy 46, Njy 65 and Mjy 47). This repeatedly appearing In the case of the Norwegian runestones, of those 31 that are intact
“ ” “ ”
epithet very good was interpreted as meaning of high birth which enough for clear identification, 74 % were erected by men for men, 10 %
could underline the closeness to the king (Sawyer, 2000, 103). As well as by men for women, 10 % by women for men and 3 % by women for
being geographically dispersed in Denmark, references to the thegn women. Looking at the Danish percentages (of 97 stones), 68 % are male
were not temporally isolated, although only found in the more for male, 7 % male for female, 17 % female for male and 1 % female for
numerous material dated after 900 CE. female. Among the inscriptions with insufficient information to identify
There has been extensive scholarly discussion of the role of the sponsors and commemorates, only male names have been identified. It is
thegn. Scholars divide as to whether thegns were simply agents of a king significant that a certain group of women had the resources and status to
or if they had some level of autonomy (see overview in Sukhino-Kho- be able to commission such runestones, reflecting not only the sponsors
menko, 2019; see also Strid, 1987). That discussion may miss a key but what had to be a wider recognition of at least select women. Of note
consideration. The thegn status (which was clearly prized) suggests that here, however, is that that capacity appears more marked in Denmark
Denmark progressively overcame the singular focus on clan and blood than in Norway.
ties as the dominant principle of human organization. Rather than The length of texts is also weighted to Denmark when it comes to
asking if the thegns were simply agents of a king (suggested in the Old women, as well as overall. In Denmark runestones of women sponsors
“ ”
Norse translation of tributary ) or autonomous (suggested in the for men are an average of 18.3 words long, while in the Norwegian case
“ ”
translation of freeman ), the relationship was likely dialectical and the average is 12.3 words. Stones of women sponsors dedicated for
mutually dependent. More centralized authority strengthened the women are 15 words on average in both the Norwegian and Danish
thegns by limiting localized clan loyalties, while centralized authority, cases, though here the numbers of stones are small, especially in the
such as a king, was strengthened by the thegns even if, as seems likely, Norwegian case.
events conspired to favor the king or the thegns as the more dominant at In sum, the runestones point to a steeper social pyramid in Denmark,
different times. compared to Norway, in the notable salience of titled ranks. The role of
In the Danelaw, there are indications that thegns had considerable thegns is of particular note, but the titles generally indicate that Danish
— ’
authority. Thegns under the Wantage Code King Æthelred s third law Viking Age society had transcended (though not replaced) the loyalties
code, issued in Wantage c. 997 CE, that gave royal imprimatur of of a clan society. Viewed together with the data of archaeological traces
— “ ”
customary court practices in the five boroughs of the Danelaw had a of centralizing authority and command and control, we can infer that
more central role compared to those under English law. Juries of twelve this hierarchy developed progressively over the Viking period. But the
“ ”
thegns had the power to apprehend tihtbysig ( men of bad repute ) and runestones reveal more, if less definitively, regarding other factors that
to oversee the most important criminal cases. When the king s reeve one would indeed associate with a socially steeper pyramid and
sought a charge of theft, the thegns determined who is tihty sig or not, centralizing authority. Women s status and wealth, at least among the
and then executed arrests. The Wantage Code stated that no-one shall higher status strata, may be, by this measure, more marked among the
have jurisdiction over a thegn of the king except the king himself. Yet, Danes in comparison to the more decentralized Norwegians.
thegns could also check the power of the royal reeve (Stattel, 2022;
Sukhino-Khomenko, 2020; Abrams, 2008, cited in Stattel). Did the 5. Discussion
Danelaw thegns status reflect, or impact, the status of thegns in
Denmark? This is a matter of debate, but Danelaw may provide a source The observations indicate that interpersonal violence in Norway was
for fleshing out the role of thegns in Denmark (see discussions in more widespread than in Denmark, both as a latent threat (demon-
Sukhino-Khomenko, 2020; Abrams, 2012; van Houts, 2011 cited in strated by the importance of carrying weapons expressed in the burial
Stattel; Hadley 2000; Neff, 1989). ritual) and as a reality (expressed in the type and frequency of trauma
“ ”
Finally, among the hierarchical social labels, there is the title king caused by fighting on Norwegian skeletons and the general abundance
to be found on Danish runestones. In two cases the sponsor of the stone is of weapons in society). They also indicate that the social pyramid in
a king, King Gorm and King Harald, respectively (Sjy 10, Sjy 11) Denmark was steeper and more complex than in Norway, especially in
“ ” ’ Þ
( konungr ). In King Gorm s case, it is in memory of his wife yrve. For the Late Iron Age and the Viking Age. Large earthworks in Denmark and
King Harald, it is in memory of his parents, Gorm and yrve and, in in Norway indicate some degree of power concentration in both regions
addition, he announces himself as king over Denmark and Norway. On before the Viking Age. In Norway it seems to be declining in the Viking
another stone the title king is used when a mother is referring to her son, Age, while increasing sharply in Denmark, peaking during the reign of
King Sigtryggr. Harald Gormsson in the third quarter of the 10th century. The rune-
There is also a group of social labels used on the Danish runestones stones too point to a steeper social pyramid in Denmark, compared to
that are not hierarchical, and which we term peer oriented. These are Norway, in the notable salience of titled ranks.
The findings concerning women s comparative status between Nor-
way and Denmark are not uniform. Runestone findings may suggest that
11 ¨ women s status in Viking Age Denmark was better in the aggregate than
See the Old Icelandic Dictionary (Zoega 2004), the Oxford English
in those parts of Norway illuminated by the runestones.
Dictionary.
12 “ ” On the other hand, the similarities between females and males in
onp.php?o15194, visited 7.1.2022. See, however, also Strid, 1987. Norway in the nature of the trauma related injuries and in terms of
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
health outcomes reported in other studies do not suggest marked status These sociological findings, and the judgment that we can speak of
differences (Buckwalter and Baten, 2019, 190). Health is also a recog- two societies, accords with recent genetic studies indicating that the
nized parameter which is often considered when discussing trauma populations of Viking Age Denmark and Norway represented slightly,
(Martin and Anderson 2014). We are not aware of data at present to but distinctly different genetic pools (Margaryan et al., 2020). The
compare the parallel health outcomes in Denmark. Current research on relationship between the social and genetic findings is manifest and
female health during the Nordic Viking and Medieval period suggests illuminating. But this does not mean the sociological and genetic di-
that there was no significant distinction between the health of rural mensions are completely congruent: we can observe independent so-
women and men during this period, indicating that women had similar ciological effects. In the centuries leading up to the Viking period, the
status (Buckwalter and Baten, 2019, 190). Even though health param- genetic differences are even more distinct. Yet, in that same pre-Viking
eters are not part of this study, it is a significant addition to further period, the differences in the complexity of social organization, from
discussions about social status during the Late Iron and Viking Age. north to south, as measured by the comparative extent of earthworks,
The analysis on the level of weapon related injuries, numbers of are not as marked as in the Viking period. Conversely, in the Viking
weapons and social organization also provides a basis for comparison. period, we have genetic evidence of a degree of mixing, though the
Violence during the Late Iron and Viking Age has often been associated Norwegians and the Danes are still clearly different groupings. However,
with male agency. However, similarities in trauma etiology between the differences in this period in, inter alia, their degree of organizational
Norwegian women and men may be indicative of women being a real complexity, are marked, indeed. It should be noted that these varying
threat to the perpetrators they were treated as brutally as any other patterns also highlight the fallacy of attributing patterns of violence to
enemy and thus telling of their influence on the political and social genetic factors as such.
arena.
6. Conclusion
5.1. Denmark and Norway were distinct societies
We began by asking what does a socially bounded, but otherwise
There is a growth in the Viking period, from north to south, from random, selection of skeletons showing such an excessive presence of
Norway to Denmark, and over time, in the amount of labor invested in violence suggest? More specifically, we asked what can we learn of
large earthworks, and a parallel increase in the complexity of the social Viking societies through the lens of violence? It turns out that, in
organization as reflected in the geographical distribution of runestones comparative perspective and contextualized with other variables and
and the titles and social categories used on them. In general, in Norway, features, it reveals quite a lot. Methodologically, we find that by asso-
the size of earthworks is declining after about 600, while they are ciating different features, notably skeletal trauma, weaponry, graves,
rapidly increasing in Denmark, and soon are surpassing those in Norway the built environment, and runestones analytically juxtaposed with
by orders of magnitude. cross-historical patterns of violence we have the initial puzzle pieces to
It is notable that the difference between north and south was less help reveal a larger picture, geographically and diachronically. The
marked in the centuries around 600 CE, compared to the Viking Age. At approach can help us, at least partially, pull back the veil on processes
that time monumental constructions in the shape of very large burial not revealed by contemporaneously recorded history.
mounds peaked in the north. They were still, however, dwarfed by the The lens of violence reveals, to start, Scandinavian societies with
investments in fortifications in the south. distinct social and political configurations. The confirmation of patterns
In the following Viking Age, however, the differences became that are cross-historical in their significance highlights the significance
sharply marked. Although large, monumental mounds become more of violence in ascertaining social patterns and institutions. Because the
frequent in the north, they also become less prominent. In contrast, in fear, act and restraint of violence are an integral part of the human
the south monumental mounds and fortresses are in the 10th century CE condition, violence becomes a critical, independent feature shaping
supplementing even more extensive earthworks on walls. This activity social relations and institutions. In the Scandinavian case, it is signifi-
takes place during the rule of Harald Bluetooth, the first Danish king cant that violence leaves its mark (literally) on some of the most
claiming to be ruler of all of Denmark – and conqueror of Norway – prominent evidence of material culture regarding the Viking Age. We
ruling in the third quarter of the 10th century CE. Harald ’ s reign thus see it in weapons, archaeological evidence associated with graves, for-
stands out as exceptional in terms of the sheer volume of earthworks, an tifications, literary sources, and embodied in skeletal trauma. This is
indication that he was able to command hitherto unseen, massive extent symbolically and substantively telling and of methodological signifi-
of resources. cance as well.
The pronounced differences between Denmark and Norway are also Even if violence is episodic, from the dyadic to clan to kingdom
revealed in the comparative scope of violence. This is reflected in the levels, the threat of violence is constant. The concern with violence is,
relative levels of trauma and in the kinds of trauma. These sharp differ- consequently, a continual animating feature of social relations and
ences are made further evident by the extraordinary gap in the extent of institutional arrangements. The concern becomes, directly or indirectly,
weaponry, made conspicuous in the relative proportion of graves with a central nexus in the forming of social and economic, as well as polit-
weaponry between the two regions. Here, one must highlight the lopsided ical, relations. The key question is, historically, explaining the diminu-
presence of swords in Norway, a weapon unambiguously about personal tion of violence to levels low enough for civic and contractual ties to
violence, defensively or offensively. The correlation between the handgun prosper. The circumstance of civility is the anomaly to be explained.
and homicide in our present global context, noted earlier, echoes the
place of the sword in the Viking era (among others). Denmark was 6.1. Broader inferences
evidently a civilianized space to a surprising degree for the time. Norway,
conversely, displayed very high levels of violence, and fear of violence is Violence as a lens is revelatory not only in terms of quantitative
evident in the extent people armed themselves. These differences in patterns of trauma, but in terms of the kinds of trauma that are evident.
patterns of violence, and whether the spaces were largely civilianized or This is brought into focus in the comparison of the similarities and types
not, reinforce the conclusion of distinctly different societies. of weapons-related injuries between Late Iron and Viking Age Norway
Although it could be claimed that each of these developments can be and Denmark. An important parameter regards the kinds of trauma,
explained individually, the concurrent direction and content of these even on a local level, is the degree of steepness of the social pyramid.
changes indicate that they have a shared dimension in reflecting the When violence is not performed by a central authority, one can expect to
progressive steepness of the social pyramid, with the pyramid being observe a less uniform type of violence on the human remains. This is
increasingly steeper in the south, compared to the north. what we observe in the Norwegian material from the Late Iron Age. In
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
Denmark, the trauma related injuries are generally associated with pu- civilianization is a precondition for the gradual shift from subjects to
nitive actions, instead of interpersonal violence, because of their citizens, with questions of agency at its core. The relation of rulers and
reflection of standardized sets of punishment. ruled is fundamentally different from a solely coercive relationship
In Norway, the comparison on this matter is borne out not only vis- (even if coercion, or its threat, is never absent). So, if we witness a
a-vis Denmark. A direct relation is evident between the identified types relatively civilianized environment, what can we deduce regarding
of weapon-related injuries on skeletons buried at locations considered to (some) subjects and their rights? What nascent notions of citizenship
be central and peripheral during the Late Iron and Viking Age, as well as may be apparent? Can we read sources in a new light with this infor-
“ ”
in the quantity of weapons identified in these contexts. One condition for mation? Civilianized environments suggest that there were public
understanding the identified violence on Norwegian human remains in mechanisms of mediating conflicts (Weber, 1962). Can we look at
— —
this study may have a connection with a general unstable reciprocal existing sources archaeological, textual and the like to see if we can
relationship between central and peripheral farms caused by the get any hints of what those mechanisms were?
“ ”
extensive foreign raids and trade recorded in the beginning of the 9th It would be a considerable stretch to suggest that citizenship had
century forward (Winroth, 2012, 26). Unbalanced access to prestigious emerged in Viking Denmark. However, the institution of thegns may
“ ” —
goods between central farms and further redistribution of such to its hint that a proto-citizenship was emerging in Denmark akin to the
“ ” ’
peripheral subjects may have caused competition and unrest. case in late medieval Europe where the proprietorship of landowners
vis-a-vis the monarch laid the ground for a civic status (starting with a
6.2. Perspectives privileged elite) (Pocock, 2016). At least, this possibility invites further
exploration and is congruent with the other factors we are seeing
The methodology applied in this article — using the lens of violence, here — notably the civilianization of social space and the progressive
seeking covariants and drawing on knowledge of social patterns that steepening of the social pyramid. (The intertwining of kinship and
cross time and geography — can hold promise for further, novel research incipient civic principles is the prevalent norm, not the exception, in the
on the Vikings, and beyond. For example, it can be propitious for adding historical emergence of citizenship, broadly understood, going back as
components to further enlighten on questions of development of far as the Ancient Near East some 4,500 years ago [Jacobson and Cinalli,
different Viking Age societies; integrating disparate areas of Viking 2023; von Dassow, 2018; and Grosby, 2018]).
“ ”
research; and for shedding light on other temporal and geographic Indeed, the violence lens in this case goes beyond the objective
contexts, for example in Sweden, Iceland, and pre-Viking Scandinavia. conditions associated with lessened violence, or even with agency, to
Questions of comparative development can be further elucidated subjective matters. Notably, the modest presence of weapons in
through layering additional features; factors that on their own may be Denmark, relative to Norway, suggests the subjective experience of
open to broad interpretation but in association with otherwise disparate Viking Danes would have been relatively relaxed. People were not
indicators can be revealing. heavily armed which, combined with the evidence of relatively mod-
Here, as a case in point, the growing research on Viking Age urban erate extent of skeletal trauma, we can reasonably deduce even sub-
“ ”
development is of interest (see discussion in Lund and Sindbæk, 2021). jective qualities on a everyday basis. That condition, in turn, would
In the light of the findings discussed in this article, it is intriguing that have fundamentally shaped social, economic, and even civic life. Thus,
such urban development was significantly more marked in Denmark to some extent, subjective as well as objective qualities of everyday life
than in Norway. A critical condition for cities to develop is a level of can be ascertained through the lens of violence. These developments in
authority that can ensure a modicum of security and civic peace. Cities Viking Denmark are striking, insofar as they are taking place mostly
are marked by the emergence of ties that are contractual and civic — ties before the establishment of Christianity in Denmark and anticipates
that complement and transcend kinship-based relationships and net- developments that would take place later elsewhere in (Christian)
works. Such contractual ties demand legal enforcement. Cities, in turn, Europe. That, in turn, provokes historical and sociological questions
have traditionally served as civic incubators for promoting norms of regarding the Vikings, and for theoretical understanding of state
civility and as loci in the development of citizenship and civic structures development more broadly. The effects of Christianisation on the levels
(see, e.g., Weber, 1962; Prak, 2018). So, the relative urban presence in of internal violence would indeed be relevant in this context.
Denmark and Norway is highly suggestive vis-a-vis this article ’ s findings Drawing on violence as a lens to societies, we can extend the meth-
regarding the social pyramid and patterns of violence. One could layer odological approach to shed light on other temporal and geographic
additional components into such analysis, helping tell a richer, multi- contexts. This goes beyond the Viking era but of particular interest in
dimensional story by, for example, drawing out the implications of this context would be regarding Sweden and Iceland. An initial, tenta-
urban trade networks, regional and international ties and the authority tive reading of evidence presented by Baten et al. would suggest that
of monarchs and powerful chieftains. Sweden leans to the Danish form, in terms of relatively low trauma and a
Suggestive indicators of different levels of wealth between Norway more hierarchical and centralized social pyramid (Baten et al., 2021).
and Denmark are also worthy of further investigation. Greater relative Viking Iceland provides, however, a different kind of case: skeletal
wealth would be expected of a society with a steeper social pyramid, also trauma appears very limited in proportional terms, suggesting limited
reflected in evidence of more extensive, developing urban centers in interpersonal violence. On the other hand, weapons appear to have been
Denmark. These hints of wealth differences come out of the earthworks available in abundance in Iceland, with weapons found in 66 of 316
and runestones. The comparative scale of earthworks and the financial graves only 15 of them with swords, however (Friðriksson 2016, 619-
commitment that they demanded is one clue. The association of wealth, 631). Can we elicit what intervening factors were limiting levels of
earthworks and cities is palpable in the presence of the defenses around violence such as, for example, the highly dispersed character of Icelandic
urban centers. Viking Age settlement? Likewise, on a similar basis such questions could
On integrating disparate areas of research, Lund and Sindbæk (2021) be asked temporally, notably to the pre-Viking period in Scandinavia.
note how Viking Age archaeology tends to focus “ either on social orga- Another question of interest, in the light of the findings here on the
nization or on social identity, personhood and ontology ” and merging social pyramid, is regarding the ability to project power abroad. Can we
“ ”
these strands can enrich understanding (emphasis in original). Similarly, discern different patterns of force projection and overseas warfare
they suggest that social organizational research can overlook questions between the more centralized Danes and the more decentralized Nor-
of agency and the “ complexity of entanglements of gender, identity and wegians? It is suggestive, in this regard, that the mostly Norwegian Vi-
status that took place in relation to the elite. ” Even though in this article kings in the northern parts of the British Isles controlled small, insular,
the emphasis is on comparative social organizational development, the and coastal territories around Scotland, with a potentially late estab-
promise of eliciting related matters of agency is implicit. For example, lishment of an earldom (Barret, 2008). The Danes, on the other hand,
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o g y 75 (2024) 101605
could coordinate the Great Army even if it was not a unified army as improved the article. We also want to thank our editor at JAA, Meghan
such but based on the coordinated command of several kings, jarls, and Howey, for her persistence and endurance along the way.
other noblemen (Raffield, 2020) and occupy swathes of England, in
what came to be called the Danelaw. Appendix A. Supplementary data
Methodologically, we can also think of the Danelaw as a potential
ered to have been diverse demographically and not politically unified, org/10.1016/j.jaa.2024.101605.
but the elite was Danish (Jones, 1965, cited in Stattel, 2022). But there
were socio-legal attributes that appear to have characterized the References
Danelaw. The Danelaw had many more free peasants or sokemen,
Abbasi, H.R., Bazdar, M., Halvaee, A., 2007. Effect of phosphorus as an alloying element
compared to Anglo-Saxon territories, and they could access the courts,
on microstructure and mechanical properties of pearlitic gray cast iron. Mater. Sci.
partake in land markets, and were organized through territorial units,
– –
the hundred, and not through the feudal manor. Punishments were
Abrams, L., 2008. King Edgar and the men of the Danelaw. In: Scragg, D. (Ed.), Edgar,
– –
King of the English 959 975. Boydell, Woodbridge, pp. 171 191.
harsh, and executions were apparently more liberally dispensed
Abrams, L., 2012. Diaspora and identity in the Viking Age. Early Medieval Europe 20 (1),
compared to the Anglo-Saxons. The mechanisms for pacification, and
monopolizing the means of violence by the elite, are apparent. Fines
Abrams, E.M., Bolland, T.W., 1999. Architectural energetics, ancient monuments, and
org/10.1023/A:1021921513937.
collective and territorial, in part at least bypassing social organization
Allen, M.W., Jones, T.L., 2014. Violence and Warfare Among Hunter-Gatherers.
based on kinship. Juries may be dated to this period and point to a
Routledge, Walnut Creek.
– ø ø
developed legal system (Stattel, 2022; Hadley, 2000; Neff, 1989). Andersen, S.W., 1995. Lejre skibssætninger, vikingegrave, Grydeh j. Aarb ger for
Nordisk Oldkyndighed og Historie 1993, 7 142.
The Danelaw is a topic of debate and evidence is partial, but
ø –
Andersen, H.H., 1998. Danevirke og Kovirke. Arkæologiske unders gelser 1861 1993.
intriguing questions can be explored. The socio-legal attributes of the
Moesgård Museums Skrifter. Jutland Archaeological Society, H jbjerg.
Danelaw fit with what one would expect from an authority (or author- Arcini, C., 2018. The Viking Age. A Time of Many Faces. Oxbow Books, Oxford.
´ ´ ´ ´
Arevalo de Leon, B., 2018. Del Estado violento al Ejercito político: violencia, formacion
ities) seeking to monopolize the means of violence (including harsh
´ –
estatal y ejercito en Guatemala, 1500 1963. PhD diss.. Utrecht University.
rule); supplementing kinship-based society with legal rules; establishing
Arkush, E., Ikehara Tsukayama, H.C., 2019. Pucarani: defensive monumentality and
ties vertically through society, reinforcing kings and earls; and gener- political leadership in the late pre-Columbian Andes. J. Anthropol. Archaeol. 53,
66 81.
ating new strata to make this all work, notably in the thegns. Such
Arkush, E., Tung, T.A., 2013. Patterns of war in the Andes from the Archaic to the late
Danelaw characteristics show an affinity with our findings on a pro-
horizon: insights from settlement patterns and cranial trauma. J. Archaeol. Res. 21
gressively steeper social pyramid in Denmark. The Danelaw, in other –
Barnes, M.P., 2008. The Scandinavian Languages in the Viking Age. In: Brink, S.,
words, may potentially help us broaden our understanding of Danish
Price, N. (Eds.), The Viking World. Routledge, London, pp. 274 280.
society itself.
Barret, J.H., 2008. The Norse in Scotland. In: Brink, S., Price, N. (Eds.), The Viking
In sum, the approach and findings presented in this article provide a –
World. Routledge, London, pp. 411 427.
rich vein, we believe, for exploring and eliciting Viking Age Scandina- Baten, J., Benati, G., Kjellstrom, A., 2021. Violence in the Viking World: New
Bioarchaeological Evidence. European Historical Economics Society (EHES) Working
vian social relations and institutions.
Papers 0206.
Baug, I., Skre, D., Heldal, T., Jansen, .J., 2018. The beginning of the Viking Age in the
Benedictow, O.J., 1996. The medieval demographic system of the Nordic countries,
second ed. Middelalderforlaget, Oslo.
– & –
Jan Bill: Writing review editing, Writing original draft, Visu-
Bennike, P., 1985. Palaeopathology of Danish Skeletons. A Comparative Study of
alization, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Formal anal- Demography, Disease and Injury. Akademisk Forlag, Copenhagen, Denmark.
– Bennike, P., Christoffersen, J., 1981. Et hoved kortere. Skalk 1981 (3), 10 13.
ysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. David Jacobson: Writing
ø ø
Berglund, B.I., 1996. Tj tta-riket: En arkeologisk unders kelse av maktforhold og
& –
review editing, Writing original draft, Supervision, Project admin-
sentrumsdannelser på Helgelandskysten fra Kr. f. Til 1700 e.Kr. UNIT,
istration, Methodology, Conceptualization. Susanne Nagel: Writing Vitenskapsmuseet, Fakultet for arkeologi og kulturhistorie.
& – Bill, J., 2017. Skipsgrav eller skipsgraver på Rolvs y? Om Tuneskipets
review editing, Writing original draft, Visualization, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Lisa Mariann
— st
Bill, J., 2020. The Ship Graves at Kormt and Beyond. In: Skre, D. (Ed.), Rulership in 1
Strand: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualiza- th
to 14 century Scandinavia. Royal graves and sites at Avaldsnes and beyond.
¨ ¨
Erganzungsbande zum Reallexikon der Germanischen Altertumskunde, De Gryter,
tion, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data
curation, Conceptualization.
B rsheim, R., Soltvedt, E.-I., Bårdseth, G.A., Bogarp, C., 2001. Gausel-utgravingene
11250/196738.
Declaration of competing interest
Bratrein, H.D., 2018. H vding, jarl, konge. Nord-Norges politiske historie i vikingtid. Ei
annerledes fortelling, Orkana akademisk, Stamsund.
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial ¨
Bratt, P., 2008. Makt uttryckt i jord och sten. Stora hogar och maktstrukturer i
¨ ¨
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence Malardalen under jarnåldern. Stockholm Studies in Archaeology 46. Stockholm
University, Stockholm.
the work reported in this paper.
Brink, S., 2008. Who were the Vikings? In: Brink, S., Price, N. (Eds.), The Viking World.
Routledge, London, pp. 4 7.
ø ø
Acknowledgements Br gger, A.W., 1917. Haugen. In: Br gger, A.W., Falk, Hjalmar, Schetelig, Haakon (Eds.),
Osebergfundet I. Den norske stat. Kristiania, pp. 123 164.
Buckholm, M.B., 2003. Jakten på Olavsvollen. Olavsvollen, Julen 2003. Borgarsyssel
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding
Museum, Sarpsborg.
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors, but David Buckwalter, M.L., Baten, J., 2019. Valkyries: Was gender equality high in the
Scandinavian periphery since Viking times? Evidence from enamel hypoplasia and
Jacobson benefited part of the project time from a Fulbright research
fellowship at PRIO. We are also grateful to the Viking Studies research
ehb.2019.05.007.
group at the University of Oslo for support, for exchanges on weapons Cannell, R.J.S., Bill, J., Macphail, R., 2020. Constructing and deconstructing the Gokstad
and violence with Nicholas Marsh, and for communications on the his-
Carver, M., 2005. Sutton Hoo Burial Ground of Kings? (repr. with revisions). British
tory of violence with Bernardo Arevalo, Gil Ben-Herut, Torkel Brekke,
Museum Press, London.
Thorgeir Kolshus, Larry Ray, Mateus Renno Santos, and Charles Stanish; —
Christensen, T., 1991. Lejre beyond legend the archaeological evidence. J. Danish
and on the Danelaw with Jake Stattel. Finally, we are grateful for the
valuable review comments that we received, and which decisively
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o gy 75 (2024) 101605
Christensen, T., Baastrup, M.P., Gelskov, S., Nielsen, J., 2015. Lejre bag myten: de Jarman, C.L., Biddle, M., Higham, T., Ramsey, C.B., 2018. The Viking great army in
Arkæologisk Selskab, Roskilde Museum H jbjerg. doi.org/10.15184/aqy.2017.196.
“ ”
Clastres, P., 2020. Society Against the State: Essays in Political Anthropology. Zone Jensen, J., 1979. Oldtidens samfund. Tiden indtil år 800 . Dansk Socialhistorie 1.
Books, New York. Gyldendal, Copenhagen.
ø ø –
Croix, S., Gundersen, E., Kristiansen, S., Olsen, J., Sindbæk, S., S vs , M., 2019. Dating Jensen, J., 2006. Danmarks Oldtid. Yngre Jernalder og Vikingetid 400 1050 e.Kr, second
earthwork fortifications: integrating five dating methods in Viking-age Ribe, ed. Gyldendal, Copenhagen.
´ ´
Dennis, A., Foote, P., Perkins, R. (Eds.), 1980. Laws of early Iceland. Gragas. The Codex Inscriptions and Skaldic Verse. The Boydell Press, Woodbridge.
´ ´
Regius of Gragas with material from other manuscripts: 1 (University of Manitoba Johannesen, L., Eriksson, J.-E. (Eds.), 2015. Faglig Program for Middelalderarkeologi.
Icelandic studies). University of Manitoba Press, Winnipeg. Riksantikvaren, Oslo, Byer, Sakrale Steder, Befestninger og Borger.
Draganits, E., Doneus, M., Gansum, T., Lars Gustavsen, E., Nau, C., Tonning, I., Jones, G., 1965. Early Territorial Organization in Northern England and its Bearing on
Trinks, W.N., 2015. The late Nordic Iron Age and Viking Age royal burial site of the Scandinavian Settlement. In: Small, A. (Ed.), The Fourth Viking Congress.
Borre in Norway: ALS- and GPR-based landscape reconstruction and harbour Brepols, Turnhout.
– ø – –
ø ´
10.1016/j.quaint.2014.04.045. Tiss kompleksets struktur og funktion. In: Jennbert, K., Andren, A., Raudvere, C.
¨ ¨
Eisner, M.P., 2003. Long-term historical trends in violent crime. Crime Justice 30, (Eds.), Plats och praxis: Studier av nordisk forkristen ritual, Vagar till Midgård 2.
– –
Eisner, M.P., 2014. From swords to words: does macro-level change in self-control J rgensen, L., 2009. Pre-Christian cult at aristocratic residences and settlement
– –
predict long-term variation in levels of homicide? Crime Justice 43 (1), 65 134. complexes in southern Scandinavia in the 3rd 10th centuries AD. In: von
¨ ¨
Elias, N., 1994. On the Process of Civilisation: Sociogenetic and Psychogenetic Phanomene des Religiosen im 1. Jahrtausend n. Chr. in Mittel- und Nordeuropa,
Investigations. Blackwell, Oxford. Kolloquien zur Vor- und Frühgeschichte 12. Habelt, Bonn, pp. 329 354.
Firth, H.W.B., 2012. Coercion, vengeance, feud and accommodation: Homicide in Kaptijn, E., 2010. Communality and power: irrigation in the Zerqa Triangle, Jordan.
– –
j.1468-0254.2012.00339.x. Kastholm, O.T., Margaryan, A., 2021. Reconstructing the Gerdrup Grave the story of an
— —
Frandsen, L.B., 1999. Nybro gamle bro et vejanlæg fra tidlig vikingetid. Mark og unusual Viking Age double grave in context and in the light of new analysis. Danish
– –
Friðriksdottir, J.K., 2020. Valkyrie: the women of the Viking world. Bloomsbury, London. Keeley, L.H., 1996. War Before Civilization: The Myth of the Peaceful Savage. Oxford
´ ´
Friðriksson, A., 2016. Viking burial practices in Iceland. In: Eldjarn, K., Friðriksson, A. Kibblewhite, M., Toth, G., Hermann, T., 2015. Predicting the preservation of cultural
´ ´ –
Reykjavík, pp. 579 640. org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.04.036.
´ ´ ´ –
Fulk, R.D., 2012. Eyvindr skaldaspillir Finnsson, Hakonarmal 6. In: Whaley, Diana (Ed.), Kjelland, A., 1996. Bygdebok for Lesja 1 3: Gards-Og Slektshistorie for Lesja. Lesja
Poetry from the Kings Sagas 1: From Mythical Times to c. 1035: 180. Skaldic Poetry kommune, Lesja.
of the Scandinavian Middle Ages 1. Brepols, Turnhout. Kjellstrom, A., 2013. A bioarchaeological perspective of violence from medieval central
Garde a, L., Kajkowski, K., 2013. Vampires, criminals or slaves? Reinterpreting ‘deviant Sweden. In: Knusel, C., Smith, M.J. (Eds.), The Routledge Handbook of the
’ – –
burials in early medieval Poland. World Archaeol. 45 (5), 780 796. Bioarchaeology of Human Conflict. Routledge, New York, pp. 237 251.
Gat, A., 2015. Proving communal warfare among hunter-gatherers: the quasi-Rousseauan Knauft, B.M., 1985. Good Company and Violence: Sorcery and Social Action in a
Giddens, A., 1985. The Nation-State and violence. Polity Press, Cambridge. Kurgaeva, A., Khamnueva-Wendt, S., Bork, H.-R., 2022. Identification of materials used
Gjerpe, L.-E. (Ed.), 2005. Gravfeltet På Gulli. Bind 1., Kulturhistorisk museum. for earthwork construction. The semi-circular fortification rampart of Hedeby,
Grimm, O., 2010. The formation of power at crucial seafaring passages in Norway. BSGM2022v74n3a040422.
¨ –
Skyllis. Zeitschrift Für Unterwasserarchaologie 2, 117 121. Lambert, P.M., 1997. Patterns of violence in prehistoric hunter-gatherer societies of
Gr n, O., Krag, A.H., Bennike, P., 1994. Vikingetidsgravpladser på Langeland. coastal southern California. In: Troubled Times: Violence and Warfare in the Past, 3.
ø –
Langelands Museum, Rudk bing. Routledge, London, pp. 77 109.
– ø
10.3390/genealogy2020017. Lewis, J.E., 2008. Identifying sword marks on bone. Criteria for distinguishing between
Guilaine, J., Zammit, J., 2005. The Origins of War: Violence in Prehistory. John Wiley cut marks made by different classes of bladed weapons. J. Archaeol. Sci. 35,
Gustavsen, L., Gjesvold, P.E., Gundersen, S.M., Hinterleitner, A., Nau, E., Paasche, K., Lillevold, E., 1971. mot Bygdebok. 2: Garder og slekter. Elversum.
’ Å
2020. Gjellestad: a newly discovered ‘central place in South-East Norway. Antiquity Lund, J., 2009. sted og vadested: Deponeringer, genstandsbiografier og rumlig
Hadley, D., 2000. The Northern Danelaw: its social structure, c. 800 1100. Leicester of Oslo, p. 427.
University Press, London. Lund, J., Sindbæk, S., 2021. Crossing the maelstrom: new departures in Viking
Forlag, Oslo. 021-09163-3.
¨ –
Harke, H., 2014. Grave goods in early medieval burials: messages and meanings. Lyman, R.L., 1994. Frontmatter. Vertebrate Taphonomy, I VI. Cambridge Manuals in
– ø
Henriksen, P.S., Holst, S., Frei, K.M., 2017. Iron and Viking Age grapes from Denmark Lyngstr m, H., 2008. Dansk jern. En kulturhistorisk analyse af fremstilling, fordeling og
ø ø
vine seeds found at the royal complexes by Lake Tiss . Danish J. Archaeol. 6 (1), forbrug. Nordiske fortidsminder 5. Kongelige Nordiske Oldskriftselskab, K benhavn.
– ø —
Hobbes, T., 2012. In: Malcolm, Noel (Ed.), Leviathan (3 volume set). Clarendon Press, possibility? Nordiske Fortidsminder Serie C 8, 139 145.
ø ø
Oxford. Lyngstr m, H., 2013. Slaggeaftapningsovne i Danmark, udgravninger og fors g. In:
Holst, M.K., 2013. 1.2 South Scandinavian Early Bronze Age Barrows a survey. In: Rundberget, B., Larsen, J.H., Haraldsen, T.H.B. (Eds.), Ovnstypologi og
ø –
Holst, M.K., Rasmussen, M. (Eds.), Skelh j and the Bronze Age Barrows of Southern ovnskronologi i den nordiske jernvinna. Portal Forlag, Kristianssand, pp. 119 133.
Scandinavia 1. Jysk Arkæologisk Selskab, H jbjerg. Majchczack, B.S., 2020. Die Rolle Der Nordfriesischen Inseln im Frühmittelalterlichen
Holst, M.K., Jessen, M.D., Andersen, S.W., Pedersen, A., 2013a. The Late Viking-Age Kommunikationsnetzwerk, Band 2. Verlag Marie Leidorf GmbH, Rahden/Westf.
ˇ ´
Royal Constructions at Jelling, central Jutland, Denmark. Recent investigations and Malesevic, S., 2017. The Rise of Organized Brutality: A Historical Sociology of Violence.
a suggestion for an interpretative revision. Praehistorische Zeitschrift 87, 474 504. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Å –
(Ed.), Enogtredivte Tværfaglige Vikingesymposium. rhus, pp. 47 61. Marsh, N., 2020. Because We Have the Maxim Gun. The Relationship between Arms
Hosar, H.P., 1994. Skjåk Bygdebok. Bind 1. Historia fram til 1537. Skjåk kommune, Acquisition by Non-State Groups and Violence. PhD diss.. University of Oslo, Oslo.
Skjåk. Martens, I., Astrup, E.E., 2021. Viking Age Swords from Telemark, Norway. An
ø ´ ø
Hultgård, A., 2020. Cosmic Eschatology: Ragnar k. In: Andren, A., Schj dt, J.P., Integrated Technical and Archaeological Investigation (Norske Oldfunn XXXIII).
Lindow, J. (Eds.), The Pre-Christian Religions of the North. Brepols Publishers, Cappelen Damm Akademisk, Oslo.
Turnhout, pp. 1017 1032. Martin, D.L., Anderson, C.P. (Eds.), 2014. Bioarchaeological and Forensic Perspectives on
Imer, L.M., 2015. The Danish runestones: when and where? Danish J. Archaeol. 3, 1 11. Violence: How Violent Death Is Interpreted from Skeletal Remains, Cambridge
Jacobson, D., 2013. Of Virgins and Martyrs: Women and Sexuality in Global Conflict. Press, Cambridge.
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. McMahon, R., 2016. Histories of interpersonal violence in Europe and North America,
Jacobson, D., Cinalli, M., 2023. Citizenship: The Third Revolution. Oxford University 1700 Present. In: Knepper, P., Johansen, A. (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of the
Jantzen, C., 2013. Middelalderbyen Aarhus. Aarhus University Press, Aarhus. org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199352333.013.44.
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o g y 75 (2024) 101605
– ø
Miller, W.I., 2009. Bloodtaking and Peacemaking: Feud, Law, and Society in Saga Sigurðsson, J.V., 2011. Norsk historie 800 1536: Frå krigerske b nder til lydige
Iceland. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. undersåttar. Samlaget, Oslo.
´ ¨ ¨
Naumann, E., Krzewinska, M., Gotherstrom, A., Eriksson, G., 2013. Slaves as burial gifts Sindbæk, S.M., Pedersen, A., Roesdahl, E., 2014. Aggersborg i vikingetiden: Bebyggelsen
in Viking Age Norway? Evidence from stable isotope and ancient DNA analyses. og borgen. Jysk Arkæologisk Selskab, Moesgård.
– ø ø
Neff, C., 1989. Scandinavian elements in the Wantage code of Æthelred II. J. Legal Hist. Museums Skrifter X (1). Oslo, Norwegian Universities Press.
– ø ø
Nicolaysen, N., 1882. Langskibet fra Gokstad ved Sandefjord. Kristiania, Cammermeyer. Museum Skrifter, X (2). Oslo, Norwegian Universities Press.
Nivette, A.E., 2011. Violence in non-state societies: a review. Brit. J. Criminol. 51 (3), Skaarup, J., 1976. Stengade II. En langelandsk gravplads med grave fra romersk jernalder
Nordal, G., 2000. The contemporary sagas and their social context. Cambrid. Stud. Rudk bing.
– –
Medieval Lit. 42, 221 241. Skaarup, J., 1989. Dobbeltgrave. Skalk 1989 (3), 4 8.
´ ø
Nordvig, M., 2020. Cosmogony. In: Andren, A., Schj dt, J.P., Lindow, J. (Eds.), The Pre- Skaarup, J., 1995. Medieval castles and castle mounds on the islands south of Fyn: the
– ’
Christian Religions of the North. Brepols Publishers, Turnhout, pp. 989 1000. situation after 50 years archaeological investigations. J. Danish Archaeol. 12,
ø ø ¨ –
N rgård J rgensen, A., 1999. Waffen und Graber. Typologische und chronologische Skre, D., 1997. Raknehaugen. En empirisk loftsrydding. Viking 60, 7 42.
Studien zu skandinavischen Waffengrabern 520/30 bis 900 n.Chr. Nordiske Spierenburg, P., 2011. American homicide. What does the evidence mean for theories of
ø & ´ ´
fortidsminder. Serie B. 17. Det Kongelige Nordiske Oldskriftselskab, K benhavn. violence and society? Crime Histoire Societes/Crime, Hist. Societ. 15 (2),
ø ø th –
th ø ø ø ø
12 Century. In: N rgård J rgensen, A., Pind, J., J rgensen, L. (Eds.), Maritime Stamnes, A.A., 2015. Geofysisk unders kelse av Herlaugshaugen, Leka kommune.
Warfare in Northern Europe. Technology, Organisation, Logistics and Arkeologisk rapport 2015: 19. NTNU Vitenskapsmuseet, Trondheim.
Administration 500 BC-1500 AD. PNM Studies of Archaeology and History 5. Standen, V.G., Santoro, C.M., Arriaza, B., Verano, J., Monsalve, S., Coleman, D.,
National Museum of Denmark, Copenhagen, pp. 125 158. Valenzuela, D., Marquet, P.A., 2021. Violence among the first horticulturists in the
doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780190264079.013.402. Stattel, J.A., 2022. Legal Culture in the Danelaw: A Study of III Æthelred. Anglo-Saxon
— –
Olausson, M., 2009. At peace with walls Fortifications and their significance AD Engl. 48, 163 203.
400 1100. In: Holmquist Olausson, L., Olausson, M. (Eds.), The Martial Society: Stoklund, M., 1991. Runesten, kronologi og samfundsrekonstruktion. In: Iversen, M.
Aspects of Warriors, Fortifications, and Social Change in Scandinavia. (Ed.), Mammen Grav, kunst og samfund i vikingetid. Aarhus University Press,
– Å –
Archaeological Research Laboratory. Stockholm University, Stockholm, pp. 35 70. rhus, pp. 285 297.
ø –
Olsen, O., Schmidt, H., 1977. Fyrkat. En jysk vikingeborg I. Borgen og bebyggelsen (Vol. Storli, I., 2006. Hålogaland F r Rikssamlingen: Politiske Prosesser i Perioden 200 900 e.
ø ø
B. 3, Nordiske fortidsminder. Serie B). Lynge og S n, K benhavn. Kr Novus forlag, Oslo.
Palmstierna, M., Frangou, A., Wallette, A., Dunbar, R., 2017. Family counts: deciding Stott, D., Kristiansen, S.M., Sindbæk, S.M., 2019. Searching for Viking age fortresses with
when to murder among the Icelandic Vikings. Evol. Hum. Behav. 38 (2), 175 180. automatic landscape classification and feature detection. Remote Sens. (Basel) 11
Pearce, J., 2020. Politics Without Violence? Towards a Post-Weberian Enlightenment. Strand, L.M., Leggett, S., Skar, B., 2022. Multi-isotope variation reveals social complexity
Pedersen, A., 2014a. Dead warriors in living memory: A study of weapon and equestrian isci.2022.105225.
– &
burials in Viking-age Denmark. AD 800 1000. PNM Studies in Archaeology Strid, J.P., 1987. Runic Swedish thegns and drengs. In: Ambrosiani, B., Jansson, S.B.F.
¨ ¨
History 20:1, Jelling Series 1. University Press of Southern Denmark, Copenhagen. (Eds.), Runor och Runinskrifter. Foredrag vid Riksantikvarieambetets och
Pedersen, A., 2014b. Dead warriors in living memory: A study of weapon and equestrian Vitterhetssakademiens symposium 8-11 september 1985. Almqvist Wiksell
– –
burials in Viking-age Denmark, AD 800 1000, Catalogue. PNM Studies in International, pp. 301 316.
Archaeology History 20:2, Jelling Series 2. University Press of Southern Denmark, Stylegar, F.-A., 2007. The Kaupang Cemeteries Revisited. In: Skre, D. (Ed.), Kaupang in
Copenhagen. Skiringssal. The Kaupang Excavation Project Publication Series 1. Aarhus University
Ø Ø Å –
Pedersen, E.A., Stylegar, F.-A., Norseng, P.G., 2003. st for Folden. stfolds historie 1. Press, rhus, pp. 65 128.
Sarpsborg, stfold fylkeskommune. Sukhino-Khomenko, D., 2019. Thegns in the Social Order of Anglo-Saxon England and
Pinker, S., 2011. The Better Angels of Our Nature: The Decline of Violence in History and Viking-Age Scandinavia: Outlines of a Methodological Reassessment. In: Ahola, J.,
its Causes. Penguin Press, London. Wilson, K. (Eds.), Interdisciplinary and Comparative Methodologies Newsletter.
Pocock, J.G.A., 2016. The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the University of Helsinki, Department of Cultures, Helsinki, pp. 25 50.
Atlantic Republican Tradition. Princeton University Press, Princeton. Sukhino-Khomenko, D., 2020. Twelve angry thegns: some possible old Norse legalisms in
— –
Poulsen, K.L., 1999. Hejrede Vold et anlæg i skandinavisk jernalderforskning. old English texts. Scandia. J. Medieval Norse Stud. 3, 201 207.
– ´ ø
Arkæologisk Forum 1, 9 14. Sundqvist, O., 2020. Cultic Leaders and Religious Specialists. In: Andren, A., Schj dt, J.
Prak, M., 2018. Citizens Without Nations: Urban Citizenship in Europe and the World, P., Lindow, J. (Eds.), The Pre-Christian Religions of the North, History and
c.1000-1789. Cambridge University Press, New York. Structures. Brepols, Turnout, pp. 739 780.
Price, T.D., Peets, J., Allmae, R., Maldre, L., Oras, E., 2016. Isotopic provenancing of the Thomas, E., 2007. Monumentality and the Roman Empire. Architecture in the Antonine
Salme ship burials in Pre-Viking Age Estonia. Antiquity 90 (352), 1022 1037. Age. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
– –
Qvisling, J.L., 1921. Gjerpen: en bygdebok: Gaardshistorie 1. Kristiania, Aschehoug. kulturminnekategori til begeistring og besvær. Heimen 53 (03 04), 295 311.
’ –
0144039X.2019.1592976. Rueschemeyer, D., Skocpol, T. (Eds.), Bringing the State Back In. Cambridge
Raffield, B., 2020. The danelaw reconsidered: colonization and conflict in viking-age University Press, Cambridge, pp. 169 191.
– –
VMS.5.121523. Cambridge.
Rasmussen Lindegaard, M., Rasmussen, M., 2019. Danmarks oldtid i landskabet. Tonning, C., Schneidhofer, P., Nau, E., Gansum, T., Lia, V., Gustavsen, L., Filzwieser, R.,
Lindhardt og Ringhof, K benhavn. Wallner, M., Kristiansen, M., Neubauer, W., Paasche, K., Trinks, I., 2020. Halls at
Ray, L., 2018. Violence and Society. Sage, London. Tummuscheit, A., Witte, F., 2018. The Danevirke in the light of recent excavations. In:
’ th
Redfern, R., Redfern, C.A., 2019. Trauma. In: Buikstra, J. (Ed.), Ortner s Identification of Hansen, J., Brus, M. (Eds.), The Fortified Viking Age. 36 Interdisciplinary Viking
th
Pathological Conditions in Human Skeletal Material. Elsevier Academic Press, Symposium in Odense, May 17 2017. University Press of Southern Denmark,
– –
pp. 211 284. Odense, pp. 69 74.
Rey-Iglesia, A., de Jager, D., Presslee, S., Qvistgaard, S.S., Sindbæk, S.M., Lorenzen, E.D., UNODC, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 2014. Global study on homicide
10.1016/j.jas.2023.105773. van Houts, E., 2011. Invasion and Migration. A Social History of England, 900 1200.
Reynolds, A., 2009. Anglo-Saxon Deviant Burial Customs. Oxford University Press, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Oxford. von Dassow, E., 2018. Liberty, bondage, and liberation in the late bronze age. History
Santos, M.R., Jacobson, D., Georgiev, G.G., 2021. The cross-national relationship Walker, P.L., 2001. A bioarchaeological perspective on the history of violence. Ann. Rev.
’ –
Sawyer, B., 2000. The Viking-Age Rune-Stones. Custom and Commemoration in early sacrifice promoted and sustained the evolution of stratified societies. Nature 532
medieval Scandinavia. University Press, Oxford. (7598), 228 231.
ø ø
Schou J rgensen, M., 1997. Vikingetidsbroen i Ravning Enge. Nye unders kelser. Weber, M., 1962. The City. Collier Books, New York.
Nationalmuseets Arbejdsmark 1997, 74 87. Weber, M., 1994. Weber: Political Writings. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
J. Bill et al. J o u r n a l o f A n t h r o p o l o g i c a l A r c h a e o l o g y 75 (2024) 101605
Weber, M., 2004. The Essential Weber: A Reader. Routledge, London. Further reading
Weber, M., 2019. Economy and Society. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Weiss-Krejci, E., 2013. The Unburied Dead. The Oxford Handbook of the Archaeology of
Petersen, J., 1919. De norske vikingesverd: en typologisk-kronologisk studie over
Death and Burial. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 281 301.
vikingetidens vaaben. Kristiania, Dybwad.
Williams, H., 2008. Runes. In: Brink, S., Price, N. (Eds.), The Viking World. Routledge,
Rygh, O., 1885. Norske Oldsager: Ordnede og Forklarede 1. Christiania, Cammermeyer.
London, pp. 281 290.
Winroth, A., 2012. The Conversion of Scandinavia. Yale University Press, London/New
Haven.
Ystgaard, I., 2014. Krigens praksis: organisert voldsbruk og materiell kultur i Midt-Norge
Web references
ca. 100-900 e.Kr. PhD diss. NTNU, Det humanistiske fakultet, Institutt for historiske
studier, Trondheim.
Toronto. 14.01.2022).
= & =