Overlapping Functions: Volunteering and Other Forms of Civic
Participation in the COVID-19 Disaster (Preprint)
Wong, Kang Li*
Department of Social and Behavioural Sciences, City University of Hong Kong
*Corresponding author information: Wong Kang Li, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, (e-mail:
kanglwong3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk).
Abstract:
Functional motivations are closely linked to important volunteer outcomes, yet more socio-
political forms of civic participation (CP) besides volunteering are growing. There is little
attention on the applicability of functional motivations to such CP, including in disasters. Using a
critical realist grounded theory methodology, 39 in-depth interviews were conducted with
Singapore residents who had engaged in a diverse range of CP before and during COVID-19. A
key mechanism, Individual Identity Integration, was found to relate to functional motivations.
Overlapping functions were found, but there are differences in how these functions were fulfilled
depending on the nature of the person’s engagement. Perceived accessibility, the subjective
mental state about one’s potential to engage, mediated the effectuation of motivations in actual
engagement. COVID-19 contributed to CP by fulfilling functions for personal coping and
increasing perceived accessibility. These theoretical developments inform policy and research
agenda in understanding and leveraging CP.
Keywords:
civic participation, volunteering, volunteer motivation, spontaneous volunteering, disaster
response, volunteer typology
Note: This manuscript is a pre-print version of a manuscript submitted for publication. Therefore,
it may not exactly replicate the final, authoritative version of the article.
Please cite this paper as: Wong, Kang Li. 2023. "Overlapping Functions: Volunteering and
Other Forms of Civic Participation in the COVID-19 Disaster " [Manuscript submitted for
publication].
Overlapping Functions: Volunteering and Other Forms of Civic Participation in the
COVID-19 Disaster (Preprint)
Abstract
Functional motivations are closely linked to important volunteer outcomes, yet more socio-
political forms of civic participation (CP) besides volunteering are growing. There is little
attention on the applicability of functional motivations to such CP, including in disasters. Using a
critical realist grounded theory methodology, 39 in-depth interviews were conducted with
Singapore residents who had engaged in a diverse range of CP before and during COVID-19. A
key mechanism, Individual Identity Integration, was found to relate to functional motivations.
Overlapping functions were found, but there are differences in how these functions were fulfilled
depending on the nature of the person’s engagement. Perceived accessibility, the subjective
mental state about one’s potential to engage, mediated the effectuation of motivations in actual
engagement. COVID-19 contributed to CP by fulfilling functions for personal coping and
increasing perceived accessibility. These theoretical developments inform policy and research
agenda in understanding and leveraging CP.
Keywords: civic participation, volunteering, volunteer motivation, spontaneous volunteering,
disaster response, volunteer typology
Introduction
Volunteerism is essential for meeting gaps in service provision by the state and its institutions,
particularly in the era of welfare policy reforms across many developed industrialised societies
(Milbourne & Cushman, 2015; Monforte, 2020; Verhoeven & Van Bochove, 2018). Further,
with its collateral benefits to public health outcomes and social integration, states have actively
promoted volunteering as a social norm (Boje, 2015; Jenkinson et al., 2013; Ministry of Finance,
2023; Verhoeven & Tonkens, 2013).
At the same time, there is a trend towards more socio-politically driven forms of civic
participation (CP) beyond volunteering in formal social service organisations (SSOs) (Ekman &
Amnå, 2012; Monforte, 2020; Williams et al., 2016). This trend challenges the traditional notion
of a volunteer as an apolitical provider of unpaid services (International Labour Organization,
2011). It can be attributed to mistrust in political systems and critical attitudes towards neoliberal
welfare (Sealey & Handy, 2023; Williams et al., 2016).
The recent COVID-19 pandemic underscored this trend in CP, as it created socioeconomic needs
that overwhelmed the state’s capacity. Both volunteering as service provision and CP advocating
for structural change have surfaced in response (Abdullah & Kim, 2020; Cai et al., 2021; Harris,
2021; Lorch & Sombatpoonsiri, 2022), resulting in greater recognition of the fundamental role of
CP in promoting societal welfare (Meade, 2020).
Aligned with this recognition of volunteerism, research has identified various antecedents of
volunteerism (Snyder & Omoto, 2008). Volunteer motivations form a major antecedent group
that predicts and sustains volunteering (Chacón et al., 2017). Conceptualisation of these
motivations is largely guided by functional motivation theory. The main assumptions of this
theory are that (1) attitudes towards a certain activity can be shifted when that activity can
perform functions important to that individual, and (2) an activity can perform varying functions
for different individuals (Katz, 1960). Volunteerism scholars have largely focused on clarifying
and expanding the essential functions for volunteers (Allison et al., 2002; Butt et al., 2017;
Chacón et al., 2017; Esmond & Dunlop, 2004), particularly through examination of the
Volunteer Functions Inventory (VFI; Clary et al., 1998).
However, scant literature examines whether the functional motivation theory can be used to
understand volunteers engaging in socio-political forms of CP. The limited studies on these
forms of CP adapting the VFI involve environmental conservation volunteers, which includes
some advocacy for the environment or their affiliated programmes (Agnello et al., 2022; Pagès et
al., 2018; Wright et al., 2015). There is as yet no research examining the nuances of these
functions in such CP. This is an important research gap as function fulfilment is relevant for both
the initiation of volunteering and volunteer satisfaction (Chacón et al., 2007; Clary et al., 1998;
Finkelstein, 2008). Effective matching of volunteer recruitment messages to the potential
volunteers’ dominant motivation also increased the response rate to recruitment calls (Snyder &
Omoto, 2009). Research needs to give due attention to volunteers engaging in socio-political
forms of CP, for the promotion of societal development. COVID-19 has also highlighted the
importance of CP in disaster response. Public health researchers and practitioners have sounded
calls to strengthen societal preparedness for the next pandemic threat (Mipatrini et al., 2022),
meriting an examination of how functional motivation theory can be applied to understand
emergent CP, or spontaneous volunteering (SV), in such situations.
The current paper expands the usage of VFI beyond volunteering to develop a typology of
functions by volunteer type that distinguishes between the traditional notion of a volunteer and
more socio-politically driven forms of CP. It also sheds light on the effects of COVID-19 on the
functional motivations of volunteers.
Theoretical Background and Research Questions
Conceptualising Civic Participation
Volunteering is often associated with apolitical forms of helping, although various scholars have
sought to expand volunteering as a socio-political form of engagement (Ekman & Amnå, 2012;
Feenstra, 2018; Monforte, 2020). Cognisant of these discourses, CP is conceptualised in this
paper as voluntary activities by concerned citizens towards bettering the circumstances of others
and improving the conditions within the community (Adler & Goggin, 2005; Ekman & Amnå,
2012), which includes volunteering. The definition highlights that while CP is not manifest
political participation aimed at influencing political decisions (Teorell et al., 2007), it has dual
roles of civil maintenance or civil repair in the civil sphere (Alexander, 2006; Janoski, 2010).
Support for an integrative approach towards participatory behaviours can be found in findings
that there are overlapping demographic and personality predispositions between volunteering and
other forms of CP (Barrett & Brunton-Smith, 2014). Further, while CP may not necessarily be
antecedent to political engagement, gaining participatory competence is a process (Kieffer, 1984)
that might start with ‘traditional’ volunteering and bridge to other forms.
Spontaneous Volunteering in Disasters
SV refers to unplanned, self-organised assistance rendered by volunteers in response to disasters
or crises (Aguirre et al., 2016; Simsa et al., 2019). There is nascent research attention on this
phenomenon, and given its unpredictable nature, formal emergency or disaster responses have
largely yet to include SV in their protocols (Aguirre et al., 2016). This is a pertinent issue, as the
extent of disasters may warrant a response beyond the capacity of formal organisations, which
SV can step in to fill (Aguirre et al., 2016; Glass, 2001). The COVID-19 pandemic also served as
a bleak reminder of the essential role of civil society regardless of the nature of the state’s
response or state-civil society relations (Cai et al., 2021; Hu & Sidel, 2020; Lorch &
Sombatpoonsiri, 2022).
At the same time, SV is sometimes viewed as a ‘second disaster’ because it can impede response
efforts in the affected areas (Harris et al., 2017; Lodree & Davis, 2016). Yet, in contrast with
natural disasters like earthquakes, where disaster response is targeted at that specific locality and
often requires professional skills (e.g. search and rescue), the pandemic required a range of
responses to meet the non-clinical needs and also reinforced the salience of locality-based
responses in the face of physical distancing measures to curb the virus spread. It thus appeared
that the role of SV was more positive than detrimental in the pandemic response.
The current digital age presented powerful ways of volunteer mobilisation during COVID-19 and
is likely for future pandemics and disasters too. Information about affected groups and their
needs can be conveyed rapidly through compelling visuals on digital media, which explains its
immense contribution to the mobilisation of SV. This is observed in the informal locality-based
mutual aid networks and community initiatives that arose to help affected people across the
globe during COVID-19. These initiatives were organised over digital platforms and shared
through social media (Duque Franco et al., 2020; Harris, 2021; Wilson et al., 2022). Such virtual
community organising was still effective in community organising and coordinating support,
though not without the problems from exclusively virtual organising, like the lack of volunteer
protocols (Wilson et al., 2022).
Emergent social identity as a collective is an important antecedent for CP in disasters and
emergencies. These include mutual aid and coordinated efforts with agencies (Drury, 2011; Maki
et al., 2019; Ntontis et al., 2018). Researchers point to a ‘common fate’ where people similarly
affected by the disaster feel a sense of belonging and togetherness (Elcheroth & Drury, 2020;
Ntontis et al., 2020). The social identity model of collective resilience explains that ‘common
fate’ is an antecedent to a shared identity as a collective, which then leads to psychological
transformations that result in ‘empowered collective action’ (Drury, 2011, p. 201). The social
identity approach thus points to how ‘common fate’ can facilitate building social networks
between strangers towards cooperative action in CP.
Other than social identity, other factors contribute to emergent CP. The exploratory study by
Kulik and colleagues (2016) provides insight into the overlap and differences between SV and
planned volunteering. It compared how motives for volunteering affect volunteer satisfaction in
regular vis-à-vis spontaneous volunteers in an emergency response. Both groups of volunteers
were most motivated by solidarity with the community. However, there were differences in the
other motives. Spontaneous volunteers were more motivated by escape from reality, while
organised volunteers had a bigger self-development motive. Social norms of collectivity appear
to be important too. Witnessing social support provided by others was a stronger direct predictor
of participation (emotional and instrumental support) than social identification (Drury et al.,
2016; Ntontis et al., 2021). It suggests that more than social identification, observing cooperative
action from others was needed to spur action.
The unique long-drawn and viral nature of the COVID-19 disaster accentuated the need for
collective efforts, especially with pandemic control efforts necessitating personal sacrifice for the
‘greater good’. Across diverse contexts, norms of collectivity were promoted in the pandemic
response. Two examples are the rallying call of ‘Together, We Fight the Virus!’ by the Hong
Kong government and the message ‘Let’s help each other. Together we can do it.’ behind Italy’s
COVID-19 information campaign (Ministero della Salute, 2020; The Government of the Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region). The Singapore state also intentionally endorsed and
enabled formal volunteering and informal ground-up efforts. An online platform was created that
served not just to link people to areas where they could volunteer or donate resources but as a
repository of stories that reinforced the narrative that ‘we are all in this together’ (SG United).
These policy decisions during COVID-19 reinforce support for norms of collectivity as a crucial
antecedent for SV.
Functional Motivation Theory
Functional motivation theory is a key framework for intrapersonal antecedents in volunteering
literature (J. Chen et al., 2022; Wilson, 2012). The VFI is the major conceptual framework under
this theoretical approach and consists of six distinct functions that volunteering can fulfil for a
person. The six functions are: to express important values (Values Expression), gain an
understanding of the world and skills (Understanding), personal enhancement (Enhancement),
acquire career-related exposure (Career), stay connected in social networks (Social) and avoid
negative feelings and personal problems (Protective) (Clary & Snyder, 1999; Clary et al., 1998).
The VFI consists of six Likert-type scales that measure the presence of these respective six
functions.
A meta-analysis of 61 samples (N= 38,327) to estimate the effect sizes of these functions in
predicting three volunteer outcome variables found significant results across all six functions
(Zhou & Kodama Muscente, 2022). This underscores that the VFI is a reliable tool for
understanding how volunteers' motivational patterns across diverse contexts link to the important
volunteer outcomes of satisfaction, intention to continue, and volunteering frequency. When
there are situational reasons that CP engagement can meet the volunteer’s motivations, the
likelihood of volunteer initiation significantly increases (Snyder & Omoto, 2008).
At the same time, there are criticisms of the VFI. While there is substantial survey research using
the VFI which supports the generalisability of the VFI functions, other conceptually distinct
functions like religious beliefs and interest in the activity are shown to be important motivations
(Agnello et al., 2022; Butt et al., 2017; Vecina & Daniela, 2019). Further, the limited research
comparing the motivations cited by the same volunteers through the VFI instrument and open-
ended questioning revealed stark differences in results (Allison et al., 2002; Vecina & Daniela,
2019). This casts doubt on the largely unchallenged assumption that the VFI accurately reflects
the functions that volunteering fulfils for the person (i.e. the person’s actual motivations). There
might be an overestimation of the importance of the functions. Vecina and Daniela (2019) found
that all the functions were cited as important when VFI was used, which did not square with the
markedly fewer functions coded from the results of the open-ended question. Still, longitudinal
and experimental studies by Kiviniemi and colleagues (2002) revealed that the relative difference
in the six functions could distinguish between individuals with either single or multiple
motivations. Respondents with conceptually different VFI functions were also linked with poorer
volunteer outcomes like lower fulfilment of important motivations and increased volunteering-
associated stress. This highlights that despite the drawbacks, the VFI is a good tool for
understanding volunteering antecedents.
However, there is thus far limited application beyond planned volunteering within the formal
organisational context in the social and health sectors. Scholars seldom use VFI to study
emergent CP during disasters as well. Two recent studies on emergent informal helping during
the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic (early-2020) used functional analysis to understand the
characteristics and experiences of volunteers (Trautwein et al., 2020; Yang, 2021). Common
antecedents were motivations linked to Values Expression, Enhancement and Protective
functions found in the VFI, underscoring its utility in understanding emergent CP during
disasters. The findings suggest that the stress and fear of infection during the pandemic
contributed to the desire to help through the various functions that helping can fulfil.
Research Questions
The findings reported here is part of a wider study exploring the interactional linkages between
CP antecedents and structural influences in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. In this paper,
the research questions addressed are:
1. To what extent do the volunteer functions identified in literature overlap with the
intrapersonal antecedents of CP?
2. How did COVID-19 impact these intrapersonal antecedents?
3. How do these intrapersonal antecedents differ depending on volunteer type?
Study Design
A critical realist grounded theory methodology (CRGT; Danermark et al., 2019; Hoddy, 2019)
was used to identify the interactional patterns between antecedents and structural influences on
the forms of CP that volunteers engaged in during COVID-19. CRGT was adopted for an
abductive inquiry to systematically investigate the most plausible hypothesis from both existing
theories and the research data (Kennedy & Thornberg, 2018; Timmermans & Tavory, 2012). The
critical realist lens also encourages attunement to structural mechanisms and causal explanations
(Danermark et al., 2019), which is important for theoretical innovation. The literature review
above hence served as a tool for theoretical sensitisation to guide the research design while being
treated as provisional in the data collection and analysis (Timmermans & Tavory, 2012).
Ethical clearance for the study was received from the College Human Subjects Ethics Sub-
committee of the researcher’s affiliated university prior to the data collection.
Sample
Thirty-nine experts in CP, based on their work and personal CP experiences, and residing in
Singapore, were interviewed from October 2021 to August 2022. Verbal informed consent was
sought from the interviewees after explaining and answering any questions about the research
over text. Interviews were semi-structured and lasted between 45 minutes to an hour. There was
an equal number of males and females (n=18), with two identifying with non-heterogeneous
genders (total n=38, one interviewee declined to disclose this information). The age of the 39
interviewees ranged between 20 to 75 years. Singapore is a multi-racial society with Chinese as
the majority race group, so the researcher oversampled for participants who would be classified
as Malay or Indian according to the official population census (Singapore Department of
Statistics, 2010). This was to capture any possible cultural differences that might influence CP.
Out of the 38 participants who shared this information, there were 26 Chinese, seven Malay,
three Indian, and one Other.
The dominant form of CP was categorised based on civil society literature and ground
observations. Over one-third (n=17) volunteered in or were co-founders of ground-up initiatives.
These refer to informally organised groups that are usually set up to address a specific or
localised area of concern, which do not have the organisational structure of formal (registered)
organisations. One-third of the participants are affiliated with formal SSOs. Of these, except one
interviewee who worked as a volunteer manager, the rest were volunteers. Three were involved
in personal collaborations, meaning they were not affiliated with an organisation but found
opportunities for CP through their networks. The CP of another three participants was classified
as cross-sector involvement, as their CP included diverse stakeholders like political parties,
private companies, and civil society groups. Lastly, one volunteered in a grassroots organisation,
which in Singapore is a state-linked entity that subtly supports the ruling political party. Two
participants were interviewed who were at that time not involved in any CP as well, a decision
made through theoretical sampling which will be discussed next.
Data Collection
A purposive sample was first created to generate quality data for future theoretical sampling
(Cutcliffe, 2000). Participant recruitment subsequently turned to contextual and demographic
variation. Regular volunteers before COVID-19 and those belonging to COVID-19 ground-up
initiatives were recruited to compare the two groups. Sampling also ensured demographic
representation in characteristics like income. Lastly, after the emergence of major theoretical
categories, attention in theoretical sampling was turned to deepening the concepts through asking
specific questions to diverse interviewees.
Theoretical sampling memos were used to direct data collection. The researcher made notes on
future interview questions to ask and the recruitment of interviewees with specific characteristics.
This was done during data analysis, which occurred synchronously with data collection.
Data Analysis
Interview data was repeatedly read and extracts with similar content were assigned the same
codes. This was conducted based on the specification of the GTM techniques by Strauss and
Corbin (1998) and the constant comparison technique (Boeije, 2002; Scott & Howell, 2008).
At the same time, code generation and the cognitive processes in constant comparison
were informed by the critical realist philosophy.
In line with CRGT, both codes with a theoretical basis and emergent codes were used to develop
open codes into main categories and their sub-categories (Titan et al., 2020). As the first stage of
CRGT was to gain a tentative description of the CP phenomenon (Hoddy, 2019), care was taken
during open coding to maintain theoretical pluralism. Category names that pointed to any single
theory to organise the initial codes were avoided. Subsequently, axial coding and abductive
interfacing of data with theory were used to develop main categories that illustrated the
interactive mechanisms between the intrapersonal antecedents and structural influences of CP
(Hoddy, 2019; Strauss & Corbin, 1998).
Findings
The core category in the emergent grounded theory (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) is the person’s
identity integration with CP. Identity integration with CP was both the fundamental similarity
shared by the interviewees and the uniting concept that linked the other main categories into a
coherent theoretical framework. Interview extracts that illustrate a key mechanism, Individual
(Burks, 1946) connected components of the mechanism to existing literature, but also found
novel insights.
Finding Significance
Finding Significance is the main antecedent category. It refers to the cognitive and attitudinal
factors at the individual level of self-categorisation (Turner & Reynolds, 2012), which form the
intention to engage in participatory behaviours. This antecedent is latent without the presence of
perceived accessibility. Perceived accessibility of CP is the perceived potential to participate in
CP opportunities and depends on the individual’s life circumstances. It is subjective- a mental
state influenced by the person’s attitudes and experiences. Fulfilling Personal Functions is a
state of CP engagement that reinforces identity integration with CP when this antecedent is
effectuated.
Finding Significance involves five qualitatively different aspects: religious sensemaking,
deriving personal benefits, authentic connection with the target group, making a difference and
an encouraging social milieu. These together reflect the interviewees’ desire to engage in a CP
activity that is personally important or meaningful. Seeking the maintenance of such
individualised significance shapes the kinds of participatory activities that the person continues
to engage in.
Extracts will be used to exemplify the five aspects in turn. Firstly, religious sensemaking is the
meaning-making process that integrates individual religious beliefs to interpret CP-related
decisions. The first extract highlights how social concern and CP were seen as obedience to God:
P19 (F, 23 years old, Pre-COVID-19 Ground-up initiative):
… just building relationships as the first point of contact, and then doing whatever I can,
knowing that these are [migrant workers] who are not in the best state and also people
that my God loves. Yeah, I guess that is a motivation for me to- spur me to want to
participate and contribute in some way.
There was an underlying sense of following the direction of God to express ‘love’ to the migrant
workers through her volunteering because they are a group that ‘[her] God loves’. This sense of
calling also helped some interviewees mitigate the costs of CP engagement. P15 faced the
tensions of time management and questioning from others about his heavy time commitment to
volunteering:
P15 (M, 55 years old, Formal SSO):
For me I must know how to adjust my time. Got work, got family, then volunteer… Cos
got people say, you volunteer, how about your family? Of course I got quarrel, my wife
said, how about family? I said… I married to you, not just belong to you but maybe God
said I belong to the public also, must trust that also! That is what I think lah, the public
need you must help, everyone got their own job to do. [sic]
For P15 the belief in a higher divine calling helped resolve some of these tensions where he sees
volunteering as a divinely-appointed role. This aspect of Finding Significance can be compared
with the Religious motivation proposed by Butt and colleagues (2017).
Secondly, deriving personal benefits is the pursuit of what one could personally gain as part of
engaging in CP. It has considerable overlap with the VFI functions Understanding and
Enhancement. The below two extracts reflect the Understanding function, although P6 and P36
engage in community issues and influence organisational decisions beyond volunteering. While
not explicitly seeking to influence policy decisions, both exhibit socio-political intentions for
systemic change:
P31 (M, 29 years old, Pre-COVID-19 Ground-up initiative):
I kind of just look through The Straits Times [newspapers] on a daily basis, and just try
to see Oh, can I craft a response to a particular publication essentially, and then publish
something? That’s one form of advocacy, and it’s just for me to start to try out and build
up some capacity to understand like, how do you do the right thing? How do you interact
with this, in this particular space, try to experiment with different forms of ideas and
suggestions.
P36 (M, 25 years old, Pre-COVID-19 Ground-up initiative):
I think typically people will be like, “Hey, why you do such things (starting CP projects),
waste time, [you’re] not making money.” But my point of view is if I run something, I
think there are invaluable skill sets [to be gained]. And there is that growth element. I
learned about the issue, about this particular system, about this person's way of life and
how they're affected by policy or whatever.
Interviewees immersed in CP for the benefits of developing a positive sense of self and social
ties as well, reflecting the Enhancement function:
P35 (M, 37 years old, Pre-COVID-19 Ground-up initiative):
I struggled a lot with self-esteem and my purpose in this world. And so, in a way when I
adopted this environmentalism it served in a way to give me that purpose, that reason for
living. Secondly also I felt like “Oh I can wear something on my shirt that I can be proud
of.” And then maybe people will look at me differently like it becomes something that I
can be special in this world for. Because not that many people are green at that time so it
became something that I could be known for or be unique.
P35’s initial foray into environmentalism through seeking a positive sense of self occurred at the
life stage of self-exploration and identity-forming. CP engagement as a means for creating social
capital through socialisation opportunities adds to the person’ sense of self too:
P34 (F, 24 years old, Personal collaborations):
I definitely felt that I was under-represented, it wasn't easy for me to find people who
look like me, who have the same passion as me, at school or in university. So I definitely
felt lonely. So I felt like by using my social media [channel] as an avenue to communicate
and to find [these] people, I will also be able to inspire and find friends through social
media.
From her personal struggle of feeling under-represented, P34 used CP as a channel to find allies
with the same passion and who belonged to the same social group.
The third aspect is authentic connection with the target group.
P7 (M, 29 years old, Formal SSO):
I think [virtual volunteering during COVID-19] did not give me the same satisfaction that
I had at the [volunteering with youths at-risk] before COVID-19. Because I think you
know human interactions are really- at least it resonated with me, it gives me some form
of happiness or satisfaction, I do not get through virtually. [sic]
P7 highlights how the nature of volunteering affects the quality of the significance sought. He
contrasts the short-term and virtual form of volunteering with his pre-COVID volunteering that
was longer-term, describing virtual volunteering as ‘quite transactional’. Other interviewees
Finding Significance in this aspect shared his intrinsic satisfaction from connecting with the
target group.
Fourthly, making a difference has an altruistic connotation, but there is also a sense of personal
gratification derived from Finding Significance through making a positive impact of perceived
consequence:
P14 (F, 38 years old, Formal SSO):
I know I [can't] help them much, you know, but I think there's always a small little thing
that you can help them. Sometimes, we say that this thing [that was donated for
distribution to the families] might not be good for me. But it might be good for other
people in the community- it might be a very useful thing.
Making a difference is a subjective perception. Even if one sees that the efforts are not sufficient
to address all the needs, as long as the efforts had been of direct observable consequence, it
contributes to Finding Significance that drives participation.
Lastly, an encouraging social milieu (cf. Pancer, 2015) contributes to Finding Significance
through fulfilling the social expectations of CP as a desirable behaviour and the desire for
positive experiences with like-minded people.
P19 (F, 23 years old, Pre- COVID-19 Ground-up initiative):
… because of COVID-19, then I think various churches, my church included, became a
lot more involved [in migrant worker initiatives]. Because like, as a church, we do
missions in the sense of going overseas to do like various activities [but when] the
traveling [was] halted the migrant workers being the foreigners in our own country, a lot
of attention was driven towards that instead. So I naturally followed.
P39 (F, 43 years old, Grassroots organisation):
I think after a while [the volunteers] all have become like family so a lot of us just stay on,
even though we somehow get exhausted we still stay on because you know we are kind of
close now.
While the first extract (P19) points to the Social function in the VFI, the desire for socialisation
with like-minded peers which sustains P39’s engagement is aligned with the Socialisation
motive (Butt et al., 2017; Esmond & Dunlop, 2004).
Civic Participation Engagement as Fulfilling Functions
Finding Significance forms the intention to engage in CP, which in the presence of perceived
accessibility results in actual engagement. Fulfilling Personal Functions is the satisfaction of
personal goals and wants implicated in Finding Significance through engagement in a matching
CP activity. The individual identity is integrated with the CP engagement, and serves to maintain
the person’s commitment to the CP despite personal costs.
For example, one interviewee expressed that what prompted him to start and sustain his
volunteering was simply
P22 (M, 61 years old, Formal SSO):
God’s calling for this job.
And actually I thought of quitting but then after that one of the sermons just suddenly talk
about the serving and also the Bible phrase that the pastor used reminded me that my job
is not done yet. So God still want to use me for this purpose.
The personal desire to quit, in part because of how ‘it’s quite a heavy burden’ in the work of
helping debt-ridden families in their challenging circumstances, was recast into a continued
sense of purpose to continue the work through ongoing religious sensemaking.
The situational factors that affected perceived accessibility included both COVID-19 and non-
COVID-19 factors. The below extracts from an interviewee who engaged in CP before and
during the pandemic highlight both factors.
P4 (47 years old, COVID-19 Ground-up initiative):
So I was thinking that I have a bit more time now because my [children] are older. So I
thought that maybe I can start being physically involved in the work. I mean, of course, I
have been sponsoring and stuff, you know, but I thought it's important, maybe I can do
something physically. So we started running a few things [for the gardeners and cleaners
in the condominium, and migrant workers working nearby].
The intention to be directly involved was latent until P4 was afforded more time. The shelter-in-
place measures during COVID-19 (‘Circuit Breaker’) removed this perceived accessibility again,
until she found allies over social media and they found ways to help while safe distancing.
… all of that activity had to stop… [when] we went into the Circuit Breaker. So I was
just feeling… there was something which was not right, I was not very happy with the
situation, I thought that I should be doing something more. But I had no idea what and
how to do it… I think it's a coincidence that I found these three other women through
social media. And…we realised that all of us were trying to do something and not really
finding the right channel to do it.
However, an unexpected finding was that there were comparatively more instances of COVID-
19 contributing to CP via increased perceived accessibility. This will be discussed in the next
section.
COVID-19 Contributions to Civic Participation
The impact of COVID-19 on CP can also be understood in terms of its effect on identity
integration. One key effect of the disaster was disruption of normal life due to the shelter-in-
place (termed ‘Circuit Breaker’ in Singapore) and other social distancing measures. It
contributed to the intentions to engage in CP as a way of personal coping and activated the latent
antecedents by providing the right conditions for CP (perceived accessibility) for those who prior
to the pandemic had the intentions to engage but felt that it was untenable for them.
Personal coping through CP to mitigate the negative effects from the disruption of normal life
led people to seek meaningful occupation of their time through CP activities, as epitomised
by the extract below:
P3 (F, 20 years old, COVID-19 Ground-up initiative):
I guess I'm just picking…meaningful things to do [through CP]. Cos [my everyday
routine during Circuit Breaker] was getting very mundane so I was thinking that I can do
productive things cos it was during my holidays.
Engagement was also way to regulate the negative feelings of fear, confusion and heaviness due
to the disruption of normal life:
P6 (F, 20 years old, COVID-19 Ground-up initiative):
I think being at home you feel very restless and I had a lot of like written assignments. So
just felt very like deadweight to me. So starting on a project that was extremely new, and
like doing it from scratch, and learning all over again, like really made me feel like that
was a way to keep myself like engaged. And not like focusing on the bad. Because you
keep thinking about creating good as well. Yes, it was like, at that point in time work [on
the ground-up initiative] was that like avenue of distraction for us? Because there was
only so many hours, you could play a game for before you got bored. Yeah. So I think
that's what I appreciated about the Circuit Breaker, and the opportunities that were
provided for me.
Fulfilling Functions in terms of deriving personal benefits and making a difference allowed both
interviewees to cope with the disruption of normal life caused by COVID-19.
More significantly, the disruption of normal life was seen to increase the perceived accessibility
for CP. While the disruption was unpleasant and exerted some mental toll, the interviewees also
saw this positively as having increased ‘spare time’, which then increased the perceived
accessibility of CP during the pandemic. This is encapsulated in the following extract:
Researcher: How did COVID-19 help you to have that capacity to volunteer?
P21 (F, 24 years old, Pre-COVID-19 Ground-up initiative):
I think if I have this full extent of my social life, and like this travelling life and my work
life, I don't think I'll have extra time to do volunteering there. I don't even think it will
even cross my mind to help someone. I don't know, maybe I'll just be so living in my own
bubble, because I have this life I always know. And then because of COVID it took away
like my social life. And then the [ability to travel overseas]. So that kind of opened up this
avenue of volunteering. I always wanted to try to volunteer, but it is always just at the
back of my head… Yeah. So I think COVID was the one who like made it happen
Further, highlighting the subjectivity of perceived accessibility, she expressed desire to sustain
her volunteering:
I do see myself doing this pretty long-term. COVID just opened up this avenue of my life
that I’m going to dedicate to.
Other interviewees also highlighted how the ‘right’ situational factors for engagement were
created due to the disrupted normalcy, including work-from-home arrangements and inability to
engage in other leisure activities. This suggests a level of latent CP antecedents that was
triggered by the disaster, at least for the more socioeconomically advantaged who experienced
the disruption as affording them more time.
Typology of Functions by Volunteer Type
The preceding sections on the mechanism, Individual Identity Integration, answered the first two
research questions on the intrapersonal antecedents of CP and the impact of COVID-19 on these
antecedents. This section addresses the third research question.
In line with abductive inquiry, Individual Identity Integration was compared and contrasted with
literature, especially the VFI and other volunteer function models. A striking finding was that the
same function was fulfilled differently, depending on the nature of the CP engagement. The five
aspects of Finding Significance and their sub-themes can be re-organised based on the ideal
types of Citizen Volunteers and Labour Volunteers in Arai’s typology (2000), and existing
personal functions by volunteer type.
Volunteer Types
Function Category Citizen Volunteer Labour Volunteer
Contribution Structural change Personal impact
(Making a Difference) Personal impact
Understanding Personal development: Personal development:
(skills, knowledge, character) community-focused self-focused
Social Integration Personal connection with target group
Affiliation Encouraging social milieu
Socialisation
Beliefs Religious sensemaking
Extracts to highlight how the same function is fulfilled differently between the volunteer types
will be presented next.
Owing to the research topic, majority of sample are Citizen Volunteers who were actively
involved in planning and organising support around the affected groups during COVID-19 when
fresh needs arose. Citizen Volunteers are characterised by their personal investment in the
community problems, both psychologically and in decision-making on organisational actions
taken to address these issues. They may hence have socio-political agendas in their CP, which
inclines them to seek structural change in making a difference, on top of wanting to make a
personal impact on the target group (see extract from P14 in p.12):
P13 (M, 66 years old, Cross-sector involvement):
We do make progress [in societal change]… [Being one] of the few bridges to the
different groups- I am friends with the government, friends with the civil society, and it’s
a privilege to be in that space where people trust me [to do this work].
The personal vision of societal transformation in these interviewees orients them to derive
personal gratification from making a difference in that area.
On the other hand, Labour Volunteers implement the programmes and activities set by the
organisation, which increases social integration but has little socio-political consequence to both
the volunteer and social change. They may also be less familiar with the organisation’s goals.
This was observed to relate to their experience of personal development through CP, which was
more self-focused:
P20 (F, 35 years old, Not currently involved):
I actually feel that [volunteering] has transformed me as a person, to be more human.
Not to say that to serve them for your own benefit, but there is that mutual exchange
going on where they benefit financially and you also grow to be more human.
Citizen Volunteers seek a community-focused growth through their CP:
P2 (Q, 22 years old, COVID-19 Ground-up initiative):
I entered mutual aid from a place of, kind of trying to like unlearn all this hierarchal
dynamics [between helper and those being helped] internally.
The absence of the third type, Techno Volunteers, might explain the absence of the Career theme
and an emphasis on relational functions (Social Integration and Affiliation). Techno Volunteers
are those who ‘contribute to efficiencies in the delivery of services’ (Arai, 2000, p. 344) through
their specialised skills, and thus may not be as motivated to build strong social ties with the
target group or with other volunteers.
Discussion and Conclusion
This paper expands on previous work focusing on planned volunteering and expanding the
number of functions beyond the VFI. The Individual Identity Integration mechanism highlighted
that perceived accessibility for CP was required to effectuate the latent antecedent of Finding
Significance. The COVID-19 pandemic reinforced Finding Significance through CP as a means
to cope and increased perceived accessibility. Lastly, there are important nuances in Fulfilling
Functions between Citizen and Labour Volunteers (Arai, 2000) who participate differently.
While functional motivation theory (Clary et al., 1998) was shown to have crossover utility for
forms of CP apart from volunteering, the findings contrasted with the known antecedents of SV,
namely emergent social identity and norms of collectivity (Drury et al., 2016; Ntontis et al.,
2021). The lack of emergent social identity might stem from the unique characteristics of
COVID-19 as a disaster. While people largely suffer similarly in disasters like earthquakes, the
pandemic exacerbated socioeconomic inequalities (Chabbott & Sinclair, 2020; Shadmi et al.,
2020). The privileged were much more shielded from the adverse impacts as most could work
from home without income loss (Gould & Kassa, 2021; International Labour Organization, 2020)
and could even derive some positive aspects from the pandemic (Irawanto et al., 2021;
Partington et al., 2022). This stratification of disaster impact can explain the absence of a
‘common fate’ (Elcheroth & Drury, 2020). Individual Identity Integration, especially in the
context of the personal coping through CP, appears to a better explanation in this context.
Further, it appears that the intention to engage in CP was present but not effectuated, as COVID-
19 contributed to emergent CP mainly through the increased perceived accessibility. It may be
that norms of collectivity were already present, as a communitarian narrative is espoused in
Singapore (Ang, 2017).
Implications
In the face of increasing societal polarisation threatening the fabric of modern societies (Kubin &
von Sikorski, 2021; McCoy & Somer, 2019), CP engagement is even more important to mitigate
the pernicious effects of exacerbated social inequality in the next pandemic threat (Mipatrini et
al., 2022). Intentional efforts to encourage CP can target the socioeconomically advantaged
segments of the population who are likely to experience increased perceived accessibility from
the social distancing measures for infection control. This can be beneficial for both the volunteer
and society. The higher-income group with greater digital access were more likely to experience
a greater impact on their well-being due to greater distress from perceived COVID-19-related
information overload (X. Chen et al., 2022). The study findings concur with research on SV
(Kulik et al., 2016; Yang, 2021) that CP engagement can help mitigate these negative emotions.
The concept of perceived accessibility introduces a pertinent research agenda in comparing
volunteers and non-volunteers. While there are motivational differences between the two groups
(Clary et al., 1996; Niebuur et al., 2019; Smith et al., 2010), the lack of perceived accessibility
for CP is likely to be a significant factor too. More research can be done on the theoretical
development of perceived accessibility, particularly specific circumstantial and attitudinal factors
contributing to increased perceived accessibility, apart from the pandemic context.
Lastly, the typology of functions by volunteer type can be applied in volunteer recruitment by
matching persuasive messages to the potential volunteers’ dominant motivation (Snyder &
Omoto, 2009). Digital advancements allow for the detailed targeting of recruitment messaging.
For example, a social bot on an online or phone application serving as a clearinghouse of CP
opportunities can be used to interact with interested individuals to understand the person’s
functional motivations and other details important for volunteer matching. The social bot can
then recommend a curated list of CP opportunities that match the person’s responses. Such
matching is a win-win solution for both the volunteer and the SSO because it increases the
likelihood of volunteer satisfaction and retention (Arai, 2000; Snyder & Omoto, 2008).
Limitations
Interviews were conducted in English, and participants were recruited through purposive and
theoretical sampling. This may have excluded non-English speaking persons and those engaging
in less visible or common forms of participation. For example, volunteers in backend roles that
do not involve social interactions. The CP represented by the sample is still largely human-
centric, which may mean that the emergent theory overlooks important nuances for people
involved in ecocentric participation.
Another limitation pertains to the person of the researcher being the instrument in data analysis,
which introduces the risk of subjectivity. The emergent theory cannot be divorced from the
researcher’s involvement as a Singaporean who engages in CP and is similarly concerned about
eco-social issues as the interviewees. Even though this intersubjectivity between the researcher
and the interviewees can be an advantage in apprehending the phenomenon, this epistemological
risk still exists.
Conclusion
This paper demonstrated the overlapping functional motivations from planned volunteering to
other forms of CP but also presented two important theoretical developments. Perceived
accessibility was introduced as a factor that mediates the effectuation of functional motivations
in actual engagement. This concept allows a nuanced understanding of the intentions to volunteer
and explains the pandemic’s contribution to CP. A second theoretical development is the
classification of motivations by volunteer type. It is an important step for understanding the
varied forms of CP within the socio-political context. Given the value of CP for societal security,
particularly in disasters, these theoretical developments contribute to a better understanding, and
thus, promotion of CP in the civil sphere (Alexander, 2006).