Functional Perspectives in Mental Jigsaw Puzzles: Insights from Eye-tracking,
Questionnaire, and Behavioral Data
a b a
Tsuyoshi Yoshioka *, Hiroyuki Muto , and Jun Saiki
Graduate School of Human and Environmental Studies, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
Graduate School of Sustainable System Sciences, Osaka Metropolitan University, Sakai, Osaka,
Japan
The correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Tsuyoshi Yoshioka, Graduate
School of Human and Environmental Studies, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. Email:
yoshioka.tsuyoshi.y65@kyoto-u.jp
Functional Perspectives in Mental Jigsaw Puzzles: Insights from Eye-tracking,
Questionnaire, and Behavioral Data
Abstract
This study investigated cognitive strategies in mental jigsaw puzzles, integrating mental rotation
and translation with a focus on directionality and detour arguments. Unlike object mental
rotation tasks, these puzzles introduced physical constraints, revealing systematic directionalities
in both eye movements and subjective reports, where small male objects were consistently
directed toward larger female objects. This was accompanied by longer completion times and
reduced linearity, paralleling strategies used in physical puzzle-solving. Behavioral asymmetries
observed in the puzzles unexpectedly mirrored those found in object mental rotation tasks. While
controlling for mental motion directions showed comparable completion times at 300° between
tasks, the study fell short of fully clarifying the role of detours, indicating the need for further
research.
Keywords
jigsaw puzzles, mental rotation, mental translation, affordance, embodied cognition
Introduction
Jigsaw puzzles, along with related activities such as building blocks and digital games like
Tetris , are widely recognized for engaging mental rotation skills, as suggested by various
studies (Brosnan, 1998; Fissler et al., 2018; Gentile & Lieto, 2022; Mutlu et al., 2020). Some
studies treat rotation tasks as involving matching and fitting processes (Fissler et al., 2018; Xue
et al., 2017), such as aligning and joining puzzle pieces, and consider these processes to share
similar cognitive demands across related tasks (Frick & Pichelmann, 2023; Mutlu et al., 2020).
However, task demands may differ significantly (Yoshioka, 2023). This may be reflected in the
mixed outcomes of studies with primary school children, where puzzle-like mental rotation
training showed benefits in arithmetic performance (Cheng & Mix, 2014; Cheung et al., 2020)
but not in matching and puzzle-like tasks (Hawes et al., 2015). This study pioneers the
investigation of cognitive strategies in two tasks under voluntary conditions and could offer
deeper insights into cognitive processes in real-world contexts, despite the complexity of cause-
and-effect relationships.
Controlling experimental variables is fundamental to uncovering pure cause-and-effect
relationships, as seen in managing trajectory in mental scanning tasks (Kosslyn et al., 1978) or
imagery (Flusberg & Boroditsky, 2011; Sirigu & Duhamel, 2001) and directionality (Xue et al.,
2017) in object mental rotation tasks (Shepard & Metzler, 1971). However, these constraints may
not fully reflect the complexity of cognitive strategies in real-life scenarios. In everyday
activities, small male objects typically move toward larger female objects, as seen when plugging
a male terminal into a female power strip. This cognitive strategy persists even though the
process could be reversed. Reflecting on mental rotation tasks involving male pairs, a question
arises: Could cognitive strategies differ if the pairs were female and male?
Novelty and Importance of the Task Design
This study introduces a novel task using mental jigsaw puzzles to explore cognitive strategies
a pair of male objects) or fitted together in fitting tasks (FT: a pair consisting of a female and a
male object). What makes this method novel is that FT introduces physical constraints that must
be considered when fitting objects together. However, the groove in the female object
corresponds precisely with the male object in MT, suggesting that FT could be solved similarly
to MT by focusing on the groove. A study by Mutlu et al. (2020) support this approach, where
participants were instructed to judge whether a puzzle piece would ‘fit’ into a gap, referring to
this fit as a ‘match’ condition, indicating similar cognitive processes. Similarly, Frick et al.
(2013) and Frick and Pichelmann (2023) demonstrated the interchangeable use of ‘fit’ and
‘match’ in describing the cognitive process of aligning a rotated ghost with a corresponding hole
in puzzle-like tasks, with a medium correlation to object mental rotation tasks involving
matching objects (Frick & Pichelmann, 2023).
While ignoring physical constraints may be theoretically sound, it might not apply well in
real-world contexts. The purpose of jigsaw puzzles extends beyond visually judging a match or
fit to achieving a physical fit, as seen in daily activities like fitting suitcases into a car trunk
(Bilge & Taylor, 2017). Motor simulation, involving both visual and physical aspects, prepares
for subsequent actions. Therefore, using strategies common in physical puzzles might be more
effective. This task design enables the investigation of cognitive strategies in detail, particularly
directionality.
Directionality
In this study, directionality refers to the preferred orientation or movement direction that entities
possess. For example, people tend to prefer the path requiring the smallest degree of rotation
during manual rotation tasks with three-dimensional (3D) objects manipulated via a hand knob,
even if a longer path in the opposite direction is possible (e.g., rotating 60° clockwise instead of
300° counterclockwise), as shown by Wohlschläger & Wohlschläger (1998). Directionality can
encompass different types of movements, similar to the motion of a rigid body, specifically
translation (leftward/rightward, backward/forward, upward/downward) and rotation
(counterclockwise/clockwise around axes: pitch, yaw, and roll). Radial movements
(inward/outward) are considered a type of translation, as they involve movement toward or away
from a central point.
Xue et al. (2017) was among the first to systematically investigate object mental rotation
tasks under conditions where translation directions were controlled in advance, demonstrating
that cognitive processing patterns vary depending on the specific object being rotated and
aligned. This highlights the importance of considering directionality in cognitive tasks, as
different strategies can emerge based on these directional preferences. Various outcomes in
directionality may arise when the tasks in this study are performed voluntarily.
One possibility is that no specific directionality bias exists. In tasks such as FT and MT,
where two objects need to be simply matched or fitted together, there may be no specific
directional bias. This is consistent with findings from eye-tracking research, such as (Just &
Carpenter, 1976), which demonstrated that multiple saccades are exchanged between two objects
during matching, indicating no inherent preference for one direction over another.
However, certain contexts may introduce directionality biases. The first potential bias is a
left-to-right preference. This might arise due to a common lateral bias, similar to the one
observed in reading this sentence, where movement progresses from left to right. Walker (2015)
demonstrated that people often depict motion in still images with a left-to-right directional bias,
suggesting that this preference is deeply rooted in visual processing and may influence how we
approach rotation tasks.
In contrast, a right-to-left bias could also emerge, particularly in right-handed individuals.
The proximity of objects to the right hand, which is dominant for most people (Nicholls et al.,
2013), may contribute to this bias. For example, the handedness questionnaire by Nicholls et al.
(2013) suggests that right-handed individuals often hold a matchbox with their left hand while
striking a match with their right. This tendency might encourage a preference for right-to-left
directionality in tasks that involve rotation or alignment.
Another bias to consider is a rotated-to-canonical position bias. Tarr and Pinker (1989)
found that people tend to rotate objects into their canonical positions, or the most familiar
orientations. This bias is likely to appear in FT, particularly when rotating a larger female piece
(remnants of a rotated cube) to align with a smaller male piece to create an upright cube. This
process reflects the cognitive preference for recognizing objects in their familiar orientations.
Lastly, a small male-to-larger female bias, commonly observed in jigsaw puzzle solving,
may also emerge. Jigsaw puzzles often involve transferring smaller pieces to a larger, partially
completed assembly, and this bias may become evident when rotating small male pieces to fit
with larger female pieces.
Trajectory
Beyond directionality, there may be two distinct trajectory strategies in solving FT, as it might be
approached similarly to physical jigsaw puzzles. Unlike MT, which involves no obstacles, FT
introduces obstacles that could require participants to navigate puzzle pieces through indirect
routes (detours) rather than direct routes (shortcuts). This study considers multidisciplinary
literature to incorporate more ecological perspectives.
(A) Shortcut: Mental Rotation. Shepard and Metzler (1971) demonstrated a linear relationship
between angular disparity and reaction time in 3D object mental rotation tasks, suggesting the
use of shortcuts across two sides without barriers for aligning two objects. Indeed, Cave et al.
(1994) found steeper slopes across temporal distances in sequentially cued tasks with prior shape
and orientation information, indicating the involvement of more than just attentional shifts.
These findings align with the concept of two independent physical motions in a rigid body:
rotation and translation.
Mental Scanning. Kosslyn et al. (1978) found similar linearity in mental scanning tasks,
where participants imagined moving a point across a straight path in a bird’s eye view,
visualizing unimpeded traversal through a bay’s barriers. This suggests a cognitive tunnel effect
(Burke, 1952), which may favor shortcuts.
Mental Navigation. Thorndyke and Hayes-Roth (1982) explored mental navigation in a
corporate building, showing that map learners (bird’s-eye view) and experienced navigating
learners (worm’s-eye view) excelled at estimating distances along direct paths onsite, supporting
the idea of cognitive tunneling.
(B) Detour: Motor imagery. Sekiyama (1982, 1983) revealed behavioral asymmetry in hand
laterality tasks, highlighting the challenges of imagining physical movements. Echoing these
findings, Tomasino and Gremese (2016) suggested the involvement of bilateral sensorimotor
network in processing bodily stimuli and motor imagery. Notably, the mental rotation of hand
tools may activate the premotor cortex in the hemisphere opposite the dominant hand, influenced
by the object’s manipulability (Vingerhoets et al., 2002), which could similarly play a role in
handling puzzle pieces.
Affordances and Embodied Cognition. Gibson’s (1979) affordance theory explains that
the environment offers certain actions to actors, while embodied cognition examines how the
body itself or the body’s interaction with the environment shapes cognition (Shapiro &
Spaulding, 2021). Flusberg and Boroditsky (2011) demonstrated the role of embodied cognition
by showing slowed mental rotation under motor imagery following the physical experience of
heavier objects, with similar effects reflected in mental navigation findings (Lhuillier et al.,
2018).
Lockman (1984) and Lockman and Adams (2001) studied this interconnection through
the detour paradigm, observing that infants engage with their environment, particularly barriers,
to learn about affordances (Kabadayi et al., 2018). In contrast, mature adults quickly resort to
detours when encountering barriers, often without considering shortcuts—such as when parking
a car.
Present study
The primary objective of this research is to investigate how physical constraints influence
cognitive strategies in FT under voluntary conditions.
Conceptualization and Predictions
Daily observations suggest that when solving physical jigsaw puzzles, there is often a directional
preference for moving smaller male pieces toward larger female pieces, with detours commonly
employed. These interactions shape cognition and reflect the affordances provided by the puzzle
environment, where contextual cues influence movement strategies. In the context of FT, the
presence of female objects may alter the functional role of male objects, guiding both their
directionality and their trajectories.
This study employs subjective reports and eye-tracking to capture potential directional
biases. Previous research has employed eye-tracking to investigate various strategic differences,
including those across angles (Just & Carpenter, 1976), sex (Alexander & Son, 2007; Nazareth et
al., 2019; Scheer et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2023a), congruency (Tang et al., 2023b), spatial ability
(Khooshabeh & Hegarty, 2010; Nazareth et al., 2019), and time-course (Just & Carpenter, 1976;
Nazareth et al., 2019).
In addition to directionality, this study investigates behavioral performance in FT. As
complex than in (a.2), as there are fewer obstacles along the way. Furthermore, even within
conditions (a.1) and (a.2), the degree of obstacles varies depending on the angle (e.g., 60° versus
300°). Cave et al. (1994) suggested that longer distances lead to longer reaction times in
sequentially cued tasks, involving both mental rotation and translation. Echoing this, longer
reaction times in the present study may correspond to longer trajectory lengths due to the
presence of obstacles, while shorter trajectories result in shorter reaction times. In contrast,
conditions (b.1) and (b.2) involve no obstacles, indicating typical behavioral symmetry around
180°. In sum, examining the relationships between reaction time, angles, and the side of the
female object may help distinguish between shortcut and detour strategies.
This study took the stance that there will be a small male-to-larger female bias in the
directionality argument and a tendency toward detours in the trajectory argument. The
preregistered primary predictions are as follows: (1) an emphasis on the larger female object as
the destination for the smaller male object (functional differences in cognitive strategies), (2-1)
longer completion times when navigating obstacles (behavioral asymmetry in FT), and (2-2)
longer times and distinct differences, contrasting with the symmetry and linearity typically
assumed in MT (behavioral differences between FT versus MT).
Materials and methods
Participants
A total of 30 out of 40 participants with normal or corrected-to-normal vision, most of whom
were right-handed (FLANDERS handedness questionnaire; Nicholls et al., 2013; Okubo et al.,
eye-tracking studies (Scheer et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2023a; Tang et al., 2023b) and exceeds the
25 sample size suggested in a pilot study (Yoshioka, 2023), employing similar methodology to
previous research (Chu & Kita, 2011; Wohlschläger & Wohlschläger, 1998). The remaining 10
participants exited early due to reasons such as drowsiness, potential overtime, fluctuations in
eye-movement signals, eye fatigue, and dizziness. Of the original 40 participants, 37 completed a
post-experimental questionnaire, with seven experiencing the experiment partially.
Ethics approval for this study was provided by the Ethics Committee of the Graduate
School of Human and Environmental Studies of Kyoto University (Approval No. 23-H-8). All
participants provided written informed consent prior to the commencement of the experiment.
This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Stimuli
A total of 576 images were generated, with variables including six angles (0° to 300°), two head
types (left and right forward protrusions), same-mirrored pairs (congruent and incongruent), six
object types, and two tasks. The male object was created by subtracting 115 unit-cubes from a
whole cube of 125 unit-cubes, and the female object was created by subtracting the male object
from the whole cube. Visual angles of the objects roughly ranged from 3.9° to 5.5°.
Apparatus
The experiment was conducted in a dark room using an EyeLink 1000 Plus Desktop Mount
participant and a 15.6-inch monitor, at a distance of approximately 735 mm. A foot pedal with
mm camera lens with a sampling rate of 1,000 Hz, managed by the supplier’s supplemental
computer and operating system version 5.50. Only the left eye was tracked to avoid reflections
from the monitor on the right eyeglass lens. Eye-tracking data were extracted using the supplier’s
Data Viewer software version 4.3.1, and the experiment was run using PsychoPy version
2023.1.2 (Peirce et al., 2019) on a Windows 10 computer.
Procedure
block, the main block, and a post-experimental questionnaire. The practice and main blocks
started with calibrating and validating the eye-tracking (C/V). The entire procedure took
approximately 75 minutes. This study used a five-point C/V (Tang et al., 2023b), with validation
criteria set to an average error below .5° and a maximum error of 1.0°.
two objects matched or fitted, and the left pedal if they did not, responding as quickly and
accurately as possible. Between trials, they were asked to fixate on a cross at the center of the
screen. To minimize hand gestures (Chu & Kita, 2011) or movements during the experiment,
participants were instructed to place their fingers crossed (hands covered) below their stomachs.
The post-experimental questionnaire used a two-alternative forced-choice method with
four randomized questions. Participants were asked to indicate whether they generally matched
(fitted) the left block with the right block or vice versa. Participants were instructed to respond
honestly.
Design
This study employed a within-participants design, manipulating angles (Angle: 0°, 60°, 120°,
180°, 240°, 300°), rotation side (R-side: left, right), and task type (Task: FT, MT). Subjective
reporting variables included direction (Direction: left → right, left ← right). This research
collapsed both head and object types and analyzed only the congruent condition. Key metrics
included reaction time (RT) and error ratio (ER) for behavioral data, dwell time ratio (DTR) for
eye-tracking data, and positive responses for self-report data.
Data curation
This study calculated ER as the ratio of errors to total responses and determined DTR as the ratio
of fixation time within one rectangular area of interest (AOI) on the rotation side to the combined
fixation time within two rectangular AOIs. A DTR value greater than .5 indicates a bias toward
Behavioral data underwent screening to exclude responses over 30 seconds, below 200
msec (Woods et al., 2015), and outliers, using the median absolute deviation method with a
threshold of 2.5 (Leys et al., 2013). This research approximately analyzed 80% of congruent
trials for mean correct RT, with all participants achieving a trial accuracy rate above 70%.
Eye-tracking data underwent screening to exclude the first fixation, trials without
effective records, and fixations outside AOIs, leading to the removal of about 2% of congruent
trials. The analysis also excluded trials that were removed from correct RT. Self-report data
centered on participants who completed or partially completed the main block and the post-
experimental questionnaire. A secondary analysis found no significant gender differences in key
metrics such as RT, ER, and DTR (Yoshioka & Saiki, 2024).
Data analysis
All analyses and visualization were performed using R software (R Core Team, 2023) with the
rstatix (Kassambara, 2023a), ARTool (Kay et al., 2021; Wobbrock et al., 2011), DescTools
(Signorell, 2023), ggpubr (Kassambara, 2023b), and gridExtra (Auguie, 2017) packages.
Parametric tests included RM-ANOVA with Greenhouse–Geisser correction (Olejnik & Algina,
2003) and the one-sample Student t-test. Nonparametric tests included RM-ART-ANOVA (Kay,
2021; Wobbrock et al., 2011), ART-C contrast test (Elkin et al., 2021), the one-sample sign test,
the Breslow–Day test, the Pearson chi-square test with Yates correction, and the binomial test.
Priority-based and Bonferroni–Holm p-value corrections were applied where appropriate.
Detailed Explanations on Predictions
This study investigates directionality using both eye-tracking and self-report data. If FT are not
solved like physical jigsaw puzzles, no bias is expected in DTR, and the self-report data should
reflect chance levels. On the other hand, if FT follows physical operations, participants are
expected to operate from the smaller male object to the larger female object, with increased focus
on the female object as the end point of the movement, showing differences from MT.
Additionally, this study analyzes the relationship between reaction times and angle
conditions to examine trajectories. If FT are not solved like physical jigsaw puzzles, typical
1 Repeated measures analysis of variance
2 RM-aligned rank transform-ANOVA
3 ART contrasts
behavioral symmetry, as assumed in MT, should be observed. In contrast, if FT follows physical
operations, behavioral asymmetry is anticipated. Specifically, longer reaction times are expected
when the female object is rotated at 240° and 300° on the left side, and at 60° and 120° on the
right, while shorter times are expected at 60° and 120° on the left, and at 240° and 300° on the
right. This pattern would create behavioral asymmetry around 180°, distinct from the
symmetrical patterns typically assumed in MT. Furthermore, these behaviors would reflect
reduced linearity in FT compared with MT.
Results
Functional difference
Eye movements
showed a significant interaction effect among Angle, R-side, and Task [F(5, 145) = 2.842, p
2 2
= .036, η = .008, η = .088]. A simple effects analysis of the two-way RM-ANOVA for Task
𝐺 𝑃
showed significant interaction effects of Angle and Task on both rotation sides (all p < .001, η
≥ .026, η ≥ .143). A simple-simple effects analysis of the one-way RM-ANOVA for Task on
both rotation sides showed significant main effects of Task at all angles (all p < .001, η ≥ .191,
η ≥ .338). The one-sample Student t-test, with Angle and R-side collapsed, showed a significant
difference from .5 in FT [t(29) = 16.909, p < .001, 𝑟 = .908]. Hence, the fovea dwelled more on
the side with a rotated object, particularly on the side with a rotated female object compared to a
rotated male object.
Subjective report
significant non-homogeneity of odds ratios between Direction and Task on the strata of rotation
sides [𝜒 (1, N = 37) = 44.209, p < .001, W = 1.195]. The post hoc Pearson chi-squared test
showed significant associations between Direction and Task on both rotation sides (all p < .001,
W ≥ .334).
At individual task levels, the chi-squared test for both FT and MT showed significant
associations between Direction and R-side (all p < .05, W ≥ .126). The binomial test for FT
showed significant biases from .5 on both rotation sides (all p < .001); for MT, there was only a
significant bias on the right rotation side (p = .005). Hence, FT operated in a systematically
directional manner, while MT was systematic on the right but not the left rotation side.
Behavioral Asymmetry
respectively. The three-way RM-ANOVA for Angle and R-side showed no significant interaction
2 2
effect among Angle, R-side, and Task (η = .001, η = .024), but a significant interaction effect
𝐺 𝑃
2 2
between Angle and R-side [F(3.26, 94.60) = 21.290, p < .001, η = .028, η = .423]. A simple
𝐺 𝑃
effects analysis of the one-way RM-ANOVA for R-side, after collapsing tasks, showed
2 2
significant main effects of R-side at three angles (60°, 240°, 300°; all p < .001, η ≥ .050, η
𝐺 𝑃
2 2
≥ .512) but not at other angles (all η ≤ .009, η ≤ .170). Another simple effects analysis of the
𝐺 𝑃
one-way RM-ANOVA for Angle showed significant main effects of Angle on both rotation sides
2 2
(all p < .001, η ≥ .392, η ≥ .686). The post hoc paired Student t-test on both rotation sides
𝐺 𝑃
showed significant differences both between 60° and 300° and between 120° and 240° (all p
< .05, 𝑟 ≥ .160).
To explore symmetry after collapsing asymmetric behaviors, the R-side factor was
collapsed. The one-way RM-ANOVA for Angle in both tasks, after collapsing rotation sides,
2 2
showed significant main effects of Angle (all p < .001, η ≥ .321, η ≥ .585), and the post hoc
𝐺 𝑃
paired Student t-test in both tasks showed no significant difference either between 60° and 300°
behavioral asymmetry, with the same characteristics at 120°, which diminished when collapsing
rotation sides.
Linearity
A previous study by Shepard and Metzler (1971) simplified rotation sides to a general direction
and reduced angles to a 0°–180° range, facilitating linear regression analysis and allowing for
exploratory examination of cognitive shortcuts and detours in FT.
A trend analysis, after collapsing to a 0°–180° range, showed significant linear
relationships between angular disparity and correct RT for both FT [F(1, 87) = 126.01, p < .001,
2 2 2 2
η = .325, η = .592] and MT [F(1, 87) = 281.64, p < .001, η = .515, η = .764]. While FT
𝑃 𝑃
demonstrated significant linearity, the angular disparity explained approximately 19% less
Behavioral difference
2 2
Task showed a significant main effect of Task [F(1, 29) = 33.338, p < .001, η = .040, η
𝐺 𝑃
2 2
= .535], but no other significant effects (η ≤ .008, η ≤ .080). Hence, FT generally took more
𝐺 𝑃
time overall than MT.
Task differences in ER were less distinctive, with speed compatible with accuracy. The
three-way RM-ART-ANOVA for Task showed no significant interaction effect between Angle,
R-side, and Task (η = .017), but a significant interaction effect between Angle and Task [F(5,
667) = 3.657, p = .009, η = .027]. The post hoc ART-C showed a significant bias of FT over MT
only at 120° [t(667) = 2.680, p = .045].
the same direction as MT on the right rotation side. At the same time, rotation also has a
direction. This study accounted for these two confounders in an exploratory analysis by
controlling for rotational direction and flipping the MT graph on the R-side right level at 180°
confounders. The two-way RM-ANOVA for Task showed a significant interaction effect between
2 2
Angle and Task [F(10, 290) = 7.180, p < .001, η = .041, η = .198]. A simple effects analysis of
𝐺 𝑃
the one-way RM-ANOVA for Task showed significant main effects of Task at five angles (all p
2 2 2 2
< .001, η ≥ .080, η ≥ .378) except 180° (η = .015, η = .052). The post hoc pairwise
𝐺 𝑃 𝐺 𝑃
comparison mostly showed significant differences between Task levels at five angles (all p < .05,
2 2 2
𝑟 ≥ .149), except at 180° (𝑟 = .052) and between FT and MT (flipped) at 300° (𝑟 = .078).
Thus, FT still took more time than MT at most angles from 0° (60°, 120°, 240°).
Discussion
This study examined how physical constraints influence cognitive strategies in FT under
voluntary conditions by addressing the following three points:
(1) Functional Differences in Cognitive Strategies: FT operated in a systematically directional
manner in subjective reports and eye movements. This pattern differed markedly from MT
(2-1) Behavioral Asymmetry in FT: The results revealed behavioral asymmetries in both FT
(2-2) Behavioral Differences between FT versus MT: Participants generally took longer to
comparison directions, the completion times for FT and MT were comparable at 180° (𝑟 = .052)
2 2
and 300° (𝑟 = .078). Notably, among significant task differences, 60° (𝑟 = .149) was
Directionality argument reflection
Subjective reports and eye-tracking data both support the directionality argument. Participants
consistently showed a preference for matching/fitting small male objects with larger female
objects, indicating a directional bias in cognitive strategies. This was further reinforced by eye-
tracking data, which showed stronger dwell times on rotated female objects, underscoring a
systematic directional bias in task processing. Together, these findings suggest that participants
employed a directional strategy similar to the physical act of assembling jigsaw puzzles, where
pieces are typically fitted in a specific direction.
Detour argument reflection
Longer completion times, reduced linearity, and directionality in FT—mirroring physical jigsaw
puzzles—support the detour argument. However, unexpected breaches of symmetry and linearity
in MT challenge this perspective. Instead, behaviors observed in both tasks, after controlling for
illustrates this angle-dependent behavior, with shortcuts occurring at angles under 90° and
detours at angles over 90°.
Angle-dependent behaviors themselves appear to hold. The face inversion effect
(Thompson, 1980; Yin, 1969) highlights orientation-sensitive cognitive thresholds at roughly
±90° (Cleary et al., 2015; Murray et al., 2000; Stürzel & Spillmann, 2000), applicable to other
stimuli by shaping prototypes or expertise in recognition (Diamond & Carey, 1986; Valentine,
1988; Valentine & Bruce, 1986). Similarly, an investigation by Edelman and Bülthoff (1992)
implied a decline in object recognition accuracy for novel angles away from trained angles,
mostly from 80° onward after repeated sessions. The role of object recognition in mental rotation
may be complemented by physical rotation research by Gardony et al. (2014), where participants
appeared to make congruence judgments between two objects during same trials below a 90°
angular disparity. The threshold concept extends to strategies; for example, occupational
experiences of podiatrists might lead to strategic shifts from motor to non-motor imagery in
mentally rotating inverted foot stimuli (Edwards et al., 2019).
Alternative explanations
Given the nature of voluntary conditions, several alternative explanations might account for the
findings, though none fully explain them in isolation, particularly the systematic directionality
and angle-dependent behavior. Instead, a combination of these explanations, along with the
trajectories, may provide a more comprehensive understanding of the present findings. These
explanations include the following.
One possibility is detours in MT. While MT lacks physical barriers, the possibility of
detours cannot be entirely dismissed. The mental process of matching objects in MT may be
analogous to fitting male objects into female objects in FT. This could involve mentally
envisioning a tight-fitting ‘box’ around the male object, requiring detours to fit the male object
within this female ‘box.’ This possibility is supported by the findings that linearity in MT
accounted for only half the variability and by the observed behavioral asymmetry. However, MT
explained 19% more variability than FT, suggesting that while detours may be involved in both
tasks, they play a lesser role in MT.
A second potential explanation is coherence in concepts. Behavioral asymmetry may
arise from conceptual coherence, similar to phenomena observed in the Stroop effect, Simon
effect, or stimulus-response compatibility (Fitts & Seeger, 1953; Lu & Proctor, 1995). For
example, Guiard (1983) demonstrated how ear-stimulating laterality aligns with steering wheel
rotation direction, illustrating a relationship between rotational direction and laterality. This
concept may be applicable to the mental rotation tasks in this study. Specifically, the coherence
between rotation (Tarr & Pinker, 1989; Wohlschläger & Wohlschläger, 1998) and translation
(matching/fitting) directions could account for much of the observed behavioral asymmetry, as
seen in motor responses (Wexler et al., 1998; Wohlschläger & Wohlschläger, 1998), rotational
motion aftereffects (Corballis & McLaren, 1982; Heil et al., 1997), laterality in both objects
(Jolicoeur, 1985; Searle & Hamm, 2016) and hands (Mochizuki et al., 2019; Sekiyama, 1982).
A third possibility is parts recognition. Hoffman and Richards (1984) suggested that
visual processing often involves segmenting shapes at their concave regions, which are perceived
as natural dividing points. In this study, both the male and female objects contain concave
regions; however, the female objects are characterized by more extensive concave grooves.
These more pronounced concave features in the female objects may require more complex
cognitive processing as the visual system attempts to structurally segment these shapes. This
increased complexity could explain why tasks involving the female object result in longer
reaction times, especially at 0°, where no rotation is required.
ground segregation processes within the ventral pathway, including regions such as the lateral
occipital complex, V2, and potentially V1 (Fang et al., 2009; Grill-Spector et al., 2001; Kourtzi
& Kanwisher, 2001; Rubin, 2001). In contrast, the dorsal pathway, which is involved in mental
rotation and includes the inferior and superior parietal cortices (Tomasino & Gremese, 2016;
Zacks, 2008), may handle the mental manipulation of these objects. This division of labor
between the ventral and dorsal pathways may account for the dip in performance at a 60° angular
disparity.
A fourth explanation is part/whole comparisons. Bilge and Taylor (2017) demonstrated a
tendency for bisected 3D objects to result in longer completion times than whole 3D stimuli,
particularly at 0° and angles greater than 90°, suggesting that FT may utilize a piecemeal
strategy, while MT employs a more holistic approach. This angle-dependent behavior may result
from a strategy shift at 90° (Khooshabeh et al., 2013).
A fifth potential explanation is motor planning. FT may require more complex motor
planning than MT, given the physical nature of fitting objects. This aligns with research showing
longer execution times for more complex motor sequences (Henry & Rogers, 1960; Klapp,
1995). While the actual translation time for detours may be short, the preparation time for
movement could be longer, contributing to the extended completion times observed in FT.
Lastly, bodily constraints may also play a role. While this study attempted to minimize
the beneficial effects of hand gestures (Chu & Kita, 2011), such restrictions might have
inadvertently hindered performance. Previous research has shown reduced performance in
awkward postures during hand laterality tasks, particularly when the hand is positioned on the
back rather than the front (Ionta et al., 2007; Sirigu & Duhamel, 2001), influenced by right-
handedness (Ionta & Blanke, 2009). This is consistent with findings of slower responses in
amputees with aesthetic prostheses (Nico, 2004) and expanded body representations in macaques
after using tools (Iriki et al., 1996; Maravita & Iriki, 2004). These results suggest that even with
the hand in a resting position on the front, right-handedness and the resulting bodily constraints
may have had a greater impact on FT under motor imagery than on MT.
Comparison with Relevant Research
The relationship between jigsaw puzzle solving and mental rotation tasks has been explored in
various contexts, including manual tasks. Aguilar Ramirez et al. (2024) employed an angle-free
analysis and found that men excel in 3D mental rotation tasks, while women outperform men in
assembling two-dimensional (2D) jigsaw puzzles. The puzzle-assembling findings are consistent
with earlier research on children using tablet-based 2D puzzles (Kocijan et al., 2017) but differ
from research involving physical puzzles (McGuinness & Morley, 1991). Aguilar Ramirez et al.
(2024) also conducted a mediation analysis, interpreting their results as evidence of partial
independence between visuospatial abilities between jigsaw puzzle solving and mental rotation
tasks.
However, the analysis may fall short of considering other potential factors. For example,
sex differences in physical and motor characteristics (Miller et al., 1993), as well as fine motor
skills (McGuinness & Morley, 1991; Peters et al., 1990), may help explain female superiority in
assembling 2D jigsaw puzzles. Another relevant factor is the frequent 90° flips in rotation typical
of physical jigsaw puzzle-solving, where pieces are repeatedly flipped until they fit or match.
This may reflect the tendency for females to make more attempts at fitting pieces into incorrect
locations (Aguilar Ramirez et al., 2024). This flipping process resembles how Tetris operates,
with each press of the controller rotating a piece by 90°. As such, a trial-and-error approach may
be more crucial than visuospatial abilities in this context. Previous research on the cognitive
training effects of Tetris found no significant cognitive transfer, such as mental rotation
performance, but rather task-specific transfer, rhetorically referring to the training as ‘Game
over’ (Pilegard & Mayer, 2018), although mental rotation itself may still play a role in the game
(Gentile & Lieto, 2022).
Interestingly, this study’s secondary analysis found no gender differences in eye-tracking
or behavioral outcomes for both FT and MT (Yoshioka & Saiki, 2024), which used a pair of 3D
male objects from Shepard and Metzler (1971) alongside a pair of 3D male and their
corresponding female objects. Hence, the present research provides a more direct, ‘apple-to-
apple’ comparison, investigated through detailed angle-specific analysis in both object mental
rotation and mental jigsaw puzzle tasks (Yoshioka, 2023), thereby facilitating a deeper
understanding of functional differences in visuospatial strategies.
Other research explored cognitive tasks using jigsaw puzzle pieces (Mutlu et al., 2020) or
ghost figures (Frick et al., 2013; Frick & Pichelmann, 2023) both in 2D formats. These studies
share similarities with the present research in that mental jigsaw puzzles appear to engage mental
rotation. Notably, monotonic linearity-like behaviors have been observed (Frick et al., 2013;
Frick & Pichelmann, 2023), and increased neural activation in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
at larger rotation angles has been documented (Mutlu et al., 2020), aligning with findings from a
meta-analysis (Tomasino & Gremese, 2016).
In terms of shapes, both male and female pairs add up to primitive shapes, such as
square-like shapes (Mutlu et al., 2020) or circles (Frick & Pichelmann, 2023), resembling the
cube used in the present study. Regarding individual female shapes, Mutlu et al. (2020)
employed white puzzle pieces fully framed by dark edges and gray assemblies, while Frick et al.
(2013) and Frick and Pichelmann (2023) employed light-gray ghost figures fully framed by dark
edges and dark circles or squares. Both studies employed male puzzle pieces that were color-
matched with the female 'male' figures. Hence, despite the female-male pairings, these visual
cues could imply a predominantly male-male pairing. Indeed, Frick and Pichelmann (2023)
employed a factor analysis to demonstrate that the ghost puzzle tasks measured the same ability
as established object mental rotation tasks. This reflects the interchangeable use of ‘fit’ and
‘match’ in these studies (Frick et al., 2013; Frick & Pichelmann, 2023; Mutlu et al., 2020). The
presence of fully framed female figures may have provided the inner space with a clear meaning,
guiding the participants' perception of the male shapes.
In contrast, the present study's fitting areas for female objects are not fully framed by unit
cubes, resulting in partial shapes. This is similar to physical jigsaw puzzles where fitting involves
typically adding pieces along the edges, either horizontally or vertically, rather than centrally.
Notably, even with incomplete information, a whole can be sometimes effortlessly perceived.
Specifically, figures can still be recognized even when partially shaped, as illustrated by the
recognized, its identification becomes easier in subsequent trials. This recognition process could
shortcuts. Hence, those with stronger gestalt perception skills—typically, the ability to form a
meaningful whole from parts—may have relied on such shortcuts, whereas participants who
strategies, such as detour strategies via motor imagery.
Previous mental rotation studies using fMRI have indicated that the affordances of hand
tools may activate the left premotor cortex among right-handed individuals (Vingerhoets et al.,
2002). It is worth investigating whether the affordances of puzzle pieces in mental jigsaw
puzzles activate similar premotor cortex areas, potentially clarifying the trajectory strategies.
Limitations
The sample size in this study was determined based on a behavioral pilot study using unique
methodologies (Yoshioka, 2023). While this provided a foundation, the calculation may not fully
account for all the present analyses, potentially leading to underestimation or overestimation in
certain areas. To mitigate this, effect sizes are provided where relevant, and raw data are
extensively available. Another limitation is the potential reduction in internal validity due to the
nature of voluntary conditions in the study design, as discussed in the alternative explanations for
the detour argument. Participants were allowed to choose their cognitive strategies, introducing
variability that complicates the control of confounders, such as directionality. However, this
variability also mirrors real-world scenarios, offering valuable insights into natural cognitive
processes.
Theoretical contributions and concluding remarks
This research demonstrates that participants approached mental jigsaw puzzles using strategies
similar to those employed in physical puzzle-solving, with a notable emphasis on systematic
directionality under voluntary conditions. The study introduces mental jigsaw puzzles as an
innovative experimental methodology that integrates mental rotation and translation. Although
behavioral asymmetry, reduced linearity, and angle-dependent behavior were observed, the roles
of detours remain unclear, underscoring the need for further research.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr. Kurt Debono, an anonymous contributor, and Yana Yu for their support of
the eye-tracking system. This research received writing support such as ChatGPT (OpenAI,
California, USA) for improving readability throughout the article.
Disclosure statement
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Funding
This study was part of research supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 20H00107.
Data availability statement
Stimuli, raw data, and supplementary information (including extensive analyses) are available at
Author contributions
Tsuyoshi Yoshioka: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation,
Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing –
original draft, Writing – review & editing. Hiroyuki Muto: Methodology, Supervision, and
Writing – review & editing. Jun Saiki: Funding acquisition, Methodology, Resources,
Supervision, and Writing – review & editing.
ORCID