IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 1
Inducing Positive Involuntary Mental Imagery in Daily Life Using Personalized
Photograph Stimuli
Mahdi Bagheri, Marcella L. Woud, Jolina Simon, Lilah Abdalla, Mats Dombrowe,
Cem Woinek, Jürgen Margraf, and Simon E. Blackwell
Mental Health Research and Treatment Center, Faculty of Psychology, Ruhr-
Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany
PLEASE NOTE THAT THIS IS A PREPRINT VERSION OF AN
UNPUBLISHED MANUSCRIPT
Author Note
The pre-registered study protocol is available on the Open Science Framework (OSF):
link. We assert that there is no potential conflict of interest. We did not receive external
funding for this study. We thank Anton Hetzenegger, Lena M. Liedtke, and Simeon M.
Meister for their help with recruiting and testing participants.
Corresponding author: Mahdi Bagheri, Email: mahdi.bagheri-m9i@rub.de; Address:
Mental Health Research and Treatment Center, Faculty of Psychology, Ruhr-Universität
Bochum, Massenbergstrasse 9-13, 44787 Bochum, Germany.
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 2
Abstract
Most people experience positive involuntary mental imagery (IMI) frequently in daily life,
and this imagery is thought to play important functional roles. However, evidence for the
importance and effects of positive IMI is largely indirect. The current study adapted a
paradigm previously used to induce IMI in the lab with the aim of investigating whether it
could also be used to experimentally induce positive IMI in participants’ daily lives. This
could in turn provide a means to conduct direct experimental tests of the effects of positive
IMI. In a within-subjects design, participants (N = 41) generated a series of positive mental
images (imagery condition) and sentences (verbal condition) via combining pictures with
positive word captions in the lab. Half of the pictures used were photos participants had taken
from their own living environment. Participants then recorded involuntary memories of the
previously generated images or sentences in a seven-day diary, before returning to the lab and
completing some measures including an involuntary memory task. In the diary participants
reported more involuntary memories from the imagery condition than from the verbal
condition, and more involuntary memories from their own photos compared to the other
photos. A more mixed pattern of findings was found across other tasks in the lab. The study
indicates the paradigm can be used as a means to induce positive IMI, and that using photos
as the basis for generating positive imagery increases the amount of IMI in daily life.
Theoretical and potential clinical implications are discussed.
Keywords: involuntary imagery, mental imagery, involuntary memories, positive
mood, processing mode
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 3
Inducing Positive Involuntary Mental Imagery in Daily Life Using Personalized
Photograph Stimuli
People often experience positive mental imagery in daily life, and much of this occurs
without any conscious effort in the context of involuntary memories or future projections
(e.g. Berntsen & Jacobsen, 2008). For example, seeing a photo of a friend could
automatically trigger a spontaneous memory of an enjoyable evening out you spent with them
the previous week. This memory might include not only the visual impressions of the
evening, but also a broader sensory experience such as sounds, tastes, and a re-experiencing
of some of the positive emotions you experienced at the time; potentially this might then
influence you to send your friend a message suggesting meeting up again the following week.
The positive involuntary mental imagery (IMI) that occurs in daily life is thought to
play a number of functional roles, for example in problem-solving, decision-making, and
emotion regulation (e.g., Barsics et al., 2016; Duffy & Cole, 2020; Blackwell, 2019).
However, the evidence for the assumed functions and importance of positive IMI is largely
indirect, derived from observational and correlational data. For example, Barsics et al. (2016)
conducted a study in which participants reported emotional future-oriented thoughts in a
diary over the course of three days. Spontaneous positive future-oriented thoughts were often
image-based, and participants evaluated these as fulfilling important functions, for example
in relation to pursuing their goals and regulating their emotions. Further, future-oriented
thoughts with a greater amount of visual imagery were associated with greater intensity of
anticipated emotions. Support for the importance of positive IMI also comes from work
investigating psychopathology and wellbeing, which has found that higher levels of optimism
are associated with more vivid and more frequent positive future-oriented thoughts in daily
life (Beaty et al., 2019), and that higher levels of depression symptoms are associated with
reduced frequency for spontaneous positive future-oriented imagery (Ji et al., 2019). While
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 4
these data are consistent with the idea that positive IMI plays important functional roles in
daily life, the evidence they provide is indirect; more direct evidence would require
experimental induction of such imagery and assessment of the effects.
Several paradigms have been used to induce positive IMI experimentally in daily life,
for example via asking participants to watch films with positive content (Davies et al., 2012)
or imagine positive scenarios guided by audio scripts (Blackwell et al., 2020; Bagheri, Woud,
Feller, et al., 2023). Participants are then asked to record subsequent involuntary memories of
these imagined scenes in a diary. However, studies using these paradigms have been
primarily concerned with investigating factors that modulate the frequency of positive IMI
(e.g. imagery vividness; Bagheri et al., 2023) rather than investigating the effects of this
imagery when it occurs. Further, in order to draw conclusions about the importance or effects
of positive IMI, ideally it would be advantageous to contrast these effects to those of positive
involuntary thoughts that do not take the form of mental images. In fact, accounts of the roles
of positive IMI generally place great importance on the image-based representation of these
cognitions. That is, it is assumed that these involuntary thoughts have the effects that they do
because they are image-based. Evidence for this assumption comes from studies contrasting
the effects of deliberately-generated mental imagery to those of deliberately generated verbal
thoughts (as a non-imagery counterpart). Such studies have generally found that generation of
positive mental images has a greater impact on emotion than generation of positive verbal
thoughts in healthy participants (e.g. Holmes et al., 2009) and mildly anhedonic individuals
(Blackwell et al., 2023). However, even if such differences are found between imagery and
verbal thoughts that are generated deliberately, it cannot be assumed that they will also be
found for images and verbal thoughts that are experienced involuntarily. To test this
assumption directly it would be necessary to induce both image-based and non-imagery (e.g.
verbal) involuntary thoughts experimentally and contrast their effects.
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 5
To this end, Bagheri et al. (in press) devised a paradigm that aimed to allow direct
experimental testing of the impact of involuntary images versus involuntary verbal thoughts
using a within-subjects design. In an initial phase, participants completed a Picture Word
Task (PWT; adapted from Holmes et al., 2008), in which they saw a series of pictures with
word captions underneath. For each picture-word pair participants were asked to generate
either a mental image (imagery condition) or a sentence (verbal condition) that combined the
picture and word. Later on, participants completed a vigilance-intrusion task (VIT; adapted
from Lau-Zhu et al., 2019), in which blurred versions of the pictures from the PWT were
used to trigger involuntary memories of the previously-generated images and sentences. Via
the manipulation of processing mode during the PWT (generation of images vs. sentence),
the paradigm provides experimental control over the representational format of what is stored
in memory (imagery vs. non-imagery) and thus what later returns to mind in the form of
involuntary memories (IMs). This therefore allows experimental investigation of the effects
of positive involuntary mental imagery via comparison of this to the effects of positive
involuntary verbal thoughts. In this initial lab-based study, Bagheri et al. (in press) found that
the paradigm could be used to induce involuntary memories of the previously-generated
images and sentences in the lab, and thus potentially provide a means to test their effects
directly.
In the current study we aimed to build on these previous results and investigate
whether the paradigm developed by Bagheri et al. (in press) could be used to investigate
positive IMI not only in the lab, but also in daily life, which would allow more direct testing
of the hypothesised effects and functions of such imagery. While there had been previous
reports of people experiencing positive IMI from a PWT in their daily lives in the context of
a clinical trial involving depressed participants (Blackwell & Holmes, 2017), this was only
anecdotal and not measured formally. We made one main adaption to the PWT to facilitate
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 6
investigating IMI in daily life, specifically in relation to the pictures used as the basis for
image and sentence generation. While Bagheri et al. (in press) used photographs from a
standardised picture database, we additionally included photographs that participants had
taken themselves in their daily living environments. We anticipated that this would increase
the likelihood of participants experiencing involuntary memories of the images and sentences
in their daily lives, based on literature indicating that involuntary memories are often
triggered via external cues that have perceptual or thematic overlap with the content of the
memory (Berntsen, 2009; Baddeley et al., 2014). Specifically, if the participants generated
images and sentences that incorporated the photographed object or scene, when they then
encountered these objects or scenes in their daily life the overlap with the content of the
images and sentences (as well as with the photograph cue used for their generation) might
trigger their involuntary recall. Further, use of participants’ own photos in the PWT could
facilitate generation of more vivid images (McLelland et al., 2015), which in turn could
increase the likelihood of their later involuntary retrieval (Blackwell et al., 2020).
The current study involved two lab-based testing sessions one week apart. In the first
session participants completed a version of the PWT in which half of the pictures used were
from a standardized image database and half of them were photos participants had been
instructed to take themselves from their daily living environment. All pictures were paired
with a positive word caption. For half of the pictures participants were asked to combine the
picture and word to form a mental image (imagery condition), and for the other half
participants were asked to combine the picture and word to form a sentence (verbal
condition). In the subsequent week, participants completed an online diary in which they
were asked to report involuntary memories of the previously generated images or sentences,
including their content, emotional valence, and the participants’ subsequent action. In the
second lab session, participants completed a form of the VIT in which pictures from the PWT
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 7
were presented, with the aim of triggering involuntary memories of the previously-generated
images and sentences. Ratings of state mood were used to investigate the effect of
involuntary retrieval of images versus sentences on mood during the VIT. We also asked
participants to complete a number of questionnaires including measures of mental imagery so
that we could explore the potential relationships between these and the experimental tasks.
To summarize, in the current study we aimed to investigate whether we could induce
positive involuntary mental images and verbal thoughts in participants’ daily life using an
adapted version of the picture-word task in which half of the picture stimuli presented were
photos the participants had taken themselves.
We formulated several main hypotheses. Following the literature indicating that
involuntary memories tend to be imagery-based (e.g. Harris & Berntsen, 2019; Ji et al.,
2022), and research demonstrating greater effects on emotion of imagery than verbal thought
(e.g. Holmes et al., 2008), we predicted that participants would report more involuntary
memories of picture-word pairs for which they had generated images, compared with pairs
for which they had generated sentences (both in the diary and during the VIT). Based on
literature highlighting the importance of external cues in triggering involuntary memories, we
predicted that participants would report more involuntary memories in their daily lives (as
reported in the diary) of images and sentences generated from their own photos than those
generated from other photos in the PWT. We expected this effect of photo type to be greater
for the diary than for the VIT (where cues for both photo types were presented equally often,
and for which we did not have any specific hypothesis about the effect of photo type).
Overall, we expected a correlation between the number of IMs reported in the diary and the
number recorded in the VIT.
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 8
A number of further hypotheses concerned the relationship between imagery and
emotion. For the diary, we predicted that participants would rate IMs from the imagery
condition of the PWT as having greater positive emotional valence than IMs from the verbal
condition. For the VIT, we predicted that participants would show greater increases in
positive state mood following presentation of picture cues from which they had generated
mental images compared to those from which they had generated sentences.
A final set of hypotheses concerned the vividness of images generated during the
PWT. We predicted that participants would generate more vivid mental images in the PWT
when the picture cues were their own photos than when the cues were other photos, and we
predicted that higher ratings of imagery vividness during the PWT would be associated with
greater numbers of imagery-based IMs in the diary and in the VIT.
Method
Design
The study used a 2 (processing mode: imagery vs. verbal) × 2 (photo type: own vs.
other) within-subject experimental design. Further, participants were randomly allocated to
one of two counterbalance orders (imagery first or verbal first) to control for possible order
effects (see task descriptions below).
Participants
A sample of N = 41 university students (7 male, 33 female, 1 non-binary/other, mean
age = 23.46, SD = 3.72, range = 19–38) was recruited via advertising on social media
platforms and the website of the psychology faculty at Ruhr University Bochum. Inclusion
criteria were: (a) aged at least 18 years old, and (b) sufficient German language knowledge.
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 9
Materials
Experimental Tasks
All laboratory tasks were programmed using the PsychoPy software (Peirce et al.,
2019) version 2021.2.3, with the exception of the diary, which was presented using the
XM
Qualtrics platform.
Picture-Word Task. The picture-word task (PWT) was adapted from Holmes et al.
(2008) and Bagheri et al. (in press). Each trial of the PWT comprised a picture with a word
caption beneath it. Participants were required to combine the picture-word pair to generate a
mental image (in the imagery condition) or sentence (in the verbal condition). Each trial
started with an instruction reminder (“imagine” or “make a sentence” in the imagery and
verbal conditions, respectively) presented for 1 s. The picture and word caption were then
shown for 3.5 s. During this time the participants either closed their eyes and generated a
mental image (imagery condition) or generated a sentence (silently, verbal condition). The
picture-word pair was followed by a beep sound for 1 s as a sign to stop image/sentence
generation. Participants were then prompted to rate vividness of their mental image/ease of
sentence construction on a 7-point scale, ranged from 1 (not at all vivid/not at all easy) to 7
(extremely vivid/extremely easy) and rate its time-orientation (how far in the future: 1 = in the
past; 7 = more than one year).
The picture-word task consisted of two blocks which differed based on processing
mode (imagery vs. verbal). Order of processing mode was counterbalanced between
participants, i.e. half the participants completed the imagery block first (imagery first) and the
others completed the verbal block first (verbal first). At the end of each block participants
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 10
Imagery Condition. In the imagery condition participants were instructed that after
seeing each picture-word pair they should shut their eyes immediately and generate a mental
image with the following features: (a) included both the picture and word; (b) involved
themselves (including seeing the situation through their own eyes, i.e. “field” perspective);
(c) situated in the future. For instance, for a picture of a theatre salon and the word of
“pleasant” someone could imagine sitting in the front row and enjoying watching a show in
the theatre the following weekend.
Verbal Condition. In the verbal condition participants were instructed that after
seeing the picture-word pair they should construct a sentence that was: (a) combination of
both the picture and word; (b) self-relevant (e.g. using pronouns “I”, “me” etc); (c)
grammatically correct; (d) future-oriented. For instance, for the picture of theatre salon and
the word of “pleasant” someone could make a sentence such as “I will have a pleasant time in
the theatre next weekend”.
Picture Stimuli. There were 64 pictures in the picture-word task. The picture stimuli
comprised two different sets of 32 pictures. One set were standardised across all participants
(here termed “other” pictures) and were derived from the pictures used in Bagheri et al. (in
press). These were selected from the Open Affective Standardized Image Set (OASIS; Kurdi
et al., 2017) to be relatively ambiguous (only mildly positive or negative; further details about
the criteria used to choose the pictures from the OASIS, see Bagheri et al., in press). This set
of 32 pictures were divided into 8 subsets comparable in terms of the mean and standard
deviation of the published valence and arousal. Four of these 8 subsets were randomly
allocated to the imagery block, with the remaining four allocated to the verbal block.
The other set of pictures were provided by participants themselves (“own” pictures).
Therefore, this set was unique for each participant. Prior to the first testing session,
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 11
participants were provided with written instructions as to scenes/ objects they should
photograph, which related to situations the participants might encounter in daily life. For
example, one theme was “journey scene”, and participants were asked to “take a picture from
a scene on your way to study/work” (see supplementary materials for the full list of themes
and their instructions). The 32 pictures were randomly divided into two sets and one set was
randomly allocated to the imagery block and the other set was used in the verbal block. To
have the size of photos comparable with the other pictures for the PWT, the photos were
resized to 750 × 600 pixels and saved as 24-bit Bitmap files.
Word Stimuli. There were 64 positive words, used in Bagheri et al. (in press), chosen
from the Leipzig Affective Norms for German (LANG; Kanske & Kotz, 2010). For details
about how the words were originally selected, see Bagheri et al. (in press). We divided the 64
words into 8 subsets balanced in mean and standard deviation of published valence, arousal,
and concreteness and number of letters. Four subsets were randomly allocated to the imagery
block, and the remaining subsets were allocated to the verbal block.
Picture-Word Pairs. Two fixed sets of picture-word pairs were made using the photo
and word stimuli described above, with allocation of the sets to each processing mode
(imagery vs. verbal) counterbalanced across participants. For example, the picture-word pairs
used in the imagery block for half participants were used in the verbal block for the other
half, and vice versa. Within a block, picture-word pairs were presented in a randomised order
for each participant (for further information, see Supplementary Appendix B).
Involuntary Memory Diary. An involuntary memory diary, adapted from Blackwell
et al. (2020) and Bagheri et al. (2023), was used to record the occurrence of involuntary
memories in daily life of images/sentences generated during the PWT. At the end of session
1, participants received verbal instructions from the researcher about spontaneous memories
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 12
and how these are different from voluntary memories. They were requested to report only
memories that popped into their mind spontaneously (i.e. not deliberate recall), and only
spontaneous memories from the PWT (i.e. not spontaneous memories of other events). The
researcher sent participants a link to the diary page three times per day, in the morning,
afternoon, and evening. The first diary link was emailed in the evening of session 1. Clicking
on the link took participants to the online diary in which they recorded any IMs they had
experienced from the PWT since completing their last diary by first writing a brief summary
of each memory and then making ratings about its characteristics: (a) when they experienced
the memory (last night, morning, afternoon, and evening); (b) valence of the memory (from -
5 = very negative, to 5 = very positive); and (c) their next behaviour, i.e. what they did after
the experience of memory (free text). Participants could also indicate that they had
experienced no involuntary memories since the last diary by clicking a button. If participant
completed the diary, the next time they were sent a link they were thanked for filling in the
last diary. Otherwise, the link for the new diary included a reminder that they had missed the
last one. Participants completed the last diary in the lab at the beginning of session 2.
After participants had made the last diary entry in the lab, they were asked a question
about their diary compliance, “How carefully did you fill in the diary?” rated from 1 (not at
all carefully) to 9 (very carefully).
Vigilance-Intrusion Task. The vigilance-intrusion task (VIT), adapted from Lau-Zhu
et al. (2019) and Bagheri et al. (in press), was used to trigger involuntary memories of the
images/sentences participants generated during the PWT. Each trial started with the
presentation of a digit from 1 to 9 for 250 ms in the middle of the screen with a black
background, followed by the black background alone for a further 1,500 ms on the screen.
Each trial therefore lasted a total of 1,750 ms. Every three successive trials there was a
picture, rather than a black background, behind the digit, and this picture was replaced by the
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 13
black background after 250 ms. Participants were asked to respond to all digits, except 3, by
pressing “G” button on the keyboard. The digit 3 was never presented in trials that had a
picture background. Participants were told that during the task they may experience
spontaneous memories. When it happened, they should press the “S” button. After pressing
this they were prompted to type in a brief summary of their memory.
The VIT comprised two blocks. Within each block, there were 22 pictures from the
PWT (11 own and 11 other pictures) and 22 foil pictures chosen from the OASIS. That is, in
total there 44 pictures from the PWT and 44 new pictures from the OASIS. We blurred all 88
pictures using the ImageMagick software (Gaussian blur 0.2).
Other Experimental Tasks. While our main focus was involuntary memories, we
also measured a number of other processes to better characterise and explore the effects of
the experimental manipulations. In addition to the tasks described above, we also assessed
voluntary memory for the PWT stimuli, as research sometime shows dissociations between
voluntary and involuntary memory (Lau-Zhu et al., 2021). We also asked participants to rate
the valence of all pictures used in the PWT at the start of the session 1 in the lab and at the
end of session 2. These tasks and results related to them are described in the supplementary
material.
Questionnaires
XM
All questionnaire measures were presented and completed using the Qualtrics
platform. The following questionnaires were used in the current study: The Depression
Anxiety Stress Scales-Short Version (DASS-21; Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995; German
translation; Nilges & Essau, 2015); the Spontaneous Use of Imagery Scale (SUIS; Reisberg et
al., 2003; German version by Görgen et al., 2016); the Involuntary Autobiographical Memory
Inventory (IAMI; Berntsen et al., 2015); the Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM; Bradley &
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 14
Lang, 1994). Detailed questionnaire descriptions are in the supplementary material. See
Procedure
The study involved two lab-based testing sessions. Before session 1, participants were
asked to take photos of daily activities/situations and send them to the researcher at most one
day before the first session. The researcher checked whether the pictures were complete and
correctly labelled, and then prepared them for use in the lab-based tasks. On arrival at the
laboratory, participants provided written informed consent. They then completed the
demographic questionnaire, DASS-21, SUIS, and IAMI. Participants then completed the
picture-word task (PWT). Participants rated their state mood using the SAM before and after
each of the two blocks of the PWT. At the end of session 1, participants received the
instructions as to how they should record their involuntary memories in the online seven-day
diary.
After seven days, participants returned to the lab for session 2, which started with
completion of the last diary in the laboratory. Participants then completed the vigilance-
intrusion task (VIT). They rated their state mood using the SAM before and after each of the
two blocks of the VIT. At the end of the session, they were debriefed and received cash
payment (€40) or course credit for their participation.
Transparency and openness
To comply with open science rules and increase research transparency and
reproducibility in line with guidelines of Transparency and Openness Promotion (TOP:
Nosek et al., 2015), we report planned sample size, tasks, and questionnaires used in the
study. We post materials, data, and analysis codes on the Open Science Framework (OSF):
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 15
comprising the study protocol document.
Statistical analysis plan
Participant inclusion in analysis. One participant completed the verbal block first for
the PWT, but in the other tasks, when counterbalance was applicable, they were in error
allocated to do the imagery block first. For analyses, the data of this participant was coded
based on their allocation in the PWT, i.e. verbal block first. One participant attended the
second session a day earlier and another attended the second session three days later than the
expected day. In the picture rating task in the beginning of session 1, some pictures from a
participant were upside down, but they were put in the correct form for use in other tasks
including the encoding and retrieval tasks. All participants were included in the analyses.
Planned and exploratory statistical analyses. The planned statistical analyses in the
pre-registered protocol were run, unless otherwise described. We ran exploratory analyses
when there were interactions between independent variables and to further explore the data,
alongside analyses reported in the supplementary materials.
We tested the potential differences between two counterbalance orders in terms of
their demographics and baseline characteristics using Welch’s t-tests (for continuous
variables) and Fisher’s exact test (for categorical variables, as the prerequisites for using the
Chi-squared tests were not met). As planned, we ran mixed ANOVAs to test effect of photo
type on vividness of mental images generated using the afex package (Singmann et al., 2021),
and we ran (mixed) ANOVAs and Welch’s t-tests to examine further manipulation impacts.
As planned, we ran mixed ANOVAs to test effect of processing mode on state mood
change during the VIT. We had originally planned to test the effect of processing mode and
photo type on number of involuntary memories using mixed ANOVAs. However, the
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 16
distribution of the involuntary memory data meant that these were not appropriate and instead
we analysed these data via Poisson regression analyses using the package lme4 (Bates et al.,
2015). As planned, we ran a mixed effects model to test impact of processing mode and photo
type on valence of involuntary memories, using the package lmerTest (Kuznetsova et al.,
2017), and we ran a binary logistic regression to investigate effect of imagery vividness on
the likelihood of occurrence of involuntary mental imagery, using the package lme4.
Results
Participant Characteristics
Participant characteristics (grouped by counterbalance order: imagery first vs. verbal
the two counterbalance orders.
Manipulation Checks
reported thinking in each processing mode (imagery vs. verbal) as instructed. That is, they
rated themselves as thinking in images in the imagery block more than the verbal block and
they rated themselves as thinking verbally in the verbal block more than the imagery block.
On average participants generated mental images/sentences that were situated in the future,
although the time-orientation ratings for the mental images were further in the future than
those for the sentences. Additionally, as expected participants rated generating mental images
as more emotionally arousing than generating sentences.
Analyses also showed some effects of photo type (own vs. other). Participants rated
mental images/sentences generated in response to their own pictures as nearer in the future
than those mental images/sentences generated in response to the other pictures. On average
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 17
However, analyses also showed some effects of counterbalance order. Participants
who completed the verbal block first reported greater vividness ratings for their mental
images than those who completed the imagery block first. Further, those who completed the
verbal block first rated generation of images and sentences as more emotionally arousing than
those who completed the imagery block first. Finally, for state mood there was an interaction
between counterbalance order, processing mode, and time (pre vs. post block). When the
interaction was broken down by counterbalance order, there was an interaction effect of
processing mode and time, F(1,21) = 6.60, p = .02, η [90% CIs] = .24 [.03, .47], amongst
those who did the verbal block first. However, when this interaction was then broken down
by processing mode, there was no effect of time either for the improvement in mood in the
imagery block, t(21) = 1.45, p = .16, g [95% CIs] = 0.30 [-0.12, 0.72], or the worsening of
mood in the verbal block, t(21) = 1.67, p = .11, g [95% CIs] = 0.34 [-0.08, 0.77]. For
participants who completed the imagery block first, there were no interaction effect of
processing mode and time, F(1, 18) = 1.00, p = .33, η [90% CIs] = .05 [.00, .28], and no
main effect of processing mode, F(1, 18) = 2.52, p = .13, η = .05 [.00, .37], or time, F(1, 18)
= 2.52, p = .13, η = .12 [.00, .37], indicating that there was no effect of processing mode or
time on state mood.
Diary Compliance
Participants generally reported high compliance in completing the diary, and the
compliance ratings did not differ between the counterbalance orders, t(38.69) = .65, p = .52, g
Effects of Processing Mode and Photo Type on Number of Involuntary Memories
Involuntary Memories in the Diary
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 18
Twenty-seven participants reported no involuntary memories of the mental
images/sentences they made during the PWT in their diary, 7 reported one, and 7 reported
more than one (max = 14). As an initial Poisson regression including all main effects and
interactions showed no significant interactions (and the interactions were not relevant to our
hypotheses), we ran our main analysis without the interaction terms. In line with our
hypotheses about effects of processing mode and of photo type, a Poisson regression with
number of involuntary memories as the dependent variable, and processing mode, photo type,
and counterbalance order as independent variables, found a main effect of processing mode,
OR [95% CIs] = 0.40 [ 0.22, 0.74], p = .004, indicating that participants reported more
involuntary memories of picture-word pairs for which they generated mental images than
those pairs for which they generated sentences. There was also a main effect of photo type,
OR [95% CIs] = 4.44 [ 2.16, 9.16], p < .001, indicating that participants had more involuntary
memories related to their own photos than those related to other photos in the diary (see
= .48.
Involuntary Memories in the VIT
Twenty-seven participants reported no involuntary memories of the mental
images/sentences they made within the PWT during the VIT, 5 reported one, and 9 reported
more than one (max = 12). A Poisson regression with number of involuntary memories as the
dependent variable, and processing mode, photo type, and counterbalance order as
independent variables, found a main effect of processing mode, OR [95% CIs] = 2.50 [ 1.35,
4.64], p = .004, but the direction was contrary to our hypothesis, i.e. participants reported
more involuntary memories in the block that had pictures from the verbal block of the PWT
than in the block that had pictures from the imagery block of the PWT. There was no effect
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 19
of photo type, OR [95% CIs] = 0.75 [ 0.43, 1.32], p = .32, or counterbalance order, OR [95%
CIs] = 2.24 [ 0.44, 11.41], p = .33.
Difference Between the Diary and VIT in Involuntary Memories of Different Photo Types
A Poisson regression with number of involuntary memories as the dependent variable,
and processing mode, photo type, record form (daily life vs. laboratory), and counterbalance
order as independent variables, found an interaction effect of photo type and record form, OR
[95% CIs] = 0.21 [ 0.05, 0.81], p = .02. There was also an interaction effect of processing
mode and record form, OR [95% CIs] = 6.00 [ 1.18, 30.58], p = .03. As the breakdown of
these interactions by record form is presenting in the sections above, they are not repeated
here. Overall, they indicate that the effects of photo type and processing mode differed
between the diary and VIT.
Correlation Between Number of Involuntary memories in the Diary and VIT
Contrary to our hypothesis, there was no significant correlation between number of
involuntary memories reported in the diary and number reported in the VIT either for those
from the imagery block of the PWT, τ = .20, p = .17, or for those from the verbal block of the
PWT, τ = -.15, p = .32.
Valence of Involuntary Memories and Effects of Involuntary Memories on Mood
Valence of Involuntary Memories in the Diary
A mixed effects model with processing mode and photo type as within subject factors,
and counterbalance order as the between subject factor was run, with a random intercept at
the participant level and picture stimulus as a (nested) random intercept. The dependent
variable was the valence ratings for each individual memory recorded. This model was
chosen (as opposed to comparing the mean valence ratings for memories for each processing
mode, photo type, and counterbalance order combination) as the small number of involuntary
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 20
memories resulted in too few mean values to run such an analysis. Contrary to our
hypothesis, the mixed effects model showed that there were no effects of processing mode,
t(43.73) = 0.91, p = .37, d [95% CIs] = 0.26 [-0.32, 0.85], or photo type, t(41.02) = 0.39, p =
.70, d [95% CIs] = 0.12 [-0.48, 0.72], on the valence of involuntary memories recorded in the
Mood Change in the VIT
To analyse mood change during the VIT, we used a 2 (processing mode: imagery vs.
verbal) × 2 (time: pre vs. post) × 2 (counterbalance order: imagery-first vs. verbal-first)
mixed ANOVA1. This found a main effect of time, F(1, 39) = 12.41, p = .001, η 2 [90% CIs]
= .24 [.07, .42], indicating that from pre- to post-test mood ratings decreased (i.e. became less
positive). There was also an interaction between processing mode and counterbalance order,
F(1, 39) = 12.41, p = .001, η [90% CIs] = .24 [.07, .42]. We repeated the mixed ANOVA
separately for each counterbalance order. In the verbal-first order, there was a main effect of
processing mode, F(1, 21) = 9.80, p = .005, η [90% CIs] = .32 [.07, .54], and time, F(1, 21)
= 9.80, p = .005, η [90% CIs] = .32 [.07, .54], but no effect of processing mode and time
interaction, F(1, 21) = 0.39, p = .54, η [90% CIs] = .02 [.00, .19]. In the imagery-first order,
there was no significant effect of processing mode, F(1, 18) = 4.21, p = .055, η [90% CIs] =
.19 [.00, .44], time, F(1, 18) = 4.21, p = .055, η [90% CIs] = .19 [.00, .44], or their
interaction, F(1, 18) = 4.17, p = .056, η [90% CIs] = .19 [.00, .44]. Generally, there was no
consistent effect of processing mode on mood in different counterbalance order, and mood
rating score was reduced from pre to post after each block, regardless of processing mode and
counterbalance order.
1 Originally we had planned to analyse mood data via first computing change scores, as per Bagheri et
al. (2023), but decided to run the ANOVA described here instead to provide more insight into the pattern of
mood change during the VIT.
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 21
Analyses of Vividness
Effects of Photo Type on Vividness Rating During Mental Imagery Generation
A 2 (photo type: own vs. other) × 2 (counterbalance order: imagery-first vs. verbal
first) mixed ANOVA, with imagery vividness as the dependent variable, and photo type and
counterbalance order as independent variables, showed that there was no effect of photo type
participants who completed the imagery block after the verbal block rated their mental
images as more vivid on average than those who completed the imagery block first.
Vividness during Mental Imagery Generation and Number of Involuntary Memories in the
Diary and VIT
Contrary to our hypothesis, there was no significant correlation between vividness of
mental images participants generated during the picture-word task and number of involuntary
memories from the imagery block of the PWT in the diary, τ = .14, p = .26, or in the VIT, τ =
.07, p = .58. As there was no correlation between vividness of mental images based on photo
type and number of involuntary memories in the diary/lab (see supplementary material), we
did not run a planned exploratory analysis to test the moderator role of imagery vividness in
the relationship between photo type and the frequency of IMs from the imagery block of the
PWT.
Discussion
The current study investigated the possibility of inducing positive involuntary mental
imagery (IMI) in daily life via an adapted version of a picture-word task (PWT) in which
participants combined pictures with positive word captions to form either mental images
(imagery condition) or sentences (verbal condition). Half of the pictures were photographs of
objects and scenes from the participants’ own living environments. Participants completed
the PWT in a first lab-based session, then reported any involuntary memories (IMs) from the
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 22
PWT in a diary over the following week before returning to the lab for a second assessment
including a vigilance-intrusion task (VIT). Participants did report IMs of the images and
sentences from the PWT in the diary, albeit only a small number, and two-thirds of the
participants reported no IMs at all. As hypothesised, participants reported more IMs in the
diary from the imagery condition of the PWT than from the verbal condition. Further,
participants reported more IMs in the diary from trials of the PWT that used their own photos
than from those trials using photos from a standardised database. However, there was a more
mixed pattern of results across other tasks. Overall, the current study indicates the potential of
the PWT to induce positive IMI in people’s daily lives, particularly when using photographs
from participants’ own living environments as cues for imagery generation. However, it also
indicates limitations of the approach taken in the current study that could benefit from
adaptation for future research.
Our finding that the adapted PWT could be used to induce positive IMI in people’s
daily lives in the current study extends previous anecdotal reports (Blackwell & Holmes,
2017), and results from a previous lab-based experimental study (Bagheri et al., in press).
However, it is important to note that the number of IMs recorded in the current study was
low, and the majority of participants did not record any IMs from the PWT. This indicates
that further adaptations may be needed to the paradigm for it to be used for these
experimental purposes (discussed further on).
There are several possible explanations for our finding that people had more IMs from
the PWT in their daily lives from those trials for which they generated mental imagery
compared to those for which they generated sentences. One possibility is that this is a
consequence of mental imagery generation being more emotionally arousing at encoding (i.e.
during the PWT) than sentence generation, as indicated by the arousal ratings made during
the PWT. Previous research using positive film stimuli has found a greater level of emotional
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 23
response at encoding (as indicated by change in state mood) to be associated with a larger
number of IMs in the subsequent week in a diary (Clark et al., 2013), and similar results have
also been found in relation to IMs resulting from positive imagery generation based on audio
scripts (Bagheri et al., 2023; albeit not consistently, Blackwell et al., 2020). Another possible
explanation could be that image-based memories have a largely sensory, visual,
representation (Pearson, 2019) and thus are likely to have greater perceptual overlap with
visual cues encountered in the environment. This greater perceptual overlap could in turn
increase the likelihood that encountering these visual cues triggers involuntary retrieval of the
memories. A further possibility is that emotional IMs with an imagery component are more
likely to capture attention and thus be noticed, given that at least for externally-presented
images and words there are differences in the extent to which these different kinds of stimuli
capture attention (e.g. Okon-Singer et al., 2013).
In contrast to the results found for IMs in the diary, during the VIT in the second lab
session participants reported more IMs from the verbal condition of the PWT than from the
imagery condition. These findings also differ from those for the previous lab-based study
(Bagheri et al., in press) in which there was no effect of processing mode (imagery vs. verbal)
on number of IMs. In this previous study one explanation provided for the lack of an effect of
processing mode on number of IMs was that the VIT was administered in the same session as
the PWT; other research has found that the effects of emotion at encoding on IM frequency
are only found after a retention interval of 24 hours or more (Staugaard & Berntsen, 2014).
While this might help explain why we now found the expected effect of processing mode on
number of IMs in the diary in the current study, it does not help explain the opposite pattern
of results found in the VIT. However, it is worth noting that the number of IMs reported in
the VIT in the current study were even lower than in the previous one, consistent with
research showing that as retention time (i.e. the interval between encoding and retrieval)
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 24
increases, the frequency of IMs reduces (Staugaard & Berntsen, 2014, 2019). Additionally,
the number of IMs recorded in the VIT did not correlate with the number recorded in the
diary, potentially indicating either different underlying mechanisms or lack of sensitivity.
Given the unexpected nature of the results found in the VIT in the current study, especially
given the low number of IMs reported, it may be best to await replication before speculating
on the underlying mechanisms. It would also be useful to investigate whether repeating the
VIT after a shorter time interval (e.g. 24 hours) would result in a more similar pattern of
findings to the diary.
As predicted, participants recorded more IMs from the PWT in the diary when the
picture stimuli had been participants’ own photos, compared to when these had come from a
standardised image database. We had hypothesised that such a result might emerge due to
overlap between the content of what was encoded into memory during the PWT and the
scenes that might be encountered during participants’ daily lives, following research showing
that environmental cues account for the experience of most involuntary memories (Vannucci
et al., 2019). Overall, the pattern of findings we found across different tasks and measures are
consistent with this explanation. First, in the VIT, in which cues for both photo types were
presented equally often, there was no difference in the frequency of IMs generated from the
different photo types. Second, an alternative explanation for the effect of photo type on
number IMs, that this might be via participants generating more vivid imagery in response to
their own photos, was not supported by the data. In fact, participants rated the imagery
generated in response to their own photos as no more vivid than those generated in response
to photos from the standardised database. Overall, these results provide further support for
the importance of environmental cues in triggering involuntary memory retrieval, and further
suggest that using photos from participants’ daily living environments does provide a means
to increase the number of IMs experienced in daily life.
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 25
Contrary to our hypotheses, we found that generation of more vivid mental imagery
during the picture-word task was not associated with a greater number of involuntary
memories either in the diary and the VIT. While this is not consistent with findings from
studies investigating IMs of imagery generated while listening to audio scripts (Blackwell et
al., 2020; Bagheri et al., 2023), in retrospect it fits with previous results found using the PWT
to induce IMs in the lab (Bagheri et al., in press). In this previous study, while there were
correlations between vividness of negative mental images generated during a PWT and
number of IMs recorded in a VIT, there was no relationship between vividness of positive
mental images and number of IMs. It may be that for positive imagery at least, vividness is
only a relevant predictor for subsequent IMs under circumstances where there is less external
scaffolding for imagery generation (e.g. listening to scripts rather than seeing a picture).
Also contrary to our hypothesis, we did not find any difference for the change in state
mood between the imagery and verbal blocks of the VIT. Via measurement of state mood
before and after each block we aimed to investigate whether experience of image-based IMs
would be associated with a greater impact on state mood than experience of verbal-based
IMs. However, given the small number of IMs experienced it is possible that the task was
insufficiently sensitive to detect any effect. Further, it is worth noting that during the PWT,
although participants reported generating mental images as more emotionally arousing than
generating sentences, there was no differential effect of image versus sentence generation on
state mood, in contrast to previous studies (e.g. Bagheri et al., in press; Holmes et al., 2008).
We also did not observe any effect of imagery vs. verbal processing on the positive valence
of IMs recorded in the diary. These results may in part reflect a ceiling effect in the context of
using only positive stimuli and a sample with relatively positive state mood at baseline.
Given that that there was no differential effect on state mood of generating images versus
sentences during the PWT, it is perhaps not surprising that no such effect was found during
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 26
the VIT, in which the number of images and sentences experienced involuntarily was much
lower. In addition to finding ways to increase the frequency of IMs experienced in the VIT,
future research could increase the sensitivity of tasks such as the PWT and VIT to detecting
changes in positive mood via using a negative mood induction beforehand or recruiting a
depressed or dysphoric sample for whom baseline levels of mood would be less positive.
The results of the current study should be interpreted in light of several limitations.
First, although using a within-subject design potentially carries advantages such as reducing
variability in the data due to inter-individual differences in general tendency to experience
IMs, it may have made it more difficult to examine the effects of processing mode (imagery
vs. verbal). Given that we found some effects of counterbalance order (for imagery vs. verbal
processing the PWT) it is possible that engaging in one experimental condition first had
confounding effects on the other condition (similar to the results found by Bagheri et al., in
press). Second, the sample size of the study was smaller than planned. While the decrease
from 54 to 41 participants would only cause a small reduction in power for a within-subjects
effect (e.g., having 80% power to detect Cohen’s d of 0.45 instead of 0.39), as a substantial
proportion of the participants reported experiencing no IMs we would probably need even
larger samples than our initial estimates. Third, recruiting unselected (mainly healthy)
students may have reduced our chances of observe the potential impacts of IMs on mood.
A final limitation concerns the small number of IMs recorded by participants in the
diary and VIT, which reduced the sensitivity of our tasks and measures to assess the impact
of our experimental manipulations. To some extent, given that one of the main aims of the
current study was to investigate whether the PWT could be used to induce IMs in daily life in
a controlled experimental study, finding out that the number of IMs induced is small is an
informative result. However, this result does indicate that if the PWT is to be used to conduct
experimental investigations to test the effects or functions of IMs in daily life, in particular
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 27
those of positive IMI, some adaptations may be necessary to increase the number of IMs
induced and thus increase the paradigm’s sensitivity. Clues as to how this could be achieved
come from the literature on IMs. For example, rehearsal of the images or sentences generated
during the PWT could potentially also increase the likelihood of their later involuntary
retrieval. In the current study, participants generated each image and sentence only once.
However, observational research indicates that naturally-occurring IMs are in fact frequently
rehearsed, at least more so than voluntarily-retrieved memories (Markostamou et al., 2023).
Further, in exploratory analyses Blackwell et al. (2020) found that recall testing of imagined
scenarios increased the likelihood of them returning later as involuntary memories.
Displaying each picture-word pair several times during the PWT, or repeated practice
retrieving a previously-generated image or sentence in response to the picture cues, may help
increase the likelihood of future involuntary retrieval via facilitating encoding of more vivid
imagery or strengthening the associative link with the picture cue.
Despite these limitations in interpreting the results of the current study, they do
indicate the potential of the PWT to be used to induce IMs in daily life. Further, they
highlight two factors associated with their likelihood of occurrence: generation of mental
imagery, and use of photos from participants’ living environments. This opens up a number
of avenues for investigating IMs in daily life in future research. For example, a number of
further manipulations of IM content could be carried out. In the current study, participants
were asked to generate images with a future time-orientation. Although this time-orientation
was not a major focus of the study, the rationale was that if this led to participants
experiencing IMs with a future (rather than past) time orientation, it would mean that the
paradigm could be used to provide an experimental analogue of spontaneous future-oriented
imagery. Interestingly, it has been argued that many spontaneous future thoughts may in fact
be involuntary memories of thoughts that were previously deliberately generated (Cole &
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 28
Kvavilashvili, 2021). This would imply that IMs with a future-orientation may indeed be an
ecologically-valid analogue of spontaneous future thoughts. However, time-orientation is just
one aspect of IMs that could potentially be manipulated experimentally. Manipulating other
aspects such as valence, the specific emotion induced (e.g. happiness, self-assurance,
excitement), and visual perspective could also provide a number of useful ways forward for
future research.
Use of the PWT to induce positive IMI in daily life also has potential clinical
applications. As mentioned previously, there have already been anecdotal reports from
clinical studies in the context of depression of participants experiencing IMs from a PWT in
daily life, with apparently positive effects on mood and behaviour (e.g. Blackwell & Holmes,
2017). Depression is associated with deficits in positive imagery (e.g., Holmes et al., 2016),
and increasing the extent to which depressed individuals experience involuntary positive IMI
in daily life could potentially have clinical benefits if this IMI is indeed associated with the
effects reported anecdotally by participants in the clinical studies. It would therefore be useful
for future research to examine the impact of positive IMI induced by the PWT in the daily
life of depressed individuals and investigate whether there are beneficial effects that could be
capitalised upon to improve treatments for depression.
In summary, the current study built upon previous lab-based experimental work and
anecdotal clinical reports via investigating using a picture-word task to induce involuntary
memories in daily life. Further, it provided experimental tests of the role of mental imagery
generation and use of photographs from participants’ daily living environments in the
induction of these involuntary memories. With suitable adaptations, the PWT potentially
provides a means to conduct studies investigating the assumed functions and impact of
positive involuntary mental imagery, and involuntary memories more broadly, in daily life,
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 29
and in particular provide the experimental control needed to go beyond observational and
correlational data and start drawing causal conclusions.
IMAGERY AND INVOLUNTARY MEMORIES IN DAILY LIFE (PREPRINT) 30