The differential impact of face distractors on
visual working memory across encoding and delay
stages
1,2+ 3+ 1 4* 1,2*
Chaoxiong Ye , Qianru Xu , Zhihu Pan , Qi-Yang Nie , Qiang Liu
Institute of Brain and Psychological Sciences, Sichuan Normal University, Chengdu,
China;
Department of Psychology, University of Jyvaskyla, Jyväskylä, Finland;
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland;
Centre for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, University of Macau, Macau S.A.R., China;
+Chaoxiong Ye and Qianru Xu contributed equally to this work and should be
considered as co-first authors.
*Corresponding author information: Qiang Liu, Institute of Brain and Psychological
Sciences, Sichuan Normal University, Chengdu, 610066, China (e-mail: lq780614@163.com)
& Qi-Yang Nie, Centre for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, University of Macau, Macau
S.A.R., 999078, China (e-mail: qiyang.nie@gmail.com).
Abstract
External distractions often occur when information must be retained in visual working
memory (VWM)—a crucial element in cognitive processing and everyday activities.
However, the distraction effects can differ if they occur during the encoding rather than the
delay stages. Previous work on these effects used simple stimuli (e.g., color and orientation)
rather than considering distractions caused by real-world stimuli on VWM. In the present
study, participants performed a facial VWM task under different distraction conditions across
the encoding and delay stages to elucidate the mechanisms of distraction resistance in the
context of complex real-world stimuli. VWM performance was significantly impaired by
delay-stage but not encoding-stage distractors (Experiment 1). In addition, the delay
distraction effect arose primarily due to the absence of distractor processing at the encoding
stage rather than because of the presence of a distractor during the delay stage (Experiment 2).
Finally, the impairment in the delay distraction condition was not due to the abrupt
appearance of distractors (Experiment 3). Taken together, these findings indicate that the
processing mechanisms previously established for resisting distractions in VWM using
simple stimuli can be extended to more complex real-world stimuli, such as faces.
Keywords: Visual short-term memory, Facial distractor, Encoding stage, Delay stage,
Distraction effect
Introduction
Visual working memory (VWM) is a key cognitive system dedicated to the active retention
and manipulation of a limited amount of visual information over short periods (Luck & Vogel,
1997, 2013). This system is pivotal for integrating perceptual information, and it contributes
to a dynamic and coherent visual experience. A fundamental aspect of VWM is its ability to
resist perceptual distractions by enabling a focus on relevant information and by filtering out
extraneous stimuli. This capability is crucial in a variety of cognitive functions and everyday
activities, including learning, reasoning, driving safety, and social interactions. Earlier
research on VWM primarily focused on the mechanisms involved in processing the
information retained in VWM (Cowan, 2001; Luck & Vogel, 1997; Olson & Jiang, 2002;
Vogel et al., 2001). However, recent studies are increasingly examining the impact of
distractive information on the actual functioning of VWM (Duan et al., 2023;
Feldmann-Wustefeld & Vogel, 2019; Hakim et al., 2020).
Previous VWM research has revealed that distractions can arise at various stages, either
during the encoding stage, when perceptual distractors are presented alongside targets, or
exclusively during the delay stages (Feldmann-Wustefeld & Vogel, 2019; McNab & Dolan,
2014). In the encoding stage, a critical factor for countering distractions is the ability to
selectively encode relevant information (Fukuda & Vogel, 2009, 2011; Liesefeld et al., 2020;
McNab & Klingberg, 2008), and event-related potential (ERP) techniques have been
instrumental in showing how participants overcome distractions during encoding in VWM
tasks (Feldmann-Wustefeld & Vogel, 2019; Vogel et al., 2005). Specifically, one ERP
component, known as contralateral delay activity (CDA), reflects the visual information load
in VWM and has been used to investigate the relationship between an individual’s ability to
resist distractions at the encoding stage and the individual’s overall VWM capacity. Vogel et
al. (2005) discovered that participants with low VWM capacities were more likely to store
simple perceptual distractors (e.g., color and orientation) in VWM, while those with high
VWM capacities showed effective resistance to these same distractors. This suggests that a
correlation exists between an individual’s VWM capacity and the ability to resist distractors
at the encoding stage. Similarly, research that has investigated resistance to more naturalistic
distractors, such as facial stimuli, has revealed that individuals with lower VWM capacities
struggle more to resist complex real-world distractors (Ye et al., 2018).
Some studies have gone beyond the examination of perceptual distractors presented during
the encoding stage to include the effects of these distractors when they appear during the
delay stage of VWM tasks (Hakim et al., 2020; McNab & Dolan, 2014). For example, Hakim
et al. (2020) engaged their participants in a change detection task that required the
memorization of six simple stimuli. In the distraction condition, the perceptual distractors
occurred during the delay stage, after the memory array disappeared and before the probe
array appeared. They found a decline in task performance under the distraction condition
compared to the no-distraction condition, indicating that distractions were also impactful
when presented exclusively during the delay stage. Further studies have suggested that the
process of resisting distractors and preventing unwanted information from being encoded
during the delay stage may be related to an individual’s internal attention control processes
on VWM (Liu et al., 2023; Makovski & Jiang, 2007; Pinto et al., 2013; Rerko et al., 2014;
van Moorselaar et al., 2015; van Moorselaar et al., 2014).
Not surprisingly, this resistance to distractors during encoding versus delay stages could
uniquely contribute to VWM capacity (McNab & Dolan, 2014). For instance, Duan et al.
(2023) recently conducted a systematic investigation into the resilience of individual VWM
against perceptual distractors at both the encoding and delay stages. Their series of
experiments used a continuous recall paradigm in which participants were tasked with
memorizing simple stimuli (e.g., the orientations of teardrops) under different distraction
conditions and demonstrated different effects of distractions presented during the encoding
versus the delay stage. Unexpectedly, however, VWM performance was significantly
impaired only by the perceptual distractors presented during the delay stage, as distractions
occurring solely during the encoding stage alongside memory stimuli did not detrimentally
affect VWM performance. Follow-up experiments that included a “full-distraction” condition
in which perceptual distractors persisted throughout both the encoding and delay stages
revealed that processing distractors present during encoding could mitigate their distracting
effect during the delay stage. Integrating these findings, Duan et al. (2023) proposed a
two-stage Bayesian model, positing that task relevance and visual uncertainty are key factors
that govern cognitive resource allocation in VWM tasks. This model effectively synthesizes
the observed behaviors across the experiments and offers a nuanced understanding of how
VWM resists distractions under varied conditions. However, to date, these distinct distraction
effects during the encoding and delay stages have only been tested with simple stimuli (e.g.,
orientations of teardrops). Consequently, the inclusion of complex real-world stimuli could
provide new insights into how distinct distraction effects might apply in more naturalistic
VWM settings.
When considering the diverse visual inputs of their real world, human beings show a unique
proficiency for processing faces, as these attract attention more effectively than most other
meaningful objects (Ro et al., 2001; Vuilleumier, 2000; Young & Burton, 2018). This
specialized processing of faces commences at the initial perceptual stages; consequently, face
stimuli are frequently used as distractors during the encoding stage in VWM studies,
especially those investigating the distraction effects of complex real-world stimuli (Stout et
al., 2015; Stout et al., 2013; Ye et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2018). However, as is often
experienced in everyday scenarios (e.g., trying to remember new acquaintances at a social
gathering), the intrusion of other unfamiliar faces can disrupt the memory of the first ones.
Thus, in real life, face-related distractions are likely to occur both during the encoding of
targets and during the subsequent delay stage. A recent study by Mallett et al. (2020), which
explored the impact of presenting face distractors during the delay stage on VWM, reported
that these distractions bias the VWM for faces. However, to the best of our knowledge,
although previous studies have used faces as perceptual distractors during either the encoding
or delay stages, no systematic investigation has yet examined the potential differences in the
impacts of face distractors presented at the two stages.
Given the special social importance of facial stimuli and their evolutionary necessity for
human survival, a natural question to ask is whether the mechanisms established for the
processing of simple stimuli can be generalized to complex real-world stimuli, such as faces.
For instance, marked differences are evident between simple and complex real-world stimuli
when using relative positional relationships between memory items in VWM tasks to enhance
memory for stimuli (Gao et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2022). Therefore, a thorough examination of
the distraction effects of face stimuli, whether introduced during the encoding or delay stages,
is needed to deepen our understanding of the influence of these stimuli on VWM tasks.
Our aim in the current study was to use a change detection task with face stimuli (i.e., a facial
VWM task) to directly assess the differential impact on VWM when face distractors are
presented during the encoding versus the delay stages. Two potential hypotheses were viewed
as possible for the experimental results. The first hypothesis was that the influence of face
distractors across different stages mirrors that of simple distractors, leading to findings akin
to those published by Duan et al. (2023). In this case, when face distractors are presented
during the encoding stage, they will not harm VWM performance. Only when face distractors
appear during the delay stage will a decrease in VWM performance be apparent. The second
hypothesis was that complex real-world stimuli, such as face distractors, are more likely than
simple stimuli to disrupt VWM; therefore, the presence of face distractors, whether during
the encoding or delay stage, will always harm VWM performance. Testing these hypotheses
would therefore provide a deeper comprehension of how face distractors influence individual
VWM and would determine whether the processing mechanisms identified for simple
stimulus distractions are extendable to complex real-world distractions.
The overall goal of this study was to enrich the broader consensus on the interplay between
distraction resistance and VWM. In doing so, the findings could prove vital in furthering
socio-affective cognition research and thereby offer significant insights into the psychological
underpinnings of a range of emotional and cognitive disorders.
Experiment 1
To test whether the distraction effects differ when face distractors appear during the encoding
stage versus the delay stage, the participants were asked to remember two target faces each
time, while ignoring the face distractors regardless of when they appeared. We manipulated
the conditions under which the face distractors appeared to include three different distraction
conditions: a no-distraction condition, an encoding distraction condition, and a delay
distraction condition. In the no-distraction condition, no face distractors appeared. In the
encoding distraction condition, two additional face distractors appeared alongside the target
faces during the encoding stage. In the delay distraction condition, the two additional face
distractors appeared during the delay stage. This setting enabled a comparison of VWM
performance under various distraction conditions (during either the encoding stage or the
delay stage) against a no-distraction condition. If the presence of face distractors during the
encoding or delay stages induced a significant distraction effect, the VWM performance in
that distraction condition was expected to be significantly worse than in the no-distraction
condition. Notably, in our study, the methodology we employed to distinguish between target
and distractor stimuli diverged from that of Duan et al. (2023), who used red or green
teardrops as distractor stimuli (with one color designating the target and the other the
distractor). Given that a teardrop is a dual-feature stimulus in which color and orientation
features are bound at the same location, the participants inevitably encoded both the target
shape (orientation information) and color when discriminating between the target and the
distractor. However, in our study, we utilized rectangular borders framing faces to inform
participants which faces were the memory targets and which were distractor stimuli. This
setup allowed participants to initially encode and select targets or distractors based solely on
the color of the rectangular borders without needing to automatically encode the distractor
face identities (akin to the content of VWM targets). Therefore, if participants had the ability
to suppress distraction effects, our paradigm could make it easier for the participants to
suppress face information within the distractor stimuli. Moreover, the experimental paradigm
employed by Duan et al. (2023) was a delayed estimation task, which, although potentially
more sensitive than the commonly utilized VWM task of change detection, is predominantly
suited for assessing simple features capable of continuous variation (e.g., color or orientation).
The delayed estimation task also necessitates precise memory of the target stimuli for
successful task completion, thereby potentially rendering participants more susceptible to
distraction by novel stimuli during the delay stage. By contrast, our study utilized a change
detection task as the participants’ VWM task. The change detection task enables the
maintenance of low-precision representations of target faces that are sufficient for task
performance, thereby potentially mitigating the impact of novel face distractors during the
delay stage should such mitigation be feasible.
Methods
Participants
Adequate statistical power for the t-test comparison was ensured by conducting an a priori
power analysis. This analysis, performed using G*Power 3.1.9.2 67, was based on the
predicted effect size derived from the study by Duan et al. (2023). Anticipating a large effect
size (Cohen’s d = 0.80) for our experimental design, and setting a statistical power of 80%
alongside an alpha level of 0.05, the analysis recommended a total sample size of 15
participants.
Our study was conducted following the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki and was
approved by a local ethics committee. Twenty-six college student volunteers (9 males and 17
females; mean age: 19.61 ± 1.444, age range 18–24 years) participated in this study in return
for compensation. This sample size aligned closely with the sample size (N = 24) used in the
study by Duan et al. (2023). All participants reported having normal or corrected-to-normal
vision, normal color vision, and no history of neurological problems. Each participant
provided written informed consent before participating in the study.
Materials
The stimuli used in the facial VWM task were 18 images of neutral male faces selected from
the Chinese Facial Affective Picture System (CFAPS; Gong et al., 2011). The CFAPS has
been widely used to investigate human face processing in China (Guo et al., 2013; Liu et al.,
2014; Luo et al., 2010; Tian et al., 2018; Ye et al., 2018; Zheng et al., 2015). The images in
the CFAPS are all similar in size, background, spatial frequency, contrast grade, brightness,
and other physical properties. Each selected image had a high agreement rate in terms of
emotion categorization (more than 70% agreement rate for each neutral expression image).
Faces were presented on a gray background and were framed with rectangular borders (2.6°
wide × 3° tall). Both the memory and test arrays contained facial images placed in fixed
locations surrounding a fixation cross. All faces were displayed in a memory array in an 11°
× 8.2° region surrounding the fixed cross. The distance between any two faces was at least
4.6° (center-to-center). The experimental task was programmed using the E-prime software
(E-prime 2.0, Psychology Software Tools, Inc.). Participants were seated in a dark,
soundproof room at a distance of 70 cm from a 17-inch screen.
Procedure
conduct a facial VWM task. The trial structures of the facial VWM task are depicted in
(500 ms), a memory array of faces was displayed (1000 ms). Following the memory array, an
interval (1000 ms) preceded the onset of the test array. The test array contained two facial
stimuli. The test array in 50% of the trials had one face that differed from the target faces in
the memory array; the test array faces were identical to the target faces in the remaining trials.
The participant’s task was to indicate whether the faces in the test array were identical to the
target faces in the memory array or whether a face had changed in the corresponding location
between the memory and test arrays. The instructions emphasized response accuracy rather
than response speed. The test array was exposed for up to 2500 ms or until the participant
responded. Following the response, feedback (1000 ms) about the correctness of the
participant’s response would appear. After the feedback disappeared, a variable interval
(500–1000 ms) elapsed before the beginning of the next trial. The experiment included three
different conditions: a no-distraction condition, an encoding distraction condition, and a delay
distraction condition. 1) In the no-distraction condition, only two target faces were presented
in the memory array, followed by a blank screen during the interval, and no distractor faces
were presented. 2) In the encoding distraction condition, when the memory array appeared,
two distractor faces appeared on the screen in addition to the two target faces. When the
memory array disappeared, both the target and distractor faces disappeared at the same time,
followed by a blank screen during the interval. 3) In the delay distraction condition, only two
target faces appeared in the memory array. After the memory array disappeared, two
distractor faces appeared during the interval. The distractor faces then disappeared when the
test array appeared. The target faces and distractor faces were surrounded by red or yellow
frames (target or distractor frames, counterbalanced across participants). Participants were
asked to memorize only the identities of faces surrounded by the target frames and to ignore
the faces surrounded by the distractor frames. The identities of distractors were always
different from those of the target faces.
Participants completed 96 trials for each condition (no-distraction, encoding distraction, and
delay distraction) for a total of 288 trials. Trials of each condition were fully randomized in
the experiment. Instructions at the beginning of the experiment informed the participants
about the task. At least 24 practice trials were performed prior to recording the test
performance. The entire task lasted approximately 45 min.
Fig. 1 Trial structure of the facial VWM task of Experiment 1 (no-distraction condition,
encoding distraction condition, and delay distraction condition), Experiment 2
(no-distraction condition, full distraction condition, and delay distraction condition), and
Experiment 3 (no-distraction condition, delay distraction condition, and delay gradual
distraction condition). Red frames indicate targets to be memorized, and yellow frames
indicate distractors. Here, only trials with identity changes are demonstrated.
Data analysis
Repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA), with conditions (no distraction vs.
encoding distraction vs. delay distraction) as a within-subject factor, was conducted for the
behavioral accuracy (ACC). Partial eta squared (η ) measures were used for effect size
estimations for the ANOVAs. The significant main effect found in ANOVAs was followed
up by applying paired t-tests to compare the results between different conditions. We also
applied the Holm–Bonferroni method to correct the original p-values to p derived from
corr
post-hoc t-tests. Cohen’s d was used as an estimator of the effect size of significant results in
the t-tests. Bayes factor analyses were used to show whether the ANOVA and t-test results
supported the alternative hypothesis or the null hypothesis (Rouder et al., 2009). The Bayes
factor (BF ) provides an odds ratio for alternative/null hypotheses (values < 1 favor a null
hypothesis and values > 1 favor an alternative hypothesis); for example, a BF of 0.25 would
indicate that the null hypothesis is four times more likely than the alternative hypothesis.
Results
The mean accuracy in each condition (no distraction condition vs. encoding distraction
of the responses showed a significant main effect of condition (F(2,50) = 9.735, p < 0.001,
η = 0.280, BF = 95.167). The accuracy was lower in the delay distraction condition (M =
p 10
0.795, SD = 0.072) than in the encoding distraction condition (M = 0.827, SD = 0.072; t(25)
= 3.270, p = 0.006, Cohen’s d = 0.641, BF = 12.717) and in the no distraction condition
corr 10
(M = 0.837, SD = 0.062 ; t(25) = 4.045, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 0.793, BF = 70.84). No
corr 10
significant difference was detected in the accuracy between the encoding distraction and no
distraction conditions (t(25)= 0.972, p = 0.340, Cohen’s d = 0.191, BF = 0.318).
corr 10
Fig. 2 Accuracy under each condition (no distraction condition, encoding distraction
condition, and delay distraction condition) in Experiment 1. Mean values, with error bars
showing the standard error of the mean. ** = p < 0.01, *** = p < 0.001.
Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 reveal that the participants’ VWM performance did not decrease
under the encoding distraction condition. However, a significant impairment in VWM
performance was observed under the delay distraction condition. This pattern of results is
consistent with that obtained by Duan et al. (2023) using simple distracting stimuli. These
findings suggest that face distractors presented during the delay stage significantly disrupt
VWM performance. Intriguingly, this effect of distraction was absent when the face
distractors were introduced during the encoding stage, indicating a distinct influence of face
distraction on VWM performance at different stages. However, these results do not clarify
whether the impairment in VWM performance in the delay distraction condition is truly due
to the presence of face distractors during the delay or whether it arises due to the absence of
processing distractors at encoding.
Furthermore, a potential explanation for the findings of Experiment 1 might lie in the
differential consolidation time of face distractors presented at different distraction conditions.
Previous research has shown that the storage of complex stimuli in VWM is a sequential
consolidation process (Becker et al., 2013; Hao et al., 2018; Liu & Becker, 2013) that
prevents parallel consolidation of both target and distractor faces. When face distractors are
presented during the encoding phase, the participants might unconsciously store both target
and distractor faces. However, due to the sequential nature of consolidation, participants must
first complete the consolidation of target faces, thereby reducing the time available for
consolidating distractors and subsequently diminishing the impact of distractors on VWM
during the encoding phase. By contrast, when distractors are introduced only during the delay
stage, participants have the opportunity to immediately begin consolidating these distractors
into VWM, providing a longer consolidation period than is possible in the encoding
distraction condition. This maximizes the potential impact of distractors during the delay
stage and leads to a more significantly detrimental effect on VWM performance compared to
the encoding distraction condition. Hence, the interference in both conditions is not solely
attributable to the stage at which distractors are presented. It may also be influenced by the
varying consolidation times of the distractors under different distraction conditions. For
further clarification, we examined this possibility in Experiment 2.
Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we modified the encoding distraction condition in Experiment 1 by
introducing a so-called full-distraction condition. In this full-distraction condition, the face
distractors were present throughout both the encoding and delay stages, effectively doubling
the exposure time of the face distractors compared to the distraction conditions in Experiment
1. Assuming that the participants did indeed try to consolidate the face distractors into VWM
during the encoding stage, this full-distraction setup ensured that the participants had
sufficient time for the VWM consolidation of the face distractors.
Two hypotheses can be proposed. First, if VWM performance is unaffected in the full
distraction condition, this would imply that the interference is not related to the duration of
exposure to the face distractors; rather, it is primarily due to the lack of encoding of face
distractors at the encoding stage. Second, if the full distraction condition also leads to a
significant decrease in VWM performance, then this would suggest that the extent of the
distraction effect is related to the time allocated for VWM consolidation of the face
distractors. This would also indicate that the face distractors shown during the delay stage are
unconsciously consolidated and that the distraction effect observed in Experiment 1 can be
attributed to the presence of face distractors during this delay stage.
Methods
Participants
A new sample of 26 college students (4 males and 22 females; mean age: 20.19 ± 1.918, age
range 18–24 years) participated in Experiment 2 in return for compensation. All participants
reported having normal or corrected-to-normal vision, normal color vision, and no history of
neurological problems. Each participant provided written informed consent before
participating in the study.
Procedure
Experiment 2 were identical to those of Experiment 1, except for the following change: The
encoding distraction condition was replaced by the full distraction condition. In the full
distraction condition, when the memory array appeared, two distractor faces appeared on the
screen, in addition to the two target faces. When the memory array disappeared, only the
target faces disappeared. Thus, the distractor faces appeared from the onset of the memory
array until the test array appeared (i.e., the distractor faces were presented for 2000 ms).
Results
The mean accuracy in each condition (no distraction condition vs. full distraction condition
responses showed a significant main effect of condition (F(2,50) = 6.272, p = 0.004, η =
0.201, BF = 10.168). The accuracy was lower in the delay distraction condition (M = 0.796,
SD = 0.075) than in the full distraction condition (M = 0.829, SD = 0.066; t(25) = 2.648, p
corr
= 0.028, Cohen’s d = 0.519, BF = 3.596) and in the no distraction condition (M = 0.833, SD
= 0.061, t(25) = 3.429, p = 0.006, Cohen’s d = 0.673, BF = 17.922). No significant
corr 10
difference was detected in the accuracy between the full distraction and no distraction
conditions (t(25)= 0.383, p = 0.705, Cohen’s d = 0.075, BF = 0.222).
corr 10
Fig. 3 Accuracy under each condition (no-distraction condition, full distraction condition,
and delay distraction condition) in Experiment 2. Mean values, with error bars showing the
standard error of the mean. * = p < 0.05, ** = p < 0.01.
Discussion
The accuracy results indicate that the participants’ VWM performance was not significantly
impaired under the full distraction condition. However, a significant impairment was
observed under the delay distraction condition. These results further validated our findings
regarding the delay distraction condition in Experiment 1 and additionally suggested that
provided the distractors are processed during encoding, the distraction interference can be
mitigated. These findings indicate that distraction interference is not linked to the duration of
exposure to the face distractors, but is primarily due to the lack of processing of the
distractors at the encoding stage.
However, beyond this explanation, another potential interpretation of our results exists. Given
that the face stimuli processed by participants may readily capture their attention, under the
delay distraction condition in both Experiments 1 and 2, the face distractors would
immediately appear at different locations following the disappearance of the memory stimuli.
This immediate appearance of face distractors might act akin to a mask, thereby disrupting
the participants’ consolidation of target faces and leading to a subsequently poorer VWM
performance under the delay distraction condition. To test this possibility, we introduced a
delay gradual distraction condition in Experiment 3. In this condition, the distractor faces do
not appear immediately after the disappearance of the memory array but emerge
progressively. Therefore, if the impairment in VWM performance observed in Experiments 1
and 2 under the delay distraction condition is indeed due to the sudden appearance of face
distractors during the delay stage, then a reduction or elimination of distraction-induced
impairment might be observed in the delay gradual distraction condition.
Experiment 3
To broaden our findings and rule out the alternative hypothesis that distraction-induced
interference might result from the abrupt appearance of face distractors during the delay stage,
we incorporated a delay gradual distraction condition in Experiment 3. This condition was
compared directly to the delay distraction condition.
Methods
Participants
A new sample of 26 students (6 males and 20 females; mean age: 19.65 ± 1.573, age range
18–24 years) participated in Experiment 3 in return for compensation. All participants
reported having normal or corrected-to-normal vision, normal color vision, and no history of
neurological problems. Participants provided written informed consent before participating in
the study.
Procedure
Experiment 3 were identical to those of Experiment 2, except that the full distraction
condition was replaced by the delay gradual distraction condition. In this newly introduced
condition, only two target faces were presented in the memory array. However, following the
disappearance of the memory array, two distractor faces gradually appeared over a period of
500 ms (the transparency of the distractor face images gradually decreased from 100% to 0%
within this duration). Subsequently, the distractor faces remained at 0% transparency (similar
to the distractors in the delay distraction condition in Experiments 1&2) for the next 500 ms
until the test array appeared.
Results
The mean accuracy in each condition (no distraction condition vs. delay distraction condition
of the responses showed a significant main effect of condition (F(2,50) = 4.197, p = 0.021,
η = 0.144, BF = 2.434). The accuracy was higher in the no distraction condition (M =
p 10
0.847, SD = 0.069) than in the delay distraction condition (M = 0.822, SD = 0.091; t(25) =
2.395, p = 0.048, Cohen’s d = 0.470, BF = 2.245) and in the delay gradual distraction
corr 10
condition (M = 0.817, SD = 0.061; t(25) = 2.668, p = 0.039, Cohen’s d = 0.523, BF =
corr 10
0.223). No significant difference was detected in the accuracy between the delay distraction
and delay gradual distraction conditions (t(25)= 0.398, p = 0.694, Cohen’s d = 0.0678,
corr
BF = 3.738).
Fig. 4 Accuracy under each condition (no distraction condition, delay distraction condition,
and delay gradual distraction condition) in Experiment 3. Mean values, with error bars
showing the standard error of the mean. * = p < 0.05.
Discussion
The accuracy results show that the VWM performance of the participants was significantly
impaired under both the delay distraction condition and the delay gradual distraction
condition. In addition, no difference was noted in the degree of impairment of VWM
performance between the delay gradient distraction condition and the delay distraction
condition. This result thus excludes the alternative explanation that the diversion-induced
interference in the delayed diversion condition was caused by the abrupt appearance of the
face distractors.
Exploratory correlation analysis between distraction effects and VWM
capacity
Previous ERP research has demonstrated that an individual’s ability to filter face distractions
is influenced by that individual’s VWM capacity, with individuals having higher VWM
capacities exhibiting superior distraction filtering abilities (Ye et al., 2018). This raises an
intriguing question: Is there a correlation between an individual’s VWM capacity and that
individual’s susceptibility to delay distraction effects? Following each experiment in our
study, the participants were asked to conduct a change detection task with color stimuli to
assess their VWM capacity (as part of another study). The methodology of VWM capacity
measurement is detailed in the Supplementary Materials. This enabled us to measure the
VWM capacity (K) for 78 participants across the three experiments. We also computed each
participant’s delay distraction effect index using the following equation:
A positive and larger delay distraction effect index indicates a greater degradation of VWM
performance due to distraction from task-irrelevant distractors during the delay stage. A delay
distraction effect index equal to zero indicates that the presence of distractors does not impact
VWM performance. Conversely, a negative delay distraction effect index suggests that
individuals exhibit better VWM performance under the delay distractor conditions than in the
absence of distractors. If individuals with higher VWM capacities demonstrate stronger
resistance to distractions during the delay stage, one might anticipate a significant negative
correlation between an individual’s VWM capacity and their delay distraction effect index.
Results
A correlation analysis was conducted to examine the relationship between each participant’s
VWM capacity (K) and the delay distraction effect index. The results revealed a significant
negative correlation between K and the delay distraction effect index (r = -0.225, p = 0.048),
Fig. 5 Pearson’s correlation (two-tailed) between the delay distraction effect index and VWM
capacity (K).
Discussion
These findings suggest that individuals with higher VWM capacities are less impaired by the
presence of facial distractors during the delay stage, in agreement with our previous research
finding that individuals with higher VWM capacities could filter out distractive faces more
effectively (Ye et al., 2018). This result also corresponds with a previous ERP study that
identified a positive correlation between an individual’s VWM capacity and the distractor
positivity (PD) ERP component, reflecting the suppression process for to-be-ignored items
(Feldmann-Wustefeld & Vogel, 2019).
Although the results from Experiments 1 and 2 indicated that presenting distractors during
the encoding stage (the encoding distraction condition in Experiment 1 and the full
distraction condition in Experiment 2) did not impair the participants’ VWM performance,
previous VWM studies using simple stimuli as memory materials found a significant
correlation between VWM capacity and the filtering effect when distractors were presented
alongside the target during the encoding stage (Owens et al., 2012; Vogel et al., 2005).
Therefore, we conducted correlation analyses for Experiments 1 and 2 to assess the
relationship between VWM capacity and the distracting effect in the encoding distraction
condition/full distraction condition. However, no significant correlation was evident between
individuals’ VWM capacity and the encoding distraction effect/ full distraction effect
(Experiment 1, r = 0.159, p = 0.437; Experiment 2, r = - 0.075, p = 0.717). Considering that
the distractors in the full distractor condition in Experiment 2 were also presented from the
encoding stage, we combined the encoding distraction effect from Experiment 1 and the full
distraction effect from Experiment 2 to examine their correlation with VWM capacity during
the encoding stage. The results still showed no significant correlation between individual
VWM capacity and the distraction effect produced during the encoding stage (r = 0.087, p =
0.539).
Notably, while we did not find a correlation between individuals’ VWM capacity and the
distraction effect during the encoding stage, this result does not challenge the previous
findings of a negative correlation between individual VWM capacity and encoding stage
distraction effects (Owens et al., 2012; Vogel et al., 2005). We believe that the reason we did
not observe a significant correlation between individual VWM capacity and encoding
distraction effects in our study is that, in the present study, the participants, regardless of their
VWM capacity, were not significantly negatively impacted by distractors appearing during
the encoding stage. We will further discuss the potential reasons for the absence of observed
encoding distraction effects in the present study and in the study by Duan et al. (2023) in the
General Discussion.
General discussion
The aim of this study was to assess the differential impact of face distractors during the
encoding and delay stages on VWM. To this end, we presented the distractors either during
the encoding stage, during the delay stage, or through both stages. In general, we found a
dissociated face distraction effect between the encoding and delay conditions. Specifically,
distraction interference of VWM performance was evident when the face distractors were
presented exclusively during the delay stage but not when the distractors were introduced at
the encoding stage. In addition, our results demonstrated that as long as the participants
suppressed the face distractors during the encoding stage, the distractors would not impair the
VWM performance, even if those distractors persisted until the end of the delay stage.
Moreover, we proved that the impairment of VWM performance caused by face distractors
during the delay stage was not due to the sudden appearance of interfering faces.
Our findings are consistent with those reported by Duan et al. (2023) for simple distractors,
thereby demonstrating that the resistance mechanism against simple distractors can be
extended to complex real-world distractors. However, as a notable divergence from Duan et
al. (2023), our investigation employed distinct experimental stimuli and methods to
differentiate between targets and distractors. Our results validate that even for facial
information, which humans are particularly adept at processing, the distraction-related
degradations only exist when face distractors are introduced during the delay stage and not
during encoding. This contributes to the research on distraction processing in VWM by
providing results with higher ecological validity.
The occurrence of face distraction effects only during the delay stage, and not during the
encoding stage, suggests that this effect may be primarily due to attention being captured by
the novel face distractors presented. When both target and distractor faces are presented
during the encoding stage, the participants allocate and focus their resources on the target
while suppressing the distractor face information. This suppression of distractor information
extends into the VWM maintenance stage (delay stage). Conversely, when distractor faces
are introduced only after the end of the encoding stage—by which time the encoded target
stimuli have disappeared—the distractor faces appearing on the screen during the delay stage
become salient stimuli that now capture the participants’ attention, leading to automatic
processing. The salient distractors require merely approximately 220 ms to capture an
individual's attention (Lin et al., 2024), thereby impacting the maintenance of VWM
representations. This ultimately results in dissociated distraction effects. To our knowledge,
this study provides the first empirical evidence revealing a dissociated distraction effect of
real-world stimuli on VWM performance, thereby highlighting the unique impact of
introducing face distractors at different VWM stages.
A recent study by Mallett et al. (2020) also reported that facial distractors present during the
delay stage can bias VWM information, thereby supporting our findings regarding the
distraction effects of the delay stage. However, Mallett et al. (2020) focused primarily on the
perceptual impact of facial stimuli and did not systematically explore their differential effects
at various VWM stages. Their study utilized only delay distraction conditions without a
no-distraction condition. Their setting therefore prevented a direct assessment of the damage
caused by facial distractors to VWM performance. By contrast, our research, which
contrasted both the delay distraction and no-distraction conditions, offers concrete evidence
for the detrimental effects of face distractors during the delay stage.
Interestingly, our previous studies (Ye et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2018) showed that presenting
face distractors during the encoding stage could impair VWM performance; therefore, our
previous findings appear contradictory to our current findings. However, the experimental
designs of our previous study (Ye et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2018) and the current work had two
noteworthy differences. First, in our previous studies (Ye et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2018), the
distractors were presented during both the encoding array and the test array, implying that the
negative impact on VWM could originate from distractions during the response stage. Second,
the durations of face distractor presentation during the encoding stage were 200 ms and 500
ms in our previous studies (Ye et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2018), whereas we presented face
distractors during the encoding stage for 1000 ms in the current study. This longer encoding
time in our current study allowed for a more thorough consolidation process in VWM.
It is important to note that the results of the present study should not be construed as evidence
against the existence of distraction effects during the encoding stage, as reported in previous
findings (Vogel et al., 2005; Ye et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2018). Previous research has shown
that a 1000 ms presentation duration allows for the top-down influence to play a significant
role (Sander et al., 2011), potentially accounting for the efficient filtering of distractors
during the encoding stage observed in our study and in the study by Duan et al. (2023).
Regarding the impact of stimulus presentation duration on VWM resource allocation, our
previously proposed two-stage resource allocation model (Ye et al., 2017; Ye et al., 2020; Ye
et al., 2019) posits that VWM consolidation consists of an early phase in which resources
are involuntarily allocated across all stimuli to form low-precision VWM representations.
This is followed by a late consolidation phase, in which resources can be voluntarily
reallocated based on task requirements. Consequently, when encoding time is limited,
participants might involuntarily allocate VWM resources to face distractors due to
stimulus-driven processes, leading to VWM impairment. However, with sufficient encoding
time, as in our current study, participants can further reallocate and focus their VWM
resources on the target items through top-down control during the later consolidation phase,
thereby mitigating the impact of face distractors. Thus, the duration of stimulus presentation
may influence whether participants can utilize top-down control to reduce distraction effects
during the encoding phase. Future research should control for the stimulus presentation
duration of the memory array to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the processing
mechanisms of distractions within VWM tasks.
Another explanation for why previous research identified distraction effects during the
encoding stage, while our study and that of Duan et al. (2023) did not, may be the different
methods used for stimulus presentation. In studies that reported encoding stage distraction
effects, the CDA component within ERP techniques was often used to track the quantity of
VWM representations stored by the participants. This led to a scenario in the previous studies
wherein both target and distractor stimuli were presented on one side of the visual hemifield
(either the left or right hemifield). Conversely, in our research and that of Duan et al. (2023),
the stimuli were presented bilaterally across the visual fields. Previous studies have shown
superior VWM performance for stimuli presented bilaterally across visual fields than for
stimuli presented in a unilateral visual field (Delvenne, 2005; Umemoto et al., 2010), a
phenomenon known as the bilateral field advantage (BFA). The BFA likely arises due to the
allocation of more attentional resources when items are presented in both the left and right
visual fields (Zhang et al., 2018). Therefore, in our study and that of Duan et al. (2023), the
bilateral presentation of the memory array could plausibly have enabled individuals to
allocate more attentional resources toward enhancing target stimuli and suppressing distractor
stimuli. This would result in a superior ability to filter out distractors during the encoding
stage than was evident in previous research (Vogel et al., 2005; Ye et al., 2023; Ye et al.,
2018). Future research could further explore this possibility by manipulating the stimulus
presentation methods.
In our previous studies (Ye et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2018), we also used emotional faces as
distractors. Previous research suggests that emotionally salient stimuli, such as fearful faces,
more readily attract attention and are more easily stored in VWM compared to neutral faces
(see reviews by Gambarota & Sessa, 2019; Xu et al., 2021), possibly contributing to the
observed impairment by face distractors. Furthermore, threatening face distractors are more
challenging for individuals to filter out of VWM storage (Stout et al., 2013; Ye et al., 2023).
Although our current study systematically investigates the distractor effect of neutral face
distractors across different stages, whether individuals can avoid impairment from emotional
face distractors during the encoding phase remains unclear. Future research, building on our
experimental paradigm and findings, could further explore the distraction effects of various
types of emotional facial stimuli and their impacts under different conditions.
Recent studies have also shown that an individual’s emotional state can influence VWM
processing. For instance, previous research has demonstrated that, under negative emotional
states, individuals exhibit enhanced VWM precision for target stimuli (Long et al., 2020; Xie
et al., 2023; Xie & Zhang, 2016), albeit with a reduced maximum capacity for VWM storage
(Figueira et al., 2017). Moreover, a recent study revealed that negative emotional states can
diminish an individual’s ability to suppress distractor stimuli, leading to the automatic storage
of distractors in VWM (Ye et al., 2024). Therefore, future investigations could further
examine whether different emotional states also affect the dissociated VWM distraction
effect between the encoding stage and delay stages.
Numerous studies have also demonstrated that mental stress or mental illnesses, such as
depression, anxiety, and persistent pain (Berryman et al., 2013; Maran et al., 2015; Stout et
al., 2013; Xu et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2021), can significantly impact
attention and VWM. Considering how daily life is inundated with visual information and
distractions, a continuous need exists for selective storing of valuable information into VWM
while suppressing distracting information within it. Future research should consider ways to
enhance the ecological validity of studies on distractor processing. Building on the
experimental paradigm of the present study and incorporating the aforementioned factors,
future research could explore individuals’ processing mechanisms for other real-world
stimulus distractions and their influencing factors, thereby enriching our comprehensive
understanding of distraction-processing mechanisms in daily life.
In summary, our study using human faces as complex real-world distractors indicates that the
VWM performance was significantly impaired by delay-stage distractors but remained
unaffected during the encoding stage. This dissociated VWM distraction effect results from
the absence of processing distractors during the encoding phase, rather than the appearance of
distractors during the delay or their abrupt emergence. By demonstrating that the mechanisms
of distraction resistance previously identified with simple stimuli can be extended to more
complex real-world stimuli, our study contributes to a deeper understanding of the cognitive
processes underpinning VWM and its resilience against distractors. Thus, our study not only
advances the theoretical understanding of VWM resilience to distractions, but it also
underscores the significance of considering the timing and nature of distractors in cognitive
processing.
Declarations
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank Xinyang Liu and Lijing Guo for their assistance with data
collection.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant
31970989) and Research Council of Finland (former Academy of Finland) Academy
Research Fellow project (grant 355369).
Conflicts of interest
The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this
article.
Ethics approval
This study was performed in line with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Approval
was granted by the Ethics Committee of Sichuan Normal University.
Consent to participate
Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
Consent for publication
The authors affirm that human research participants provided informed consent for
publication of their data.
Availability of data and materials
The data obtained in the study are available for open access at
Author contribution
Chaoxiong Ye: Conceptualization (equal); Data curation (lead); Formal analysis (equal);
Funding acquisition (supporting); Investigation (equal); Methodology (lead); Project
administration (lead); Resources (lead); Software (equal); Supervision (lead); Validation
(lead); Writing – original draft preparation (lead); Writing – review & editing (supporting).
Qianru Xu: Formal analysis (equal); Investigation (equal); Software (equal); Validation
(supporting); Visualization (lead); Writing – original draft preparation (supporting); Writing
– review & editing (lead). Zhihu Pan: Validation (supporting); Writing – review & editing
(supporting). Qi-Yang Nie: Conceptualization (equal). Qiang Liu: Conceptualization (equal);
Funding acquisition (lead); Validation (supporting); writing – review & editing (supporting).