PSYCHOLOGICAL INQUIRY
2023, VOL. 34, NO. 3, 192–197
COMMENTARIES
Speech Repression and Outrage from Orthodox Activists as Attempts at
Facilitating Mobilization and Gaining Status among Allies
Antoine Marie and Michael Bang Petersen
Department of Political Science, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark
We agree with Pinsof et al. (this issue) that the inconsistencies Mobilizing Threat-Based Narratives and Speech
in how political principles and ascriptions of responsibility are Repression
opportunistically used by partisans—mostly to benefit friendly
Throughout Western history, many political and religious
groups—are well explained by their subordination to mobiliza-
movements bind around and vocally affirm mobilizing nar-
tion goals: attempts at increasing popular support for allies
ratives. The narratives are often about social threat,
and at undermining sympathy for foes. We are also convinced
denouncing how villains or harmful ideas are encroaching
that a key foundation of ideology-related phenomena is cogni-
on core values, such as the true faith, the nation’s unity,
tive instincts for mobilizing allies, which would have evolved
racial or gender equality, emancipation, racial purity, or pri-
by natural selection to increase coalitions’ size and power, in
vate property (Atran, 2016; Graham & Haidt, 2012).
particular in group conflict (Marie & Petersen, 2022b;
Participation in those movements, at least among the most
Petersen, 2020; Tooby et al., 2006; Tooby & Cosmides, 2010).
devoted activists, then triggers strong motivations to protect
Here, we zoom in on one central aspect of ideological
the narratives from critique, especially by other in-group
phenomena, which the authors did not pay special attention
members, with truth and nuance as the primary casualties.
to: the fact that devoted activists and leaders of political and
The repressive reactions vary in their intensity, ranging
religious movements often display orthodox mindsets and
from motivated resistance to contrarian opinions and facts
behaviors. That is, motivated resistance to and active repres-
to the violent repression of dissenting sources. For instance,
sion of speech perceived as undermining the narratives and
in medieval Europe, the Catholic Church collaborated with
moral principles that unite ideological movements. While
temporal powers to persecute the “heretics” perceived as
Pinsof et al. briefly discuss intolerance and authoritarianism
threatening core religious teachings (Mchangama, 2022;
as facets of ideological commitments (section “Comparing
Rokeach et al., 1960). In the 1950s, U.S. elites were seized by
Alliance Theory to Alternative Theories”), they do not
an anti-communist panic and started suspecting liberal intel-
develop on what the social functions of those behaviors may
lectuals and public servants of being Soviet spies (Joseph,
be, focusing instead on rebutting the claim that conserva-
1950; Polsby, 1960; Stouffer, 1954). Recently, the country
tives score higher on those two traits than liberals. As
has seen an upsurge in attempts to silence views and
argued below, our concept of orthodox mindsets proposes
researchers perceived as insufficiently committed to the ten-
to view phenomena of speech repression, dogmatism,
ets of racial and gender equality on the left, and a race-
intolerance, authoritarianism, aggressive outrage and the like
blind, Christian society on the right (Disinvitation Database,
as tactics directed toward doing mainly two things. First, (i)
2022; Haidt & Lukianoff, 2018; Lukianoff & Weiss, 2020;
to protect mobilizing (and typically threat-based) narratives
McWhorter, 2021). And authoritarian countries apply strict
from critique to try to preserve allies’ commitment and
censorship on their populations, kill and imprison political
attention to cherished causes. Second, (ii) to signal devotion
dissidents, etc. (Amnesty International, 2021; King et al.,
to ideological causes and their unifying narratives in order
2013; Sherstoboeva, 2020).
to gain personal status among allies. In line with Pinsof
et al.’s perspective, we see orthodox attitudes and behaviors
as manifesting among liberals, conservatives, and potentially
Hard-to-Falsify Threat-Based Ideological Narratives
all religious and political groups in times of high polariza-
as Potent yet Fragile Instruments of Mobilization
tion and group conflict. But we contend that an explicit
integration of orthodox mindsets into the Alliance theory of Why such a link between participation in ideological move-
ideology is required to explain dynamics of political opinion ments, and motivations to repress speech? Group cooper-
formation in conflict. ation is costly for its participants and its long-term benefits
Our focus on orthodox mindsets also requires widening are often uncertain (Baumard et al., 2013; Trivers, 1971).
the basis of ideological phenomena under consideration Moreover, engagement for a group or cause often reduces
beyond the contemporary U.S. on which Alliance theory is one’s ability to engage for other groups or causes (Tooby &
exclusively seated. Such empirical broadening is vital for any Cosmides, 2010). From a computational perspective, achiev-
viable cognitive and adaptationist theory of ideology. ing mobilization for a focal cause or group therefore requires
CONTACT Antoine Marie antoine.marie@ps.au.dk Department of Political Science, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
� 2023 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
COMMENTARIES 193
ideological entrepreneurs to persuade allies that engaging in it relative to the costs incurred from alternative challenges Y, Z, n
(denominator) in the minds of potential allies.
now will provide them with more benefits than all the other
ventures they could potentially engage in at a given time (see
Ideological threat-based narratives vary widely in the extent
equation 1 below). Characterizing the challenge of mobiliza-
to which they are grounded in facts. At one end of the spec-
tion in this way does not imply any assumptions about the
trum, narratives such as “the U.S. is structurally racist”, at
motivations of leaders. Leaders may try to mobilize allies
least under certain interpretations of the claim, are based on
because they are sincerely convinced that a moral cause
solid historical evidence (e.g., practices of “redlining” by
would benefit everyone in society, because they happen to
banks and insurance companies against Black neighbor-
profit personally from getting their coalition to protect them
hoods: Rothstein, 2017). Another example is academic
or solve a particular problem, or a mix of all of these
Marxism, which captures very real conflicts of interest
(DeScioli et al., 2014; Tooby & Cosmides, 2010).
between owners of capital and the employed workforce. At
One way of conveying mobilization benefits to followers
the other end of the spectrum, one finds narratives much
is through a narrative depicting, e.g., the utopian end state
further removed from reality, such as conspiracy theories
of a revolutionary process (Graham & Haidt, 2012). But as
like “America is invaded by a communist plot” (in 1954) or,
underscored by Pinsof et al., the most efficient way of influ-
a fortiori, “Democratic politicians are running a satanic child
encing allies’ beliefs toward high perceived benefits of
sex-traffick” (QAnon, today).
engagement may be through a narrative about an out-group
Regardless of how much evidence is available to back
threat—that is, through communication of the costs incurred
them up, however, it is important to highlight how difficult-
if collective action is not taken (see equation 2 below). The
to-falsify ideological threat-based narratives—and indeed all
reason for this is that moving closer to starvation, injury or
social theories—are. If you see no cat or no mat in front of
death compromises fitness faster than moving away from
you, you can safely reject the claim that “there is a cat on
those increases fitness (Nettle, 2016; Stephens, 1981). Because
the mat”. By contrast, statements like “America [or Russia]
of this asymmetry, the mind evolved to be particularly averse
is invaded by secret foreign agents” or “the U.S. is structur-
to losses (Tversky & Kahneman, 1991). As a result, negatively
ally racist” are macro social claims about entire nations.
framed information is attended, remembered, believed, and
Assessing them would require systematic observation and
passed along more than neutral information (Blaine & Boyer,
induction, which almost nobody undertakes (apart from a
2018; Fessler et al., 2014; Rozin & Royzman, 2001). It also
few professional social scientists). Most of the harmful deeds
makes speakers appear more competent (Boyer & Parren,
they point to are inaccessible to individual perception, either
2015). Social threats in particular tend to be over-attended
because they take place out of sight in distant cities or
and over-detected by the human mind (van Prooijen & van
organizations, or are almost unobservable in principle (e.g.,
Vugt, 2018). This is likely because of the extreme costs that
agents conspiring in hidden places; harmful private
coordinated humans can inflict, and the higher collective
thoughts). For the most part, the referents of ideological
effort required to counter group-based relative to non-
narratives can only be meta-represented in the “mind’s eye”
human threats (Laustsen & Petersen, 2015). These factors
as reflective beliefs (Petersen & Aarøe, 2013; Sperber, 1997),
contribute to explain why political and religious movements
not through our actual visual system. And to the extent the
recurrently craft and bind around dramatizing narratives
social harms they portray are aggregated dynamics, there is
emphasizing how intentionally evil, oppressive, universal,
no clear criterion for determining what events in the world
existential, ubiquitous, long-lasting or imminent a social
would make such beliefs true or false. What distinguishes a
threat is—whether it threatens to hurt the ingroup from the
society in which there is from one where there is no com-
outside (e.g., fighting the Protestants for Catholics, the evil
munist or capitalist or Western conspiracy? At what point
U.S. for Russia) or through infiltration among its ranks (e.g.,
does an objectionable hiring practice or a racially discrimin-
spotting communists in 1954 U.S.) (Graham & Haidt, 2012;
atory thought becomes so widespread that it counts as
Tooby & Cosmides, 2010).
“structural”?
The semantic abstraction of threat-based narratives makes
Benefits of engagement for coalition or cause X
them difficult to falsify through direct observation, both in
Benefits of engagement for coalitions or causes Y, Z, n
the minds of activists spreading them and in their followers’.
This, given their ability to tap systems of social threat avoid-
Equation 1: The goal of an ideological entrepreneur seeking to
ance, calibrated to err on the side of over-sensitivity
mobilize allies is to increase this ratio, i.e., to inflate the
(Haselton et al., 2015), may help threat-based narratives
perceived benefits among allies of mobilization for coalition or
cause X (numerator) relative to the benefits of engaging in penetrate and “stick” in the minds of potential followers,
alternative causes Y, Z, n (denominator).
facilitating their mobilizing effects.
Costs incurred from threat T
Speech Repression and Motivated Resistance to
Costs incurred from challenges Y, Z, n
Critique as Strategies for Preserving Mobilizations
To the extent threat-based narratives can motivate followers
to engage in a group or cause, ensuring their endorsement
Equation 2: Efforts to mobilize often take the particular form of
inflating the perceived costs incurred from threat T (numerator) by potential allies becomes the target of fierce political
194 A. MARIE AND M. B. PETERSEN
battles of influence from ideological entrepreneurs. A typical Lukianoff & Weiss, 2020; McWhorter, 2021). At the
ideological narrative is a description of social threat extreme, dictatorships such as China and Russia, engaged in
(“American corporate values are threatened by communist a global struggle of influence with Western democracies, use
influence”; “racism is endemic in society”) from which fol- their administrations to surveil, censor and imprison cri-
lowers’ motivational systems of cost-avoidance and cooper- tiques of the regimes lest they might endanger narratives
ation infer a need for collective action (“ … so we must about exemplarity of the nation (e.g., role in WW2), and
defeat communism/racism whenever we see it”). Put differ- lead to subversive demands for more political freedoms
ently, the threat-based core of the narrative operates like a (Amnesty International, 2021; King et al., 2013;
cognitive vector that pushes with more or less force toward Sherstoboeva, 2020).
more investment in specific cooperative efforts, presented as A similar mobilization-maintenance logic may drive
being capable of tackling the threat (e.g., being more vigilant merely verbal acts from activists as well, such as motivated
about socialist sympathies in the administration/about resistance, dogmatism, and displays of aggressive outrage
racially offensive remarks on campus). This entails that the toward individuals bringing arguments that nuance a cher-
vector’s force is constantly undermined by contrarian argu- ished threat in the conversation (e.g., “But world poverty
ments (e.g., “communism/racism is not that widespread, has significantly decreased over the last decades,” “But not
you’re dramatizing”) or facts (e.g., nuanced scientific conclu- all cops are bastards” for strong liberals; or “You don’t
sions) that, if they were to spread from mind to mind and acknowledge that there are also benefits/negative side effects
become common knowledge, might lead followers to lower to immigration” for strong conservatives and strong
their investment in the movement. This is what the ortho- liberals, respectively). Some of these manifestations of cogni-
dox activists and leaders viscerally want to prevent. tive rigidity may be explained as aiming to deter further
In social environments where speech is unregulated, dissemination of contrarian discourse, with the hope of pre-
information can circulate freely and widely. From the serving shared beliefs in and attention toward the serious-
perspective of an ideological entrepreneur concerned with ness of the threat.
maintaining widespread support for their cherished cause, Importantly, how effective repressions of contrarian
free speech opens the risk that views nuancing the saliency claims are at preserving mobilizations is another story—
which we don’t have room to cover here. Speech repressors,
of the threat creates a shift in prior beliefs in allies’ minds
toward less perceived benefits of engagement against the if they are too few or not powerful enough, may fail to pre-
serve the mobilizing narrative from dilution by critique. Or
their acts may be perceived as excessively authoritarian and
that human psychology likely evolved programs for channel-
thus erode the image of their movement. If sufficiently large
ing communication flows so as to reduce risks that demobi-
scale and complete, however—in particular when ideological
lizing information spreads among allies, with the goal of
leaders can rely on entire administrative and carceral sys-
tems—contrarian views may go extinct, at least temporarily.
vides a graphic illustration of the logic of such strategies of
Suppression of competition on the cognitive market may
speech repression.
lead to more extremism of the ideological narrative, and less
Many attitudes and behaviors that are part of what we
pragmatic policy propositions, which may increase group
call “orthodox mindsets” may be aimed at such mobiliza-
polarization and conflict (see dark blue arrow at bottom
tion-maintenance functions. Indeed, they tend to covary
with beliefs about the ingroup’s cohesion and safety being
In a similar vein, we would like Pinsof et al. to develop
under threat by physically external rivals or betrayers inside
on the consequences and second-order effects of partisans
the ingroup. Perhaps the most conspicuous of those tactics
repeatedly and vocally broadcasting their political beliefs.
are attempts to repress speech. For instance, councils of the
How persuasive are the stated moral principles, and the
medieval Catholic Church issued dogmas (i.e., policies) the
rhetoric emphasizing victimhood of allies on, e.g., politically
punitiveness of which could be predicted by the amount of
undecided audiences? What are the effects of exposure to
perceived threat to the Church’s unity, which varied from
discourse demonizing rivals among allies, and among rivals,
minor controversies over rituals to schisms sparked by
in terms of mutual perceptions and treatment (e.g., Lees &
Luther who rejected core Church teachings (Mchangama,
Cikara, 2020)?
2022; Rokeach et al., 1960). In the 1950s U.S., the anti-
communist witch-hunt of McCarthyism took place in a con-
text of intense geopolitical rivalry with the U.S.S.R. and
Speech Repression and Motivated Resistance to
paranoia about communist influence in U.S. institutions and
Critique to Gain Status Among Allies
culture (Joseph, 1950; Polsby, 1960; Stouffer, 1954). It is in
the highly polarized U.S. of the 2010s–2020s that radical Within ideological movements in which there is some
activists sometimes “call out” and “shitstorm” on social degree of partner choice (Baumard et al., 2013; Noe &
media, and demand the “cancelling” and “deplatforming” of Hammerstein, 1994), each activist is incentivized to appear
thinkers and scholars whose conclusions are seen as being as more devoted personally to the movement than the aver-
insufficiently supportive of racial and gender equality on the age activist if they are to secure membership and gain status
left, or a race-blind, Christian traditional society on the right among allies. From a computational perspective, an activist’s
(Disinvitation Database, 2022; Haidt & Lukianoff, 2018; level of devotion to a cause or group X is assessed by her
COMMENTARIES 195
allies of an ideological movement. Top: Free speech opens the risk that contrarian views and evidence create a shift in prior beliefs among allies that may under-
mine the perceived truth—and thus mobilization power—of a threat-based narrative. Bottom: Active avoidance and repression of contrarian views and evidence by
orthodox activists reduces the likelihood of such prior beliefs shift in allies’ minds. Such tactics may be aimed either at preserving the narrative’s mobilization poten-
tial, or at accruing status via signaling of an unwillingness to compromise with the cause, or both simultaneously (as the behavior is the same). Finally, large scale
repression of contrarian views can lead to further extremism of the narrative (dark blue arrow).
allies by inferring how much more the activist cares about they are jointly pursing, relative to the activist’s devotion to
other causes or groups Y, Z, n.
the focal group or cause X compared to alternative causes Y,
Z, n. Equation 3 below summarizes this logic of devotion-
Importantly, Pinsof et al. do not discuss how expressions
signaling.
of beliefs signaling devotion to causes or groups one’s allies
0 value can serve the personal reputational embellishment of a
activist s devotion to coalition or cause X
signaler in the eyes of those allies—a narrowly selfish
activist s devotion to coalitions or causes Y, Z, n
preoccupation. The authors only cover how expressions of
political beliefs may be done to embellish the image of
Equation 3: The goal of a signaler (activist or leader) is to
increase this ratio, i.e., to inflate the perception that allies have third-party friendly groups to widen support for them, and
of her own devotion to their welfare and/or to the focal cause X
to undermine the image of third-party rivals (which we
196 A. MARIE AND M. B. PETERSEN
agree partisans are probably doing). Acknowledging strat- that identifying the social goals pursued by orthodox mind-
egies of personal enhancement through expression of spe- sets are crucial additions to the Alliance theory of ideology.
cific political beliefs does not allow to predict the content of In particular, we argued that speech repression may emerge
the expressed beliefs, one of the main goals of Alliance the- from attempts at (i) maintaining mobilization of followers
ory (cf. Abstract). Nonetheless, this acknowledgement pre- for mutually beneficial causes in polarized and conflict-
dicts a match between the allegiances expressed by signalers ridden times, and to (ii) signal devotion to the causes one’s
and what they believe their allies want to hear, plus compe- allies value to gain status—the latter goal being left out of
tition among allies with increasingly hard-to-fake expres- Pinsof et al.’s Alliance theory as currently formulated.
sions of devotion. This is why the beliefs unifying
ideological groups can be so outlandish (Mercier, 2020;
Disclosure Statement
Petersen, 2020; Tooby & Cosmides, 2010; Williams, 2022).
Given the centrality of signaling dynamics in political and No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
religious phenomena, we consider the role of personal repu-
tation a central addition to Alliance theory.
Funding
Let us now focus again on acts of repression of and out-
rage at contrarian claims. If they occur publicly, they give a This work was supported by a grant from the Carlsberg Foundation to MBP
cue to observers that the agent is unwilling to compromise
with the advancement of the focal cause (i.e., that, in his
mind, the numerator of equation 3 is much greater than its
ORCID
denominator). This makes it possible for orthodox activists
to signal devotion to the cause (and the people invested in
it) in the form of speech repression for strictly personal rep-
utational benefit. This leads to the prediction that the higher
the perceived threat and fitness interdependence among