Human Divergent Exploration Capacity for Material Design:
A Comparison with Artificial Intelligence
Hiroyuki Sakai
Toyota Central R&D Labs., Inc., 41-1 Yokomichi, Nagakute, 480-1192 Japan
Kenroh Matsuda
Toyota Central R&D Labs., Inc., 41-1 Yokomichi, Nagakute, 480-1192 Japan
Nobuaki Kikkawa
Toyota Central R&D Labs., Inc., 41-1 Yokomichi, Nagakute, 480-1192 Japan
Seiji Kajita
Toyota Central R&D Labs., Inc., 41-1 Yokomichi, Nagakute, 480-1192 Japan
Abstract
Applications of artificial intelligence (AI) to material design have attracted increasing
attention in recent years. Although AI-aided material design holds great promise for
some applications, whether it has surpassed human creativity remains uncertain. The
aim of the current study was to compare the divergent exploration capacity of AI with
that of humans on a material design task. Human participants were asked to find a
high-performance lubricant molecule under searching conditions comparable to a state-
of-the-art AI system. Results indicated that, on average, AI was able to find significantly
better lubricant molecules. However, the best molecule found by AI fell short of the best
molecule found by a human participant. Furthermore, the structural characteristics of
the molecules found by AI and human participants differed significantly. These find-
ings suggest that a state-of-the-art AI system is capable of surpassing human divergent
exploration capacity in material design, as in other fields in which AI has advanced.
Nevertheless, our results also demonstrate that human intelligence and AI can play
complementary roles. This investigation opens up new possibilities for collaborative
systems involving both AI and humans in material design.
Keywords: creativity, divergent thinking, lubricant molecule, collaborative intelligence
Funding: This work was supported by Toyota Central R&D Labs., Inc.
correspondence: sakai@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp, fine-controller@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp
Preprint submitted to Computers in Human Behavior July 4, 2023
1. Introduction
Applications of artificial intelligence (AI) to material design have received in-
creasing attention in the context of the reduction of costly human effort. Func-
tional materials are commonly developed by exhaustive trial-and-error processes.
The time span from a discovery in a laboratory to a commercial product is typically
a few decades (Maine and Garnsey, 2006). To alleviate such delays, AI is begin-
ning to be applied to the large-scale screening of materials (Elton et al., 2019a;
Pilania, 2021; Pollice et al., 2021; Sanchez-Lengeling and Aspuru-Guzik, 2018). In
particular, AI-aided screening has discovered important materials, such as organic
photovoltaics (Pollice et al., 2021), high-capacity oxygen storage materials (Ohba
et al., 2019), and super-ionic conductors (Kajita et al., 2020b). These emerg-
ing technologies enable the discovery of hidden promising materials from multiple
known compounds, by the use of high-throughput material screening with little or
no human involvement.
More recently, AI has come to be used to design de novo molecules. It has long
been believed that the discovery of novel materials from scratch can be achieved
only by the creativity of experts because the number of synthetically feasible mate-
rials is infinitely large. For example, a drug-like chemical space of organic molecules
30 60
is expected to contain between 10 and 10 molecules (Polishchuk et al., 2013;
Virshup et al., 2013). However, this belief is changing because recent progress
in machine learning allows materials to be designed autonomously (Elton et al.,
2019a; Pilania, 2021; Pollice et al., 2021; Sanchez-Lengeling and Aspuru-Guzik,
2018). For example, Yang et al. (Yang et al., 2017) demonstrated a closed-loop
system that combines an evaluator of octanol-water partition coefficient and molec-
ular generation using a Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) algorithm (Agrawal, 1995;
Auer et al., 2002), which was inspired by the success of AI for playing strategic
board games, such as chess and Go (Silver et al., 2016, 2018, 2017). The system
sends a molecule generated by MCTS to the evaluator, receives feedback compris-
ing the value of a target physical property, and then uses this value as a score
to generate the next promising molecule. This generation–evaluation loop iter-
ates until the material structure is optimized with respect to the score. Another
line of research used molecular dynamics simulation as an evaluator to optimize
transport-related properties, such as the ion conductivity and viscosity of liquids,
by calculating the realistic dynamics of molecules. This resulted in the discovery
of novel molecules that are potentially useful in industry (Kajita et al., 2020a;
Kikkawa et al., 2020).
Has AI-aided molecular exploration already surpassed human creativity? In
strategic board games, AI has proven to overwhelm humans in finding the next
move (Silver et al., 2016, 2018, 2017). Accordingly, because similar search al-
gorithms are applied to AI-aided molecular exploration, it can be hypothesized
that AI is capable of discovering novel materials that humans cannot easily find.
Kajita et al. (Kajita et al., 2020a) demonstrated that AI-aided material explo-
ration using the MCTS algorithm could find lubricant molecules whose lubrication
performance is better than that of lubricants on the market. However, it is not
fair to simply compare these AI-proposed molecules with existing human-designed
molecules with respect to their physical properties because the feasibility of syn-
thesis was not taken into account during the AI exploration. To demonstrate the
superiority of AI in material exploration, as compared with human intelligence
(HI), the comparison should be conducted under the same search conditions, as
far as possible (Firestone, 2020). Such a fair comparison would enable us to prop-
erly use not only AI but also HI for material exploration in industry.
Thus, the aim of the current study was to compare AI and HI with respect
to their exploration capacity in material design. For this purpose, we conducted
a behavioral experiment involving a material exploration task, in which partici-
pants were asked to propose a lubricant molecule with the highest viscosity index
(VI) under the same searching conditions as an AI system using a state-of-the-art
MCTS algorithm for exploratory material design (Kikkawa and Ohno, 2022). We
then compared the molecules proposed by AI and HI from several perspectives,
including both the targeted physical property and structural characteristics. The
results constitute the first empirical evidence for assessing the effective usage of
AI and HI in the divergent exploration of high-performance materials.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Material Exploration by Artificial Intelligence
We used a closed-loop system that consists of generation and evaluation al-
gorithms. The following subsections explain the computational details of these
algorithms and the procedure of material exploration.
2.1.1. Generation algorithm
We used an MCTS model to generate candidate lubricant molecules. The lu-
bricant molecules generated by this model are encoded in the simplified molecular-
input line-entry system (SMILES) (Weininger, 1988), which is a format for repre-
senting a molecular structure of chemical species as an ASCII string. The SMILES
strings are generated by concatenation of the following string fragments that de-
scribe chain structures of molecules (Kajita et al., 2020a).
In the main chain:
CC, OC, C=C, (, $, c1ccccc1$, C1CCCCC1$, =O$,
In the side chain:
CC, OC, C=C, (, ), c1ccccc1), C1CCCCC1), =O),
where ‘$’ indicates the end of the molecular generation. The ‘c1ccccc1’, ‘C1CCCCC1’,
and ‘=O’ fragments are termination groups. A pair of symbols ‘(’ and ‘)’ represents
a branch of the chain of the molecule. In the molecular generation, the first set of
fragments is selected and these fragments are concatenated to form the structure
of the main chain. Once the fragment ‘(’ is chosen, the second set of fragments is
used for the generation to construct a side chain. In addition, the string concate-
nations are performed according to the following rules: (1) The initial molecular
fragment, called a root node, is ‘C’. (2) To restrict the length of the molecule,
the fragments containing ‘$’ can only be used if the number of constituent atoms
without hydrogen is 20 or more. The maximum number of atoms is set to 36 and,
if the number of atoms after the fragment linkage is 37 or more, the fragment is
excluded from the fragment selection in advance. (3) The molecule must have at
least one side chain.
According to the above rules, favorable fragments are strategically selected
by considering the pseudo-upper confidence bound score, which was proposed by
Kikkawa and Ohno (2022). This selection scheme has proven to outperform the
other schemes in several material search tasks (Kikkawa and Ohno, 2022), and
we slightly tuned the original algorithm to introduce the expansion scheme of
regular MCTS (Section S1, Supplementary Material). This modified algorithm
was used as a representative AI method and was named MaxSearch (MS). We also
used random search (RS), which selects fragments randomly, as a ‘non-intelligence’
reference.
2.1.2. Evaluation algorithm
Although molecular dynamics simulation is able to evaluate the VI accurately,
the computational cost is too high to adopt an evaluator in the MCTS approach.
We therefore replaced it by a lightweight computation method that is sufficiently
fast to achieve real-time user interaction. The method adopted was a supervised
learning model, lightGBM (Ke et al., 2017), which was trained with a dataset
containing 55,000 pairs of SMILES strings and VI values estimated by molecular
dynamics simulation. This machine learning model can estimate the VI of any
molecule in less than a second. The dataset used for training is available as Sup-
plementary Data in a previous report (Kajita et al., 2020a). The details of the
machine learning model are described in Section S2 (Supplementary Material).
2.1.3. Procedure
Each search trial was performed until 60,000 molecules were generated, and
each trial was repeated 30 times. These computational conditions were determined
by considering the number of participants and the time available for the experiment
(up to two hours).
2.2. Material Exploration by Human Intelligence
For fair comparisons of AI and HI, we asked human participants to search for
lubricant molecules described in the SMILES format with feedback on VI values
A B
aim of maximizing the viscosity index (VI) using the molecular design window (A). Each time the
user changes the molecular structure using the molecular design window, this tool immediately
updates the estimated VI and the three-dimensional structure (B) of the molecule.
under searching conditions comparable to the AI exploration. Although in gen-
eral organic synthesis needs high expertise in organic chemistry, the current ex-
perimental configuration allowed the participation of non-experts. The following
subsections describe the methodological details of the HI exploration.
2.2.1. Participants
We recruited participants regardless of their expertise in organic chemistry. A
total of 29 healthy adults (22 males and seven females) with ages ranging from
22 to 31 years participated in the study and received financial incentives for their
participation. They self-reported no history of neurological or psychiatric diseases.
All participants provided written informed consent in accordance with a protocol
approved by the institutional review board of XXXXXX (anonymized during the
review process).
2.2.2. Software
We developed a graphical user interface (GUI) tool for material exploration
ture of the lubricant by choosing constituent fragments encoded in the SMILES
format. This tool instantly updates the VI value and the three-dimensional struc-
interactive material exploration without stressful delay. The VI value is estimated
by the machine learning model that is also used in the AI exploration, unless the
manipulation of the molecular structure violates predetermined rules. The rules
are the same as those imposed on the AI exploration. Specifically, the number of
constituent atoms in a molecule is limited to the range 20–36. The following six
fragments can be used:
CC, OC, C=C, c1ccccc1, C1CCCCC1, =O, (),
where the carbonyl group ‘=O’ and the cyclic fragments ‘c1ccccc1’ and ‘C1CCCCC1’
are allowed to be used only as the terminal group. To maintain lubricity at room
temperature, ‘()’ (which indicates a side chain) must be used at least once. Because
molecular structures that contain ‘=C=’ and ‘=CC=’ patterns are chemically un-
stable, the tool does not allow the creation of such structures. Moreover, starting
with ‘C1CCCCC1’ or ‘C=C’ molecules is not allowed. Starting from a given ‘C’
string, the user can deploy the fragments in any locations of the molecule and
delete the constituent atoms, provided that these rules are satisfied. In addition,
which the user can refer as a starting point.
VI = 73.5 VI = 144.4 VI = 141.2 VI = 133.0 VI = 131.3
VI = 199.7 VI = 197.2 VI = 197.0 VI = 196.9 VI = 196.3
VI = 194.4 VI = 194.0 VI = 193.7 VI = 193.6 VI = 193.6
VI = 197.2 VI = 197.1 VI = 196.6 VI = 196.1 VI = 196.0
which are typical existing lubricant molecules. These were shown to participants in the human
intelligence (HI) exploration as references (A). The second row shows the top five molecules
found in the HI exploration (B). The third and fourth rows show the top five molecules in the
random search (RS) and MaxSearch (MS) explorations, respectively (C, D).
2.2.3. Procedure
After receiving instructions on the use of the GUI tool, the participants began
the material exploration task. They were asked to undertake the task for between
one and two hours and find the lubricant molecule with the highest VI value. They
were also asked not to take account of the feasibility of molecule synthesis.
The participants also completed a follow-up survey at a later date, answering a
questionnaire on their knowledge and experience of organic chemistry. The ques-
tionnaire consisted of three questions: (1) Have you ever had any education in
organic chemistry? (Yes/No). (2) Have you been involved in research or work re-
lated to organic chemistry? (Yes/No). (3) How useful do you think your expertise
was in conducting the experimental task? (1: not at all, 2: somewhat, 3: quite,
4: very much). According to their responses to questions (1) and (2), participants
were divided into three groups with different levels of organic chemistry expertise.
Specifically, 13 participants who answered ‘No’ to both questions were assigned to
the non-expert group (Non); six who had education but no professional experience
in organic chemistry were assigned to the middle-expertise group (Educated); and
eight who answered ‘Yes’ to both questions were assigned to the high-expertise
group (Worked). The remaining two participants did not respond to the question-
naire.
It is worth noting that, because of the COVID-19 pandemic in Japan (Sakai
et al., 2021), the experiment was conducted remotely through video teleconfer-
encing software (Zoom, San Jose, CA) to prevent infection. The GUI tool was
executed on a personal computer (Apple MacBook Air, Cupertino, CA) in our
experimental room, and participants operated it from their own working environ-
ment using the remote control function of the video teleconferencing software. The
follow-up questionnaire was collected by email.
2.3. Comparisons of artificial and human intelligence
First, we compared the VI values of the proposed molecules found by AI and
HI, using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a post hoc Welch’s unequal
variances t-test. For the HI-proposed molecules, we further examined the impact
of participants’ expertise in organic chemistry (i.e., Non, Educated, or Worked) on
the VI values using one-way ANOVA with a Welch’s t-test. In addition, the same
ANOVA model was applied to the questionnaire score regarding the subjective
usefulness of expertise. The significance level was set at p < 0.05 for all the
statistical tests.
Second, we compared the structural characteristics of the AI-proposed and
HI-proposed molecules using the smooth overlap of atomic position (SOAP) de-
scriptor (Bart´ok et al., 2013; De et al., 2016). The SOAP descriptor encodes
the three-dimensional coordinates of the constituent atoms of a molecule, and
is widely used in materials engineering, for example, for regression of properties
(Kajita et al., 2020b) and structural morphing (Oba and Kajita, 2022). In this
study, the SOAP descriptor of each molecule was computed by the Python package
of the proposed molecules were all embedded in a 252-dimensional array in the
format of the SOAP power spectra (Section S3, Supplementary Material). To sta-
tistically test the separability of the AI-proposed and HI-proposed molecules in
the descriptor space, we then applied principal component analysis (PCA) to the
SOAP descriptor data and performed one-way ANOVA with a post hoc Welch’s
unequal variances t-test on the first principal component (PC) score. In addition,
we performed a two-sample Hotelling T test in the reduced dimensionality space
spanned by components whose cumulative contribution was greater than 95%. The
significance level was set at P < 0.05 for all the statistical tests.
Results
Fig. 2 shows the five best molecules proposed in the searches conducted by HI
and AI. The HI exploration succeeded in finding novel molecules (Fig. 2B) that
0 200 400 600 800
Number of moves
thin line depicts the VI trajectory for each participant. The closed circles and error bars represent
the mean and standard deviation, respectively, across all participants.
have better lubrication performance than the existing lubricant molecules pre-
sented to participants as references (Fig. 2A). The RS search also found molecules
(Fig. 2C) with better lubrication performance than the reference molecules, as
a consequence of the large number of iterations performed. The MS exploration
(Fig. 2D) was even more successful than the RS exploration, indicating that the
MS exploration performed effectively on this task, as demonstrated in a recent
study (Kikkawa and Ohno, 2022). The best molecule, with a VI value of 199.7,
was found by a participant in the HI exploration, even though this participant was
a non-expert in organic chemistry. In contrast, the maximum VI value was 194.4
in the RS exploration and 197.2 in the MS exploration. From the perspective of
structural characteristics, the proposed molecules, regardless of the search agents,
tend to contain many branch fragments and fragments with a double bond (i.e.,
‘=O’ and ‘C=C’), compared with the reference molecules. A clear difference from
the HI exploration is that the RS and MS explorations used fewer cyclic com-
A B
210 210
200 200
x x
e e
d d
n n
i i
y y
190 190
t t
i i
s s
o o
c c
s s
i i
V V
180 180
170 170
HI RS MS HI RS MS
HI-proposed molecules were comparable to those proposed by AI exploration with RS but sig-
nificantly lower than those proposed by AI exploration with MS (A). However, for the aver-
age number of moves made in the HI exploration (i.e., 480), the VI values of the HI-proposed
molecules were significantly higher than those of the AI-proposed molecules, regardless of the
search algorithm used (B). Each open circle depicts the VI value of one proposed molecule. The
closed circles and error bars represent the mean and standard deviation, respectively.
pounds (i.e., ‘c1ccccc1’ and ‘C1CCCCC1’). In the HI exploration, only six of the
29 participants (20.7%) used one or more cyclic compounds, whereas the RS and
MS explorations were more likely to use them (RS: 66.7%, MS: 36.7%).
Fig. 3 presents a plot of the mean VI value as a function of the number of moves
(molecular generations) in the HI exploration. On average, participants made 480
moves in their searches (SD = 153, min = 127, max = 853) and achieved a final
VI value of 191.1 (SD = 5.1, min = 181.5, max = 199.7). Fig. 4A shows the
final VI values achieved by the searches using HI and AI. An analysis of multiple
comparison followed by ANOVA (η = 0.21, F = 11.4, P < 0.001) revealed that
the mean VI value achieved by the HI exploration was statistically comparable
to that achieved by the RS exploration (P = 0.24) and significantly lower than
that achieved by the MS exploration (P < 0.001). In addition, it showed that the
mean VI value achieved by MS was significantly higher than that achieved by RS
A B
180 l
t u
s f
o 2
160 1
Non Educated Worked Non Educated Worked
Expertise in organic chemistry Expertise in organic chemistry
ration. According to the questionnaire regarding expertise in organic chemistry, participants
were classified into three classes: Non (N = 13), Educated (N = 6), and Worked (N = 8). Un-
expectedly, expertise had no significant effect on the VI values (A), but the subjective usefulness
of expertise in the Worked group was significantly higher than in both the Non and Educated
groups (B). The open circles represent data for individual participants. The closed circles and
error bars represent the mean and standard deviation, respectively.
(P < 0.001).
The same comparisons were performed with respect to the average number of
moves in the HI exploration (Fig. 4B). One-way ANOVA revealed a significant
main effect of search condition (η = 0.40, F = 28.2, P < 0.001). Post hoc multiple
comparisons showed that the mean VI value achieved by the HI exploration was
higher than those achieved under the other two search conditions (P < 0.001) and
that the performance of the MS exploration was comparable to that of the RS
exploration (P = 0.16). This suggests that the HI exploration, which can refer to
existing lubricant molecules, is more efficient than the AI exploration, given the
same number of moves.
Unexpectedly, participants’ expertise in organic chemistry had no significant
effect on the VI values of the molecules proposed in the HI exploration (η =
0.12, F = 1.61, P = 0.22; Fig. 5A). However, ANOVA revealed that the subjective
usefulness of expertise differed significantly between the groups (η = 0.37, F =
6.97, P = 0.0041; Fig. 5B). Further, multiple comparisons showed that partici-
pants in the Worked group recognized that their own expertise was useful for tack-
ling this task, compared with the other two groups (Non vs Educated: P = 0.77,
Non vs Worked: P = 0.0011, Educated vs Worked: P = 0.033).
PCA on the SOAP descriptor data revealed that the first PC explained 77.3%
of the total variance and the cumulative contribution was greater than 95% with
the first five (of 252) PCs. Using this PCA result, a structural distinction was
found among the proposed molecules. Specifically, one-way ANOVA with multiple
comparisons on the first PC score showed statistically different distributions for
each of the three search conditions (η = 0.14, F = 7.16, P = 0.0013; HI vs RS:
P = 0.0037, HI vs MS: P = 0.050, RS vs MS: P = 0.055; Fig. 6). This tendency
was further confirmed by a pairwise Hotelling T test using the first five PCs (HI
2 2
vs RS: T = 62.3, P < 0.001; HI vs MS: T = 18.7, P = 0.0022; RS vs MS:
T = 39.3, P < 0.001).
Discussion
The current study investigated human divergent exploration capacity for high-
performance material design and compared it with AI. To our knowledge, this was
the first attempt to compare the exploration capacities of AI and HI in mate-
rial design under comparable conditions. Regarding the physical property as the
exploration objective, the state-of-the-art AI method (i.e., MS exploration) outper-
formed the HI exploration on average, although the best molecule was found by the
HI exploration. Regarding the structural characteristics, our results demonstrated
that the AI and HI explorations covered different search spaces.
0.09
0.06
0.03
P -0.03
-0.06
-0.09
HI RS MS
structural characteristics were quantified using the first principal component score in the SOAP
descriptor space. The open circles represent data for individual participants. The closed circles
and error bars represent the mean and standard deviation, respectively.
It has already been demonstrated that AI can produce a wide range of solutions
that are not easily found by human insight (Silver et al., 2016, 2018, 2017). The
current study indicated that a similar situation is emerging in the field of mate-
rial design. Material designers typically explore de novo molecules under the con-
straints of synthetic feasibility. Therefore, it is not surprising that the AI-proposed
molecules achieved much higher performance than existing lubricant molecules
(e.g., the reference molecules). However, this study demonstrated that, even when
synthetic feasibility constraints were relaxed, the AI-proposed molecules achieved
significantly higher performance on average than the HI-proposed molecules.
It should be emphasized that our results also showed that a non-expert human
participant found a molecule that outperformed all the AI-proposed molecules.
This finding may be very important because one of the main goals in material
design is to find new materials with record-breaking properties of interest, such as
high-temperature superconductivity (Orenstein and Millis, 2000). In typical tasks
performed by AI, such as playing a board game, the guiding principles of search
algorithms focus mainly on maximizing the mean reward because a win can be
achieved by scoring only one point more than the opponent; that is, there is no
advantage in obtaining a very high score. Therefore, these approaches are designed
to avoid choices with high failure rates. As failure is said to breed success, such
conventional strategies that avoid mistakes are not always optimal for achieving
a significant materials discovery. Serendipity relying on human insight may be
statistically unreliable but may play a crucial role in winner-takes-all tasks, such
as materials design, even in the era of AI.
Structural distinctions between the AI-proposed and HI-proposed molecules
suggest directions for the effective use of AI in material design. The AI-proposed
and HI-proposed molecules both used branches and carbonyls frequently, but had
different skeleton structures in the SOAP descriptor space. One notable difference
was the usage of cyclic compounds. Our results showed that AI could find high-
performance molecules using cyclic compounds that tended to be avoided in the HI
exploration. This may be attributable to the different search strategies employed
in the AI and HI explorations. The AI exploration looks ahead to some extent
using MCTS roll-outs. Conversely, the HI exploration receives feedback comprising
the VI value every time a fragment is chosen in one molecular generation. A cyclic
compound contains a large number of atoms. Its use reduces the number of degrees
of freedom because of the rule that limits the number of atoms in a single molecule.
Therefore, from the perspective of HI, it seems reasonable to avoid using cyclic
compounds. These insights indicate that AI and HI can follow complementary
strategies in the search space. Collaboration, rather than competition, between
AI and HI could help to expand the search space in material design.
In this study, we obtained unexpected results regarding the effect of expertise
on the HI exploration. Even among the participants who had professional expe-
rience in organic chemistry (i.e., the Worked group), contrary to their subjective
evaluation, their expertise had no significant effect on search performance. We do
not attribute these results to the experts’ incompetence but to the fact that the
task did not require much expertise because the immediate feedback of VI values
was provided by the machine learning algorithm. Although the purpose of the
task was to explore material molecules, it can actually be regarded as a game task
in which character strings are manipulated using a feedback score as a hint. This
hypothesis is corroborated by the fact that the current AI method (Kikkawa and
Ohno, 2022), which does not possess a broad knowledge of organic chemistry, was
also able to accomplish the task. In addition, our results suggest the potential of
non-expert collective intelligence. The participants in this study performed the
task independently without sharing knowledge with each other, and achieved per-
formance that surpassed that of the AI method. It may be possible to achieve even
better performance by allowing the participants to share results and knowhow with
each other via a crowdsourcing platform. In fact, a similar approach has achieved
great success in determining the folded structures of protein molecules (Cooper
et al., 2010). To demonstrate the validity of collective intelligence in material de-
sign, at least at the divergent exploration stage in the material design process, is
an important future research direction.
The results of the current study suggest the possibility of a collaborative frame-
work that combines AI and HI. The framework involves a gamification approach
whereby experts in materials engineering set a problem to solve, such as finding
a de novo molecule with optimal performance with respect to a specific physical
property. Specifically, the problem is formulated in the form of a game to make it
more engaging and accessible to novices in materials engineering. This generalizes
the approach to material exploration using string manipulation and the immediate
feedback of VI values deployed in the experiments in this study. The gamification
approach involves both crowdworkers and AI agents participating in the game to
find the best solution under the same search conditions. Although the AI agents
use specific approaches or methods they choose, each crowdworker relies on their
own creativity and insight to solve the problem, resulting in coverage of a broader
search space. In addition, the best molecule discovered by the participants is reg-
ularly shared among all the participants to improve their strategies. This sharing
of information helps to build a collective intelligence among the crowdworkers. By
exploiting the computational power of AI agents and the collective intelligence of
a diverse group of humans, this framework can lead to the discovery of optimal
solutions in an efficient manner.
This study has limitations that should be addressed in future research. In
this study, comparisons between AI and HI were made only with respect to the
divergent exploration capacity for designing lubricant molecules. To generalize
the current findings, it is necessary to replicate the results in material design for
different applications. For industrial applications, in addition to the physical prop-
erties of the material, the feasibility of synthesis must also be taken into account.
Comparison, with respect to the feasibility of synthesis, between AI-proposed and
HI-proposed molecules is a critical future research direction. The evaluation of
synthetic feasibility is currently a difficult task for both organic chemistry experts
and AI algorithms, although AI algorithms have made significant progress (Coley
et al., 2017; Elton et al., 2019b).
Conclusion
In this paper, we provided the first empirical evidence on the divergent ex-
ploration capacity of humans for material design in the context of a comparison
with AI. Our findings suggest that state-of-the-art AI surpasses human capacity
in exploratory material design, as it has in other fields in which AI has advanced.
However, this does not mean that the need for experts will disappear. Our results
also indicate that humans can provide intelligence that complements AI in mate-
rial design. Rather, we believe that the current investigation opens new avenues
for collaborative systems that combine HI and AI in material design.