Article information
Article title
Lifespan trajectories of risk preference, impulsivity, and self-control: A dataset containing self-
report, informant-report, behavioral, hormone and functional neuroimaging measures from a
cross-sectional human sample
Authors
1 1 2 1
Loreen Tisdall *, Simon Mugume , David Kellen , Rui Mata
Affiliations
Center for Cognitive and Decision Sciences, Faculty of Psychology, University of Basel,
Switzerland
College of Arts & Sciences, Syracuse University, USA
Corresponding author’s email address
Email: loreen.tisdall@unibas.ch
Keywords
Aging, risk taking, propensity, task, testosterone, fMRI, Balloon Analogue Risk Task, delay
discounting, mixed gambles
Abstract
This paper describes data collected from a cross-sectional convenience sample of 200 healthy
human volunteers between 16 and 81 years of age. We assembled an extensive battery of
measures of risk preference, impulsivity, and self-control, as well as a range of demographic and
cognitive measures, Crucially, we adopted different measure categories, including self-reports,
informant reports, behavioral measures, and biological measures (hormones, brain function) to
capture individual differences, and adopted a within-participant design. Data collection took place
over multiple sessions. First, participants completed a laboratory session at the university during
which we collected computer-assisted self-report measures (i.e., standardized questionnaires) as
well as behavioral measures using computerized tasks. Second, participants independently
completed a home session that included the completion of self-report measures, and the
collection of saliva samples. In parallel, we acquired informant reports from up to three individuals
nominated by the study participants. Third, participants completed a final session at the local
hospital during which we collected structural and functional neuroimaging data, as well as further
self-report measures. The data was collected to address questions concerning the developmental
trajectories of risk preference and related constructs while assessing the impact of the
assessment method; however, we invite fellow researchers to benefit from and further explore
the data for research on decision-making under risk and uncertainty in general, and to apply novel
analytical approaches (e.g., machine-learning applications to the neuroimaging data). Combining
a large set of measures with a within-participant design affords a wealth of opportunities for further
insights and a more robust evidence base supporting current theorizing on (age-related)
differences in risk preference, impulsivity, and self-control.
Experimental and Cognitive Psychology, Neuropsychology and
Subject
Physiological Psychology
Developmental trajectories of risk preference, impulsivity, and self-control
Specific
subject area
Comma-separated values files (.csv)
Type of data
Portable Document Format (.pdf)
JavaScript Object Notation files (.json)
Tab-separated values files (.tsv)
Compressed Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative files (nifti.gz)
Self-report measures, well-being, and demographic variables were
How the data
collected using the online survey platform UniPark, as well as pen-and-
were acquired
paper questionnaires. Informant reports were collected using pen-and-
paper questionnaires. We used E-Prime software to collect behavioral
measures (including a cognitive battery). Participants independently
collected six saliva samples. The neuroimaging data were collected on a
3T Siemens MAGNETOM Prisma MRI system with the 20-channel head
coil. During scanning, we collected an anatomical scan and functional
scans for two behavioral measures. Behavioral data from the functional
neuroimaging sequences were collected using E-Prime.
Raw data
Data format
Partly analyzed
Transformed
Filtered
We collected data from a cross-sectional convenience sample of 200
Description of
healthy human adults between 16 and 81 years of age. Participants
data collection
completed a laboratory session, a home session, and a magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) session. We also collected informant reports from up to three
individuals nominated by study participants.
Institution: University of Basel
Data source
City/Town/Region: Basel, Basel-Stadt
location
Country: Switzerland
Self-report, informant-report, behavioral, and hormone measures
Data
Repository name: Open Science Framework
accessibility
Neuroimaging data
Repository name: OpenNeuro
Data identification number: ds004711
This paper is not a companion paper to empirical work published
Related
elsewhere. However, we have analyzed subsets of the data, and have
research
reported these analyses in a published paper as well as a manuscript
article
currently available as a preprint:
Tisdall, L., & Mata, R. (2023). Age differences in the neural basis of
decision-making under uncertainty. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral
Tisdall, L., Frey, R., Wulff, D.U., Kellen, D., & Mata, R. (preprint).
Developmental Trajectories of Risk Preference, Impulsivity, and Self-
Value of the Data
• The dataset results from an effort to understand lifespan trajectories of risk preference and
consists of a large age-heterogenous sample of individuals, covering several modalities (self-
report, informant-report, behavioral tasks, hormone, neuroimaging)
on standardized measures of risk preference, impulsivity, and self-control, as well as a
cognitive function battery (working-memory, semantic memory, numeracy). The dataset
is unique in combining the breadth of measurement modalities for these constructs in an age-
heterogenous sample.
• The current data may be of interest to researchers from various disciplines, including (but not
limited to) cognitive scientists, psychologists, neuroscientists, and economists interested in
individual and age differences in decision-making under risk and uncertainty, reward
processing, temporal discounting, impulsivity, self-control, personality, and cognitive function.
• This dataset supports robust science by inviting independent efforts to examine the primary
study goals (i.e., convergence and divergence of developmental trajectories as a function of
the construct and assessment method), potentially adopting alternative or more sophisticated
techniques than those planned at data collection.
• Possible (re)use of the data includes individual and age differences analyses of cognitive
function (working memory, semantic memory, numeracy), model-based analysis of informant
reports, comparative computational modeling of behavioral tasks, and advanced processing
of and extracting indices from functional neuroimaging data (e.g., multivariate pattern
analysis).
• Further (re)use cases involve comprehensive research synthesis efforts, for example using
individual participant data meta-analysis concerning any of the measures included in
the study.
1. Objective
Conceptual clarification and the development of theories are central challenges for psychological
science. In the field of psychological science of aging, extant theories and methods aim to
describe and explain the link between aging and individual differences in decision-making under
risk and uncertainty. However, existing work is characterized by the unsystematic examination of
pertinent constructs (e.g., risk preference, impulsivity, and self-control), as well as the
uncoordinated adoption of assessment methods (e.g., self-report, informant-report, behavioral, or
biological measures). This state of affairs has contributed to a heterogeneous evidence base
concerning the lifespan trajectories of risk preference and related constructs. The overarching
aim of this dataset was to facilitate the extensive examination of trajectories of risk preference
and related constructs across the adult human lifespan and to probe the convergence of
trajectories across different measure categories rooted in distinct measurement traditions.
2. Data description
In what follows we provide more detailed descriptions of the actual data. To achieve maximum
transparency and legibility given the extensive number of data points collected for every
participant, we organize this section by the repository in which the data is deposited. All measures
are further documented and described in section 3 (Experimental design, materials, and methods)
of this paper.
2.1 Open Science Framework (OSF)
‘data’, and ‘materials’. To facilitate the linkage of files across directories (e.g., codebooks with
relevant data files), we applied consistent naming conventions. For example, in each of the three
parent directories we created child directories that are consistently labeled 0_participants’,
‘1_self_reports’, ‘2_informant_reports’, ‘3_behavioral_measures’, ‘4_biological_measures’ (note
that we only deposit data and materials associated with the hormone analyses on OSF; the
neuroimaging data are deposited on OpenNeuro). All codebooks are provided as PDF documents
and contain detailed descriptions of all variables contained in the data files. All data files are
provided as CSV files, their contents, and variables being meticulously documented in the
codebooks.
Fig. 1. Schematic overview of the structure of the Open Science Framework repository.
All data files contain a 5-character participant ID variable to facilitate the merging of different data
files by participant ID. In the data subdirectory labeled ‘0_participants’ we provide demographic
data (i.e., ‘demographics.csv’) for each participant, and in the respective codebook (i.e.,
‘Codebook_demographics.pdf) we detail the respective scales and response options. Critically,
we provide a data file ‘participants_key.csv’ which can be used to match, for example, the self-
report and behavioral data on OSF with the neuroimaging data on OpenNeuro. Where possible,
we provide one file that contains data for all participants (e.g., demographics, self-reports,
informant reports, hormones, as well as for four behavioral measures, namely numeracy, verbal
fluency, vocabulary, and automated operation span). However, the extent of three of the
behavioral measures (namely Balloon Analogue Risk Task, delay discounting, and mixed
gambles task) required data to be provided as individual data files, that is, one data file per
participant. For each of these three tasks, we provide one folder containing individual CSV files
and also provide extensive codebooks to facilitate future analyses. All data were collected in
Switzerland; thus, in the directory ‘materials’, we make available the original wordings (in German)
of each item used for self-reports and informant reports, as well as the mathematical problems
used in the numeracy task. The data file for the vocabulary task (‘vocabulary.csv’) contains both
the individual (German) words presented as stimuli as well as participants’ responses.
2.2 OpenNeuro
187 participants, all of whom completed the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART). Out of the 187
participants, 178 also completed the delay discounting task inside the scanner (due to time
constraints we were unable to collect delay discounting data for nine participants). We provide
accompanying ‘.json’ and ‘.tsv’ files to detail and describe the participants, tasks, and pertinent
acquisition parameters. For example, the file ‘participants.tsv’ contains participants’ id, gender,
and age, as well as three columns (‘bart_run1’, ‘bart_run2’, ‘delay_discounting’) indicating
whether a participant has functional neuroimaging data for two runs of the BART and the delay
discounting task, respectively. Importantly, while the ID contained in this file is specific to the
neuroimaging session, this id can be linked up with self-report, informant-report, behavioral, and
hormone data using the key (‘participants_key.csv’) provided on OSF. The variables contained in
‘participants.tsv’ are described in detail in the accompanying ‘participants.json’ file.
Fig. 2. Schematic overview of the structure of the neuroimaging dataset on OpenNeuro.
The individual-level neuroimaging data are organized into 189 folders, with subfolders for
anatomical (‘anat’) and functional (‘func’) data. (Note that we included empty subdirectories for
the two participants for which we did not collect MRI data, as this was thought to facilitate
automated preprocessing pipelines). For every participant with MRI data, the ‘anat’ folder contains
a T1 structural image (e.g., ‘sub_002_T1w.nii.gz’) that was processed (see section 3.6.4 for
further details and functions) to safeguard the anonymity of participants by stripping non-brain
tissue (e.g., bone, eyes, teeth). Each participant’s ‘func’ folder contains task-specific functional
brain images; two images for the BART (run 1 and run 2), and if collected, one image for delay
discounting. Similar to the structural images, the functional images were processed to remove
any non-brain tissue from the individual images. In addition, for every functional brain image, we
provide the associated events and their onsets (e.g., ‘sub-002_task-bart_run-01_events.tsv’), and
also provide codebooks (e.g., ‘sub-002_task-bart_events.json’) for the BART and delay
discounting event files in every participant’s ‘func’ folder.
3. Experimental design, materials and methods
In the next sections we provide detailed descriptions of participant recruitment, the data collection
protocol, as well as all study materials and methods. Where required, we provide relevant
references for materials and methods.
3.1 Recruitment, screening, and final sample
We recruited a cross-sectional convenience sample from the local community using
advertisements, public academic presentations, and the lab participant database. Advertisements
included a project-specific email address and telephone number to allow individuals to express
their interest in study participation. Trained study personnel then contacted interested individuals
to introduce the study in more detail, and to conduct an initial screening to determine individuals’
eligibility for study participation. Screening covered initial questions such as individuals’ age and
overall well-being, but also covered essential inclusion and exclusion criteria for participation in
the neuroimaging session. This comprehensive screening process was conducted to identify any
factors that may pose risks in relation to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) safety. Individuals
who reported having permanent implants (e.g., pacemakers, cochlear implants, neurostimulators,
insulin pumps), as well as those who experienced claustrophobia, tinnitus, epilepsy, or had
permanent metal objects inside or on their bodies (such as surgical clips, metal splinters, metal
prostheses, copper coils, or artificial heart valves), or had previously undergone heart or brain
surgery, were excluded from participation. Additionally, individuals who reported conditions that
would prevent them from lying comfortably still inside the scanner, those who were pregnant, or
those who reported the use of prescribed medications that could interfere with cognitive and
neural function were also excluded.
Resulting from this recruitment process was a final sample of 200 healthy human volunteers (51%
female) between the ages of 16 and 81 years (Mean age=45.0, SD=19.0), with a comparable age
distribution for the 102 female participants (Mean age=44.5, SD=19.1) and 98 male participants
(Mean age=45.6, SD=20.0) included in the study. A detailed description of the final sample is
study.
N=200
Mean age in years (SD) 45.0 (19.0)
Gender female (%) 102 (51)
Marital status (%)
Single 68 (34.0%)
In relationship 45 (22.5%)
Married 67 (33.5%)
Divorced 14 (7.0%)
Widowed/partner deceased 5 (2.5%)
Registered partnership 0 (0%)
Resolved registered partnership 1 (0.5%)
Education (%)
No degree/certificate 0 (0.0%)
Primary school 1 (0.5)
Secondary/district/orientation school 13 (6.5%)
10th grade, 1-year pre-apprenticeship, 1-year vocational school 7 (3.5%)
Diploma secondary school, traffic school, technical secondary school 6 (3.0%)
Vocational apprenticeship, vocational school, vocational baccalaureate 42 (21.0%)
Secondary school, grammar school baccalaureate, seminary 34 (17.0%)
Higher technical/vocational training, higher technical college 27 (13.5%)
University of applied sciences, HWV, technical school 12 (6.0%)
University, college, ETH/Poly 58 (29.0%)
Children (%)
None 111 (55.5%)
One 27 (13.5%)
Two 46 (23.0%)
Three 11 (5.5%)
Four 4 (2.0%)
Five or more 1 (0.5%)
Main occupation (%)
In education 55 (27.5%)
Employed 81 (40.5%)
Unpaid work / activity 6 (3.0%)
Unemployed 7 (3.5%)
Retired 51 (25.5%)
Native language (%)*
(Swiss) German 180 (90.0%)
French 8 (4.0%)
Italian 4 (2.0%)
Spanish 4 (2.0%)
English 16 (8.0%)
Other 20 (10.0%)
Personal monthly gross income in Swiss Francs (%)
NA 8 (4.0%)
<=1’000 39 (19.5%)
1’001-3’000 46 (23.0%)
3’001-5’000 37 (18.5%)
5’001-7’000 38 (19.0%)
7’001-10’000 16 (8.0%)
10’001-15’000 11 (5.5%)
>=15’001 5 (2.5%)
Total value of assets in Swiss Francs (%)
NA 6 (3.0%)
<=1’000 20 (10.0%)
1’001-5’000 22 (11.0%)
5’001-10’000 20 (10.0%)
10’001- 20’000 18 (9.0%)
20’001-30’000 14 (7.0%)
30’001-50’000 16 (8.0%)
50’001-100’000 24 (12.0%)
>=100’001 60 (30.0%)
Total value of debt in Swiss Francs (%)
NA 35 (17.5%)
<=1’000 110 (55.0%)
1’001-5’000 10 (5.0%)
5’001-10’000 7 (3.5%)
10’001- 20’000 4 (2.0%)
20’001-30’000 2 (1.0%)
30’001-50’000 3 (1.5%)
50’001-100’000 3 (1.5%)
>=100’001 26 (13.0%)
*Note: Some participants indicated several native languages, thus frequencies and percentages do not add
up to 200 and 100%, respectively.
3.2 Data collection protocol
Data collection took place at the Center for Cognitive and Decision Sciences at the University of
Basel, as well as the University Hospital. The collection of data from the study participants was
during which we collected computer-assisted self-report measures (i.e., standardized
questionnaires) as well as behavioral measures using computerized tasks. Second, participants
independently completed a home session that included the completion of self-report measures,
and the collection of saliva samples. Third, participants completed a final session at the local
hospital during which we collected neuroimaging data and the final set of self-report measures.
For the majority of participants, all three sessions took place over the course of two to three
weeks. All study participants were provided with financial reimbursement of 15 Swiss Francs (~15
US Dollars) per hour of participation, resulting in a maximum participation fee of 98 Swiss Francs
for 6.5 hours of participation. Payments were made after each completed session, which allowed
for timely and partial payments in case of early termination of participation. Performance in the
behavioral measures included in both the laboratory and the neuroimaging session was also
incentivized, thus adding to the overall monetary payment received.
Screening MRI
Laboratory Home
Informants
session session
session
30 minutes
Duration 20-30 minutes 180 minutes 90 minutes 120 minutes
Informed
consent
Demographic
data
Self-report
measures
Behavioral
measures
Biological
measures
(hormones) (brain)
Informant-report
measures
nomination
Cognitive
battery
To gather informant reports, participants were asked during the laboratory session to nominate
up to three individuals whom they believed could serve as informants. Once nominated, each
person was sent a study packet by mail which contained written study information, a consent
form, a printed survey, a labeled return envelope, and a voucher valued at 10 Swiss Francs
(approximately 11 US Dollars) as compensation for their time; this could be redeemed at local
shops and amenities.
3.3 Neuroimaging data acquisition
Neuroimaging data were collected at the University Hospital Basel using a Siemens 3T
MAGNETOM Prisma MRI system equipped with a 20-channel head coil. At the beginning of the
MRI session, we obtained a structural T1-weighted scan for each participant using a
magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo sequence. The parameters for this scan were as
follows: repetition time (TR) of 2500 ms, echo time (TE) of 4.25 ms, inversion time (TI) of 1100
ms, flip angle of 7 degrees, field of view of 256 mm x 256 mm, 192 slices, and voxel dimensions
of 1.0 mm isotropic. For the task-related functional runs, we acquired T2*-weighted blood-oxygen-
level-dependent (BOLD) echo-planar images for each person. The acquisition parameters for
these images were as follows: repetition time (TR) of 2010 ms, echo time (TE) of 30 ms, flip angle
of 78 degrees, field of view of 192 mm x 192 mm, voxel size of 3 mm x 3 mm x 3 mm, and 33
transversal slices per volume with a 15% distance factor. The MRI acquisition protocol can be
accessed on the Open Science Framework repository.
3.4 Materials
To capture individual differences in risk preference and related constructs, we assembled an
extensive battery of measures and adopted different measure categories, including self-reports,
informant reports, behavioral measures, and biological measures (hormones, brain function). The
data was collected in Switzerland; thus, all materials and instructions were presented in German.
Whenever possible, we provide the materials used in this study on the Open Science Framework,
as well as English translations. For the translations, we used the web-based DeepL Translator
translations were checked by a native English speaker and, if necessary, adjusted for
comprehension. For ease of access and use, the self-report and informant-report items that
require recoding have already been recoded (see documentation on the Open Science
Framework).
3.4.1 Self-report measures
To address the main objective of the project for which the dataset was collected, we adopted an
and risky activities, as well as related constructs (e.g., impulsivity, self-control). Self-reports were
also used to capture other constructs, including personality and affect, and to assess general
health, well-being and demographic variables. Some of the questionnaires were adopted twice to
allow for test-retest analyses (albeit over a short time interval of approximately two to three weeks)
or to allow for state versus trait assessment of affect. For context, we report published test-retest
test-retest reliability varies as a function of the exact implementation (e.g., test-retest interval),
sample (size) and scoring procedure (e.g., total score versus subscale score) [1]; to document
and differentiate between these is beyond the scope of this paper.
3.4.2 Informant reports
The informant surveys collected information regarding the informant's age, gender, duration, and
type of relationship with the study participant, as well as ratings on the study participant's risk
preference, impulsivity, and low self-control. To minimize the burden on informants, we asked
3). Specifically, informants provided ratings on the study participant's general risk-taking behavior
and domain-specific risk-taking in areas such as recreation/sport and trust in strangers [2,3]. They
also rated 12 items (two per factor) from the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (Version 11) [4], eight
items (two per factor) from the UPPS Impulsive Behavior Scale [5], eight items (two per factor,
easy and difficult) from the Sensation Seeking Scale [6], four items (two per factor) from the
BIS/BAS Scale [7], three items (including the item with the highest loading and two items tied for
the second highest loading) from the Brief Self-Control Scale [8], 12 items (two per factor) from
the Low Self-Control Scale [9], and four items (two per factor) from the GRIT Scale [10].
Scale Included in Assessment Included in Test- Ref.
self-reports session self- informant retest reliability
reports reports [Ref.]
General risk-taking propensity Laboratory, MRI 0.7 [2,3]
[11]
Domain-specific risk-taking Laboratory, MRI 0.58 – 0.62 [2,3]
propensity (recreation, trust)
[11]
Domain-Specific Risk-Taking Home 0.42 – 0.81 [11,12]
(DOSPERT) Scale
[1]
Frequency of risky behaviors Home 0.51 – 0.88 [11]
(4 and 12 months)
[11]
Behavioral Inhibition / MRI 0.44 – 0.82 [7,13]
Behavioral Activation Scale
[1]
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale Laboratory 0.23 – 0.92 [4,14]
[1]
Sensation Seeking Scale Home 0.52 – 0.94 [6,15]
[1]
UPPS Impulsive Behavior Home 0.64 – 0.93 [5,16]
Scale
[1]
Brief Self-Control Scale Laboratory 0.75 – 0.87 [8,17]
(German: SCS-K-D)
[1]
GRIT Scale (German: BISS) MRI 0.61 – 0.78 [10,18]
[1]
Low Self-Control Scale Home 0.44 – 0.76 [9,19]
[9]
GSOEP Big Five Inventory Laboratory 0.57 – 0.80 [20,21]
[20]
Positive and Negative Affect Laboratory & MRI 0.84 [22,23]
Schedule (trait and state) (state), Home (trait)
[22]
Health Survey (SF-36) Home 0.60 – 0.81 [24,25]
[24]
Demographic information (e.g., Laboratory 0.95 – 0.99 [3]
age, gender, education)
[1]
3.4.3 Behavioral measures
Apart from the verbal fluency task, all behavioral measures were programmed in E-Prime 2.0 and
displayed on a computer screen. Responses were recorded on the keyboard. For two measures
(Balloon Analogue Risk Task, Delay Discounting) we collected data both outside and inside the
MRI scanner; for details about the MRI versions of the task, see section 3.4.5 ‘Neuroimaging
paradigms’.
3.4.3.1 Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART). The BART is a commonly used behavioral
measure to capture risk taking [26]. In this study, participants aimed to accumulate monetary
winnings by inflating virtual balloons without causing them to explode. Successful pumps resulted
in earnings, while explosions led to the loss of accumulated earnings for that balloon. Participants
were not provided with information about the balloon's capacity or explosion points; instead, they
had to learn and develop a mental understanding of these factors through experience over time.
Participants were only informed that the balloon could explode at any point between the first pump
and filling up the computer screen. For each successful pump, participants earned 0.05 Swiss
Francs, and these earnings accumulated across successful pumps (e.g., four pumps would earn
0.20 Swiss Francs). If participants chose to stop pumping before an explosion occurred, their
accumulated earnings for that balloon (e.g., 0.20 Swiss Francs after four pumps) were saved in
a permanent account. However, if participants continued pumping and caused an explosion, all
accumulated earnings for that balloon were lost, and no additional earnings were saved.
Participants completed a total of 40 balloons: 20 with a maximum capacity of 64 pumps and 20
with a maximum capacity of 128 pumps. Participants were informed about two balloon types
represented by red and blue colors (colors were randomized between the two capacity conditions
for each participant), but the specific capacities were not disclosed. The explosion point for each
balloon was determined randomly within a uniform distribution between one and the maximum
capacity of that balloon type (i.e., 64 or 128). Feedback on accumulated earnings for the current
trial (balloon) and total earnings after the trial was provided on the screen between trials. The
sequence and manipulation of explosion points were not controlled between participants.
Participants received their accumulated earnings in cash at the end of the laboratory session.
3.4.3.2 Delay Discounting. Participants were presented with a delay discounting task using
established procedures [27]. Specifically, participants completed two training trials and 80 test
trials, all involving decisions between a “smaller-sooner” or “larger-later” amount. The order of the
80 trials was randomized for each participant. These trials encompassed five distinct temporal
pairings of “smaller-sooner” versus “larger-later” amounts: today versus in two weeks, today
versus in four weeks, in two weeks versus in four weeks, two weeks versus six weeks, and four
weeks versus six weeks. Each of these pairings included 16 trials, which varied based on eight
possible percentage differences (1, 3, 5, 10, 15, 25, 35, 50) between the smaller and larger
amounts. We generated the 80 different magnitudes by randomly selecting numbers from a
normal distribution, with the smaller amount ranging from five to 40. To ensure incentive
compatibility, participants were informed that one trial would be chosen randomly, and their
decision would be realized. If a delayed option was selected, participants received the
corresponding amount after the specified waiting time. Payments scheduled for a later time were
delivered in cash through registered mail.
3.4.3.3 Mixed Gambles. Participants engaged in a series of forced choices between two lotteries
characterized by different numbers, magnitudes, and probabilities of monetary outcomes [28]. A
total of 210 trials were completed, divided into two runs of 105 trials with a short break in between.
The specific lotteries presented during each trial were carefully designed by one of the authors
(D.K.) to optimize the computation of loss aversion indices. Each of the seven unique types of
gambles was represented by 30 trials, featuring specific combinations of outcome numbers,
magnitudes, and probabilities. One type involved participants deciding between two gambles,
both with a 50% chance of a gain or an equivalent loss (e.g., Option A: 58 Swiss Francs gain with
50% probability and -58 Swiss Francs loss with 50% probability; Option B: 72 Swiss Francs gain
with 50% probability and -72 Swiss Francs loss with 50% probability). In another type, both
gambles consisted of three equally likely outcomes (i.e., 33.3%) or outcomes with varying
probabilities (e.g., 80%, 10%, and 10%). Importantly, the probabilities of outcomes were identical
for the two gambles, with the only distinction being the magnitude of the two or three possible
outcomes. Additionally, when two outcome gambles were presented, the gains and losses within
each gamble were symmetric (i.e., the same magnitude). For three outcome gambles, two
outcomes represented symmetric gains and losses, while the third option remained consistent
across the two gambles.
3.4.3.4 Vocabulary. Participants encountered several 5-word sequences [29]. One of the five
words was an actual German word, whereas the remaining four words were non-words (in
German). Participants were instructed to indicate the actual German word. In total, participants
completed 37 different word sequences, and there was no time limit.
3.4.3.5 Numeracy. Participants were given eight scenarios, where each scenario included a
different numerical problem [30]. Solving these problems required participants to compute
probabilities or frequencies for particular events described in each scenario. There was no time
limit for this task.
3.4.3.6 Working memory. Participants completed an Automated Operation Span task which
involved 75 numerical exercises to assess working memory [31]. During the encoding stage, on
each trial, participants are presented with a math operation (e.g. (1*2) + 1 = ?). Participants
indicate per mouse click when they have solved the operation, and then continue to the next
screen. On the next screen, a digit is presented, which participants must judge to be either the
correct or incorrect answer to the math operation encountered on the previous screen.
Participants’ judgment of the number as being the correct or incorrect solution is followed by the
presentation of a letter for 800 ms. This is followed by a recall stage. During recall, after every
four trials of solving math operations, participants are presented with a set of 12 letters, and their
task is then to indicate which letters were presented during the previous four trials, as well as the
order in which these letters were presented. After recall, feedback is presented for 2000 msec,
indicating how many of the four letters were correctly recalled, and how many of the math
operations were solved correctly. Participants completed 75 problems, ranging in complexity from
three to seven operations and associated letters per set.
3.4.3.7 Verbal fluency. In this free-listing paradigm [32], participants were provided with a
category (animals) and were then instructed to name (by saying out loud) as many examples of
this category as possible (e.g., dog, cat, horse) in a pre-specified time of three minutes. We
recorded participants’ spoken (oral) responses as audio files, and provide transcriptions of these
audio files (see section 3.6.2 for details).
3.4.4 Hormone samples
Participants were asked to provide six saliva samples over the course of two consecutive days.
Each day, they were instructed to collect three samples: one upon awakening, another 30-45
minutes later, and a final one in the evening. To ensure high-quality samples, participants
received both an in-person demonstration and detailed written instructions after the laboratory
session. The demonstration and instructions covered the proper method and timing for collecting
saliva samples, as well as the correct storage procedures. Additionally, participants had to
document their saliva collection on a paper form, which included recording the day, time, and
duration since their last food or drink intake for each sample. Participants received salivettes for
saliva collection (SaliCap set, IBL Hamburg, Germany), as these were thought to facilitate self-
administration. To ensure consistency, all sample containers were pre-labeled with the
participant's identification number, collection day (day 1 or day 2), and sample number (1, 2, or
3). Participants were instructed to store the samples in their refrigerator, with all samples being
frozen upon receipt by the study personnel. Hormone samples were assayed externally (see
section 3.6.3 for details).
3.4.5 Neuroimaging paradigms
During the MRI session, participants completed two behavioral measures adapted for the
scanner: the BART [33] and a delay discounting task [27]. The two fMRI paradigms were
comparable to the laboratory versions of the two measures with regards to trial structure,
participant instructions, incentivized performance, and the visual presentation, but were optimized
for the scanner with regards to stimulus timing and color (see sections 3.4.5.1 ‘BART fMRI’ and
3.4.5.2 ‘Delay Discounting fMRI’ for further details). The stimuli used for the laboratory and the
fMRI version of both measures are available on the Open Science Framework (cf. ‘materials’
folder). Before entering the scanner, all participants completed brief training programs for the fMRI
versions of the two tasks. The purpose of these training programs was to familiarize participants
visually and motorically with the two tasks they would complete during the scanning session. The
behavioral measures used inside the scanner were programmed and implemented using E-Prime
2.0, and were synchronized with the scanner trigger signal to ensure the temporal alignment
between volume collection and the initiation of behavioral measures. The stimuli were projected
onto a screen positioned behind the scanner, and participants could see these through a mirror
placed on top of the head coil. To record participants' responses, we used a hand-held Celeritas
response system, which involved capturing participants’ button presses made with the right
middle and ring finger. As our participant group encompassed individuals with varying ages, MRI-
safe glasses were available to compensate for any vision impairments.
3.4.5.1 BART fMRI. For fMRI scanning, we used an adapted version of the BART that included
three types of balloons: two reward balloon types (red and blue, counterbalanced across
participants) and a gray motor control balloon. The gray balloons served solely as a motor control
condition for the fMRI contrast analyses and did not contribute to participants' earnings. In
contrast, reward balloons had explosion points randomly selected from a uniform distribution
ranging from one to 16. However, they differed in terms of the payoff function used to accumulate
rewards for successful pumps. One reward balloon type followed a standard reward function that
increased monotonically, meaning that each successful pump resulted in the same gain
throughout the entire BART. The other reward balloon type, in contrast, followed an exponential
function: the payoff for a successful pump was low (i.e., lower than in the standard reward balloon)
at the beginning of the trial, but increased steadily with additional pumps. Each participant
completed two runs of the BART inside the scanner, with each run lasting approximately 10
minutes. Participants were instructed to press a button with their right middle finger to pump a
balloon. To stop pumping and collect the earnings from a balloon, they were instructed to press
a button with their right ring finger. Feedback regarding earnings for the current trial and the total
earnings across all trials, including the current one, was presented on the screen at the end of
each trial. A fixation cross visually separated the trials. The fMRI BART employed a controlled
temporal sequence with predetermined but randomly selected inter-stimulus intervals between
stimulus offset and stimulus onset within a trial (ranging from 1000 to 2000 ms, with a mean of
1500 ms) and inter-trial intervals between trial offset and trial onset (ranging from 1000 to 11000
ms, with a mean of 4340 ms). Participants controlled the pace of their performance, and the
incentives were aligned with their earnings, which were paid out in cash at the end of the fMRI
session.
3.4.5.2 Delay Discounting fMRI. During the scanner session, participants completed a total of
80 trials, involving five different delay-pairings: 'today versus in two weeks', 'today versus in four
weeks', 'in two weeks versus in four weeks', 'in two weeks versus in six weeks', and 'in four weeks
versus in six weeks'. Additionally, we included eight percentage differences (1, 3, 5, 10, 15, 25,
35, 50) between the amounts of smaller and larger rewards. To determine the reward amounts,
we generated 80 random numbers from a normal distribution. The minimum value was set at five,
and the maximum was 40, representing the smaller amounts. Within each delay pairing, we added
the corresponding percentage difference to the smaller amount to calculate the larger amount.
This approach ensured that the specific magnitudes of the smaller and larger rewards varied to
avoid repetition from the lab session. During each trial, participants were initially presented with
both the smaller-sooner and larger-later offers simultaneously on the screen. They had a
maximum of five seconds to make their choice by pressing a button. Specifically, the right middle
finger corresponded to choosing the smaller-sooner option, while the right ring finger
corresponded to choosing the larger-later option. If no response was recorded within the time
limit, the trial ended without a recorded response. After making their choice, participants received
visual feedback confirming their chosen option, and the trial concluded. Participants were given
an incentive-compatible setup, and their payment was based on one of their randomly chosen
decisions. For optimal visibility, we presented the fMRI version of the task with an inverted color
format, displaying white information against a black background. Trials were visually separated
by a fixation cross. Additionally, the task was programmed to include a mean inter-trial interval of
4320 ms, with intervals ranging from 1000 ms to 11000 ms.
3.5 Missing data
of these, 192 participants (96%) completed the home session. At the time of the neuroimaging
session, 189 participants (94.5%) were still enrolled in the study, and we collected neuroimaging
data from 187 participants; two individuals started the session but were unable to enter the
scanner due to discomfort. Note that participants are not fully nested in subsequent sessions; for
example, participants may have participated in the neuroimaging session but did not complete
the home session questionnaires. Regarding collecting informant reports, we received a total of
471 informant reports for 193 out of 200 participants (96.5%). Among these reports, 31
participants (16.1%) had one informant report, 46 participants (23.8%) had two informant reports,
and 116 participants (60.1%) had three informant reports, resulting in an average of 2.4 informant
reports per participant. Regarding the collection of hormone data, 190 participants (96.5%)
provided 1134 saliva samples. From one (0.5%) of those 190 participants we received four
samples, from four participants (2.1%) we received five samples, and from 185 participants
(97.4%) we received all six saliva samples, averaging 5.7 saliva samples per participant.
Fig. 3. Overview of drop-outs and missing data, organized by data collection session.
3.6 Preprocessing and anonymization procedures
Where possible we make the raw data files available. However, for one of the behavioral
measures we provide summary statistics due to technical reasons. Moreover, to uphold the
principles of open science and safeguard the anonymity of participants, we implemented various
anonymization techniques for some of the data discussed in this paper. In the subsequent
sections, we outline these procedures.
3.6.1 Computation of scores for the automated operation span task
The data for this task were collected using a pre-programmed E-Prime script [31]. To simplify and
standardize the analyses given the complexity and sequential nature of the task, the script we
used to run the task was set up to provide five summary statistics as part of the output data files
for every participant. We provide these five summary statistics for each participant. The summary
statistics were obtained according to the following published instructions [27, p. 501]: "After the
task, the program reported five scores to the experimenter: Ospan score, total number correct,
math errors, speed errors, and accuracy errors. The first, the Ospan score, used our traditional
absolute scoring method. This was the sum of all perfectly recalled sets. So, for example, if an
individual correctly recalled 3 letters in a set size of 3, 4 letters in a set size of 4, and 3 letters in
a set size of 5, his or her Ospan score would be 7 (3 4 0). The second score, “total number
correct,” was the total number of letters recalled in the correct position. Three types of errors were
reported: “Math errors" were the total number of task errors, which were then broken down into
“speed errors,” in which the participant ran out of time in attempting to solve a given math
operation, and "accuracy errors", in which the participant solved the math operation incorrectly."
3.6.2 Transcription of verbal fluency audio files
To protect individuals’ identities, we transcribed all audio files recorded for the verbal fluency task.
The data file for this task includes all (task-relevant) utterances produced over the course of the
three minutes of the task. We also transcribed repetitions and category-irrelevant words (e.g.,
‘safari’ or ‘fur’ for the category ‘animals’), and also transcribed each utterance as faithfully to the
original production as possible (e.g., we transcribed singular and plural). We only coded
productions as missing in case a word was either incomprehensible or inaudible.
3.6.3 Assaying of saliva sample
After data collection was complete, participants' saliva samples were sent to an independent
testosterone, the chosen lab had the specialized expertise and appropriate equipment for
analyzing testosterone levels in saliva samples. To maintain integrity during transportation, the
samples were shipped on dry ice. At the external lab, the saliva samples underwent a quality
control process. Subsequently, we received 1134 testosterone scores (unit = pg/ml) for 190
participants, with each participant having between four and six measurements taken. The external
lab also provided a detailed record of all the samples received, including information about the
quality of each sample. Additionally, certain samples were double-checked to ensure the accuracy
and validity of individuals' testosterone data. Once the necessary assays were completed, the lab
disposed of all the samples, ensuring their proper destruction.
3.6.4 De-identification of neuroimaging data
All structural and functional magnetic resonance neuroimaging data were preprocessed using the
FSL Brain Extraction Tool (BET) to remove the skull and any other (potentially identifying) non-
brain tissues. Structural images were processed using the function bet, specified as follows: bet
<input> <output> -f 0.5 -o. Quality assurance checks suggested that the default threshold of 0.5
was suboptimal for one participant; accordingly, we made adjustments to the threshold for this
image and documented the threshold on OpenNeuro. For the functional images, we specified the
extraction function as follows: bet <input> <output> -F; this produced good results for all images.
Ethics statements
The project for which the data was collected was reviewed and approved by the Ethikkommission
Nordwest- und Zentralschweiz EKNZ (EKNZ BASEC 2015-00094). All regulations and ethical
guidelines were followed during the conduct of the research. All participants received verbal and
written study information and provided written informed consent prior to participation.
CRediT author statement
Loreen Tisdall: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing-
Original draft preparation, Writing- Reviewing and Editing, Visualization, Supervision, Project
administration, Funding acquisition. Simon Mugume: Data Curation, Writing- Reviewing and
Editing. David Kellen: Methodology, Writing- Reviewing and Editing. Rui Mata:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing- Reviewing and Editing, Supervision, Funding
acquisition. All authors approved the final version of the submitted manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We express our gratitude to Dirk Wulff and Renato Frey for their valuable contributions during the
initial discussions regarding study design and methodology. We further wish to acknowledge
Anne Albrecht, Anna-Chiara Schaub, Markus Steiner, Jennifer Kurath, Linda Goosen, and Lisa-
Marie Wadle for their help with data collection. We thank Laura Wiles for her assistance with the
translation of survey items for documentation on the Open Science Framework. This work was
supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant to Rui Mata,
Research Fund for Junior Researchers and the Swiss National Science Foundation
(P2BSP1_188172). We wish to express our thanks to the Scientific Research Network on
Decision Neuroscience & Aging (NIH grant, R24-AG076847) for supporting the writing of this
manuscript with an Open Data Award attributed to Loreen Tisdall.
Declaration of interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.