An EZ Bayesian hierarchical drift diffusion model
for response time and accuracy
a,b a,b,*
Adriana F. Chávez De la Peña and Joachim Vandekerckhove
Draft of December 31, 2023.
The EZ-diffusion model is a simplification of the popular drift diffusion model of choice response times that allows researchers to calculate
diffusion model parameters directly from data with no need for expensive computations. The EZ-diffusion model is based on a system of
equations in which the diffusion model’s drift rate, boundary separation, and nondecision time parameters are jointly used to predict three
summary statistics (the accuracy rate and the mean and variance of the correct response times). These equations can then be inverted to
obtain estimators for the three parameters from these summary statistics. Here, we describe a probabilistic formulation of the EZ-diffusion
model that can serve as a hyper-efficient proxy model to the drift diffusion model. The new formulation is based on sampling distributions of
summary statistics and consists only of normal and binomial distributions. It can easily be implemented in any probabilistic programming
language. We demonstrate the validity of the proxy model through extensive simulation studies and provide multiple examples (via osf.io/
bzkpn), including an implementation in JASP. We conclude that, although the recovery of some parameters with the proxy model is biased, the
recovery of regression parameters is good, making the method useful for explanatory cognitive modeling. Casting the EZ-diffusion model
in the broad family of Bayesian generative models allows us to benefit from mature implementations, practical workflows, and powerful
extensions that are not possible without a probabilistic implementation and not feasible with the regular drift diffusion model.
Hierarchical Bayesian | EZ diffusion | cognitive psychometrics
Cognitive psychometrics is a relatively new, specialized discipline Theoretical progress in cognitive psychometrics is achieved
in which advances in cognitive modeling are applied in psycholog- through the development of cognitive models to describe the latent
ical measurement (Batchelder, 2016). The advance of cognitive processes that generate data. Ideally, the models specify such
psychometrics reflects a broader trend towards the use of idealized processes with parameters that carry psychological meaning and
models in the philosophy of measurement (Tal, 2020). that can be interpreted in the context of the data collection, while
formalizing only those substantive assumptions about cognition to
The relationship between cognitive science and cognitive psy-
which the researcher is willing to commit.
chometrics is by nature symbiotic: As cognitive scientists develop
ever more sophisticated models of cognition and behavior, so are
Some of these models, however, are somewhat involved and
psychometricians empowered to use those models as measure-
require significant modeling expertise to be implemented. The
ment tools. The goal of cognitive psychometrics is to construct
DDM in particular became popular for its ability to account for
an algebra of data, so that complex and nonlinear data patterns
data patterns that are known to be elicited by specific aspects
can be expressed as simple composites of interpretable units. An
of experimental task designs, but its implementation is computa-
example success story of this research program is the diffusion
tionally complex, erecting a barrier to applications. In response
model for two-choice response times. The model was developed,
to these limitations, Wagenmakers, van der Maas, and Grasman
gradually, byPStone (1960) and Link (1975). It was then made
(2007) developed an “EZ” version of the DDM that allows the user
popular through extensive work by Ratcliff (1978), who showed
to estimate the model’s key parameters from summary statistics
that diffusion model parameters behave like their namesakes in
of observed choice RT data (i.e., the mean and variance of the
a wide variety of contexts (Wagenmakers, 2009; see also Voss,
correct RTs and the accuracy rate). The EZ-DDM has since been
Rothermund, & Voss, 2004). After that, the model was developed
widely applied in the study of, among others, perceptual decision-
into a measurement tool (Vandekerckhove, Verheyen, & Tuerlinckx,
making (Bitzer, Park, Blankenburg, & Kiebel, 2014; Mulder, van
2010; Vandekerckhove, Tuerlinckx, & Lee, 2011), and many inter-
Maanen, & Forstmann, 2014), of working memory and intelligence
esting applications have resulted (see, e.g., Ratcliff, Smith, Brown,
(Schmiedek, Oberauer, Wilhelm, Süß, & Wittmann, 2007), of self-
& McKoon, 2016). Taken together, this is a cognitive psychometric
regulation (Enkavi et al., 2019).
research program, intended to quantify patterns of data that are in-
The Bayesian implementation of cognitive process models is
dicative of underlying latent features that vary between individuals
crucial to the cognitive psychometrician, as it facilitates their appli-
and other empirical units. When quantified, we may then seek to
cation as measurement models. Cognitive process models that are
explain the observed variability (De Boeck & Wilson, 2004).
typically used to account for the underlying response processes
at the individual level can be extended hierarchically to take into
account between-subjects variability and capture individual differ-
ences (Lee, 2011; Vandekerckhove et al., 2011). Furthermore,
a b
Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine; Department of
models can be extended into cognitive latent variable models that
Statistics, University of California, Irvine
All authors contributed to the final draft. distinguish across different levels of variation, or incorporate meta-
Correspondence should be addressed to Joachim Vandekerckhove (joachim@uci.edu).
regression structures that capture predictors associated with any
This work was supported by National Science Foundation grants #1658303, #1850849,
of the parameters (Vandekerckhove, 2014).
and #2051186.
To deal with complex models with intractable likelihoods, statis- Parameter Process role Interpretation
Drift rate ν Evidence accumulation rate “Ability”
ticians will sometimes adopt so-called ‘indirect inference’ ap-
Boundary separation α Speed-accuracy trade-off “Caution”
proaches, in which a target likelihood is approximated by an auxil-
Nondecision time τ Perceptual encoding and motor execution time
iary or proxy model (Jiang & Turnbull, 2004; Price, Drovandi, Lee,
& Nott, 2017). For example, Wood’s (2010) synthetic likelihood
method models relevant summary statistics using a multivariate
normal distribution.
In this paper, we propose a similar approach to working with
the DDM. We construct a proxy model from the sampling distri-
butions of the EZ-DDM summary statistics. This simplified model
can easily be implemented in specialized software as a Bayesian
generative model, allowing for the implementation of hierarchical
and explanatory meta-regression structures. We demonstrate the
viability of this application through multiple examples developed in
JASP (via osf.io/bzkpn). First, we will review the DDM and EZ-
DDM. Then we will introduce our proxy model, and then illustrate
how it can be made into a proxy for a Bayesian hierarchical DDM.
Fig. 1. Evidence accumulation in a two-choice decision task. The jagged line rep-
resents the noisy process of evidence accumulation over time until the observed
The drift diffusion model
reaction time (RT) when the evidence hits the ‘correct’ decision bound. The distribu-
tions are predicted RT distributions for correct decisions (top) and errors (bottom).
The drift diffusion model (DDM) is a cognitive process model that
The drift rate ν captures the participant’s evidence accumulation rate: their ability
describes binary choice response time data as the result of a
at the task. The boundary separation α captures the participant’s speed-accuracy
stochastic sampling process. The core assumption is that decision- trade-off: their caution at the task. The nondecision time τ captures the time spent
on processes other than decision making.
makers accumulate information about stimuli presented, starting
the moment they are asked to make a binary judgment and ending
once a decision boundary is met. One implication of the princi-
application of a process model as a measurement model will typi-
ple of accumulation of information (Laming, 1968) is that people
cally necessitate the use of a Bayesian hierarchical model (Dutilh
make two decisions: when they are ready to respond and what to
et al., 2017; Rouder & Lu, 2005; Rouder et al., 2014; Rouder
respond. These aspects are captured by the response time and
& Haaf, 2019; Schubert, Nunez, Hagemann, & Vandekerckhove,
choice data, respectively.
2019; Vandekerckhove et al., 2011; Villarreal et al., in press).
The drift rate parameter ν (nu) indicates E the average amount of
evidence sampled per unit of time; the boundary separation pa- Hierarchical cognitive models
rameter α (alpha) corresponds to the distance between the two
Cognitive models are traditionally implemented to describe
response boundaries; and the non-decision time parameter τ (tau)
individual-level performance (e.g., Lee, Newell, & Vandekerck-
accounts for the time required to encode and process the infor-
hove, 2014), with group performance being described using aggre-
mation presented by the stimuli. The parameters of the DDM
gate measures that assume low between-subject variability (Estes,
capture relevant aspects of the psychological process that under-
1956). This traditional approach implies a multi-step analysis that
lies decision-making. These aspects can be manipulated through
starts by estimating individual parameter values and then using
experimental design: The drift rate is affected by the quality of the
summary measures for inference regarding average group perfor-
information conveyed by the stimuli and by individual differences
mance and individual differences (e.g., Klauer, Voss, Schmitz, &
in processing efficiency. The boundary separation captures the
Teige-Mocigemba, 2007). While this two-stage approach is com-
speed-accuracy trade-off imposed by task instructions and serves
mon, it is important to remember that the parameters estimated
as an indicator of individual caution. The nondecision time is an
in the first stage have uncertainty associated with them (either
indicator of the perceptual complexity of the stimulus (encoding
posterior variability or standard error of measurement), and for the
time) and of the response modality (motor response time), and
purposes of statistical inference this uncertainty needs to be prop-
seems to be affected by stimulus complexity (Nunez, Gosai, Van-
agated appropriately. Neglecting to account for this uncertainty in
dekerckhove, & Srinivasan, 2019) and participant age (Ratcliff,
the second stage leads to a risk of so-called generated regressor
Thapar, & McKoon, 2001).
bias (Pagan, 1984).
The DDM is frequently implemented as a cognitive process
Hierarchical cognitive models are extensions of cognitive mod-
model to account for the underlying mechanisms that generate
els that model multiple sources of variability simultaneously (e.g.,
the collected data. In contrast, cognitive psychometricians use
measurement error, variability between individuals, stimuli, exper-
the DDM as a statistically tractable measurement tool that can be
imental conditions, etc.; Coleman, 1964; Clark, 1973). In these
extended to explore latent variable structures, quantify individual
models, parameter values across levels of variation are assumed
differences, and estimate regression coefficients for covariates of
to be sampled from parent distributions (Lee, 2011), such that
interest (Rouder, Province, Morey, Gomez, & Heathcote, 2014).
variability in individual performance is taken into account when esti-
In the present paper, we focus on the latter case: the implemen-
mating population-level statistics (Lee & Webb, 2005; Rouder & Lu,
tation of the DDM as a measurement model to explain variability in
2005). In the context of nonlinear models of cognition, hierarchical
the model’s parameters with exogenous predictors. The practical
modeling is especially critical because generated regressor bias
may be asymptotic (i.e., the bias does not go to zero even with
Indirect inference has recently come to imply the use of simulated data sets to fit models and
very large samples; Rouder & Lu, 2005).
estimate parameters, but that is not what we will do here.
2 of 13 Chávez et al.
While it is possible to implement hierarchical cognitive models and parameter estimation is made possible through the following
under any statistical philosophy, it is often most convenient to make inverse EZ equations:
use of flexible Bayesian modeling strategies (Lee & Wagenmakers,
(cid:18) (cid:19)
2013), and this is the default practice.
L = log
Going forward, we will use the following notational conventions. 1 − R
The choice and response time y of person p on trial i is modeled s
pi (cid:0) (cid:1)
˙ ˙ ˙
(cid:16) (cid:17) L R2L − RL + R −
using a Wiener distribution with participant-specific drift rate ν , 1
p ˙ 4 2
νˆ = sgn R − [8]
boundary separation α , and nondecision time τ (Eq. 1). The 2 V
p p T
hierarchical model assumes that individual parameters ν , α , and
p p L
αˆ = [9]
τ are sampled from parent normal distributions with a mean and
p νˆ
variance that describe the population (Eqs. 2, 3, and 4). (cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
αˆ 1 − exp(−νˆαˆ)
τˆ = M − . [10]
y ∼ Wiener (α , τ , ν ) [1] 2νˆ 1 + exp(−νˆαˆ)
pi p p p
(cid:0) (cid:1)
ν ∼ Normal µ + βx , σ [2]
p ν p ν ˙ ˙
Here, R is the observed accuracy rate, M is the observed mean
(cid:0) (cid:1)
α ∼ Normal µ , σ [3] ˙
p α α of the correct-trials reaction times, and V is the observed variance
(cid:0) (cid:1)
2 of the correct-trials reaction times. νˆ, αˆ, and τˆ are parameter
τ ∼ Normal µ , σ [4]
p τ τ
estimates.
Equation 2 includes by way of example a metaregression struc-
The EZ-DDM gained popularity rapidly as a parameter esti-
ture on the drift rate. Here, person-specific drift rates are modeled
mation tool due to its simplicity and practicality. Despite initial
as samples from normal distributions that are shifted from a shared
criticism calling the EZ model ”too EZ”—for model fit assessments
population mean by an individual predictor (indexed with p) multi-
and for obtaining meaningful parameter interpretations when its
plied by a regression coefficient β. Similar regression structures
assumptions are not met, the trial size is limited, or there are out-
can be applied to the boundary separation and nondecision time
lier response times (Ratcliff, 2008)—Wagenmakers, van der Maas,
parameters, and nonlinear regressions may be implemented as
Dolan, and Grasman (2008) have shown that the EZ-DDM can
well.
be extended to address most of these cases. Moreover, as van
Ravenzwaaij et al. (2017) point out, most binary choice tasks do
The EZ-diffusion model P not elicit the data patterns specifically captured by the full DDM in
the first place.
The ”full” DDM accounts for empirical data patterns commonly
Importantly, van Ravenzwaaij and Oberauer (2009) compared
observed in binary choice tasks through the implementation of trial-
the performance of the full and EZ-DDM in a parameter recovery
by-trial variability in the drift rate, starting point, and nondecision
simulation study, and demonstrated that the EZ model can capture
time (Ratcliff, 1978; Ratcliff & Rouder, 1998; Ratcliff & Tuerlinckx,
individual differences in true data-generating parameters, while
2002). However, this seven-parameter version of the DDM is sig-
the full model failed to recover individual differences in parameters
nificantly more complex and requires specific modeling expertise
with across-trial variability. Further, van Ravenzwaaij et al. (2017)
(Vandekerckhove & Tuerlinckx, 2007). Furthermore, the data pat-
used the full DDM to generate data emulating experimental effects
terns specifically captured by the full DDM are elicited only by
and then contrasted the ability of the EZ-DDM to detect said those
certain task designs. In maRny cases—including many of those
effects against the full model, and were able to conclude that the
where the DDM is used as a measurement model—using the full
EZ-DDM provides a powerful test of simple empirical effects.
DDM is asking too much of the data (van Ravenzwaaij, Donkin, &
Vandekerckhove, 2017).
A probabilistic proxy model for the drift diffusion model
In cases where it is reasonable to forgo these assumptions of
between-trial variability in the parameters of the model, as well
Equations 8-10 provide deterministic estimators of the three diffu-
as the need for a response bias, parameter estimation is much
sion model parameters. To implement the EZ model in a proba-
easier through the ‘EZ-diffusion’ implementation of the DDM (EZ-
bilistic programming language, we require a probabilistic estimator
DDM) presented by Wagenmakers et al. (2007). The EZ-DDM was
– that is, we need a distribution over data that is conditional on
developed by first constructing a system of equations showing how
the model parameters. Such a distribution can be derived from
the DDM parameters can be used to predict the accuracy rate R e
Equations 5-7 and application of sampling statistics (e.g., Rice,
and the mean M e and variance V e of the correct response times
2006).
(the ‘forward’ system). The insight by Wagenmakers et al. is that
If N observations are drawn from a diffusion model whose
the forward system is invertible, so that parameter estimates can
accuracy rate is R e, then the sampling distribution of the number of
be obtained directly from these three summary statistics. ˙
correct trials T is:
Let y = exp (−αν). The forward EZ equations are then:
(cid:16) (cid:17)
T ∼ Binomial R e , N . [11]
R e = [5]
y + 1
Similarly, if N observations are drawn from a sample whose
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
α y − 1
M e = τ + , [6] mean and variance of the correct RTs are M e and V e, then the
2ν y + 1 ˙
sampling distribution of mean correct RT M is:
(cid:26) (cid:27)
(cid:16) (cid:17) 2
α 1 − 2ανy − y
(cid:18) (cid:19)
V e = [7] V
2ν3 (y + 1) 2 M ˙ ∼ Normal M e , . [12]
Although care should be taken with parameters that are naturally bounded to be positive. Some-
times it is preferable to apply a linear regression to log(α) or log(τ) instead. Here the normal distribution is expressed with a mean and variance parameter.
Chávez et al. Cognition and Individual Differences lab | University of California, Irvine | cidlab.com | December 31, 2023 | 3
Finally, the sampling distribution of the variance of the correct
RTs follows this probability law:
(cid:0) (cid:1)
˙ ˙
(T − 1) ∼ Chi-squared T − 1
(cid:18) (cid:19)
˙ ˙
V T − 1
⇒ (T − 1) ∼ Gamma , 2
(cid:18) (cid:19)
T − 1 2V
⇒ V ∼ Gamma , .
T − 1
As T becomes sufficiently large, this is well approximated by a
normal distribution:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
2V
V ∼ Normal V e , . [13]
T − 1
Together with Equations 5, 6, and 7, Equations 11, 12, and 13
provide a predictive distribution of three summary statistics in terms
of three DDM parameters – that is, a likelihood. We call this set
of equations our “proxy model” for the DDM. It is easy to see from
Equations 11-13 that the EZ-DDM estimators in Equations 8-10
are the maximum likelihood estimators of the proxy model.
Equipped with a likelihood for the EZ-DDM, we can now im-
plement it in a probabilistic programming language like JAGS
(Plummer, 2003) or Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017). This will allow
us, among other things, to use this proxy model as a component
of a Bayesian hierarchical model.
The EZ Bayesian hierarchical drift diffusion model
A hierarchical Bayesian extension of the EZ-DDM allows for a
Fig. 2. Root mean squared error (RMSE) of beta weights β as defined in Equation 2.
practical and easy implementation of the hierarchical DDM as a
Left column: “t test” design. Right column: “linear regression” design. Top to bottom:
measurement model. Equations 1-4 describe the initial hierarchical
drift rate criterion, boundary separation criterion, nondecision time criterion. Different
extension of the DDM (Vandekerckhove et al., 2011). To implement
lines indicate different numbers of simulated participants, from 20 (blue, highest
our proxy model, it suffices to substitute the likelihood equation RMSEs) doubling each time to 320 (purple, lowest RMSEs).
(Eq. 1) with the three equations that constitute our proxy model
(Eqs. 11-13). In practical applications, we will also have to adjust
data preprocessing code so that mean accuracy and the mean (RMSE) was higher for the linear regression design than the t test
and variance of correct RTs in each design cell are available. An design, lower when nondecision time was the criterion than for the
illustrative implementation of the EZ Bayesian hierarchical drift other two parameters, and generally decreases in the expected
diffusion model in JAGS is given in Appendix A. ways as P and T increase. For typical data sizes (e.g., 40 partici-
To test the ability of our proxy model to recover DDM parame- pants with 80-160 trials), the RMSE hovers around 0.1, or 10% of
ters, we conPducted a large simulation study. Reproducible code the range of the covariate, which we considered acceptable.
for the simulation study can be found via osf.io/bzkpn and more
In Appendix B, we further observe that our model estimates
extensive detail is in Appendix B. Briefly, we simulated data sets
the beta weight and the mean drift rate well with no notable bias
from a hierarchical diffusion model in which P participants pro- (other than β being drawn to the prior with very small samples).
vide T trials in exactly one condition (a between-subjects design).
The model tends to underestimate the mean boundary separation
Exactly one of the three DDM parameters was selected as the parameter when T is small, but this bias quickly recedes for T ≥
‘criterion’ and made a linear function of an exogenous covariate 40. The mean nondecision time parameter appears the most
X (Eq. 2 shows the case where drift rate was the criterion). X
difficult to recover, as our model tends to overestimate it for small
was either binary (taking only values of 0 or 1; the ‘t test’ design values of T but underestimate it for large T , and more so as P
scenario) or took a value between 0 and 1 (inclusive, the ‘linear
increases.
regression’ design), yielding six distinct scenarios. Additionally,
we varied the number of participants and trials per participant,
participants, in the data set is the same between each marker and
P ∈ {20, 40, 80, 160, 320} and T ∈ {20, 40, 80, 160, 320}, for a
its neighbor to the right and one line up (or left and down). This
total of 6 × 25 = 150 conditions. In each condition, we simulation
1,000 data sets and used our proxy method (implemented in JAGS
often gained by increasing the sample size P than the trial count
using pyjags; Miasko, 2017) to recover the parameters.
T , a known but underappreciated fact (DeKay, Rubinchik, Li, &
Complete results and full details of the implementation are in
De Boeck, 2022; Rubinchik, 2019; Vandekerckhove, in press).
In summary, the simulation study illustrates highly desirable
sion weight β in all 150 conditions. The root mean squared error
recovery properties of the mean drift rate parameter and the beta
4 weight parameter, but also shows that our proxy model inherits the
Here the Gamma distribution is expressed with a shape and scale parameter.
4 of 13 Chávez et al.
estimation biases from the EZ diffusion model. Consequently, we Boehm, U., Evans, N. J., Gronau, Q. F., Matzke, D., Wagenmakers,
recommend the use of the EZ Bayesian hierarchical drift diffusion E.-J., & Heathcote, A. J. (2023). Inclusion Bayes factors for
model specifically in the cognitive-psychometrical context, where mixed hierarchical diffusion decision models. Psychological
the focus of interpretation is on regression structures. Methods. doi: 10.1037/met0000582
Carpenter, B., Gelman, A., Hoffman, M. D., Lee, D., Goodrich, B.,
Betancourt, M., . . . Riddell, A. (2017). Stan: A probabilis-
Conclusion
tic programming language. Journal of statistical software,
The drift diffusion model (DDM) is a popular model of choice
76(1).
response time that comes at a significant computational cost.
Clark, H. H. (1973). The language-as-fixed-effect fallacy: A critique
Moreover, many of its applications add computational complexity
of language statistics in psychological research. Journal
above and beyond that of calculating the expensive DDM likelihood.
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12(4), 335–359.
Such costly applications have included Bayesian hierarchical ex-
doi: 10.1016/S0022-5371(73)80014-3
tensions (Vandekerckhove et al., 2011), latent variable structures
Coleman, E. B. (1964)N. Generalizing to a Language
(Vandekerckhove, 2014), applications to large population samples
Population. Psychological Reports, 14(1), 219–226.
(Lucio et al., 2017; Salum et al., 2014a, 2014b), use of DDMs as a
doi: 10.2466/pr0.1964.14.1.219
component in numerical experiments (Stafford, Pirrone, Croucher,
De Boeck, P., & Wilson, M. (2004). Explanatory item response
& Krystalli, 2020), real-time adaptive design optimization (Bahg et
models: A generalized linear and nonlinear approach. New
al., 2020), and model comparisons that involve high-dimensional
York: Springer.
numerical integration (Boehm et al., 2023; Gronau, Heathcote, & I
DeKay, M. L., Rubinchik, N., Li, Z., & De Boeck, P. (2022).
Matzke, 2019).
Accelerating psychological science with metastudies: A
The EZ-diffusion model (Wagenmakers et al., 2007) was a sig-
demonstration using the risky-choice framing effect. Per-
nificant development in this regard, allowing for rapid approxima- R
spectives on Psychological Science, 17(6), 1704–1736.
tions to DDM parameters with relative ease. However, enhancing
doi: 10.1177/17456916221079611
the EZ-diffusion model with additional statistical structure was not
Dutilh, G., Vandekerckhove, J., Ly, A., Matzke, D., Pedroni, A.,
yet possible. We have introduced the EZ Bayesian hierarchical
Frey, R., . . . Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2017). A test of the
DDM, a new formulation of EZ-diffusion as a Bayesian generative
diffusion model explanation for the Worst Performance Rule
model that lends itself to implementation in generic probabilistic
using preregistration and blinding. Attention, Perception, and
programming languages. The derivation was based in standard
Performance, 79, 713–725.
mathematical statistics – the key equations are Equations 11, 12,
Enkavi, A. Z., Eisenberg, I. W., Bissett, P. G., Mazza, G. L.,
and 13. We conducted simulation studies showing good recovery
MacKinnon, D. P., Marsch, L. A., & Poldrack, R. A. (2019,
of DDM parameters using our new method, including good recov-
March). Large-scale analysis of test–retest reliabilities
ery of hierarchical regression parameters, and we provide some
of self-regulation measures. Proceedings of the National
examples in an online repository (osf.io/bzkpn).
Academy of Sciences, 116(12), 5472–5477. doi: 10.1073/p-
With this new ‘EZ’ formulation, using the DDM is no more costly
nas.1818430116
than using a normal distribution, opening the door to a wide array
Estes, W. K. (1956). The problem of inference from curves based
of modeling applications.
on group data. Psychological Bulletin, 53, 134–140.
Gronau, Q. F., Heathcote, A., & Matzke, D. (2019). Computing
Open practices: Code availability and reproducibility Bayes factors for evidence-accumulation models using Warp-
III bridge sampling. Behavior Research Methods, 52(2),
Our simulation studies can be reproduced using code made
918–937. doi: 10.3758/s13428-019-01290-6
available via GitHub, github.com/joachimvandekerckhove/
Jiang, W., & Turnbull, B. (2004). The indirect method:
ezbhddm, and archived on the Open Science Framework (osf.io/
P Inference based on intermediate statistics—a syn-
bzkpn). The python codebase is in the src/ directory. Python
thesis and examples. Statistical Science, 19(2).
notebooks to repeat small-scale simulations and create figures are
doi: 10.1214/088342304000000152
in the notebooks/ directory. Finally, the vm/ directory contains set-
Klauer, K. C., Voss, A., Schmitz, F., & Teige-Mocigemba, S. (2007).
up information for a virtual machine with a suitable computational
Process components of the implicit association test: A
environment for reproducibility.
diffusion–model analysis. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology, 93, 353–368.