The Double-Edged Sword
Mediatized Integration Processes during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Author Note
Stephan O. Görland
University of Münster
Author’s Brief Biography
Dr. Stephan Oliver Görland is a research associate in the BMBF project hyBit. Here he is investigating
the media networking of northern German hydrogen players with a focus on energy communication
and platform use. Previously, he was a research assistant at the Institute for Media Research at the
University of Rostock, at the Berlin Institute for Empirical Integration and Migration Research at the
Humboldt University of Berlin and at the University of Bremen: first at the Center for Media, Com-
munication and Information Research (ZeMKI) and then at the Sustainability Research Center (artec).
Keywords
COVID-19, digital media, media, mediatization, post-migrant, refugees
Abstract
The issue of media appropriation by refugees experienced a boom in 2015, but since then the topic has
received less attention over the years. In addition, refugees have faced significant challenges since the
appearance of COVID-19. In this paper, I discuss how Syrian migrants and refugees who have lived
in Germany for at least four years used media technologies during COVID-19. I present findings from
twelve guided interviews conducted in a northern German city. In summary, media use in general has
increased, as has that of the majority society. On the other hand, media use during the pandemic has
proven to be a double-edged sword: Some refugees had great(er) problems coping with the situation,
while others gained self-empowerment and agency through using media during the pandemic.
Number of characters (including notes):
42.534 including spaces
This submission is to be considered as a peer-reviewed article.
This article is not submitted simultaneously for consideration to any other publication.
The Double-Edged Sword
Mediatized Integration Processes during the COVID-19 Pandemic
1 Introduction / Abstract
The issue of media appropriation by refugees experienced a boom in 2015, but since then the topic has
received less attention over the years. In addition, refugees have faced significant challenges since the
appearance of COVID-19. In this paper, I discuss how Syrian migrants and refugees who have lived
in Germany for at least four years use media technologies during COVID-19. I present findings from
twelve guided interviews conducted in a northern German city. In summary, media use in general has
increased, as has that of the majority society. On the other hand, media use during the pandemic has
proven to be a double-edged sword: Some refugees had great(er) problems coping with the situation,
while others gained self-empowerment and agency through using media during the pandemic.
2 State of Research & Desideratum
2.1 From Mediatized Migration to Post-migrant Media Cultures
In 2004, Steven Vertovec described cheap phone calls as “The Social Glue of Migrant Transnational-
ism” and indicated that these inexpensive calls “represent one of the most significant forms of global-
izing technology” (Vertovec, 2004, p. 223). Nowadays, less than 20 years later, this statement already
seems like an anachronism.
Today’s world has become smaller by bridging time and space through electronic media (Giddens,
2007). It should be emphasized that not only the telephone but also the Internet has been a major driver
of this development (Hepp, 2021). Media has made today’s world placeless (Relph, 2008), which has
also shaped the processes of migration, mobility, and integration. Thus, it is not surprising that since
the proliferation of the World Wide Web, a variety of approaches have emerged to denote the interplay
of electronic media, migration, and integration. Proposals range from “connected migrant” (Dimi-
nescu, 2008) and “e-diasporas” (Diminescu, 2012; Borkert et al., 2018) to “migrant digitalities” (Tri-
mikliniotis et al., 2015, p. 3). These buzzwords are leading to new branches of research called “digital
migration studies” (Leurs and Smets, 2018).
However, many of these approaches focus on digital media or show a techno-centrism on the
smartphone. To understand the broad range of the phenomenon, the terms “mediatized migrant” or
“mediatized migration” (e.g., Hepp et al., 2011; Hepp et al., 2013; Madianou, 2014; Greschke et al.,
2017) have best described emerging migration and media challenges in the past. Even though migra-
tion is a multidimensional construct that combines several influencing factors, the media “do not just
add a new dimension to the phenomenon of migration – they transform it altogether” (Madianou, 2014,
p. 323). In this respect, the notion of mediatization does not reduce refugees’ media practices exclu-
sively to devices such as the cell phone (Awad & Tossel, 2019), but additionally seeks to include local
(in the host country) and translocal communication (to other entities such as the country of origin) of
daily life (Hepp et al., 2012). Accordingly, digital-centric research undermines “classic” media reper-
toires like watching television, listening to radio or reading newspapers; and is a good example of neo-
“technological centralism” (Hepp, 2008, p. 132).
To date, research on mediatization and migrants has focused primarily on diasporas and their commu-
nicative and cultural connections to countries of origin and destination (e.g., Hepp et al., 2012; Madi-
anou, 2014). Due to the general emphasis on mobility since the proliferation of mobile communication,
the relationship between mobile media and forced migration has now come into increased focus among
researchers.
In the last decade, numerous papers have been written addressing this specific phenomenon in different
countries and contexts (e.g., Coddington & Mountz, 2014; Harney, 2013; Witteborn, 2015; Gillespie
et al., 2016; UNHCR, 2016; Wall, Campbell & Janbek, 2015; Andrade & Doolin, 2016; AbuJarour &
Krasnova, 2017; Arnold & Görland, 2019; Borkert et al., 2018; Dekker et al., 2018; Risam, 2018). In
this context, the meta-study on 43 international studies by Mancini et al. (2019) is worth mentioning.
The authors distinguish five dominant themes about refugees’ experiences with cell phones between
2013 and 2018: “(a) media practices in refugees’ everyday lives; (b) opportunity and risks of MPs
during the migration journey; (c) the role of MPs in maintaining and developing social relations;
(d) potential of MPs for refugees’ self-assertion and self-empowerment; (e) MPs for refugees’ health
and education” (Mancini et al., 2019, p. 1). For an overview of the broad research in Europe since
2015, see also the Sage Handbook of Migration & Media (Smits et al., 2019).
In Europe, most studies in this context have very different topics, each reflecting different research
interests, e.g., ‘decision making’ via social networks (Dekker et al., 2018), expectations of the host
country (Emmer, Kunst & Richter, 2021), self-expression (Risam, 2018), social integration into the
new society (AbuJarour & Krasnova, 2017), unaccompanied youth (Kutscher & Kreß, 2018), or mu-
tual support via social media (Borkert et al., 2018): Thus, the topics and the different research interests
are diverse.
Since then, however, the research field of media and communication and migration/integration has
been quiet, especially in German-speaking countries. Only a few studies dealt with long-term perspec-
tives of media resonance after successful migration to the host country and mostly still with a focus
(a) on the mobile phone (e.g., Alencar, 2020) and (b) the processes immediately after migration (e.g.,
Berg, 2021). In the case of Germany, however, many refugees who have arrived since 2015 are now
at a different stage or phase of integration than in 2015 (Gürer, 2019): Most of them have a sound
knowledge of language, politics, and society. This leads to the question of how they – three to five
years later – use the media for their purposes in general and for further integration into the majority
society in particular. This research question is mainly unanswered, most studies on these phenomena
were published before 2015 (e.g., Hepp et al,, 2013; Madianu, 2014). And since then, media environ-
ments have progressed even further in the context of an increasing mediatization of everyday life.
(Hepp, 2021). For example, in 2016, Arnold & Görland (2019) found that refugees’ media use was
nearly the same as among the major society. However, the use of the majority society has also evolved
in recent years: social networks have an even higher penetration rate due to increased audiovisual
content (for the German context, see Beisch & Schäfer, 2020) and this also leads to new forms of
participation among refugees (Kruse et al., 2019).
The increase in participation could be seen as evidence of post-migrant media cultures (Foroutan,
2016; Author, in press; Kruse et al., 2019, Römschild, 2017): Identities and lifestyles are increasingly
interwoven, mixed, and hybridized. The boundaries between ‘refugees’ and ‘majority society’ are blur-
ring, and the factors influencing specific media use are much more found in political affiliations, sub-
cultural ties, and demographic factors such as age or education. A ‘postmigrant’ society has already
been shaped by migration, and new negotiations are now taking place between different population
groups on several levels. Following this approach, the most important change is that I am no longer
talking only about migration itself, but also about the negotiation of migration in society. Thus, the
perspective of this approach “would be to illuminate the institutions, milieus and contexts of the (ma-
jority) society from the perspective of migration” (Römschild, 2017). Digital media cultures play a
significant role in this field of tension, as they also have the potential to shape it through participation
and making oneself visible or making it possible to express in a self-confirming sense (Kruse et al.,
2019). In light of these developments, I can speak of a further step in ‘media migration research’,
which is evolving from a mere analysis of the media as an instrument of self-empowerment (mediatized
migration) to that of the media as a tool that can create agency in the society of arrival (postmigrant
media cultures).
2.2 Corona and Refugees / Migrants
Since the appearance of COVID-19 in 2019, refugees and migrants have been particularly affected
(Brickhill-Atkinson & Hauck, 2021). They are significantly more likely to be infected with COVID-19
compared to the rest of the population (Kondilis et al., 2021). This is mainly due to living conditions
(e.g., shelters) and limited access to health care, for whatever reason, but also to personal factors such
as a higher likelihood of obesity and smoking, both factors that influence a severe course of COVID-19
disease (Elisabeth et al., 2020). In addition, many refugees are without family in the host country.
Families or family support have proven to be of great help during the Corona pandemic as they support
each other (Ekmen et al., 2021).
As for coping with COVID-19 through media use, there is a lack of studies; only two known papers
addressed this phenomenon. Fujii et al. (2020) emphasized the potential catalyzing inequality risks of
digital media for young refugees. In addition to the disadvantage of limited language and media liter-
acy, young refugees (as diverse a group as they may be) have less access to infrastructure and social
capital. Yet despite limited access, digital media is helpful for refugees to build well-being: The higher
the psychological distress, the more often refugees use digital media (Mancini et al., 2021). At the
same time, the total time spent with media increased in the Italian sample (ibid.).
2.3 Research Desideratum
Most people can certainly say from their own experience that during the pandemic, personal exchanges
and information searches took place mainly online. During this time, blocking and contact restrictions
led to “increased usage of all online applications” among users (Lemenager et al., 2020, p. 1). But
what if someone is still learning the language? Or doesn’t have that many contacts in the host country
yet? In the case of Sweden, for example, refugees were found to be highly likely to “seek unreliable
forms of health information and even self-medication” (Elisabeth et al., 2020, p. 3).
The aim of this paper is therefore to examine the media use and information seeking of migrants who
arrived in Germany in 2016 at the latest, with a view to the special circumstances of the pandemic. The
guiding research question is:
How do Syrian refugees and migrants in Germany coping with COVID19 pandemic by using media?
refer on the one hand to the legal status of individuals. But on the other hand, most refugees we inter-
viewed preferred the term "migrants", which is more neutral for them.)
3 Method
This paper presents the results of twelve qualitative interviews with Syrian refugees and migrants. The
interviews were conducted between February and October 2021 in a northern German city. The ques-
tions focused on the interviewees’ migration history, their current living conditions in Germany, and
their usage patterns of smartphones and other media in their home country, during the journey and
after arrival, and how they have changed over the past four years. I paid particular attention to the
question of the extent to which the Corona pandemic influences integration into the majority society
and the role of the media in this process. The respondents were between 24 and 51 years old and had
higher education. Six of them were male, six were female, and all had arrived in Germany in 2016 at
the latest. I had the interviews translated by an Arabic student assistant and analyzed the qualitative
data according to Kuckartz & Rädinger (2019).
Based on the questionnaire, I first created deductive categories. Subsequently, inductive categories
were formed from the material. ‘Mediatized coping with COVID-19’ was one of seven major catego-
ries. The other categories were ‘media use in Syria’, ‘general communication and media use’, ‘creating
agency & self-empowerment’, ‘learning language’, ‘following influencers’ and ‘potential of media
applications for integration processes’.
According to a representative study, Syrian refugees have above-average school-leaving qualifications
compared to other refugee groups (Edele et al., 2021). In a way, our sample represents the progress
since 2014/2015 for many refugees who are now in (higher) education or already have a job, but are
still in the process of integration into major society.
Living in
Gen- Profession Profession Family Ethnic-
Name Age City Germany Legal status
der in Germany in Syria status ity
since
Refugee; got
Student of speech
the German na-
Sanaa F 25 Damascus 2015 therapy in ‘Ausbild- School student Single Arabic
tionality in
ung’
Student; learning the
Mona F 55 Damascus 2015 Refugee Lawyer Divorced Arabic
language
Student of political
Lama F 24 Idlib 2015 Refugee School student Single Arabic
science at university
Student of informat-
Basma F 24 Damascus 2015 Refugee School student Single Arabic
ics at university
Architecture engi-
Miriam F 39 Aleppo 2014 Refugee Master student Married Arabic
neer
Student of informat-
Omar M 27 Damascus 2015 Refugee School student Single Arabic
ics at university
Student in ‘Weiter-
Basel M 51 Aleppo 2013 Refugee Translator Married Syrian
bildung’
Student of informat-
Ghassan M 25 Damascus 2016 Refugee School student Single Arabic
ics at university
Student as dental Student of Eng-
Hassan M 30 Idlib 2015 Refugee technician in ‘Aus- lish literature at Single Arabic
bildung’ university
Rami M 37 Aleppo 2013 Refugee Musician Musician Single Arabic
Student of
Student of law
Ahmed M 28 Dir Alzor 2015 Refugee political science at Single Arabic
at university
university
Student; learning the
Amal F 37 Daraa 2014 Refugee Lawyer Divorced Arabic
language
Note: ‘Ausbildung’ and ‘Weiterbildung’ are specific German words for ‘job training in a company’
and ‘further education’.
4 Results
First, I present findings that highlight the challenges in the context of the Corona pandemic in gen-
eral (I). Following on from this, the focus is on how media use has increased (II). Then, I first show
problems that have arisen as a result of heavy media use (III). Finally, the “other edge” of the sword is
discussed, i.e., how some refugees were able to gain self-empowerment through the media during the
pandemic (IV).
I The General Challenge of COVID-19: The Corona Pandemic as a Separating Force
The most common challenge among respondents was the lack of communication with people from
the majority society, as there were no meetings or social activities during the lockdown. This led to a
sense of isolation, as Omar (male, 27 years old) explained:
“I have not dealt with Germans in the last eight months, only in the supermarket or doing very
simple things, so no hour-long meetings or interactions with Germans.”
There were also many psychological challenges, especially because of the learning and work situa-
tion. For Rami (male, 37 years old, works as a musician), working in German society is a key factor
for integration:
“Maybe since Corona started I’ve only given two concerts, and as I told you, the work here is
part of integration, so Corona has affected my work, and this decreases integration. You can’t
meet people, you can’t participate in cultural or social events because everything is closed, so
this will certainly affect all people, will affect everything in life, including integration, because
you can’t meet people, you can’t develop your work, you can’t participate in social events and
so on.”
Overall, our interviewees confirmed the concerns already expressed in the mentioned previous studies.
Integration (as normative as the term may be) is more difficult for refugees because there is less contact
with the majority society. This was mainly based on the fact that a) contacts were generally lower and
b) many could no longer pursue their professions, as many of our interviewees worked in the service
sector.
II Increasing of Media Use During the Corona Pandemic
Most of the interviewees confirmed that media use increased dramatically during the Corona pan-
demic. It can be said that all important integration processes took place online, as Amal, a 37-year-old
mother, impressively reported about her online activities:
“For instance, a painting course with a Syrian and German painter, and in July there will be an
opening evening for children on the topic of integration between Germans and Syrians, for moth-
ers and children. I also signed up for an event next Monday about the difficulties parents face in
raising their children in German society. I also attended a session on how to register your chil-
dren in daycare and school, and how to psychologically prepare the child for this transition, and
that was in German, and I got a lot out of it, how to deal with the child and so on.”
Amal showed in her numerous examples that many processes took place online. Not only compulsory
courses such as language classes, but also civic initiatives such as painting courses took place online.
However, media consumption was differentiated according to two different motivational structures.
First, I call it “the fear of missing out,” as the example of Amal showed, out of obligation or to
maintain activities, communication, and information seeking. Particularly important here was the fact
that they wanted to find out about the situation and get news, as Basel (male, 51 years old) mentioned:
“I follow German sources, especially the official one in this situation from Corona, so I follow
a lot of news through Buten und Binnen [a North German information source] – the news from
Corona.”
And Hassan (male, 22 years old) stated:
“When a person has fears, they need to hear more news and know more, so media use will
definitely increase as people read more articles about this pandemic and more overall.”
Respondents tend to use more media to communicate, as Sanaa (female, 25 years old) said: “It has
increased, because my desire to communicate with people has increased.”
On the other hand, there was also a lot of time. Fighting boredom (and having fewer activities) was the
other main motive for using more media mentioned by most respondents. In this regard, Amal (37
years old, female) told us: “It increased because of boredom, because you use your cell phone all the
time to pass the time.” And Mona, a 55-year-old woman from Damascus, added:
“There’s a lot of free time, like those activities [cooking with groups and language learning
activities] have stopped, so I tend to watch movies to entertain myself and watch videos on
YouTube and stuff.”
Lama, a 24-year-old woman from Idlib, also made a simple and brief statement when she remarked:
“I tend to use it [the smartphone] more because I get bored.”
Overall, the numerous examples show: Media consumption by migrants and refugees has increased,
especially with regard to the use of digital media. Here, the two basic motive structures that increased
usage differed. In the first motive, the “fear of missing out” was noticeable. This point is often found
in discussions around smartphone disconnection (e.g., Elhai et al., 2016), but found a much more ex-
istential expression here: during a pandemic, knowledge is power. Therefore, the various programs,
services, and platforms were constantly scoured for new information.
On the other hand, bridging boredom, one of the oldest and most cited reasons for media use (Author,
2021), was the second motivation for more media use: the need for distraction and ‘killing time’ is
mainly associated with waiting situations (Gasparini, 1995). Thus, the results speak to the perception
of a long waiting situation with no clear end on the part of our respondents.
III Media-Related Problems for Migrants During COVID-19
The increase of media usage is also accompanied by problems. In particular, digital learning during
the Corona pandemic was cited as the biggest problem for migrants. Many respondents stated that they
attended many different courses, either to learn the language, to learn a new skill, to study for univer-
sity, ‘Ausbildung’, ‘Weiterbildung’ (specific German terms for ‘job training in a company’ and ‘fur-
ther education’), or to learn about new subjects. All of these processes/courses were done via Zoom or
other programs such as Google meet or Skype. Poor internet connection at home resulted in limited
access to many of these courses, as Miriam (female, age 39) said:
“Yes, I had problems with my router or with the network and several times I could not attend
class or part of the class was interrupted because I had bad internet.”
However, some of the interviewees faced general difficulties because of the digital learning, as men-
tioned by Omar (male, 27 years old):
“So, the situation online was so bad because when you’re in school, you hear something from
that person, you ask your friends about something, you get information from another site and so
on, so there’s more communication when you’re in school and you’re dealing with people di-
rectly, but through the Internet, the situation was like you’re isolated.”
For Sanaa (female, 25 years old), digital learning has had a negative impact on the length of her
studies:
“The information was not conveyed the way it should be, there was no interaction. One of the
negative things that happened with me is that through the online lectures I did not receive the
information as it should be. Now I am forced to extend my studies because I have weaknesses in
some areas because I did not learn them the right way. So now I am forced to extend my studies
for one year because of this crisis.”
In addition, the role of the media in relation to integration in the Corona times has had a negative
impact on migrants, as they cannot rely on the media to find and meet new people, as there is a lock-
down, as Basma (female, 24 years) mentioned:
“So without Corona, yes, they [the media] help a lot, for example, if someone comes to Germany
now, they can easily find groups and events that match their interests, and meet a lot of people
and integrate into society.”
Basma refers to the lack of connection between the offline and online worlds. Even though many of
the processes take place digitally on Facebook or in WhatsApp groups (e.g. on Facebook in Germany:
“our Syrian house”), it is just as important for people to see and meet each other in real life.
The pandemic time was not contributing to the advancement of language skills for some individuals,
as Hassan, a 30-year-old man from Idlib, told us:
“I haven’t practiced the language or watched news in German, so I tend to watch the necessary
news on the news channels that broadcast their news in Arabic, so Corona has a big impact.”
Overall, I consider the media-related problems during COVID-19 to be primarily a confirmation of
previous research. As pointed out by Fujii et al. (2020), critical technical infrastructure is the biggest
barrier to digital media use. However, the problems go beyond technical issues. Language learning, in
particular, was affected by the pandemic. The many digital learning formats caused motivation to drop,
and with it the sense of achievement. One respondent even complained about longer learning times as
a result. In addition, online formats primarily functioned in a hybrid manner, i.e., with an interweaving
of online and presence. When one of these two sides failed, people in this sample felt left behind.
IV Media-Related Empowerment for Migrants During the Corona Pandemic
Many migrants were empowered by media use during the Corona pandemic, as the media enabled
them to communicate (more) with others, as Amal (female, 37 years old) mentioned: “I tend to
communicate more with people because of boredom.” They also enabled her to participate in various
activities during the pandemic, as she explained:
“I also signed up for an event next Monday about the difficulties parents face in raising their
children in German society. I also attended a session on how to register your children in daycare
and school, and how to psychologically prepare the child for this transition, and that was in
German, and I got a lot out of it, how to deal with the child and so on.”
Amal showed us how you can also build an agency with the many digital offerings. She uses the
countless offers that are available and derives personal benefit from them. But it’s not just the micro-
coordination of everyday life that can be influenced by digital media. Media, and especially digital
media outlets, have helped refugees stay connected with language learning during the pandemic, as
Rami (male, 37 years old) mentioned:
“On YouTube, there are many channels that specialize in teaching you the language, and also
apps. I know ‘Duolingo’ and I’m sure there are many other apps that I don’t know. Also, there
are many pages and groups on Facebook that help you by asking you questions and answering
you. I think that helps a lot with learning the language, especially during Corona times when
people can’t go to classes, then they can rely on that. So there are a lot of people who advise you
to rely on these tools because it’s not a traditional way of learning and you can reach them
anytime and practice with them.”
Mona (female, 55 years old) stated in this matter:
“The media is very helpful, especially there are good online language courses, and there are
listening courses, and there are movies especially for learning the language, these are perfect,
(...) these are the most important things, through the media a person can get many benefits if
they want to strengthen the language. If a person has a hobby, then through YouTube they can
get many benefits, like videos that help them. So it is very useful.”
Both interview partners showed with their statements that the great diversity of the Internet can enable
self-determined learning. It doesn’t matter whether YouTube, movies or smartphone applications
are preferred: It is important to become active oneself and to actively search for information. And this
can even be done in a very simple way – by receiving jokes and cartoons, as Ghassan, a 25-year-old
man, told us:
“Through the mobile phone, I just learned using a page on Facebook, so this page tends to
download German jokes, and I got in the habit of checking what they post, like these jokes tend
to be entertaining and funny, and at the same time you’re learning.”
Media also played an important role in the general education of migrants during the Corona period,
as media use increased but some relied on educational and entertainment videos to educate themselves,
as Mona also noted:
“Also, lately I’ve started to get interested in English-language or Arabic channels that are about
health, sports, or nutrition, maybe because this year, we didn't move a lot, which has made us so
sluggish, so I’ve started following people in that field.”
But for some interviewees, personal development went even beyond the simple consumption of media:
during COVID-19, some respondents said they were inspired by the media to start own projects, like
Ahmed (male, 28 years old), who had the opportunity to receive a scholarship. Another respondent,
Sanaa (25 years old from Damascus), started her own YouTube channel:
“On the other hand, I see that the Corona period provided me with some time, and during that
time I got the scholarship.”
Based on the results on this aspect, I see that the forced mediatization during COVID-19 also helped
some of the refugees to develop agency and self-empowerment. This was especially evident in the
active search for information, but also in the self-determined learning of the language, without re-
strictions as in a language school. The language was simply learned through various means. In addition,
some refugees and migrants educated themselves in other areas that interest them, and one even got
familiar with the bottom of German humor.
5 Conclusion / Discussion
At first glance, it seems that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on refugees is not very different
from that of the majority society. The problems of not being able to work and meet friends seem similar
to those of non-immigrants. But because of the special living conditions of refugees – and here the
study is in line with previous research –, it can be stated that they are hit particularly hard by the
circumstances (cf. Brickhill-Atkinson & Hauck, 2021; Fujii et al., 2020), harder than the major society.
The feeling of ‘being alone’ was the main problem for the refugees. Along with this, (German) lan-
guage skills could not be developed further as Omar from Damascus, for example, noted: The only
contact with Germans was in the supermarket. This continued online as well. Due to the large number
of courses via Zoom or Skype, a discomfort with these online services gradually developed. The some-
times poor Internet connection of the respondents also played a role, who complained that the Internet
kept crashing. It should also be noted the time to acquire the language skills has increased for some
individuals. Thus, some of the concerns (e.g., Elisabeth et al., 2020; Fujii et al., 2020) can be con-
firmed.
But that brings me back to the double-edged sword: Being online also had a certain self-empowerment
factor. Some refugees took matters into their own hands and found out about the situation from regional
broadcasters. They learned the language via tutorials or developed new hobbies through the media.
One interviewee even started her own YouTube channel during the pandemic.
In this small sample, I was unable to draw any conclusions about why some refugees cope better than
others. What did become clear, however, was this: The special situation of refugees makes them more
vulnerable to the pandemic than many people from the majority society.
In addition, research has shown that there is a need for greater theoretical engagement with the question
of why some people cope better with a mediatized environment and others do not. Migration and inte-
gration processes are strongly influenced by the media, that much is clear, and most of our interviewees
have either a) come to terms with it or b) even benefited from it. This also shows that homogenizing
approaches do not work. There are not ‘the refugees’ or ‘the Syrians’. There are different people with
different talents and motivations in terms of media use. And this media appropriation is also charac-
terized in our sample by “postmigrant media cultures” (Kruse, Stehling & Thomas, 2019; Arnold &
Görland, 2019; Foroutan, 2016), “postmigrant” meaning the dissolution of the binary of majority so-
ciety and migrants and the creation of a new, shared narrative (Römhild, 2017). In our admittedly
highly educated sample, respondents lived out this motto. They not only used Arabic and German
media, much more than, for example, Hepp et al. (2013) had already addressed. They also participated,
for example, in online painting courses, created YouTube channels, or tried to understand German
memes: Activities like these can be seen as significant evidence of such a change that goes beyond a
‘mediatized migration’, because media are also used by our sample to negotiate and actively participate
in society. The actual stage of ‘migration’ is already in the past for our respondents. The media are
thus used less for orientation than for engaging in society and for creating agency in order to be a full
member of society.