Supplementary quotations:
Q1: “It allows having meanings that make the link between what is happening outside and inside us. It
allows to move, communicate, to touch and feel others, and to exist” (Nov102)
Q2: “inhabiting a body, getting used to it… it is strange to own it and to act with it. Sometimes it does not
correspond to what is in my head, and I often forget it” (Nov38)
Q3: “As a sensory experience the body is totally part of consciousness. Using the body in meditation
refocus, reincarnate the consciousness within the body and become present with the different sensations,
tensions, all things that the body can express. It has a very beneficial effect. We are mental, coming back
to the body cuts through this conceptualization. A notion of reintegration, reincarnation, realignment”
(Exp78)
Q4: “Having a body is what makes me an individual. But it also jails me, I’m constrained by it and it puts
me in an awkward situation because while my mind is more or less free, without frontiers, it lodges,
identifies itself with a body which has frontiers. It is weird being free and in prison at the same time. All
the mental experiences I had are tinged with reminiscences of bodily experiences. It’s very difficult to
imagine a pure mind (silence). I'm not saying that it doesn't exist, it is related to purely meditative
experiences” (Exp51)
Q5: “My experience doesn't go beyond my physical senses and my mind: there are things I see, hear,
touch, smell, taste, and think. It can't be more than that, it goes no further, that’s experience. Mental and
physical are completely linked, thoughts and physical sensations, whatever they are, go together. There
is not a physical sensation that isn't relayed by a mental concept. They always go together. These two are
so linked that meditating cannot dissociate the two either. Focusing on mental objects implies physical
exercise. That's why we're sitting” (Exp69)
Q6: “When you settle in something you become part of that thing. This human body is very precious, of
course it is also a constraint. Without a body it would have been easier! (Laughs). (…) It's important to
keep your body held because it's useful also to keep developing your path. The body is a tool that can be
extremely helpful. To have too much attachment to it is useless because it's impermanent. It's an
instrument, a very precious one. It can help you to develop other things, qualities about understanding
reality or anything else. Understanding the mind it's very tricky. The body is helpful to think what the mind
is, which is a rather big thing” (Exp77)
Q7: “Real suffering is psychic, it lasts more, it's more insidious, it has the best memory, always capable of
being reborn. It takes up all the space and there is no way to get out of it. The greatest suffering is mental,
we must not let ourselves be locked up, but we do what we can” (Nov34)
Q8: “when I suffer, it's unavoidable. I try not to maintain it but it makes me embarrassed, preoccupied,
constrained. It prevents life leading to its dark side. When I suffer morally, I let myself be carried away by
the dark side. It can Expand little by little, getting bigger, invading all the space” (Nov30)
Q9: “Sometimes it’s so anchored in our interior, we cannot make it leave. We can accompany better, we
can deal with it... Before I was focusing on it, now it disturbs me, but I can deal with it, accept it, I can't let
it suffocate everything. It eats up our life and even other lives” (Nov35)
Q10: “Suffering is being locked in this condition while we’re more than that... I'm sorry (crying). Our
society and diktats disconnect us from what we intimately are. There are sufferings we can avoid, others
with which we have to compose. When you’re aware, you open your eyes and find the right to say ‘no’ to
things that are not you. There is so much suffering because we are not aware of what we submit to”
(Nov26)
Q11: “You have to find the strength to respect yourself and stop pleasing others. To be in agreement with
yourself, whether you like it or not, whether it is perceived or not. It doesn't matter. That’s what creates
the greatest difficulties, this Expectation of ‘what will happen if I do this or how it will be
perceived?’”(Nov92)
Q12: “It can be moral, or loneliness, or uneasiness in being aside of our life or not knowing ourselves
enough and feeling unworthy. Not living in adequacy with what we really are and what makes us vibrate.
If we are in phase in our way, the rest just flows. If not, you're always struggling” (Nov92)
Q13: “We have to take action in our life, get out of the victim paradigm, of pain, emotional, and existential
suffering. The legitimacy of being, existing, being an actor of our life, of our healing. I think we can bless
our suffering, see what it taught. My brothers and sisters suicided: today I bless them. I wouldn’t be what
I am without these inner erosions. It is not staying in the comfortable warmth of old habits that we open
our mind. We can live in joy, go through tribulations, be afflicted… Suffering is not antinomy; it is the only
way life uses to make us evolve. It is the tool life in its wide, spiritual sense uses to get us out of our
comfort towards our Expansion. We can learn much more from enemies than from friends” (Nov32)
Q14: “We're here talking, but underneath there is always something going on. The more you look, the
more you think about it, the more you investigate, and the more you see that suffering really is
everywhere, even when you are happy. This can be a little depressing but actually, it's freeing. Cause
you're not pretending suffering is not there” (Exp77)
Q15: “what triggers it is adding a commentary, a supplementary judgment such ‘it shouldn’t be like that,
it’s unbearable, why now, why me?’. We give our truth about how things should be” (Exp69)
Q16: “one of the major qualities of suffering is aversion. Whatever experience you reject becomes
suffering” (Exp65) and “We say hello suffering, but we don’t grasp on it, we don’t separate. We try not to
adhere too much, because we try either to grasp or to push. Let come and let go, take a distance, then it
can come, no doubt, but then it also goes, because we do not engage with it. If we start to engage, then
we have a problem” (Exp76)
Q17: “The nature of the mind it's not suffering, it's happiness. We are trying to reveal that nature. Now
it's obscure because of suffering, but we're trying to reveal what is beneath it” (Exp67) or “We fail
ourselves as we don’t experience what we really are” (Exp74)
Q18: “I can relate to it to wish others to be freed of this quality of suffering, I can meditate on it,
exchanging me and others as a whole, same thing. I can also realize that its nature is not real” (Exp71)
Q19: “it depends on dualism, believing things are two: me and others, body and mind, internal and
external. That is the problem” (Exp71)
Q20: “when I deal with serious conditions of pain and suffering, I’m with them without being
uncomfortable about their situation. Even accompanying people dying. I can watch them in the eyes and
have a warm, human relation without being unsettled by their state” (Exp80)
Q21: “There will be less fear and panic, it will be ok. This way we prepare good conditions for the next
life” (Exp54)
Q22: “Good is about accepting, being tolerant, even about the worst crimes. Understanding, without
justifying, that things could not go differently. Good and evil are so bonded… I grew up with catholic good
and evil as if they were in me, but I changed. I respect what is licit to do, but without judging it as good or
evil: that would be a moral judgment, and this doesn’t suit me, suits religion. This is authorized, this is not,
I can do what I do as I have the right to do it. For example, homosexuality, people can beat around the
bush if it is good or not, but if it is authorized, it is neither good nor evil. My effort is about non judging,
but it is not evident” (Nov38)
Q23: “I put effort in non-judging, adding the good or evil about others’ behavior and way of acting. But it
still happens in society, about corruption, destruction, about the damage of the environment, and all
behaviors that negatively affect us. Today I consider good and evil as connected with harming others or
the planet” (Nov82)
Q24: “Good is non harming others, that’s it (laughs). When we don’t make others suffer, it’s good. Then,
I don’t have strict rules, a religious morality such as avoiding relations before getting married, those
prescriptions and proscriptions. I think everyone is free of doing whatever he wants, as long as he doesn’t
harm others. Plus, helping them when they need it” (Nov103)
Q25: “It depends on our mental reaction to the situation. Nobody is intrinsically evil, everybody has pure
nature. There are just people hiding it much better (laughs). It's our mind that determines good or bad,
it's relative. I'm not saying nobody is good, nobody is bad, I mean many people do bad things, we do bad
things also, even if we don't want to. But that bad it's relative to our experience of it. If somebody is really
trying to harm me, if I can use it to transform myself and make myself a better person, then he's helping
me! Of course, we do not run for trouble (laughs). We have enough already in our lives; but when it
happens if we react negatively, then it is negative, but if we're looking positively then he's very kind
because he's giving us a chance to improve!” (Exp67)
Q26: “it's a matter of intention. It is a consequence of what we do, depending on the intention we have,
even though we can harm with good intentions, as a surgeon that operates to save somebody’s life, he
has the intention to help, but he can harm. But if you’re not driven by wisdom, you cannot frame things
this way, as hell is built of good intentions. Without wisdom, I only make mistakes, so intention also
depends on wisdom. And wisdom, is a very long thing to acquire” (Exp71)
Q27: “Nothing has intrinsic nature, yet karma is working, so we have to take it into account. A Tibetan
master said: «even if my sight is as vast as space, my actions are small as flour». We have to keep a correct
and appropriate conduct, avoiding negative actions and generating positive ones. Accumulating merits is
a path to realize wisdom about the true nature of mind. Merits purify obstacles and our neuroses and
interior conflicts to realize what is always has been already there” (Exp58)
Q28: “If there is an order, a harmony, good is what fits in it. Reality is made of many layers, the more you
enlarge your vision, the more you take into account different spheres and see how everything is relative,
as anything intrinsically exists per se. You can acknowledge the relative ergonomic character depending
on specific sphere you’re interacting with” (Exp73)
Q29: “Take the way native Indians and primitive people lived in harmony with nature. If a God exists, it is
nature. The relation with nature is the most important thing that should be the foundation of any
reflection” and “I will be retired soon, I would like to take care of myself a bit. I am going to take care of
humanitarian, environmental and ecological things as well. I want to be able to help people really in need,
and raise others’ awareness” (Nov37)
Q30: “What matters about ethics? The environment, what I consume, which transport I use, how often I
change my phone. Every act of consumerism destroys the planet. Besides voting, I have to be responsible
at this level. Everybody can change things in his daily life. We all need each other, and this is true across
species. We are complementary and we have to cooperate. If we enter competition, we could destroy
everything” (Nov104)
Q31: “We are losing contact with nature. We come from there. We have to keep this respect of life on
earth, start with that. And teach it to our children. We have to change our vision and be tolerant and
respectful, without impositions” (Nov26)
Q32: “Taking into account others’ needs and interests, causing as little suffering as possible. Acting with
empathy, tolerance, compassion. Listening. Be myself as far as I can. We need each other to change global
things” (Nov38)
Q33: “we can have different views on what is good. If my behavior disturbs somebody, we have to agree
on a reciprocal compromise. Living in groups brings this obligation, and we have to make this balance as
light as possible” (Nov92)
Q34: “getting rid of prejudices, listening before acting. One’s freedom ends where it limits someone else’s
freedom. We have to teach this moral of respect and tolerance towards others, nature, animals. Since
each act has consequences, make them positive” (Nov101)
Q35: “If I can do something helpful for me or others, I have to act” (Exp57) or “In the morning I wake up
asking how I could do some good today. In the evening, listing them. I all traditions we are happy to the
extent we are affected by others” (Exp54)
Q36: “We have to get rid of egocentrism and open up to others, also on the material level. Be open to to
others instead of being scared” (Nov83)
Q37: “we should act for others’ benefit. It is difficult. Good teachers act like that, without caring about
themselves while benefiting others. When you act only for others, jealousy, pride, selfishness, are gone.
Put the others before your own interest” (Exp60)
Q38: “Step back and stop acting-reacting. If we take time to reflect and analyze honestly our actions, see
their outcome, we get to know which is our motivation and what we want, and drop those that have
negative consequences. We have to learn to predict those actions that have less negative consequences.
It has to start from us, not from external dogmas. If we can't be ethic, we can at least be honest” (Exp74)
Q39: “Enlarge my mind and acknowledge how emotions build up; understand mechanisms that make me
suffer. By acknowledging the emotions, we see how we could approach things differently. It’s not stepping
back to dissociate from the situation, rather recognizing what is happening in the emotional system and
seeking the source of this idea of suffering and dissatisfaction. Then realize that it is the same for other
people” (Exp78)
Q40: “It’s up to you to try to live with your heart in line with yourself, in your truth. Be authentic, not just
kind. I believe in kindness and respect, in particular nature, as it teaches so much. If we respect each
other's territory, it is fine. There is an aesthetics of ethics which is not about judgment: there are
appropriate manners” (Nov32)
Q41: “Really understanding the situation and our own mechanisms, as we cannot change others.
Acknowledge, honestly, what causes happiness or suffering in others and myself without assumptions.
Try to be pragmatic and test what works” (Exp69)
Q42: “I try to love as much as I can. I have a positive attitude towards others, with my limitations. I love
human beings. Our actions should follow our intention, but it’s not always as easy” (Nov30)
Q43: “We have to be in peace with ourselves and our ethics, without wanting others adhering to our
principles, being directive by giving my advice. I’m not in charge more than others on what is good or evil”
(Nov40)
Q44: “We all seek happiness, and we are in contradiction with ourselves. It is necessary to align our actions
with our most vast intention: wishing happiness for all living beings. If we want to end suffering, we have
to eradicate ignorance of ‘my’ suffering as such” (Exp71)
Q45: “Develop wisdom to see things as they are and combine it with compassion, helping others to be
happy and free from suffering, including ourselves. We need compassion to avoid negative actions
because you wish others not to suffer, so you try to not harm them and help. You have to combine that
with wisdom and see the world as empty and devoid of real existence. Those things combined totally free
the mind from suffering. Having a pure vision and trying to restrain negative actions of body and mind
while doing positive things. Ultimate happiness is when your mind is free. To help others see things as
illusory you need first to train. Then you can be useful. The more you free your mind, the more you help.
Just sitting and meditating will have a tremendous impact on others” (Exp59)
Q46: “sharing our knowledge and access to direct experience. Besides behavioral ethics, we all wish to be
happy, but we do not all know what brings this happiness. Society teaches us to look for it outside without
realizing it inside. But it doesn’t last” (Exp72)
Q47: “In social interactions, truth is aligning with what we feel and what we want to do. False are those
acts that are far from what we are. There is never absolute truth or false, it is a gray zone, with many
shades. I have an insightful intelligence, and feel things… So I feel false in relations, I perceive it, even
without understanding or labeling it, I feel it” (Nov95)
Q48: “True relations with others and with nature, being in touch with truth, being authentic. Sometimes
I would like to be authentic, and I am false because I find excuses and pretexts not to do something. This
is false. It is a vast question. Sometimes I say things which I do not believe. As a mechanism, there are
conversations, and then we wonder, “Why did I say that? It is not my truth!” (Nov39)
Q49: “Believing in God or not, depends on collectivity and history. Each collectivity has its own story and
truth; we have to go beyond that” (Nov36)
Q50: “We see things through our lenses, by what we have been instilled with. We know what we know as
others discovered it before; we see what we see as others tell us what to see. At the same time, we are
not robots, we are loaded with our experience, what we learned, what has been inculcated. So everybody
has his own vision, which is at the same time his vision and not his vision! Fifteen people see the same
thing and see 15 different things, and will remember different things” (Nov26)
Q51: “There’s no binary true nor false. Truth is about statistical demonstration. There are indisputable
truths in my opinion, and truths that are more subjective. Today with media information, we have to be
careful. It can be very subjective, based on interpretation and filters. Everyone thinks his truth is true, and
all of them are true. But there are undisputable evidences” (Nov92)
Q52: “Truth is fluctuant, always changing. I am skeptical about the truth. Certain things do not change.
Then there are things that are true. I’m a scientist so I believe in science” (Nov103)
Q53: “A color-blind will claim seeing a different color than you, and you would be both right. There is a
scientific truth but it depends on epistemological frameworks and evolves through time. An animal
without stereoscopic vision will claim the earth is flat. Even science needs caution” (Nov98)
Q54: “Scientifically we discover what’s true or false after five years (laughs). Truth is valid only in the
present. Knowledge evolves, we reframe things. Discoveries occur with specific techniques and
approaches, wth available concepts. Then after years, we realize our interpretation was wrong. Not
everything is false, but truths evolve progressing through time. I’m starting my retirement and I think we
end our lives without knowing much more than at the beginning. A researcher tries to understand things,
learn plenty of things, all the time. Then you end up not knowing much. We don’t know why we are here,
where are we going” (Nov96)
Q55: “Erroneous views are relative to bodily acts, words, and mental beliefs such as nihilistic or eternalist
views. Rejecting taking shelter in the law of causes and effects, karma, or losing confidence in awakened
beings. There is my search for truth and erroneous views, believing in reality of things, overlooking
impermanence or believing in a solid, permanent ‘me’. It is false also believing that we can gain something
by harming others or taking advantage. Whatever brings suffering is false and whatever brings opening of
mind is true” (Exp58)
Q56: “teachings lead outside of the duality of true and false. Everything is illusory, we have to understand
non-duality” (Exp50) and “We see truth when we see the real nature of things and understand they are
devoid of reality. Then it's evidence. Actually, everything that is not this awakening is false” (Exp71)
Q57: “It is about vacuity. At that level, the whole conditioned mind shaped by education, culture, and
projections about truth gets deconditioned, entering a perception of phenomena not based on judgments
of true or false. As all phenomena are vacuity and don’t have own existence, being composed” (Exp62)
Q58: “Truth is in accordance with reality. You cannot define ultimate reality by positive affirmation, as
being something. When you say this then it's finished, it’s false. You can say it's not this, it's not that,
getting to a point where you see it, experience it. But you cannot describe it, or very approximately: you
can say the ultimate nature of mind is like space, but it's a bit approximate, cause it's not exactly space
(laughs). Everything you say is false, ultimately” (Exp59)
Q59: “I don’t think in terms of true and false, but rather in terms of obscuration and awakening of
consciousness. Truth emerges as we take off obscurations, when we see clearly” (Exp52)
Q60: “Should we rather talk of real and illusory? False is not real, it is altered. Reality is absolute or relative,
but it is the same reality. The phenomenological side is relative, the other side is the pure, absolute nature
of mind you experience in meditation: the less you are perverted, the more I approach reality or truth.
First, we have to constantly question things and try to be picky, all the time. At the mental level, until
there are layers, emotional veils. The more we acknowledge these foils the more we see how dirty our
glasses are. You can see through them, big part of the path is about this purification of layers” (Exp51)
Q61: “It depends on perception. We should question if what we experience is real or if we contribute to
creating its reality by attributing a concrete reality. In Buddhism we learn putting aside or taking off the
layers of our projections, judgments, and perception. Often, we can acknowledge that we add a lot of
emotional negativity in our perception, focusing on it, we can relativize and see the positive sides. We
have to question our beliefs” (Exp74)
Q62: “I'm sure I don't have access to what's really true, maybe sometimes some glimpses. Everything else
is false (laughs). If you try to get more what could be true, you get more aware of the falseness of things.
That is how you can ascertain what is false in itself. But you can be more aware of the fact that other
things are false. Getting closer to something that can be ultimate truth” (Exp77)
Q63: “It is chance and necessity that brought oxygen and hydrogen together, and that this brought to
fishes and living beings. Earth has 4 milliards of years, human existence is nothing, like 300.000 years…
I’m stunned some scientists believe in a transcendent presence” (Nov36) and “How did everything
manifest at the beginning... A slow evolution, which developed progressively, from basic to complex
beings, aggregating more and more elements. I don’t think that at some point boom! all this happened”
(Nov92)
Q64: “The whole experience of life, of environments, of our own experience. It is biological and cultural
life” (Nov38)
Q65: “It is a self-organizing thing that tries to work at best. It functions stemming from what exists. It is
the chance that makes things move to ameliorate. Being is the fact of existing and living among this. I
don’t believe that God created us, otherwise he would have forgotten plenty of things! (Laughs). I think it
is about chemical reactions, as a mixture of material and psychic that together try to live and share”
(Nov28)
Q66: “The Big Bang and then evolution which started… from nothing, I don’t know, it is questionable. The
cosmos is nebulous to me, I cannot understand it” (Nov99) and “Difficult to conceptualize, either the Big
Bang is not Explanatory, which is the origin of time, maybe if there’s no end there’s no beginning?
(Laughs)” (Nov42)
Q67: “The source is a spiritual question for me. It comes from a longing for Expansion, an energy, but
where does it come from? I don’t have the answer, my deepest beliefs I think there is a deep intelligence
at stake. This wonderful earth is inhabited by a soul of the world, which was not created only for
humankind. We appeared only recently with respect to the timescale of life on this earth” (Nov32)
Q68: “We evolved like animals but how did life appear? From nothing, but when we die it does not come
back so how does it start? Something brought it but I couldn’t explain it, I’m not a believer I don’t think
some entity threw planets as dices to play with us” (Nov103)
Q69: “I don’t give relevance to God which is a human invention, but I’m still enchanted by the functioning
of plants, animals. Difficult to explain how this level of ingeniousness reached such harmonic biological
and psychological functioning. It enchanted me if I stop and observe, this is the feeling about all this”
(Nov82)
Q70: “Either we believe in evolution, or in religion. I like stories in the Bible; they are very rich, complex
and poetic, even though they are certainly not scientific. They allow us to abate some mental schemes.
Their symbolic language is a surprisingly intelligent tool. The principles channeled there are beautiful I’m
just a shy believer (laughs) but I like these roots and the rich sources of this and other religions” (Nov40)
Q71: “Faith and God saved me. I discovered God when I was sixteen, taking part in communities and
meeting wonderful people. I was raised as a practicing, but I discovered God as a presence of
unconditional love, always with me. It saved me from despair, and it still does. I believe in this power of
love, but I have no answer. Life is magic, from embryos to humans. The way our conception, the
functioning of our bodies, minds, how everything enchains, it is marvelous, a mystery, but there is this
power of love” (Nov30)
Q72: “There is a religious answer and a scientific one. Then a different way, more spiritual, that includes
all living beings, with a global meaning. We are here by chance, and we do what we can to respect nature,
as everything lives together. This is the common origin of it all, developing interactions between all these
parts as a whole. We cannot deny that humans are not the only species deserving life on this earth and
destroy everything else to monopolize the environment. Nowadays with this increasing unbalance, we
can witness this ensemble that transcends us and that we have to respect” (Nov104)
Q73: “I’ve been raised in catholic religion, but I also believe in reincarnation and soul. I think there is an
origin, we come from somewhere, maybe it is… I don’t like the word ‘supernatural’ but maybe it has a
cosmic origin?” (Nov109)
Q74: “Origin depends on phenomenal perception, but do these perceptions really exist? I have this feeling
that what comes to me comes from my mind, I don't know if entirely or partially I don’t know, it depends.
Origin exists only if I perceive it, then we will see” (Exp51)
Q75: “It depends on the instant by instant cognition of perception, perception of what is. But who
perceives it? There is always this semi-continuous movement of cognition. From here everything
originates and dissolves” (Exp73)
Q76: “I didn’t integrate yet the ‘no origin no end’ principle. What questions me is if life is a succession of
cycles… However, at which moment the identification with the ‘me’ or ‘I’ ‘my existence’ occurred? There
is an ‘I’ that thinks, feels, experiences. But where originates taking part in this process, all the energy we
invest in desiring and avoiding. Why can't we take experiences as such?” (Exp56)
Q77: “The material being in its relative existence, like me and you, has an origin, which is its consciousness,
channeled by the material being, whatever its shape, which depends on past actions. By previous
conditions, this consciousness circularly embodies a material form until the realization of its awakening.
Material being is per se consequently produced by something that has a certain potential. This potential
is hidden by our actions. This provides a direction, obscuring what we have within. I feel as if at the
beginning we were a luminous globe, as if we were sparkles of light coming from it, took a shape, then we
got lost in their materiality, becoming dependent on sensations and perceptions, losing our origin.
Everybody has this potential, but we took a direction that obscures it. Consciousness carries us from life
to life, even if this is just a word of something intangible. Our energy depends on what we did and that
we carry from existence to existence” (Exp53)
Q78: “it comes from nowhere, otherwise it would have already been!” (Exp60), and “doesn't make any
sense cause there always has to be something before” (Exp59). More explicitly, other participants state
how “It sounds absurd to define the origin of consciousness!” (Exp79) and “From where does emptiness
come?! (Laughs). Where does reality come from!? From nowhere, it’s the nature of reality itself, it cannot
exist nor it cannot not-exist” (Exp71)
Q79: “Every moment is caused by the preceding moment. You will never find a preceding moment that
comes out of nothing. Consciousness has as its only condition each preceding moment. It can’t be an
infinite regression because it didn’t come out of nothing. However, it doesn't mean that it's not changing
and becoming. Its origin is a co-emerging property” (Exp63) and “mind is beginningless, its origin is every
moment. Every moment we perceive things wrongly” (Exp67)
Q80: “from a previous moment of awareness (laughs). Its origin feels inherent. I can’t pinpoint its origin
or its end” (Exp65). Some participants enhance the felt-meaning of this lack of origin: “(very long silence).
There is this state of knowing. Simply being. It feels to be without an origin” (Exp64) and “This light is right
here, don’t know where it comes from” (Exp25)
Q81: “chronological time depends on the entropy of the universe; it is the thermodynamic time, after
Einstein’s geometrical time. Cause and effect occur in this time, which measures the ignorance of
humankind. The question of origin exist only because we believe time is absolute, whilst it is not” (Exp68)
Q82: “Emptiness of my own being, its manifestation has no intrinsic existence; everything is carried by
this illusion while it is a manifestation of our mind. Anything that manifests then leaves according to
causes and conditions. It is impermanent. There’s no real being. Even though I’m often confronted by my
ego” (Exp58)
Q83: “A succession, a blind succession that brings an evolution by chance... There’s nothing that pulls the
strings” (Nov99)
Q84: “It’s accidental; so many accidents can happen (laughs). Dinosaurs’ extinction was accidental,
humans are maybe going to die by their fault, but there’s no written destiny, it’s a mechanistic
coincidence, as the combustion of two molecules creates a third one. I believe in Darwinian adaptation”
(Nov90)
Q85: “I think that for human beings everything is planned: death. It’s about life and death, it is reassuring
to believe in a trajectory but maybe there’s not” (Nov36), and “A human being goes from birth to death”
(Nov34)
Q86: “We challenged any harmonious balance on Earth, by setting the goal of possessing, accumulating,
destroying, leading to a real extinction threat. Cultures that have been massacred such as Americans
Indians had this sense of balance, for example by asking forgiveness when killing a buffalo” (Nov104) and
“I see positive and frightening sides in our way of being. What can I do to contribute, feeling acting for
both others, and myself being part of a whole. It has never been so difficult for many animal species, at
the same time many people work to study and rescue them. I’m ambivalent, as I can see both sides”
(Nov38)
Q87 “We can learn much from other cultures and civilizations. Meditation came by people who traveled.
While countries close their borders, we all need to share and find some roots. There still are native people
who can teach us so much, also on the spiritual level. We have to live in harmony, without wars. There
are communities able to do so for some time, but there are always wars for primary resources. Is it
necessary that the more humans have to share the more they have to fight?” (Nov29)
Q88: “There have been developments in the way civilizations provided higher living standards as well as
technological knowledge, culture, science, and care to their members. So many positive things since the
cave dwellers, we managed many phenomenal prowess at technical levels: we are driving robots on Mars
right now, it’s a dream. There is undeniable progress. At the same time, moral standards are not adequate.
Maybe it is slower?” (Nov40)
Q89: “There are plenty of directions. We are as entrapped flies, if we don’t take a choice we are going to
run into circles, as a drunken boat. It is the moment we decide where we go and become captains of the
boat that is interesting, when we put effort in taking a direction” (Exp51)
Q90: “We pretend to be eternal, but we have to recenter now, fully enjoy the present, find a good balance
between ourselves and others to make it better for everybody. We’re not alone, everything we do is for
everyone. What matters is how we are going, the path not its end: take care, protect others, and ourselves
little by little, not big steps for the earth’s sake. These are not going to help” (Nov39)
Q91: “Awareness has a goal, being. Does being have a goal? No. If it has a goal or a direction, it's not open
anymore. Its qualities provide no direction either, as the quality of water of being wet is not a direction.
If you say awareness is open it also should be naturally altruistic, but I don't think it's directed altruistically”
(Exp65)
Q92: “we try to guide our mind and body to that door but we don't have control over it. If you want to
train your mind, you can try to find a direction. The main thing you can do is first to see your mind. The
more you become aware of it, the more you can try to help yourself not being stuck with that. The
purpose, in itself, we can say it is ultimately inexistent. What is the purpose of something that doesn't
have any inherent existence? That is why the mind is not endless, as it doesn't have a proper existence.
How can it have a purpose? It is logically impossible. Concepts do not bring anywhere… Why would you
try to understand things more deeply, to be happy right? To have a better life, to live in community, and
this is pragmatic. If you don't behave appropriately, what's the point of all that?” (Exp77)
Q93: “Emptiness doesn’t have direction, nor intention. It is pure wisdom” (Exp71) and “there’s no goal or
direction in itself. We are given by our karma. Then it depends if you follow a spiritual or religious path
then it can give a goal. However, life itself has no spiritual goal. It is just like it is, then we can give sense
to life or not” (Exp76)
Q94: “Mind doesn't have a beginning but it has an end. When the nature of mind is completely free, that
is the end. The mind does not end, it just gets transformed, maybe revealed. Because it's covered by all
the illusions but when we see all that, then the nature of mind can come out. Yes. You can call it
enlightenment, awakening from this sleep of ignorance (laughs)” (Exp67) and “There’s a goal. The goal of
truth of awakening of all beings to this consciousness, to the fact that there’s no separation between us
and others” (Exp72) and “By practicing, we try to follow the path to liberation and realization of true
nature of mind” (Exp50)
Q95: “I became Buddhist as I don’t believe in a God who’s freeing us from all this. It’s a big question. It’s
a bit magical, as humans we are sensitive, empathetic towards each other, and happier when there’s
compassion or when we are in love, progressing to help as many people as possible. Not to become a
better ecologist, but to find our foundation” (Exp54)
Q96: “a life is nothing with respect to time, a star is nothing with respect to distances. It is about harmony.
Being here to experience being in connection with others. If we eat plants and animals we should be
grateful to them. Why are we here on Earth, is there life elsewhere? Human collective life has already
passed through a lot… There has to be a meaning to it” (Nov29)
Q97: “It’s up to us to find the balance, acting in harmony with one’s self and with others at the same time.
As we all belong to something, we are connected” (Nov30) which means aligning and balancing one’s self:
“it is a whole, heartfelt body and mind. They have to be in osmosis with the social and natural
environment. Being is a whole thing composed by body, mind and heart. None of these parts prevail”
(Nov26)
Q98: “I would answer rather ethically. We have been trained in prizing, possessing and consuming rather
than being. Being is undoubtedly being able to stop and feel, being connected with the environment, with
children, rather than becoming a workaholic and consumerist, possessing. Being present” (Nov104)
Q99: “To be means to be alive. To make good use of this opportunity, being active, happy, joyful, and
clear-minded. Being in the present, knowing what you're doing. Being alive and knowing the fact that
you're alive. To be means to be here, present. For me (laughs)” (Exp75)
Q100: "we are strongly identified with this body, liking it or not, the spirit, the heart, the mental, all that.
But it’s always changing, and our knowledge, states of mind, and emotions are constantly changing. Being
is not one, something solid, but composed and dynamic. But we can adapt, there is the possibility of
welcoming change” (Exp56)
Q101: “Being is, whether we like it or not, having precise physical sensations and mental concepts. That's
being because it's something shaped that way that you can't stop. As a living human being, we cannot
remove experience, you can't stop thinking or seeing as far as you have eyes” (Exp69)
Q102: “Being it's just an illusion, a label. It's a concept we introduce to define aggregates. The combination
of forms, feelings, perceptions, volition, and consciousness, is impermanent, we label that as being, as ‘I’
but that thing doesn't exist on its own, there is no individual. We cannot find it anyway. It's like the chair,
I say this is a chair but the chair doesn't exist on its own, it's a piece of plastic with a piece of metal all
together. it's just a label, a practical way to define something. Therefore, that is not the ultimate meaning.
The ultimate meaning of being is empty. Empty of substance. But this being, this idea of I, comes from
ignorance and attachment because from ignorance we develop attachment and from this we have all
consequent factors. So being is suffering, I exist therefore I suffer (laughs). Any definition of being is a
label, a mental construction” (Exp59)
Q103: “Being manifests in a certain slot of space and time. But how it manifests, we have no answer with
that. And what precedes this manifestation we have no answer either. So, once we want to qualify being,
we need to bring in a qualifier. That qualifier is in this room. It exists (...) Knowledge and being are mutually
shaping our conceptions. But it's always dependent on our cultural context, on our framework of how we
see the world, we co-create reality. There is a primacy about the mind, but it doesn't mean that this
primary is perceiving reality as such. The universe per se is a being. Not saying it's not, it certainly is. But
being isn't what we define, being as a certain phenomenon with some properties. (...) when we talk about
being, it is a co-created phenomenon, a living being” (Exp63)
Q104: “from the experiential point of view, it's the nature of mind. It's who I really am if I look inside, in
meditation, I can experience this nature of mind. This is the ultimate truth, the basis of everything” (Exp67)
Q105: “Just being I think would be... Awareness. That's being, just being. Awareness. Then if being is
something, is when awareness identifies with something” (Exp65)
Q106: “Being means enjoying the harmony of senses and perceptions, being aware of them: the
immediate fact of being, moment by moment. Being aware of what we feel, feel the joy of this possibility
of being, here and now. I believe in our spiritual being, our soul, the coming back to a non-individuated
incarnation. This enjoyment of my senses is what allows my awareness of being here and now” (Nov32)
Q107: “Having a certainty about that question, having an answer, is just a concept that I'm going to be
able to apply to a question that is itself a concept, to a problem that isn't directly connected to the reality
of the moment. I'm going to invent a concept with things I've heard, things I remember, sensations,
understandings to which I refer, and with that I'll put together a kind of answer and say ‘plop,’ that's where
it comes from! But even that thing is just a kind of bubble of concepts translated into words that will
answer a question. I don't really have an answer to that. If I knew, maybe the universe would stop; I don't
know (laughs)” (Exp69)
Q108: “For me, being a living being means any functioning linked to biology, everything that enables us
to develop and grow. To be, for a human being means social relations, sharing and mutual aid, as well as
all the destructive aspects that can be associated with this human being. This ambivalence of positive or
negative behavior, of mutual aid or opposition. Then there is the biological, physiological dimension. I'm
quite amazed at how a living being functions” (Nov 82)
Q109: “If you want to train your mind, you can try to find a direction. The purpose, in itself, is ultimately
inexistent. What is the purpose of something that doesn't have any inherent existence? That is why the
mind is not endless, as it does not have a proper existence. How can it have a purpose? It is logically
impossible. Concepts do not bring anywhere… Why would you try to understand things more deeply, to
be happy right? To have a better life and this is pragmatic. If you don't behave appropriately, what's the
point of all that?” (Exp77)