Taking Personality to the Next Level:
What Does It Mean to Know
a Person?
SIMINE VAZIRE and ROBERT WILSON
Abstract
What does it mean to know a person? In his famous article, McAdams (1995)
addresses this question from the perspective of personality psychology and
concludes that personality traits are “the psychology of the stranger.” To really
know someone, you need to know more than just how they typically think, feel,
and behave on average (a common definition of traits). You need to know how
their thoughts, feelings, and behaviors change depending on their role and context,
why those fluctuations occur (the underlying motives and causes of those patterns),
and how they make sense of their own patterns over time (their life narrative).
In this essay, we argue that although there has been little empirical work on
within-person fluctuations in personality, the time is ripe to examine these patterns.
New technology has made it possible to quantify momentary thoughts, feelings,
and behaviors, and to track the contextual factors that underlie these fluctuations
(i.e., “personality signatures”). By capturing individual differences at this dynamic
level, we can gain a better understanding of how people differ from one another.
This will also open the door to new research questions, such as investigating the
amount of insight people have into their own and others’ personality signatures.
“We are sometimes as different from ourselves as we are from others.”
Francois de La Rochefoucauld
INTRODUCTION
P T P S
ERSONALITY RAITS AND ERSONALITY TATES
When we describe what people are like, we often begin by talking about their
general tendencies. For example, we might describe Sally as an agreeable
person and Tricia as a disagreeable person. These trait descriptions allow
us to easily describe Sally and Tricia’s past behavior and anticipate their
future behavior. Furthermore, we can use these broad individual differences
to predict a wide range of outcomes such as occupational success and divorce
Emerging Trends in the Social and Behavioral Sciences. Edited by Robert Scott and Stephan Kosslyn.
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN 978-1-118-90077-2.
2 E T S B S
MERGING RENDS IN THE OCIAL AND EHAVIORAL CIENCES
(Barrick & Mount, 1991; Karney & Bradbury, 1995; Ozer & Benet-Martinez,
2006).
However, people vary quite a bit around these average tendencies. Sally
may be agreeable most of the time, but surely she has moments when she
interrupts others or acts unkind. Although these fluctuations are usually
treated as noise in personality trait research, they are themselves an individ-
ual difference. Indeed, we can think of Sally’s fluctuations on agreeableness
as a part of her personality. Perhaps Sally is typically agreeable but fluc-
tuates a lot, whereas Tricia is consistently disagreeable. Focusing on the
within-person fluctuations in personality states does not contradict the fact
that there are also stable individual differences at the trait level.
Fleeson (2001, 2004, 2007) has proposed a very elegant way of conceptu-
to Fleeson’s density distribution approach to personality, personality traits
(e.g., Sally and Tricia’s average levels of agreeableness) are summaries of
each person’s more nuanced density distribution of states. That is, Sally’s
trait level of agreeableness (high) is the mean of her state agreeableness. But
the full distribution of Sally’s states gives us a much richer picture of Sally’s
personality—we can see that her personality states range all the way from
low agreeableness to high agreeableness (although the latter state is much
more common than the former for Sally). In contrast, Tricia’s trait level of
agreeableness (low) is basically all we need to know to discern what she
is like on agreeableness—she does not fluctuate much around her typical,
pretty disagreeable state.
Fleeson’s empirical work shows that most people exhibit almost all levels
of a given trait at some point during a typical week. Most of us have
0.5
0.4
0.3
emit
fo
Sally
Tricia
0.2
0.1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Low Level of agreeableness High
Taking Personality to the Next Level: What Does It Mean to Know a Person? 3
some agreeable moments and some disagreeable moments. However, there
are very robust individual differences in our average states—some of us
consistently experience agreeable states much more often than disagreeable
states, and others show the opposite pattern. Moreover, these individual
differences in average states are stable from week to week—someone who
experiences mostly agreeable states 1 week is likely to do so the next week.
The same goes for other traits (e.g., extraversion, neuroticism, etc.).
By conceptualizing personality traits as density distributions of states, we
can get closer to McAdams’s ideal of knowing not just what a person is like
on average but also understanding the dynamic ways in which they fluctuate
over time and across situations. Knowing the shape of a person’s distribution
of personality states provides more nuance than just knowing their trait level,
and provides the opportunity for even further understanding. Specifically,
once we know how much people fluctuate around their global traits, we can
investigate the causes of those fluctuations.
FOUNDATIONAL RESEARCH
P S
ERSONALITY IGNATURES
The brute fact that Sally is sometimes very agreeable and at other (rare) times
quite disagreeable is valuable information about Sally’s personality in itself.
However, it raises other questions. For example, what causes Sally to vary
on agreeableness? Can we predict these fluctuations based on Sally’s role,
her mood, or her environment? These are the kinds of questions that moti-
vated Mischel and Shoda to develop the Cognitive Affective Personality Sys-
tem (CAPS) model of personality (Mischel & Shoda, 1995). In CAPS, Sally’s
unique pattern of cause and effect is her “if … then” contingency, or her per-
sonality signature.
This model takes us another level deeper in our understanding of person-
ality. The goal is not just to describe how much people’s personality states
fluctuate, but to explain those fluctuations. Some of the fluctuations may be
caused by similar triggers for most people. For example, most people are
probably more agreeable when they are with people they like compared to
when they are with people they do not like. To the extent that a person’s
“if … then” contingencies are driven by universal triggers, that does not
really give us much information about how people differ from one another.
However, some personality triggers are probably idiosyncratic. Perhaps
Sally is more agreeable around people she knows well, whereas Tricia is
more agreeable (to the extent that she is ever agreeable) around strangers.
These unique “if … then” contingencies are what constitute a person’s
unique personality signature.
4 E T S B S
MERGING RENDS IN THE OCIAL AND EHAVIORAL CIENCES
According to the CAPS model, the influence of external triggers on person-
ality states is mediated by cognitive and affective processes. That is, Sally’s
cognitive and affective reaction to strangers (vs close others) is what explains
her drop in agreeableness. Thus, the entire dynamic system, from external
triggers to mental processes to behavior, is what constitutes a person’s per-
sonality. As such, to fully understand a person, you need to understand not
just their global traits and their density distribution of states but also the trig-
gers that predict their fluctuations and the cognitive and affective processes
that explain these patterns. This idea is not unique to CAPS. In addition to
McAdams, many other personality theorists have argued that understand-
ing people’s idiosyncratic reactions to different situations is fundamental to
capturing their personality (Allport, 1937; Lewin, 1936; Magnusson & Endler,
1977).
E R
MPIRICAL ESEARCH
So far, most of the work on personality signatures has been theoretical
(Allport, 1937; McAdams, 1995; Mischel, 1973, 2004; Mischel & Shoda, 1995,
1998, 1999). There is very little empirical work examining personality beyond
global traits (cf., Fournier, Moskowitz, & Zuroff, 2008; Shoda, Mischel, &
Wright, 1994). Fleeson has pushed the field into new territory by docu-
menting that most people vary quite a bit around their average states (i.e.,
traits), and that this within-person variation is itself a fundamental aspect
of a person’s personality. However, the research has pretty much stopped
there. The next frontier for personality research is to empirically examine the
patterns that may be hidden within these density distributions—personality
signatures. Here, we review some of the fundamental questions that need to
be addressed.
What Are the “Active Ingredients” of Situations That Trigger Fluctuations in Per-
sonality States? We know how to measure the “then” part of the “if … then”
contingency—the personality states (although we rely on the assumption
that the taxonomy of personality traits also applies to states, an assumption
that needs further examination; see Borkenau & Ostendorf, 1998). However,
there is very little consensus about the taxonomy of the “if” part of the
contingency—the situational triggers. What are the important dimensions
along which situations differ? Several researchers have suggested tax-
onomies or catalogues of situational variables that are meant to capture the
“psychologically active ingredients” of situations—the factors that affect
how people think, feel, and behave (e.g., Funder, Furr, & Colvin, 2000; Moos,
1973; Saucier, Bel-Bahar, & Fernandez, 2007). This is a good start, but more
exploratory research needs to be done, including research combining the
Taking Personality to the Next Level: What Does It Mean to Know a Person? 5
“if” and “then” halves of the personality signature, to identify which aspects
of situations can predict the variance in people’s personality states. This is
the first step in measuring personality signatures.
Do Most People Have Idiosyncratic Personality Signatures? Once we identify
situational triggers that explain fluctuations in state personality, we can
examine the extent to which these triggers are idiosyncratic or universal.
Are Sally’s fluctuations in agreeableness caused by the same triggers as
Tricia’s and everyone else’s? Fleeson’s results cannot directly speak to
this—even though most people vary quite a bit around their average states,
it is still possible that the same triggers account for the variance in each
person’s states. Many personality theorists firmly believe that this is not the
case—that Sally’s fluctuations are caused by different triggers (and different
cognitive and affective reactions to triggers) than are Tricia’s fluctuations.
This intuition is central to all idiographic approaches to personality, includ-
ing McAdams’. It is almost an article of faith in personality theory that you
cannot fully know a person without understanding her unique personality
signatures Thus, the next step for personality research in this area is to
empirically measure the idiosyncrasies of personality signatures.
What Processes Mediate the Effect of Triggers on Personality States? Once we
can identify people’s unique personality signatures, the next step in under-
standing the person is delineating the cognitive and affective processes that
explain how the situational triggers produce variations in thoughts, feelings,
and behaviors. This step involves going from simply describing people’s
patterns (e.g., Sally is less agreeable around strangers than around friends)
to explaining them (e.g., Sally feels anxious around strangers, which causes
her to act disagreeable). One empirical example of this type of research is
Downey’s work on rejection sensitivity (Downey & Feldman, 1996; Downey,
Freitas, Michaelis, & Khouri, 1998; Downey, Mougios, Ayduk, London, &
Shoda, 2004). These studies indicate that people high in rejection sensitivity
are more likely to interpret ambiguous information (e.g., a partner leaving
the experiment) as rejection and this cognitive interpretation leads to the
self-fulfilling prophecy, where rejection sensitivity ultimately leads to unsat-
isfying romantic relationships and dissolution (Downey & Feldman, 1996;
Downey et al., 1998). This is an example of moderated mediation, where the
trigger (i.e., ambiguous partner behavior) causes people high in rejection
sensitivity (i.e., moderator) to engage in the self-fulfilling prophecy (i.e.,
moderated mediator), which leads to negative relationship outcomes. More
research is needed to identify other such dynamic within-person processes
that account for individual differences in personality signatures. Ultimately,
6 E T S B S
MERGING RENDS IN THE OCIAL AND EHAVIORAL CIENCES
this research would help us not only to predict when people will fluctuate
from their global traits but also to understand why they do so.
CUTTING-EDGE RESEARCH
M A
ETHODOLOGICAL DVANCES
One of the main reasons that little empirical research has been conducted on
personality signatures is that there are important methodological obstacles
to such research. Idiographic approaches to personality require extensive
repeated measurements in order to obtain enough power to investigate
within-person processes. Furthermore, to study personality signatures, it
is necessary to measure both situational variables (i.e., potential triggers)
and personality states over time. In addition, people may not be consciously
aware of their triggers, their personality states, or both, and thus ideally
these would be measured both subjectively and objectively. Finally, these
variables should be measured in people’s natural environments in order to
have the best chance of capturing ecologically valid assessments of people’s
patterns of thinking, feeling, and behaving in response to the triggers they
encounter in their daily lives. Fortunately, new technological developments
make it easier and cheaper than ever to collect such data. Here, we describe
several methods that can be used to achieve these goals, and we give an
example of one of our ongoing studies that implements these methods
(Vazire et al., 2014).
Daily Life Studies: Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA). Daily life studies
have been around for over 100 years and come under a variety of names such
as diary methods, experience sampling methods (ESMs), ambulatory assess-
ment, and ecological momentary assessment (EMA). The common theme is
that these methods are conducted outside of the laboratory in approximately
real time, focus on systematically measuring the behavior, perceptions, envi-
ronment, and/or physiology of participants, and are assessed on repeated
occasions (Mehl & Conner, 2012). These methods provide remarkably rich
information about people but historically they have been very difficult to
implement (for a review, see Wilhelm, Perrez, & Pawlik, 2012). Fortunately,
the proliferation of smartphones and expansion of Internet access has made
the collection of daily life data much easier (see discussion in Miller, 2012).
For example, it is now feasible for researchers to conduct an EMA study
by writing a web questionnaire that can be accessed from any smartphone
or Internet-connected device. In a modern EMA design, participants can be
prompted by text or e-mail to log into a web questionnaire and complete a
report about their thoughts, feelings, behavior, and/or situation. It is possible
to prompt participants several times per day for several days or weeks and
Taking Personality to the Next Level: What Does It Mean to Know a Person? 7
ask them to give “status updates” of both situational variables (e.g., Did you
like the people you were with? Was it a familiar situation?) and personality
states (e.g., Did you act extraverted? Did you feel calm?).
In our ongoing study, over 400 college student participants have completed
EMA reports up to four times per day for 2 weeks. Our questionnaire asks
participants to report on their mood (11 items, e.g., “happy,” “lonely”), per-
sonality states (10 items, e.g., “rude,” “reliable”) and situation (13 items, e.g.,
“how much did you like the people you were with?,” “how deep/substantive
was the conversation?”). We enter participants into a lottery for each survey
they complete (which costs us about 22 cents per completed survey). Our
average response rate has been 52%, with 75% of participants completing at
least 15 of 56 surveys (M = 29.4, SD = 15.2).
Daily Life Studies: Electronically Activated Recorder (EAR). EMA provides valu-
able information about subjective experiences but this method is hampered
by the limitations inherent in any self-report measure, such as blind spots in
self-knowledge and consistency motivations (Paulhus & Vazire, 2007; Vazire,
2010). There is also a concern that self-reports of certain constructs (e.g., depth
of conversation) are so subjective that between-person comparisons cannot
be trusted without some form of external corroboration. Fortunately, tech-
nological advances are making it possible to passively collect a rich trove of
information about situations and behaviors that can act as a validation check
for EMA and potentially add complimentary information about if-then trig-
gers not captured by self-reports.
For example, our ongoing study incorporates the electronically activated
recorder (EAR), which is an iPhone- or iPod-based application designed to
record brief sound snippets from participants’ natural environment as they
go about their day. We ask our participants to clip an iPod Touch with the
EAR software to the outside of their clothing during the first week of the
EMA portion of the study. The EAR is programmed to record 30-s audio files
every 9.5 min, giving us over 700 audio files per participant. One benefit of
the EAR recordings is that they can be coded and recoded as many times
as desired. There is no established taxonomy of situations and the ability to
capture behavior broadly is highly desirable because the same audio files can
be used to test a range of behaviors depending on the hypothesis of interest.
Our team of research assistants is currently coding sound files on items that
parallel the EMA variables (e.g., personality states, depth of conversation) as
well as other variables that are unique to the EAR data (e.g., coding specific
behaviors such as laughing, apologizing, bragging). Taken together, the EAR
codings and EMA ratings gives us a multimethod repeated measures design
that is ideal for assessing common if-then personality triggers and distinctive
personality signatures.
8 E T S B S
MERGING RENDS IN THE OCIAL AND EHAVIORAL CIENCES
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
What are the most important questions that remain to be answered? One aim
of our current study is to examine the average within-person relationships
among the situation variables and the personality states. That is, on aver-
age, what do personality signatures look like for each situation–personality
state combination? For example, on average, are people happier when they
are having deeper conversations? The next aim is to examine individual dif-
ferences around this average within-person slope. That is, are there idiosyn-
cratic variations in these personality signatures? For example, is happiness
more contingent on depth of conversation for some people than others? From
there, we can examine moderators (e.g., which people show a stronger rela-
tionship between depth of conversation and happiness?) and mediators (e.g.,
is the association between depth of conversation and happiness accounted
for by self-disclosure?). This allows us to predict who will have what person-
ality signatures (moderators) and understand what internal processes might
explain these patterns (mediators).
We hope this project will lay the groundwork for assessing people’s
personality signatures, and that these methods can then be used to study
new basic and applied research questions. Here, we give a few examples of
research questions that we will be able to tackle once these methods have
been validated.
S - O -K P S
ELF AND THER NOWLEDGE OF ERSONALITY IGNATURES
A fundamental question that cuts across all subdisciplines of psychology
is how well do people know themselves (Vazire & Carlson, 2011; Vazire
& Wilson, 2012; Wilson, 2009). In the realm of personality, we now have
quite strong evidence that people have some insight into their global
traits, but also have important blind spots in this arena (Carlson, Vazire,
& Oltmanns, 2013; Vazire, 2010). However, very little is known about how
much self-knowledge people have about the dynamic aspects of their
personality. Do people know how much their personality states fluctuate?
Do they know the causes of those fluctuations? That is, do they know
their personality signatures? McAdams argues that to really know another
person, we must understand them at this dynamic level. The same can be
said of self-knowledge: for a person to really know herself would mean for
her to know not only how she is on average but also when and why she
deviates from her typical personality profile.
One intriguing possibility is that self- and other-knowledge of personality
signatures may be asymmetrical. The research on self- and other-knowledge
of global personality traits suggests that there are some traits the self can
judge more accurately than can close others, and some traits that close others
Taking Personality to the Next Level: What Does It Mean to Know a Person? 9
can see accurately but the self cannot. The same might be true of personality
signatures. For example, people might have good self-insight into what trig-
gers their fluctuations in neuroticism, but close others may be better at iden-
tifying the factors that trigger fluctuations in agreeableness (because agree-
ableness is more observable to others and perhaps less salient to the self).
Identifying the bright spots and blind spots in self- and other-knowledge of
personality signatures can help us understand the process of self-perception
and the function that self-insight and self-deception might be serving in peo-
ple’s everyday lives.
Moreover, once we know what aspects of their personality signatures peo-
ple tend to be unaware of, we can develop interventions to try to improve
self-knowledge in these areas. For example, if people tend to be unaware of
their idiosyncratic triggers for agreeableness, giving them feedback may help
them select the situations that bring out their desired levels of agreeableness.
To the extent that we can identify the mediators that explain why these trig-
gers cause fluctuations in personality states, we may even be able to intervene
in that process and help people break maladaptive patterns.
H D P I S S
OW OES ERSONALITY NFLUENCE THE ELECTION OF ITUATIONS?
So far we have discussed environmental triggers as if they are independent
drivers of personality fluctuations, but people actively navigate their world
and personality likely plays an important role in the selection of environ-
ments. Such an indirect effect of personality may help explain individual
differences in the presence or absence of certain triggers in daily life. For
example, an extrovert may attend more parties, and being at parties is likely
a situational trigger to act more extroverted. Untangling this reciprocal rela-
tionship presents exciting new opportunities for understanding dynamic
person-by-situation interactions.
H C R P S A R -W
OW AN ESEARCH ABOUT ERSONALITY IGNATURES BE PPLIED TO EAL ORLD
ROBLEMS?
Another exciting avenue for research on personality signatures is the poten-
tial application of this work in real-world contexts. For example, many men-
tal disorders are characterized by unique patterns of fluctuations in moods
or personality states (e.g., bipolar disorder). Developing better techniques for
assessing these patterns will help us understand these disorders better, and
may also help with treatment. For example, the methods described could
be used to identify people’s idiosyncratic triggers for manic or depressive
episodes, and people could be given empirical feedback about their own
unique triggers. The same could be done for other health and mental health
10 E T S B S
MERGING RENDS IN THE OCIAL AND EHAVIORAL CIENCES
problems (e.g., chronic pain, insomnia, social anxiety). This feedback could
then be used to help people select healthier situations or break unhealthy
patterns of “if … then” contingencies.
Similarly, research on personality signatures has the potential to be very
useful in organizational settings. One challenge in organizations is identify-
ing people who will thrive in various kinds of positions (e.g., leadership posi-
tions, high stress positions, etc.). For example, research suggests that there
are important individual differences in how people respond to high status
positions and winning verses losing (Mehta, Jones, & Josephs, 2008). Specifi-
cally, people with high testosterone levels who lose in a competition are less
likely to want to compete a second time but more likely to want to compete
if they win. On the other hand, winners and losers with low testosterone
do not differ in their willingness to compete a second time. This is an excel-
lent example of how understanding people’s personality signatures can help
predict context-specific behavior. Ultimately, this kind of research could help
people make better choices for themselves and their organizations, and max-
imize person-environment (or person-role) fit.
CONCLUSION
What makes a person unique is not just their global patterns of thinking,
feeling, and behavior but also the pattern of responses to external triggers in
theireveryday life. To know a person well requires moving beyond under-
standing the general tendencies and learning what “pushes their buttons.”
New tools provide a way to quantify fluctuations in thoughts, feelings, and
behavior with unprecedented detail and precision. Social scientists now have
the opportunity to study life as it is actually lived at the individual level in
order to better understand how people differ from one another. Examining
personality at this dynamic level will help move our field forward to a more
fine-grained and comprehensive understanding of personality. It is an excit-
ing time to be a social-personality psychologist.
DEFINING PERUVIANS AS A PROBLEM: ETHNIC PROJECTS AND RESISTANCE AT A
JAPANESE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
Robert Moorehead
College of DuPage
An earlier version of this paper was published in 2014 in Damunhwawa Ingan [Multicultural
from the conference “The Ins and Outs of Migration: Migration and the Life-World in Global
Asia,” held at the Catholic University of Daegu, Korea, in May 2014.
ABSTRACT
I argue that some Japanese elementary school practices, such as having foreign parents sign a
loyalty oath and repeatedly questioning the parents about their migration plans, constitute an
ethnic project that defines these parents as disloyal aliens who are unwilling to adapt to
Japanese cultural norms. In response, the foreign parents limit their willingness to assimilate.
Based on ethnographic fieldwork at a public elementary school in central Japan that has more
than 50 foreign children, the majority of whom are Peruvians of Japanese descent, I explore the
context of reception in the school, including teacher-parent relations, teachers’ expectations,
their complaints, and their questions about the parents’ commitment to living in the host
country. I ask what is the nature of the relationship between Japanese teachers and foreign
parents? How are school practices influencing the context of reception, and how is that context
impacting foreign parents’ sense of belonging in Japan? I conclude by discussing potential
impacts, including the reproduction of existing inequalities in this immigrant population.
KEYWORDS: Japan, Peruvians, immigration, education, ethnic project
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 2
In 1903, W.E.B. Du Bois famously asked of black Americans’ experiences of racial
subjugation in the United States, “How does it feel to be a problem?” (p. 1). This question
resonates more than 100 years later, in another country and on another continent, as we
examine tensions in the relations between native-born teachers and foreign parents at
Shiroyama Elementary School.1 This public school in central Japan has approximately 50
students from foreign families, many of whom are Peruvian. In this setting, school policies and
teachers’ actions call into question foreign parents’ motives for migration and their loyalty to
the host country. This reception creates an environment in which being foreign is seen as a
problem (Du Bois 1903; Lewis 2003). Across Japan, tens of thousands of foreign children are
attending public schools (MEXT 2013); however, foreign residents are less than two percent of
the Japanese population, and popular notions of Japanese identity position foreigners as
permanent outsiders in Japan. In this context, what is the nature of the relationship between
Japanese teachers and foreign parents? How are school practices influencing the context of
reception for foreigners, and how are foreign parents responding to this reception? Also, what
are the potential future impacts on inequality for these foreign groups?
Based on participant observation and interviews with parents, teachers, and
administrators, I explore the context of reception for Peruvian parents at Shiroyama
Elementary. I examine teachers’ relations with the parents, including teachers’ expectations,
complaints, and questions about Peruvians’ commitment to living in Japan. I highlight the
mechanics of how teachers are able to create social distance (Blumer 1958; Memmi 1968; Omi
and Winant 1994) between themselves and Peruvian parents through the use of an ethnic
1 In this article, informants’ names and place names are pseudonyms to protect informants’ identities.
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 3
project (Moorehead 2012, 2013; Omi and Winant 1994) that defines Peruvian parents as
disloyal aliens who are unwilling to adapt to life in Japan and who must prove their loyalty to
the host country. The concept of an ethnic project is a Japan-specific adaptation of Omi and
Winant’s (1994) racial project that foregrounds the role of ethnicity in teachers’ explanations of
the relationships between foreigners and Japanese. Omi and Winant (1994:56) define a racial
project as “an interpretation, representation, or explanation of racial dynamics, and an effort to
reorganize and redistribute resources along ... racial lines.” I use the term ethnicity, and not
race, to better fit the Japanese context, where notions of group membership extend beyond race
to include shared ancestry, culture, and nationality. This examination also reveals how the
teachers’ ethnic project may structure paths to future inequality by producing counter-
hegemonic resistance (Tsuda 2000; Williams 1977) by the foreign parents, who state they will
hold off on assimilating further until they receive greater acceptance as members of Japanese
society. This resistance, in turn, may fulfill the negative expectations of nativist teachers,
resulting in a cycle of hostility (Bonacich 1973; Takenaka 2004).
This tension between foreigners and the native-born has the added dimension that
many of these foreigners are Nikkeijin (foreigners of Japanese ancestry) who migrated from
South America to Japan with their Japaneseness as key part of their ethnic identity (Takenaka
2004, 2008; Tsuda 2003, 2010). The Japanese state has encouraged this perspective by
sustaining diasporic ties with ethnic associations in South America, and by creating a special
visa category only for the Nikkeijin and their family members (Takenaka 2004, 2008; Tsuda
2003, 2010). While ethnic return migration is often motivated by migrants identifying with the
ancestral homeland, such identification tends to weaken after migration as members of the
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 4
host society reject migrants’ claims to a shared ethnic identity (Fox 2007; King and Christou
2010; Takenaka 2014; Tsuda 2009). In the case of the Nikkeijin, such a reception reinforces their
status in Japan not as ethnic descendants who have returned to the homeland, but as gaijin
(foreigners, outsiders).
That these foreigner-native interactions are occurring at a local public elementary
school is important, as host-country schools are key sites for the integration of foreign families
into the host society. Positive parent-teacher relationships can encourage foreign parents’ trust
in the schools, facilitate their sense of belonging in the host society, and help foster more
consonant acculturation within foreign families (Kasinitz et al. 2008; Portes and Rumbaut
1996, 2001; Portes and Zhou 1993; Zhou and Bankston 1998). Parent-teacher relations can
also reflect the relations of power and domination that define immigrants’ status in the host
society (Jung 2004). When foreign parents do not meet teachers’ expectations of how a
(native-born) parent should act, teachers may blame the parents’ foreign status and push the
parents to prove their commitment to staying in, and adapting to, Japan. In response, the
parents recoil at being treated as outsiders and as lesser members of the school community.
Through these interactions, foreign parents are learning their place at the school and in
Japanese society. As members of a subordinate group, they are coming to expect
marginalization (Golash-Boza 2006:33); however, they are also resisting it.
FIELD SITE AND METHODS
Shiroyama Elementary School is located in the working-class district of Shiroyama, in a
city of 75,000 people in central Japan. Many of the district’s roughly 700 foreign residents are
South American Nikkeijin. Their migration to Japan was made possible by the Immigration
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 5
Control and Refugee Recognition Act of 1990, which created a long-term resident visa for
people of Japanese ancestry. Since the law’s passage, hundreds of thousands of Nikkeijin have
migrated to Japan from South America. By 2007, the number of South American residents had
peaked at nearly 394,000, up from only 3,600 in 1985 (Statistical Research and Training
Institute 2010). When able to find employment in Japan, the Nikkeijin are often in low-skilled
factory positions that provide no opportunities for advancement (Higuchi and Tanno 2003;
Takenoshita 2006; Tsuda, Valdez, and Cornelius 2003). Like labor migrants in many countries,
the Nikkeijin have few opportunities to transfer their skills to the broader labor market, as they
are held back by their limited command of the Japanese language and by discrimination, from
which Japanese law offers few protections (Gurowitz 2006).
Many of Shiroyama’s Peruvian families migrated as target earners who planned to
return to Peru after several years of work. They have since decided to settle in Shiroyama for
the foreseeable future, as their children have acculturated to life in Japan and speak Japanese
better than Spanish. However, the mass layoffs of foreign workers at the start of the global
recession in 2008 reminded the workers of their precarious position in Japan (Higuchi 2010).
By the end of 2012, the number of South Americans in Japan had dropped by 36 percent from
its 2007 peak, as more than 140,000 had left the country (Ministry of Justice 2013). This mass
exodus was accelerated by growth in the Brazilian and Peruvian economies, and by a Japanese
government payment to Nikkeijin to return to South America (Ministry of Health, Labour, and
Welfare 2009, 2012).
The migration wave back to South America has also reduced the number of foreign
students at Shiroyama Elementary School. In 2007, prior to the economic downturn, the
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 6
number of foreign students at the school had peaked at 56, out of a total student population of
roughly 800. In 2013, only 23 foreign students were attending the school. Nearly all of the
school’s foreign children are from Peruvian families, with smaller numbers of students from
Bolivia, Brazil, China, and the Philippines. Most were born in Japan, and all but a few attended
Japanese preschool or kindergarten prior to starting elementary school.
From 2005 to 2007, I conducted participant observation full-time at Shiroyama
Elementary. Funded by a Fulbright fellowship, I volunteered as a Japanese-Spanish interpreter,
translator, and assistant teacher. While taking ethnographic field notes, I interpreted during
parent-teacher meetings, translated messages and school documents, tutored in remedial
Japanese and mathematics, and led free Spanish classes on Saturdays. I also conducted
intensive interviews with Peruvian and Bolivian parents, and informal interviews with Japanese
teachers and administrators. I recorded and later transcribed these interviews, with a research
assistant performing the Japanese transcriptions. Since returning to Japan in 2011, I have also
made multiple trips to Shiroyama to interview foreign parents and children, meet teachers, and
visit the school. I coded the interview transcriptions and field notes using HyperResearch, a
qualitative software application, in order to sort the data into “various categories that organize
it and render it meaningful from the vantage point of one or more frameworks or set of ideas”
(Lofland et al. 2006:200)
In the following section, I examine the nature of parent-teacher relations in Japanese
schools and teachers’ complaints about Peruvian parents, including teachers’ view of the
parents as obstacles to their children’s assimilation. I also explore teachers’ use of written
oaths and tests when dealing with Peruvian parents, and the symbolic importance attached to
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 7
Peruvian families’ travel to Peru, before examining the impacts on Peruvian parents’
assimilation strategies.
PARENT-TEACHER RELATIONS IN JAPANESE SCHOOLS
Foreigners’ reception in the host society can vary from welcoming support to hostility
and exclusion, and this reception influences their path of assimilation. In host-country schools,
positive relations between teachers and foreign parents can positively impact immigrant
families’ adaptation to the host society (Kasinitz et al. 2008; Portes and Rumbaut 1996, 2001;
Portes and Zhou 1993; Zhou and Bankston 1998). In contrast, negative relations can spur
mistrust and resistance, expressed through reactive ethnicities and oppositional identities that
reject the values, norms, and identities of the host country (e.g., Portes and Rumbaut 1996,
2001; Tsuda 2000; Williams 1977).
Upon entering Japanese schools, foreign parents discover that Japanese teachers have a
broad authority to promote the welfare of their students (Moorehead 2007; Tsuneyoshi 2001).
This authority extends into the community, where teachers share “interlocking, overlapping,
mutually reinforcing responsibilities” with parents and neighborhood residents (White
1987:73). At Shiroyama Elementary, this collective role manifests itself in calls to former
students who now work at a local labor broker that places many foreign parents in nearby
factories. Teachers call upon these helpers to relay messages, to explain school practices to the
parents, and to help the parents request time off for school matters. As I note later, this act of
calling in the community also opens the door to involving others in families’ private matters,
and limits parents’ ability to challenge teachers. Teachers’ broad authority also reveals itself in
meetings with parents, as teachers ask about parents’ lives at home and work, their
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 8
employment status, and even the names and relationships of the people living in their home.
They also ask foreign parents how long they intend to stay in Japan, and their plans for visiting
their home country. Teachers justify these inquiries on the grounds that such details are related
to the children’s well-being, and thus fall under the teachers’ purview.
In the classroom, professional norms dictate that teachers should treat all children
similarly, including having teachers act as if they do not see differences between foreign and
Japanese children (LeTendre, Hofer, and Shimizu 2003; Moorehead 2012, 2013; Shimizu 1992,
2001; Shimizu et al. 1999; Tsuneyoshi 1996, 2001). Within this model, teachers are
discouraged from openly expressing concerns in class about their students or parents, lest they
appear to not be treating students equally. Instead, teachers vent those concerns outside the
classroom, in meetings with parents and in children’s renrakuchō (a notebook used for sending
messages home). The discrepancy between teachers’ positive and inclusive front-stage
performance (Goffman 1963) inside the classroom, and their more negative treatment of
foreign outside the classroom, reveals how teachers construct the ethnic project that defines
the parents as disloyal aliens who are unwilling to adapt to life in Japan.
One such instance occurs when Hikaru, a Peruvian boy in the first grade, brings hierba
(Peruvian tea) to school in his thermos. As Japanese schools often do not have drinking
fountains, students routinely bring a thermos to school. School rules dictate that the thermos
may contain only water or unsweetened tea, however Hikaru’s teacher, Sasaki-sensei, mistakes
hierba for sweet lemon tea. After scolding Hikaru in class for bringing the drink, Sasaki
handwrites a three-page note to his mother, in large, bold characters, admonishing her for
supposedly violating school rules.
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 9
I am writing you because, no matter how many times I ask you, you do not
follow the rules. Today Hikaru had a drink in his thermos that tasted like lemon
tea. … As I told you before, please put only water or tea in his thermos. Please
do not give him sweet drinks.2
In the same note, Sasaki also reprimands the mother for paying her monthly school fees by
giving her son cash. Sasaki later dismisses the mother’s reply that she does not know how to
arrange for bank transfers in Japanese, and, even if an interpreter were to accompany her to the
bank, her lunch break from work is too short for her to travel to the one bank branch the
school requires parents to use for the transfers.
QUESTIONING PERUVIANS’ COMMITMENT TO LIVING IN JAPAN
In situations like Hikaru’s, teachers treat foreign children as potentially able to
acculturate to Japanese norms. In contrast, they treat foreign parents as resisting adapting to
life in Japan and as obstacles to their children’s successful assimilation. These divergent
approaches reflect differences in the teacher-student and teacher-parent relationships. The
teacher-student relationship positions children as malleable and receptive to teachers’
guidance; however, the teacher-parent relationship treats the parents like finished products
who should already know their role. Thus, when foreign parents send their child to school with
an unfamiliar type of tea, or with an envelope filled with cash, teachers can complain that the
parents are not learning or fitting in. This view of the parents also appears in a tale that the
school’s interpreter, Kitagawa-sensei, frequently shares. In the tale, Kitagawa finds a foreign
student distraught and crying because her father had said that he hated Japanese people
(Nihonjin kirai). The girl’s ethnicity and grade level change each time Kitagawa tells the story;
2 All translations in this paper are my own.
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 10
however, the depiction of the father’s supposed hatred for the Japanese remains constant, and
positions him as a barrier to his daughter’s otherwise smooth assimilation in Japan.
Oaths and Tests
Teachers’ general distrust of foreign parents further reveals itself in two recurring
issues: the school’s oath requirement for foreign parents, and teachers’ repeated questioning of
parents’ future migration plans. The written oath (seiyakusho) was implemented to address the
supposed problem of foreign parents not committing to following school rules.3 The oath lists
11 general school rules, including contacting the school when children would be absent or late,
having children walk in their assigned groups to and from school, making their children study
at home, and paying monthly school fees on time. Every year, foreign parents sign the oath,
affirming “To the principal of Shiroyama Elementary School, I want to enroll my child in the
school. I affirm that I will respect the school rules, and in the event that I violate the rules, I
will respect the school’s decision.” There is no Japanese version of this oath, because, as one
teacher claims, the Japanese parents already know to follow these rules—even though teachers
have to call Japanese homes almost daily to check on unexplained absences.
Teachers praise the supposed efficacy of the oath in changing foreign parents’ behavior;
however, the causal impact of the oath is unclear, as parents were asked to sign a poorly legible
photocopy of a handwritten Spanish oath that contained grammatical and spelling errors. The
school also has no Portuguese, Mandarin, Tagalog, or English versions of the oath, perhaps due
3 Tsuneyoshi (2001:132) notes the use of a similar document in a 1991 guidebook for foreign parents at another
public school in Japan. There is a historical precedent for the use of oaths in the postwar treatment of resident
Koreans in Japan. Parents who wished to enroll their children in Japanese public schools were required to sign an
oath that read “Upon enrolling our child in this school, we will agree to abide by Japanese laws and never to burden
the school with the cost of our child’s education. If we breach this agreement, we will not object to our child’s
expulsion from the school” (Sakuma 2006, as quoted in Kanno 2008:16).
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 11
to the predominance of Spanish speakers among the school’s foreign population. Nonetheless,
some teachers refer to the oath when problems or misunderstandings occur, complaining that
parents are not keeping their promises to follow the rules (yakusoku wo mamotte kurenai).
Extending this logic, teachers contend that parents who do not keep their word on small
matters, like calling the school when their child is absent, cannot be trusted to commit to
something larger, like assimilating into Japanese society.
In addition to using the oath, teachers also question parents about their future
migration plans. Nearly every parent-teacher conference starts with teachers asking whether
the families are returning to Peru or staying in Japan. With few exceptions, parents consistently
answer that they are planning to remain in Japan. The only trips to Peru, parents explain, will
be “de visita” (for a visit). Each year several families travel to Peru during the school’s winter
break. During these trips, parents visit relatives not seen for years, and children see their
grandparents, sometimes for the first time. The high cost of these trips limits families to
traveling about once a decade, with some families having never visited Peru since arriving in
Japan more than 20 years ago.
As with many migrant groups traveling back to their home countries, Peruvian parents
see these trips as important opportunities to instill a Peruvian identity in their children. Many
of these children feel more connected to Japan than Peru, to the point of seeing themselves as
ethnic Japanese. In trying to instill a Peruvian identity, the parents seek to protect their
children from the disappointment they themselves experienced when they were treated in
Japan as gaijin and not as Japanese descendants (cf. Takenaka 2004, 2008; Tsuda 2000, 2003).
Parents also hope that travel to Peru will counter the cultural distance between them and their
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 12
children, as their children acculturate to Japanese norms and Japanese becomes the children’s
primary language.
In public, teachers are supportive of the trips, saying that family ties are important.
However, in private, teachers react as if the trips were a betrayal and represented parents’ lack
of commitment to living in Japan.4 This resentment can be seen in comments made by
Watanabe-sensei, who asks me why Makoto, a student in his class, had left school to travel to
Peru. “What do they do when they go back? … Live regular lives? Are they playing?” I tell
Watanabe the story Makoto’s mother had shared with me, that they had not visited Peru for
ten years, that her father, whom Makoto had never met, would not live much longer, and this
was the family’s last chance to visit Peru for many years. While I feel I am telling a sad, moving
story about long-distance family separation, Watanabe seems dissatisfied and unhappy that the
families would go back to Peru.
Is that so. The nationality for over there is something that’s really important to
them, isn’t it. They came here to earn money. … I wonder what they’re doing. I
thought they were simply going back to their hometown, but somehow, to say it
badly, they go there to play and then they come back, and then here they work,
and then they go back there to play. That’s a bad way of looking at that lifestyle.
I don’t really think that’s very good. They have different reasons, but, that’s
what I think.
Watanabe does not frame his concerns in terms of impacts on students’ academic performance,
as some teachers do. Rather, he describes a life of circular migration, with Peruvian families
having no more commitment to living in Japan than to make money to send back to Peru,
where they will eventually return. However, that does not describe the Peruvian families in
4 100 years earlier, Nikkeijin in Peru faced a similar reaction when they tried to sustain ties to Japan. For Peruvians,
this constituted “an act of betrayal and a sign of anti-Peruvian militancy” (Takenaka 2004:87).
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 13
Watanabe’s class. Makoto is a strong student, outperforming some of his Japanese classmates,
and his family has expressed their commitment to permanently residing in Japan.
Despite parents’ consistency in describing their long-term plans, teachers often doubt
the veracity of parents’ statements. “What do they want to do? I don’t know what problems
they’re having,” complains Yoshida-sensei.
[T]hese South Americans, do they want to go back over there, do they want to
stay here, there’s no expression of their intentions, none at all. How should we
teach them? For example, are they here temporarily to work and then they’ll go
back? Then it’s not necessary to teach them the Japanese language or Japanese
education. They can come to school and make friends with the Japanese kids,
but no, if they’re going to stay in Japan, then they have to study. And go to high
school and a university. That path and thinking about the future, somehow, they
only partially hear it. I haven’t had a slow and careful conversation with them
about it. How should we deal with it, what advice do we give, I don’t know.
Other teachers share Yoshida’s frustrations, complaining that they are unsure whether to teach
foreign children kanji (Chinese ideographs), or to focus more on lessons that could be useful in
Peru, such as mathematics. Thus, in asking parents about their migration plans, teachers are
both questioning parents’ commitment to living in Japan and seeking clarification of their role
in teaching the children. In contrast, parents worry that the school is reproducing their
marginal status by tracking their children into less rigorous work because teachers think the
children will leave the country. Thus, parents do not discuss any uncertainty in their future
plans, and they plead with the teachers to teach their children more Japanese.
Calling in the Community
When foreign parents do not comply with teachers’ efforts, some teachers resort to
contacting others in the community for assistance. As noted previously, contact between the
school and community members is not unusual (Moorehead 2007; White 1987). School
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 14
policies prohibit teachers from sharing confidential information; however, some teachers
violate these policies by discussing families’ private matters with employers and others in the
community. In one instance, Kitagawa-sensei telephones the employer of Hikaru’s mother to
request that the employer investigate Hikaru’s comment that his mother is pregnant.
The child, Hikaru, says his mother is pregnant. Now, the father isn’t there, and
Hikaru is a first-grade student, so this is a school matter. Is she getting married,
is she getting divorced, that kind of thing, it has to do with the child. This is
important, and I want information.
Based on a teacher’s claim that Hikaru had once said he was hungry, Kitagawa also asks the
employer to look into whether the mother is abusing her son by not feeding him. Despite
teachers’ claim that they are involving people in the neighborhood because they have a shared
responsibility in raising the children, during my fieldwork teachers only took this step when
dealing with foreign children. Hikaru’s mother also describes these calls as spurring gossip
among co-workers in the factory. “The things that reach the office, everyone in the factory
knows them. Whatever happens, everyone knows about it,” she explains.
IMPACTS ON PERUVIAN ASSIMILATION
Involving the community in these matters usurps Peruvian parents’ authority over their
children, and reinforces the teachers’ position of power over the parents. The parents are
further restricted by the fact that they cannot enroll their children in a different public
elementary school. Hemmed in by limited language skills, calls to their employers and
neighbors, and the inability to change schools, parents acquiesce. Some have challenged
teachers and loudly questioned their treatment of foreigners, however these exchanges have
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 15
merely reinforced the parents’ outsider status. “There’s nothing you can do about it. You have
to keep gambateando (fighting),” says Hikaru’s mother in a mix of Spanish and Japanese.
Here, I can’t speak [Japanese], I don’t even have the chance to say that I don’t
like the teacher, how she treats the kids, because I don’t know the language,
one, also because I can’t change schools because I live in Shiroyama, so I have to
take [my son] to that school. There’s nothing I can do about it. So, as they say, I
have to put up with it.
In conversations and interviews, Peruvian parents openly discuss their bitterness over
how teachers treat them. Like the teachers’ discourse about the foreign parents, the parents
mainly talk about the school in negative terms. The parents’ position as outsiders to their
children’s Japanese education, and their heavy reliance on the school for preparing their
children for life in Japan are recurrent themes in this discourse. Nonetheless, parents feel the
responsibility to adapt falls more on them than on their children. Angelica, the mother of a
child in the sixth grade, explains:
Comparing it to your own country, it’s so different, and sometimes so
ridiculous. … We just have to adapt, because they [the children], it’s not that
they have to adapt, ya son (they already are) [Japanese]. We’re the ones who have
to adapt, the parents, because they’re already there, they see things as if that’s
the way they really are.
Despite feeling this pressure to adapt, parents are distrustful of the school, unhappy with their
children’s academic progress, and unsure how to raise concerns or make changes.
Parents also connect their treatment at the school with the broader challenges of
integrating into Japanese society. Juan, a father of two school-age children, notes the barriers
that Peruvians face in gaining greater acceptance and integration in Japan:
For example, what I see in the factory, the highest position you could get is
leader. Leader of who? The Japanese? No. Leader of the foreigners, foreigners
like Brazilians, Paraguayans, and others. But here I can’t achieve more, I’m never
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 16
going to achieve more. I’m never going to be a permanent [employee]. So that
whole situation, it’s not resentment toward the Japanese, because my father and
mother were Japanese, if they weren’t I wouldn’t be here. But it’s … more that
the Japanese need to be more open toward foreigners ….
In response to this perceived lack of openness, parents are resisting by assimilating more
selectively. This involves learning what they think they need to know to live in Japan, such as
gaining basic language skills and understanding the education system so they can prepare their
children, while setting limits on that assimilation. Juan states that without an environment of
acceptance and inclusion, he and his wife, Lucía, avoid trying to further integrate into Japanese
society. Instead, he says that they have just “semi-adapted”:
What we do is, we haven’t gotten used to it, we’ve semi-adapted. Semi. … My
wife and I are more included, semi-included, in Japanese society than others.
Why? Because of our physical features and our last name [which are Japanese].
For Juan, this “semi-adapting” enables him and Lucía to claim a sense of agency by setting the
terms of their future assimilation. To the extent that Japan opens up to them, they will respond
in kind. However, until then, Juan says they have stopped assimilating.
Japan’s other major migrant group from South America, Brazilian Nikkeijin, have
responded similarly, by expressing a deterritorialized nationalism (Tsuda 2010) in which they
convey their Brazilian identity by wearing Brazilian-style fashion, dancing samba, and
displaying the Brazilian flag—activities few engaged in prior to migrating to Japan. Some
Peruvians also feel a renewed national bond and proudly don t-shirts emblazoned with the
name of their home country. However, even in Shiroyama where Peruvians are the majority of
the foreign population, the Peruvian flag is displayed infrequently. This may reflect the
ambivalence many Nikkeijin feel regarding their status in Peru, where their Peruvian-ness was
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 17
routinely questioned. Many note the irony that in Peru they were told they were Japanese and
not Peruvian, while in Japan they have been told they are Peruvian and not Japanese. Being
treated as outsiders in both countries weakens their sense of national belonging, leading one
parent to say the Nikkeijin do not have a homeland, but instead exist somewhere in the clouds.
Despite this pessimism, Peruvian parents are open to more positive relations in Japan, and
speak warmly about instances of Japanese adapting to their presence and to their culture,
including adopting the Peruvian custom of public displays of affection. They also praise other
Japanese schools where they feel they were better accommodated and made to feel welcome.
CONCLUSION
The parents’ strategy of holding out for greater acceptance by the Japanese might serve
as a psychic bulwark against a hostile environment in which being Peruvian is seen as a
problem (Du Bois 1903; Lewis 2003); however, this strategy is unlikely to facilitate integration
in Japan. As Tsuda (2000:68) notes:
The ethnic resistance of the nikkeijin does not produce any economic or political
benefits. On the contrary, it reinforces their socioeconomic subordination in
Japan by ensuring that they remain a culturally different and unassimilated
immigrant minority which will continue to be socially marginalized by the
Japanese.
This resistance also risks fulfilling the negative expectations of the teachers’ ethnic project,
which defines Peruvian parents as disloyal outsiders. In response, teachers are likely to present
renewed complaints, advancing the cycle of hostility (Bonacich 1973; Takenaka 2004) between
parents and teachers. However, Peruvian resistance is not only about socioeconomic goals, but
also about the role of ethnic difference in contemporary Japan (cf. Appadurai 1996:14). As Juan
notes, Peruvians seek inclusion and chafe at being only semi-included. Thus, asserting their
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 18
Peruvian-ness and holding back from trying to assimilate further is about seeking
“recognition,” which Lie (2008:80) defines as “a complex of attributes—love, right, and esteem—
that endow people with a sense of acceptance and acknowledgement” as full members of the
nation-state. This acceptance and acknowledgement also extends to recognizing the shared
humanity of Peruvians and Japanese (cf. Fanon 1967; Tsuda 2000).
Research has repeatedly shown that stronger, more positive ties between immigrant
parents and host-country teachers can promote more consonant acculturation in immigrant
families, and enable parents’ to feel greater trust and belonging in the new society (Kasinitz et
al. 2008; Portes and Rumbaut 1996, 2001; Portes and Zhou 1993; Zhou and Bankston 1998).
However, a more negative context of reception, in which being an immigrant is seen as a
problem, risks fomenting reactive ethnicities and oppositional identities (Du Bois 1903; Lewis
2003; Portes and Rumbaut 1996, 2001), as immigrants cling more strongly to a minority
identity, frame the host-country identity in negative terms, and reject mainstream host-country
values. The process of creating the disloyal alien defines the meaning of Japanese and Peruvian
identities in this relatively new inter-group relationship. Those meanings, in turn, influence the
relationship between the two groups (Moorehead 2012, 2013; Omi and Winant 1994:61). The
ethnic project has less to do with explaining ethnic or cultural differences than with a
dominant group creating social distance, and then using that distance against the groups it
want to distance itself from (Blumer 1958; Memmi 1968; Omi and Winant 1994). Examining
this process also reveals how the paths to unequal future outcomes are structured, as Peruvian
marginalization in Japan may inhibit the group’s academic and occupational mobility.
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 19
Peruvian parents remain open to the possibility of a more positive future in Japan, but
are highly skeptical that such a future will happen. They complain that real inclusion, not semi-
inclusion, is a two-way street (cf. Massey and Sánchez R. 2010:2), in which both immigrants
and members of the host society adapt to each others’ presence. First-generation Peruvians in
Japan continue to hold out for the Japanese to adapt. Selective assimilation can be a successful
assimilation strategy that allows immigrant families to draw on the resources of both
immigrant and host-country communities, and balance both cultures (Portes and Rumbaut
1996, 2001). However, achieving this balance is complicated by the fact that the second
generation has adapted to the point that many children self-identify as Japanese. As Angelica
notes, the children already are Japanese, at least in terms of culture and language.
Teachers’ negative treatment of the parents as disloyal outsiders in Japan may also be
structuring future paths to inequality, by encouraging Peruvian children to reject their parents’
ethnicity in favor of that of the host society (e.g., Kasinitz et al. 2008; Portes and Rumbaut
2001). This can be seen as Peruvian children cringe when their parents speak to them in
Spanish in public, and point out others as being Peruvian while seeing themselves as Japanese.
In so doing, the children may be simply following their teachers’ lead, as teachers question the
parents’ commitment to living in Japan and define being Peruvian as a problem. The
combination of children’s assimilation, the framing of Peruvian-ness as a problem, and the
parents’ resistance to further assimilation risks increasing generational dissonance within the
families (Portes and Rumbaut 1996, 2001). Parents try to keep this dissonance in check by
telling the children they are Peruvian and not Japanese, by speaking to the children in Spanish,
and by traveling back to Peru. Despite these efforts, the pressures on the children to assimilate
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 20
are strong, particularly in Japanese schools, where ethnic minority students are often pressured
to blend in and avoid standing out in the classroom setting (LeTendre, Hofer, and Shimizu
2003; Moorehead 2012, 2013; Shimizu 1992, 2001; Shimizu et al. 1999; Tsuneyoshi 1996,
2001). This assimilative distance between the children and their parents may also exacerbate
the parents’ feelings of homelessness, as they find themselves in exile (Lie 2008), rejected by
both Peru and Japan and lacking the sense of belonging that comes from having a homeland.
These findings highlight the prospective nature of race and ethnicity by showing how
present-day social relations can lay the groundwork for unequal relations in the future. Thus
race and ethnicity are not pre-existing categories, but processes by which groups create and
maintain social distance (Blumer 1958; Memmi 1968; Omi and Winant 1994). Immigrants’
assimilation paths are shaped not only by the context of reception (Portes and Rumbaut 1996,
2001), but also by the relations of power and domination that define each group’s status in the
host society (Jung 2004). Understanding the processes by which each group’s status is
negotiated and defined, through racial and ethnic projects, can reveal the specific mechanisms
through which group categories are defined and resisted.
DRAFT - Please do not cite without permission of author.
Defining Peruvians as a Problem 21
TRAINING PROPRIOCEPTION AND TOUCH FOR
BALL HANDLING IN SPORTS
Angel Palacios
Working Paper
angel.palacios.orueta@gmail.com
angel.palacios@sport-sense.net
ABSTRACT
Having a good sense of touch and proprioception is essential for ball handling in ball sports.
Handling a ball requires the player to pay as little attention to the ball as possible in order for
him to be able to pay attention to the other players around him or to the circumstances of the
game. In order to do that, players need to develop their touch and proprioceptive senses and
their mental system for managing their peripersonal space. Two approaches are described
herein that allow players to train those senses to enhance their ball handling skills.
INTRODUCTION
Many of the activities performed by us rely on the automatic and instinctive control of our body.
An area where this is particularly important is sports, particularly ball sports. For example, when
a soccer player is handling the soccer ball and has to go past several opponents, he needs to pay
as little attention to the ball as possible in order to be able to pay attention to where the
opponents are and anticipate their intentions. The same happens in other sports such as
basketball, handball, hockey (where rather than a ball there is a puck) and others. In these
circumstances, the player needs to control the ball in a way that is as automatic and instinctive
as possible.
As Stephan Curry explains in an interview to CSN about his training methods with Brandon
Payne: “When we are out playing, there are so many things you have to think about[...]. The last
thing you should be thinking about is where the ball is. [...] That should be second nature.”
(“Stephan Curry’s interview to CSN,” 2015)
The way to achieve this “second nature” ball handling is to train one’s instinct, namely the sense
of touch and proprioception and the command of the whole system that manages the
peripersonal space.
NEURAL BASIS
When a soccer player is handling a soccer ball around other players, touch allows him to feel the
contact with the ball. Proprioception allows him to feel his limbs and where they are located,
particularly the foot he is using at this moment of contacting the ball. By combining touch with
proprioception, the brain can identify the position where the ball is located and the direction
and speed that the ball will take after the contact.
Even when the foot is not in contact with the ball, the brain can keep track of where the ball is
located. This is achieved by brain maps that control the peripersonal space. The peripersonal
space is the space immediately surrounding the body, including the objects that exist in it
(Rizzolatti, Fadiga, Fogassi, & Gallese, 1997). These brain maps are supported by sensory
information that comes, mostly, from vision and touch. It is based on several types of neurons
that respond to the visual and or tactile stimuli created by an object that is located near the
body. Some of these neurons are monomodal and only respond either to visual stimuli or to
tactile stimuli (Graziano, Yap, Gross, & others, 1994). Others are bimodal and can respond to
both types of stimuli (Làdavas, Farnè, Zeloni, & di Pellegrino, 2000; Rizzolatti et al., 1997;
Wolpert, Goodbody, & Husain, 1998).
Training proprioception and touch and the system that manages the peripersonal space requires
training the neural paths that the brain uses to put those capacities into action. The problem
in ball sports is that when an athlete starts training his ability to ball handling, he often does it
while looking at the ball, besides touching it. That is, the player is relying both on the visual
system and on the proprioceptive/touch systems.
The reason this is a problem is that when two neural pathways can be used to perform an action,
the brain usually focuses on the easier one, thus leaving aside the weaker one (Doidge, 2007).
Because the visual path is the easier one in this case, the brain will not rely on the
proprioceptive/touch path as much and, as a result, it will not develop it as far as it could.
This would not be a problem if despite engaging the visual path the proprioceptive/touch system
would also be equally engaged nonetheless. However, there is evidence of the relative
independence between of the visual and the touch/proprioceptive paths. For example, M F S
Rushworth, Nixon, & Passingham (1997) found, working with monkeys, that if a given neural
area related to proprioception was damaged, the monkey would be able to reach the object if
it was seeing it, but not if it was not and had to rely on proprioceptive information. Conversely,
if it was the proprioceptive that was in good condition and it was the visual area that was
damaged, the monkey would not be able to reach the object when it was seeing it, but it was
able to do it in darkness when it was being guided by proprioceptive information. In other
experiment Rushworth, Ellison, & Walsh (2001) found that spacio-visual attention and motor
attention related to finger movement are handled by different neural areas.
Moreover, it has been observed, for example, that some hand related neurons respond to touch
if the person can see the area that is being touched, but that they barely respond if she cannot
see it. In contrast, shoulder or face related neurons have a greater response to touch (Làdavas
et al., 2000). Because hands are easy to see, the person relies on vision when using them, and
does not develop touch so much. On the other hand, the shoulder is rarely seen and the face is
never (directly) seen, so touch related neurons must be used directly more often, and therefore
they develop more.
In conclusion, all this suggests that in order to develop the neural areas related to proprioception
and touch, it is necessary to make sure that proprioception and touch are being used.
A way to develop a neural pathway that is in competition with another easier pathway is to block
the easier one, so that the brain is forced to use the path that needs to be developed. This
approached was used for example by Taub & Uswatte (2003) to create a novel rehabilitation
technique for certain types of motor deficits that are caused by stroke and other nervous system
problems. If the patient has problem moving one arm, the technique works by constraining
movement of the less affected arm by using means such a sling. When the patient’s brain
perceives that it cannot move the arm, it resorts to the neural paths that guide movement of
the affected arm and starts developing them again.
TWO CURRENT TRAINING APPROACHES
In basketball, Stephen Curry practices a training technique with Brandon Payne that shares some
basis with Edward Taub’s constraining based approach to rehabilitation. The goal of the
technique used by Curry is to develop the proprioceptive and touch pathways that will allow him
to handle the ball instinctively, without looking at it and paying conscious attention to it. In order
to do that, Curry is handling a basketball with one hand while, at the same time, is handling a
tennis ball with the other. The tennis ball is smaller than the basketball, so he must pay close
attention to it. As a result of this, he is forced to handle the basketball without looking at or pay
attention to it. To make the training deeper, Curry performs the drill while he is wearing a pair
of strobe goggles. Strobe goggles comprise liquid crystal glasses that switch rapidly between
transparent and opaque states, thus disturbing vision. This forces Curry to pay even more
intense attention to the tennis ball (“Stephan Curry’s interview to CSN,” 2015).
Another application which shares some traits with this one is the one developed by the company
Cognisens (Cognisens, 2015). Their goal is to help players develop cognitive skills for tracking
several players simultaneously during a match. For that, they have developed a computerized
3D multiple object tracking (MOT) activity in which several identical objects are moving on a
computer display. The player’s goal is to focus attention on some of those objects and keep track
of them as they mix with the rest of the objects. Their training protocol ads a physical task for
the player to perform while he is carrying out the MOT activity and paying attention to the
objects. The protocol gradually increases the difficulty of the physical task that the player
performs. At one point, the physical task will have the player paying attention to the objects in
the MOT while handling a hockey puck.
In contrast to Payne and Curry’s drill, this protocol has the direct goal of helping the user to
optimally learning the MOT activity, rather than learning ball handling. Cognisens incrementally
adds a physical task because they have found that if subjects are performing a physical task
when they start learning, their ultimate learning will be poorer (Faubert, Sidebottom, & others,
2012). This happens even with as simple a task as standing while doing the MOT learning. In
summary, rather than learning ball handling, Cognisens’ goal is help players learn multiple player
tracking while performing other tasks, as might be ball handling.
However, Cognisens’ protocol could also be interpreted in the reverse situation. By having the
athlete perform the MOT activity, his brain is forced to focus on it, and therefore must perform
the side physical activity using proprioceptive, touch and other instinctive resources, therefore
developing them.
NEW APPROACH: GAZE CONTROLLER
A new approach to train proprioception, touch and management of the peripersonal space is
based on a new product. This product is built upon a device that measures the direction of the
person’s line of gaze and affects it or gives some kind of feedback when it is directed to the
undesired way.
A way to implement the product is based on a pair of spectacles upon which several additional
devices are mounted. When combined, these devices can measure the direction of the person’s
can see normally. When he is trying to look at the ball, the lenses turn opaque and he cannot
see the ball.
(B)
(A)
player is looking downwards trying to see the ball, and the lenses are opaque.
the first device that is attached to the spectacles frame is a gyroscope (marked as ‘2’). This
gyroscope measures the angle that the spectacles form with the horizontal plane (or other plane
that might be taken as reference). When the user tilts his head to look down, the gyroscope
senses this tilt and if the angle goes beyond a given threshold, it can produce a reaction that will
be described later. The gyroscope only measures the inclination of the head, so if the user
merely rotates his eyes downwards, the gyroscope will not be able to sense it.
The second device attached to the frame is an eye-tracking system. This system comprises a pair
eyes, and which are connected to a software that tracks the direction of the eyes’ line of gaze.
In contrast to the gyroscope, this eye-tracking system only measures the gaze direction with
respect to the spectacles frame. If the user moves the head to look down but does so without
rolling his eyes in any direction, the mini-cameras will not notice it.
When both devices are combined, a measurement is obtained of the eyes’ line of gaze with
respect to a reference plane, such as the horizontal plane. Therefore, when the user looks down
to see a soccer ball or a basketball, the system can detect it.
The third device added to the frame is a pair of lenses for the spectacles frame. These lenses
(corrective or not) are made of a material, such as liquid crystal, that can be turned opaque or
transparent with an electrical stimulus. They have become well known in recent years because
they have been used to create this strobe effect glasses. This kind of glasses were mentioned
above in relation to the strobe glasses that Stephen Curry uses in his training. In the current
product, they are used so that when the user’s line of gaze is pointing in a direction that is not
appropriate, the lenses will be made opaque and therefore will prevent the user from seeing in
that direction.
1 1
2 2
4R
4R
4L 4L
3R
3L
(A) (B)
frame, an eye-tracker system that contains cameras ‘3’ for left and right eyes and
two lenses ‘4’ that are turned opaque when the user’s line of gaze is directed
downwards beyond a given angle. (B) The lenses ‘4’ have been turned opaque.
(Additional electronics necessary to make these elements work together is not
shown)
gyroscope and the eye-tracker device to measure the angle created between the user’s line of
gaze and the horizontal plane. When the user is looking down beyond a given angle (presumably
looking at the ball) the system turns the lenses opaque, so that the player will not be able to see
the ball. The result is that the user is obliged to handle the ball using touch, proprioception and
his system to manage the peripersonal space, thus developing those systems and their related
abilities.
In order to make the experience as natural as possible, the lenses might turn opaque gradually
in time. Or even, gradually along the vertical axis, making the bottom part more opaque than
the upper part, and even leaving the very top in a transparent state permanently. Furthermore,
rather than making the lenses opaque, it would be possible to block vision sufficiently, for
example by reducing their transparency level or, with a different technology, making the lenses
blurry.
An important issue is: Why have a system that prevents the player from seeing the ball rather
than just instructing the player to refrain from looking at it? The reason is that three problems
arise if the player just refrains from looking at the ball.
The first problem is that for the player to being careful not to look downwards, he must be
paying attention to himself. However, it has been found for better learning the player should
have an external focus of attention, not internal (McKay, Wulf, Lewthwaite, & Nordin, 2015;
McNevin, Shea, & Wulf, 2003; Wulf, Höß, & Prinz, 1998)
(A)
(B)
lenses ’4’ are transparent. (B) The line of gaze S defines an angle γ with
the horizontal plane R which is the sum of the angle β that it defines
with the frame plus the angle α that the frame defines with the
horizontal plane. This angle γ is considered to be beyond a given
threshold, and the lenses ‘4’ have been turned opaque.
The second problem is that by paying attention to where he is looking at, the player will be doing
two actions at the same time rather than just putting all his resources into one.
The third problem is that by reflecting on and paying attention to himself, the player might be
interfering with processes that work better when left alone (Beilock, 2010)
Moreover, if the player has been practicing looking at the ball for a long time since he started
training the sport, he will have become used to it, and therefore will have a strong tendency to
keep doing it instinctively. Therefore, it will be difficult for him to stop doing it, and he will need
to put a lot of attention for controlling that habit. Finally, it should also be kept in mind that
Edward Taub’s constraining based rehabilitation is based on constraining the patient to move
the less affected limb rather than on instructing him not to move it.
Different variations can be performed on the above described apparatus. It is possible to create
simpler versions by just adding a gyroscope or an eye-tracking system alone. Despite this would
have reduced functionality because it will only allow to sense head position or eye position, it
would be cheaper to build. Also, the apparatus can be built by appending lenses on a helmet or
any other head-worn device. The software and hardware necessary for the system to work can
be embedded in a small box that would be attached to the frame, or in a box that the person
would carry for example on a jacket which would be connected to the frame’s devices by a cable
or by radio waves.
Finally, it is possible to create an even more affordable, despite limited, version by using just a
frame and creating in shape in such a way that it does not allow the wearer to look downwards.
(A)
(B)
downwards and develop ball ‘feel’.
PERIPHERAL VISION
The described spectacles-based product provides two additional benefits regarding peripheral
vision. Peripheral vision is considered to be a key ability for sports that involve open activities
and the athlete has to react to a changing environment full of different sources of information.
For example, a football goalkeeper that wants to intercept effectively the ball has to be able to
quickly read the different signals sent by the different parts of the body of the adversary having
the ball plus the considering positions of the other players around him.
To see the role of peripheral vision it is important to consider the following. In general terms,
when the brain uses vision to extract information from a given scene, it does so by fixating the
eyes on one point of the scene (Rayner, 1998; Rayner, Schotter, Masson, Potter, & Treiman,
2016). When the eyes move from one point to fixate a different point to extract information
from it, the movement that is performed is called a saccade. A saccadic movement requires
approximately 40ms to be completed, and during this time vision is suspended in a process
called ‘saccadic suppression’ (Rayner, 1998; Rayner et al., 2016). Despite the perceived speed
with which the eyes move, performing a saccade to fixate a given point requires approximately
200ms of advance motor planning. That is, once the brain has perceived a stimulus, it needs
around 200ms to be able to organize the muscle movements that will fixate the eyes on the
source of that stimulus. One can easily get a feeling of this limit by trying to repeatedly move
the ayes between two different points to fixate those points.
However, a goalkeeper that needs to keep track of many sources of signals cannot simply rely
on moving eyes very rapidly to fixate from point to point because of two reasons which are
based on the above mentioned facts. The first reason is that, due to saccadic suppression, during
the time his eyes move, the player is functionally blind. In the hypothetical case that a player
was able to make 25 saccades in a second, he would not be able to notice anything from the
environment. The second reason is that due to the time needed to plan the motor actions
required for a saccade, he would only be able to fixate around 5 or 6 points per second.
As a result, it is considered that expert players rely on information that they gather from the
context by peripheral vision besides the one gathered from gaze fixation. However, this has been
difficult to prove experimentally. Moreover there is some apparently contradictory evidence
about this point. On the one hand, it has been found in some circumstances that expert players
perform less saccades than novice players, which leads to believe that expert players can extract
more information from each fixation. However, in other situations it has been found that expert
players perform more saccades than novices. This apparent contradiction might be due to the
fact that in some circumstances expert players are able to realize that they need to perform
more saccades while at the same time extracting more information from peripheral vision.
柳東賢
However, the jury is still out there on it (Ryu & , 2014; Williams, Davids, & Williams,
1999).
The benefits that the spectacle based apparatus provides for peripheral vision are two. First, it
allows the player to train peripheral vision while handling the ball on the pitch. Second, it allows
the sport scientist to learn about what role peripheral vision has on handling the ball.
This comes from the fact that the spectacles prevent the
user to fixate on the ball, but they allow him to gather
information about the ball via peripheral vision coming
through the bottom part of the lenses and through the
space that lies between the lenses/frame and the cheek,
In relation to training, if the player wearing the
spectacles needs to gather information about where the
forced to look forwards, the
vision, given that his eyes cannot look at the ball. His
player can see downwards
direct-vision path is blocked, so his brain must use this
using peripheral vision
indirect-vision path, developing his ability for peripheral
vision.
In relation to learning about the importance of peripheral vision, the device allows for comparing
the performance of player who can peripheral vision and those who cannot. This is done by
comparing ball handling between players for whom this
part is blocked with players for whom this part is open.
Furthermore, eye-tracking glasses are equipped with
means to record data while they are being used,
including data about where the user is looking at. This
facilitates to analyze players’ line of gaze and compare
those players that keep the line of gaze as low as
possible without turning the lenses opaque and those
who keep a line of gaze more parallel to the ground. The
assumption would be that those players keeping a low vision for investigation
purposes
line of gaze would be benefiting more from peripheral
vision on the ball.
NEW APPROACH: CONTINUOUS FOOTBALL
This application’s goal is facilitating the user to compress a great amount of practice to train his
neural systems devoted to “feel” the ball. Skill development requires both practice quality and
quantity (Van Mullem, 2016), and this approach is directed to increase both. It can be used while
wearing the gaze controller spectacles or without then. If not wearing the spectacles, the player
will still benefit from it because he will have to pay attention to certain stimuli that will make it
difficult for him to look at the ball.
Continuous Football can be put into practice in two different variations, as described below
Football Path
The first variation to this approach is based on arranging certain equipment along a given path
that the player must complete while keeping control over the ball. The equipment will force the
player to execute actions that will enhance his learning.
Let us take a quick look first to a very popular
drill for training skills. It involves zig-zagging
The problem with this drill is that the cones are
static, so the player knows beforehand what
move he will need perform. The player is
training the move, but he is not training the
decision to instantly executing it in response to
around static cones.
an external stimulus.
Football Path is a product that allows to
perform a similar drill but in a dynamical way. A
way to implement it is arranging equipment as
be moving along with the player and will
interfere in his path.
The player will then have to make the decision
to perform a reaction move without having had
time beforehand to plan it. The player will need
to be paying attention to the obstacles, so he
will develop his skills for handling the ball based
on ‘feel’.
some obstacles that appear dynamically.
A computer controls the obstacles, and
presents them in a way that depends on the
player’s skills and is optimal for his development. Two or more cameras are filming the drill and
specialized programs are analyzing the position of ball and player. The player wears some
markers on his clothing to facilitate this analysis.
Another way to implement
mechanical arm
A computer and two mechanical
arms move along two handrails.
The computer shows a cognitive
activity which requires the user to
respond by touch on the screen.
mechanical
The mechanical arm structure
arm
slides along at a defined distance
possible along a path while maintaining the ball far from
The player has to run as fast as
two mechanical arms. The left mechanical arm is open
possible while at the same time
and impacting on the ball.
keeping the ball sufficiently close
to him to prevent it from being impacted by a mechanical arm. The shorter the distance
ball has got too far away and the left mechanical arm has fired to impact on it.
As before, two or more cameras are filming the drill and specialized programs are analyzing the
position of ball and player. This position analysis is used to slide the computer at the right speed
to keep close to the user, and to evaluate whether the ball is close to a mechanical arm and, if
so, to fire the mechanical arms to impact on the ball.
This device forces the player to control the distance of the ball while he is running. This is a
critical part in a football match. Having the ball far from the feet allows to run faster, but gives
more opportunity to adversaries to steal it. Football start Lionel Messi is usually acclaimed for
his ability to run having the ball “glued” to his feet.
There are other ways to implement and use this product. In general, all of them the player will
have to pay attention to some stimuli while at the same time performing a football activity that
will help him to develop ball handling skills.
Football Treadmill
A second variation to implement Continuous Football is using equipment similar to the one
shown above but installing it together with a running treadmill.
A treadmill is a different environment than a football pitch and the biomechanics of running on
a treadmill is different from that of running overground. It has been found that running on a
treadmill involves a faster step cadence (Riley et al., 2008), and that sprinting on a treadmill
requires less energy (Frishberg, 1982).
However, treadmills provide some advantages for training skills. It is a much more controlled
environment which allows for a finer control of the training variables. Moreover, given that
running on the treadmill usually involves a faster step cadence, the player will need to touch the
ball more times per time unit and will have less time to prepare for it. Furthermore, because it
demands less energy from the runner, the player can spend more time training ball handling.
As in Football Path, there are different ways to set up the equipment to perform drills. The first
handling a football with his feet as if he was running on the pitch. Ball position can be measured
by different means, and in this case is measured by a set of lasers that emit several rays that are
detected by photoelectric sensors.
(A) (B)
sensors ‘2’ to facilitate training the instinctive handling of the soccer ball. (A) The ball is not in
the path of the photoelectric sensors, and the mechanical arm is at rest. (B) The ball is in the
path of the photoelectric sensors and the mechanical arm has been fired to intercept the ball.
In this setup, the computer display shows game situations in which the adversaries are farther
or closer to the treadmill user. Depending on where they appear, the user knows that he can
keep the ball at a larger distance or that he must keep it at a shorter distance. He then can decide
to run at an adequate speed that allows him to keep control of the ball. The computer is
synchronized with the mechanical arm so that depending on the distance at which adversaries
are located on the computer display, the computer moves the mechanical arm farther or closer,
and allows the user to keep the ball at larger or smaller distances. This helps the player not only
to learn to control the ball instinctively, but also to instinctively adapt to the circumstances of
the match.
11 shows how a sliding mechanical arm with no computer display can be used to put more or
less pressure on the player’s handling skills. An external computer slides the arm closer to or
farther from the player. The player would pay attention to the position of the dummy and would
be used to present moving obstacles to the player, as he runs on the treadmill. The player has
to avoid the obstacles as they move towards him while at the same time keeping control on the
user to move right or left to virtually dribble an adversary that might appear on the computer
display.
a computer is mounted on a sliding bar. It
handle the ball with more care, or farther mechanical arms are used as obstacles for
from him so that he can run faster. A the user to avoid them while keeping the
dummy allows the user to more clearly see ball under control.
the arm’s position.
A beneficial add-on for some of the manners in which this product can be implemented is an
automatic system to allow the player to automatically change the treadmill speed. Different
ways to perform this speed adjustment have been described in the literature (Kim, Stanley,
Curatalo, & Park, 2012; Minetti, Boldrini, Brusamolin, Zamparo, & McKee, 2003).
CONCLUSIONS
Athletes in ball based sports need to develop their touch/proprioceptive and peripersonal
management systems in order to be able to manage the ball instinctively while they are paying
attention to teammates and adversaries. Modern sport coaches such as Stephen Curry’s follow
training regimens that facilitate this development by having the athlete manage a ball while
simultaneously have his attention is directed elsewhere.
Two additional approaches have been described that allow to train these skills particularly for
football, but which are applicable to other sports as well such as basketball. The first one is based
on a spectacle apparatus that measures where the athlete is directing his gaze. When the line
of gaze is interpreted to be directed down towards the ball, the apparatus turns the spectacle
lenses opaque. Because of that, the player will automatically refrain from looking down and will
have to rely on touch and proprioception to handle the ball, thus developing those systems and
related abilities.
The second one is based on providing the necessary equipment for the player to continuously
perform a football task. This can be put into practice in two variations. In the first one, some
equipment is laid on a training field that forces the player to run and evading obstacles while at
the same time keeping control of the ball. In the second one, similar equipment is attached to a
running treadmill on which a soccer player would run while handling a soccer ball with his feet.
A computer can be added to the path or treadmill versions that displays a cognitive task for the
player to perform while he is running. In both cases, the system captures the player’s attention
and forces him to handle the ball relying on his touch and proprioceptive systems, thus
developing them as well. 
Journal of Research in Personality xxx (2016) xxx-xxx
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Research in Personality F
O ☆
Are fluctuations in personality states more than just fluctuations in affect?
a, ⁎ b a
Robert E. Wilson, Renee J. Thompson, Simine Vazire
University of California, Davis, United States
Washington University in St. Louis, United States
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Article history: People fluctuate in their behavior as they go about their daily lives, but little is known about the processes underlying
Received 3 October 2015 these fluctuations. In two ecological momentary assessment studiDes (Ns = 124, 415), we examined the extent to which
Received in revised form 11 May 2016
negative and positive affect accounted for the within-person variance in Big Five states. Participants were prompted six
Accepted 4 June 2016
times a day over six days (Study 1) or four times a day over two weeks (Study 2) to report their recent thoughts, feelings,
Available online xxx
and behaviors. Multilevel modeling results indicated that negative and positive affect account for most, but not all, of
the within-person variance in personality states. ImportantEly, situation variables predicted variance in some personality
Keywords:
states even after accounting for fluctuations in affect, indicating that fluctuations in personality states may be more than
Personality states
fluctuations in state affect.
Affect
T © 2016 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Situations’ P × S interactions
1. Introduction 1.1. State personality
Empirical evidence has confirmed that people fluctuate extensively In 1936, Allport and Odbert combed through the unabridged Eng-
in their behavior as they go about their daily lives (Fleeson, 2001; lish dictionary and identified 18,000 terms that could be used to “dis-
Heller, Komar, & Lee, 2007). Understanding why people fluctuate tinguish the behavior of one human being from that of another” (as
from one situation to another and how people differ in their patterns of
cited in John & Srivastava, 1999, p. 103). Importantly, Allport and
fluctuations is central to understanding the very essence of personal-
Odbert differentiated between terms that represented “generalized and
ity beyond personality traits (Allport, 1937; Lewin, 1936; Magnusson
personalized determining characteristics-consistent and stable modes
& Endler, 1977; Mischel & Shoda, 1995). Conceptually, it is use-
of an individual’s adjustment to his environment” (i.e., traits) and
ful to think of fluctuations in behavior over time and across situa-
terms that referred to “temporary states, moods, and activities” (i.e.,
tions as a density distribution of states, or a temporary way of be-
states; as cited in John & Srivastava, 1999, p. 103) and included only
ing, that centers around a stable mean that corresponds to personality
the former in their final taxonomy. In its early years, the field of per-
traits (Fleeson, 2001). However, some basic questions about the na-
sonality focused on distilling Allport and Odbert’s trait terms into a
ture of these within-person fluctuations in states remain unanswered.
useful taxonomy of traits (Cattell, 1943, 1944). Decades of empiri-
For example, to what extent can personality state fluctuations be ex-
cal work on this topic have led to a consensus that five superordi-
plained by fluctuations in state affect? Is being more neurotic than
nate traits (e.g., the Big Five) adequately capture the principal dimen-
usual anything more than feeling more negative affect than usual? Is
sions of personality along which people differ at the trait level (Costa
being more extraverted than usual more than feeling more positive af-
& McCrae, 1992; Goldberg, 1981, 1990, 1992), including some pro-
fect than usual? The goal of the present paper is to shed light on these
ductive debate about alternative trait factor structures (e.g., HEXACO,
questions in order to build a better foundation for future research ex-
Ashton, Lee, & Goldberg, 2007; the Big Six, Thalmayer, Saucier, &
amining within-person fluctuations in personality states. Specifically,
Eigenhuis, 2011). The focus on traits spurred a renaissance in person-
we examine whether the majority of fluctuations in people’s personal-
ality research and has provided a solid foundation for exploring more
ity states is explained by state negative and positive affect, or whether
complex phenomena (e.g., interpersonal perception, personality de-
there is meaningful variance in personality states remaining after ac-
velopment, personality and health, personality and relationships). Per-
counting for state affect.
sonality researchers have recently devoted increased attention to indi-
vidual differences in states that capture dynamic patterns of thinking,
feeling, and behaving (Fleeson, 2001; Fournier, Moskowitz, & Zuroff,
☆☆
Funding: The preparation of this manuscript was supported by a grant from
2008; Slatcher & Vazire, 2009).
the John Templeton Foundation to Matthias Mehl (44245) and two grants from
McAdams (1994) famously referred to global traits as ‘the psy-
the National Science Foundation to Simine Vazire (BCS-1025330, BCS-1125553).
The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not chology of the stranger’, and argued that to truly understand a person,
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or the John
we must understand his/her contingent, context-specific patterns of
Templeton Foundation. The funders had no role in study design, data collection
thoughts, feelings, and behavior (and, ultimately, their life narrative).
and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Prominent social-cognitive theories of personality also emphasize
⁎⁎
Corresponding author.
Email address: wilson@ucdavis.edu (R.E. Wilson)
0092-6566/© 2016 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
2 Journal of Research in Personality xxx (2016) xxx-xxx
that the essence of personality is not global, decontextualized traits, itive and negative affect. Below we review the literature on the associ-
but people’s idiosyncratic patterns of fluctuations, and the situational ation between personality and affect at the trait level, and then discuss
factors that trigger these ‘if… then’ patterns (Mischel & Shoda, 1995). whether we should expect to find similar associations between person-
ality and affect at the state level.
Yet there has been little research on how much of the fluctuation in
personality is at the dynamic, intrapersonal (i.e., within-person) level.
1.2. Associations between personality and affect: trait vs. state levels
Perhaps the most empirically well-supported social-cognitive
model of personality is Fleeson’s Whole Trait Model (Fleeson &
In this paper, we restrict our consideration of personality to the Big
Jayawickreme, 2015). This model combines the robust evidence for
Five in order to provide a broad, first pass at our research question.
individual differences in average global traits with the growing evi-
A great deal of research has examined thOe associations between the
dence that people also vary substantially around these averages. Ac-
Big Five personality traits and positive and negative affect at the trait
cording to this model, personality traits are best conceptualized as den-
level. The most intensively studied associations between personality
sity distributions of momentary states. Traditional trait measures cap-
and affect have been the associations between extraversion and pos-
ture the average of a person’s density distribution – the level at which
itive affect and neuroticism and negative affect (Charles, Reynolds,
a person typically falls. However, it is possible to examine the sit-
& Gatz, 2001; Costa & McCrae, 1980a; David, Green, Martin, &
uational and cognitive influences that explain why people fluctuate
Suls, 1997; DeNeve & Cooper, 1998; Diener & Lucas, 1999; Diener,
around their general tendencies, as represented by the mean of a den-
Oishi, & Lucas, 2003; DienerP, Suh, Lucas, & Smith, 1999; Fossum &
sity distribution. For example, Fleeson (2007) found that certain situ-
Barrett, 2000; Gross, Sutton, & Ketelaar, 1998; Izard, Libero, Putnam,
ational cues (e.g., anonymity, task orientation) could explain variation
& Haynes, 1993; Larsen & Ketelaar, 1989, 1991; Lucas & Fujita,
in personality states. If the causes of variance in personality can be ex-
2000; McCrae & Costa, 1991; Meyer & Shack, 1989; Rusting, 1999;
plained, it may lead to a better understanding of the processes underly-
Schutte, Malouff, Segrera, Wolf, & Rodgers, 2003; Spain, Eaton, &
ing personality structure and personality development. Individual dif- D
Funder, 2000; Suh, Diener, & Fujita, 1996; Watson & Clark, 1992).
ferences in the underlying causes of personality fluctuations may have
One meta-analysis found that extraversion correlated 0.37 with posi-
important explanatory power, both for predicting outcomes and mak-
tive affect (Lucas & Fujita, 2000). A separate review of the literature
ing sense of people’s seemingly inconsistent thoughts, feelings, and
found that traiEt neuroticism correlates strongly with trait negative af-
behaviors.
fect (r = 0.33–0.65; Wilson & Gullone, 1999).
Despite the theoretical importance of understanding within-person
Although fewer studies have focused on the other Big Five traits
personality dynamics, few empirical studies had examined this topic.
(i.e., agrTeeableness, conscientiousness, and openness), there is some
In the last decade, however, new methods and technologies have made
evidence that trait affect is related to these personality traits as well.
it easier to collect and analyze intensive longitudinal data on personal-
Watson and Clark (1992) found that, across four samples, trait neg-
ity states. The widespread use of smartphones makes collecting Eco-
ative affect correlated most strongly with neuroticism (r = 0.58), fol-
logical Momentary Assessments (EMA) of personality more conve-
lowed by agreeableness (r = −0.23), extraversion (r = −0.20), consci-
nient. A typical EMA study will prompt participants to report how
entiousness (r = −0.19), and openness (r = −0.13). Trait positive af-
they were acting, feeling, or behaving multiple times per day for a
fect was also related to all Big Five traits, correlating most strongly
number of days or weeks (Barrett & Barrett, 2001; Csikszentmihalyi
with extraversion (r = 0.58), followed by conscientiousness (r = 0.37),
& Larson, 1987; Hektner, Schmidt, & Csikszentmihalyi, 2007;
openness (r = 0.33), neuroticism (r = −0.29), and agreeableness
Hofmann, Baumeister, Förster, & Vohs, 2012). This approach pro-
(r = 0.21). In addition, other research has found that state conscien-
vides enough information to accurately estimate people’s density dis-
tiousness is positively associated with positive affect (Schutte et al.,
tributions of personality states (Fleeson, 2001). Alternatively, re-
2003). In sum, the pattern that emerges based on existing research is
searchers can use smartphones to passively collect EMA data. For
that trait affect is an integral component of all Big Five traits.
example, the Electronically Activated Recorder (EARR; Mehl,
There is some debate about whether the associations between trait
Pennebaker, Crow, Dabbs, & Price, 2001) provides an observer-based
affect and personality traits are strong enough to raise concerns about
ecologically valid measure of daily behavior that can be used to es-
discriminant validity (Costa & McCrae, 1980b; Larsen & Ketelaar,
timate density distributions of (acoustically-detectable) personality
1989). For example, should extraversion and neuroticism be reconcep-
states. However, before these methods can test fundamental questions
tualised as trait positive and negative affect, respectively? We do not
about dynamic personality processes, we must first ask some basic
hope to resolve this debate. Instead, we argue that this literature shows
questions about what we are measuring when we are assessing person-
that extraversion and neuroticism have a stronger affective component
ality states. C
than the other Big Five traits. This is also supported by Pytlik Zillig
One important possibility to consider is that fluctuations in per-
et al. (2002), who conducted an analysis of item content in Big Five
sonality states may merely reflect fluctuations in affect. For example,
measures showing that neuroticism had the largest proportion of af-
being more agreeable than usual could be entirely accounted for by
fect-related items, followed by extraversion and agreeableness.
feeling better than usual. Before attempting to understand and predict
What do these trait-level findings mean for the state-level associ-
within-person fluctuations in Big Five personality states, we should
ations between personality and affect? As we know from many other
examine whether these fluctuations can be accounted for by state pos
domains, we cannot extrapolate from the trait level to the state level
(i.e., commit the ecological fallacy). Two variables that are strongly
related at the trait level may have no association at the state level, and
EMA is often used interchangeably with the phrase ‘Experience Sampling
vice versa. For example, people who are more sociable (a facet of ex-
Method’ (ESM). However, ESM refers to repeatedly asking participant’s to
traversion) may also experience more positive affect (trait-level as-
complete self-reports whereas EMA is used more broadly to refer to any method
that collects intensive repeated measures (Mehl & Conner, 2011). The findings sociation), but people may not experience more positive affect when
presented in Section 3 are based on ESM data. However, we chose to use EMA in
our Sections 1 and 4 to remain inclusive of all intensive repeated methods.
Journal of Research in Personality xxx (2016) xxx-xxx 3
they are being more sociable (state-level association). There could be a personality. We then examined the proportion of within-person vari-
delayed effect of sociability on positive affect (or of positive affect on ance in personality states that could be accounted for by affect. Of
sociability), or there could be a third variable causing the association course, not all of the within-person variance in personality states is
at the trait level (e.g., popularity). Likewise, it is possible that agree- true variance, some of it is error variance. We took a conceptual ap-
ableness and positive affect are strongly linked at the state level, even proach to test whether the residual within-person variance in person-
though the association at the trait level is modest. This could happen ality states leftover after accounting for affect is valid variance (i.e.,
if, for example, those high on trait agreeableness are kind all the time, more than error). Specifically, we reasoned that if there was reliable
but those low on agreeableness are only kind when they are in a very within-person variance in personality leftover after controlling for af-
good mood (a state-level association that would be moderated by trait fect, it should be possible to find another within-person variable (e.g.,
agreeableness). a characteristic of the situation) that prediOcts within-person variance
Thus, we cannot assume that the associations at the state level will in personality states after controlling for affect. For example, if we
mirror those at the trait level. Instead, we must look to research that find that people are less extraverted when they are studying than when
directly examines within-person fluctuations in personality and affect. they are socializing, independent of their state affect, this suggests
Fortunately, recent work has begun to explore the within-person asso- that there are meaningful fluctuations in state extraversion that can-
ciations between affect and personality. Research using both experi- not be reduced to state affect. Because our studies contain EMA mea-
mental and Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) has found that sures of situational variables, we were able to examine whether includ-
people report being happier when they are acting more extraverted ing within-person situational vPariables predicted additional variance in
than when they are acting more introverted (Fleeson, Malanos, & personality states above and beyond positive and negative affect. The
Achille, 2002; McNiel, Lowman, & Fleeson, 2010). In addition, peo- specific relations among the situation variables and state personality
ple report feeling more state negative affect when they are acting more were not the main focus of these analyses. Rather, we simply used the
neurotic than when they are acting less neurotic (McNiel & Fleeson, situation variables we had available to test whether the within-person
2006). variance in personality states leftover after accounting for affect could
As with the trait literature, research on associations between state- be predicted by relevant situational variables. We describe how we se-
level personality and affect has largely focused on the relations be- lected the situation variables in the method and results sections below.
tween extraversion and positive affect and neuroticism and negative The searchEfor non-affective (i.e., situational) predictors of within-
affect. The only exception, to our knowledge, is research by Ching et person variance in personality states is a conservative test; even if
al. (2014) that examined the within-person associations between all there is valid within-person variance in Big Five states remaining af-
Big Five personality traits and affect (among other constructs) across ter accouTnting for affect, these particular situational variables would
five cultures. Across five samples, they found that positive affect co- not necessarily predict that variance. Nevertheless, we reasoned that,
varied positively with extraversion, agreeableness, openness, and, to if affect does not predict most of the valid within-person variance in
a lesser extent conscientiousness, and covaried negatively with neu- perCsonality states, situational variables should have a good chance of
roticism. They also found that negative affect covaried positively with predicting some of the remaining valid variance (Fleeson, 2007). On
neuroticism and covaried negatively with extraversion, agreeableness, the other hand, incremental validity claims may be susceptible to in-
sonality variables were entered simultaneously into one model (with affect) is measured imperfectly and observed variables are used (i.e.,
state affect as the dependent variable), making it difficult to draw con- the model assumes no measurement error in the control variables)
clusions about the associations between each personality construct and (Westfall & Yarkoni, 2016). Thus, if the situational variables account
affect. In addition, no study has assessed whether there is meaningful for state personality above and beyond state affect, these results should
variance in personality states remaining after controlling for state af- be interpreted with caution.
fect. The primary goal of the present study is to understand the nature
of personality states. One important step is to establish whether fluctu-
1.3. Present study ations in personality states are more than changes in state affect. Un-
derstanding the amount of overlap between state personality and af-
The goal of the present study is to test whether fluctuations in the fect will further our understanding of the nature of dynamic personal-
Big Five personality states are more than fluctuations in affect. When ity processes and open the door to other important research questions.
people are more extraverted, neurotic, agreeable, conscientious, and The present study is designed to quantify this overlap and examine
open than usual, is it more than feeling more positive or negative af- how it may differ for each Big Five domain.
fect than usual? We tested this by examining whether there was any
meaningful within-person variance in personality states remaining af- 2. Method
ter accounting for within-person variance in affect. Thus, we did not
take a hypothesis-testing approach but rather an effect estimation ap- We used data from two independent studies to test our research
proach. questions. For both studies, we report how we determined our sam-
Another aim of our study was to examine whether the amount of ple size, all data exclusions, and all measures examined as part of this
within-person variance in personality states explained by affect varies project (Simmons, Nelson, & Simonsohn, 2012). In addition, all R
across Big Five domains. Are fluctuations in some Big Five constructs code, data used in the results section, and details regarding other mea-
more strongly linked to state affect than others? Based on the evidence sures collected for the two samples are available on the Open Science
presented above, we expected that, among the Big Five, state extraver- Framework: osf.io/xrpjt). Although analyses from these two datasets
sion would be most strongly related to state positive affect and state have been published elsewhere (Bollich, Rogers, & Vazire, 2015;
neuroticism would be most strongly related to state negative affect at Solomon & Vazire, 2014; Wilson, Harris, & Vazire, 2015; Wilson &
the within-person level. Vazire, 2015), none of the results reported here overlap with any pub-
To test these questions, we collected EMA data on personality and lished work; all reported results are original.
affective states across two studies using different measures of state
4 Journal of Research in Personality xxx (2016) xxx-xxx
2.1. Study 1 the 11 am survey read: “From 10 to 11 am, how ‘reserved, quiet’ were
you?”). The surveys were emailed to participants at exactly 11 am,
2.1.1. Participants
1 pm, 3 pm, 5 pm, 7 pm, and 9 pm using Qualtrics, a survey design
Participants were undergraduate students at Washington Univer-
program. Text messages were also sent to participants’ cellphones at
sity in St. Louis who participated in exchange for either course credit
these times to remind participants to complete the surveys. The sur-
or monetary reward ($20 for a two hour in lab session and a one in
veys took 2–3 min to finish and could be completOed on a smartphone
15 chance to win an additional $50 for completing EMA surveys).
or any other device with access to the Internet.
The current sample (n = 124) is a subset of a larger study (N = 208),
Participants completed a total of 2809 EMA surveys. To ensure a
which only includes participants who completed the EMA portion of
high level of quality for the EMA data, a number of exclusion criteria,
the study. The EMA portion of the study was added after the study O
which were determined prior to analyzing data, were applied. Specif-
had been running for a semester, explaining the difference between the
ically, EMA surveys were excluded from analysis if: (a) a survey was
overall and EMA sample size. The participants (67% female) ranged
completed more than two hours after it was sent; (b) the participant
in age from 18 to 36 years (M = 20.1, SD = 2.3). Self-reports of eth-
indicated that they were sleeping during the hour block; (c) less than
nicity indicate that 54 (43.5%) participants identified as Caucasian, 24
75% of the items on the survey were completed; or (d) if the partic-
(19.4%) as Asian, 10 (8.1%) as Black, 5 (4.0%) as Hispanic, and 31
ipant gave the same response for 70% or more of the items. Based
(25%) did not report their ethnicity. Participants were recruited via the
on these criteria, 2351 surveys qualified for inclusion (84.1%). Of the
student Psychology Department participant pool and through flyer ad- P
130 participants who participated in the EMA portion, 124 partici-
vertisements.
pants completed at least one survey that met our criteria (mean num-
ber of surveys completed = 19.0, SD = 10.2).
2.1.2. Procedure and materials
Participants attended a two-hour lab session during which they
2.2. Study 2 D
completed a variety of tasks unrelated to the current research ques-
tions. At the conclusion of the in-lab session, the EMA portion of the
The data used for the Study 2 are part of the longitudinal Person-
study was described to the participants. EMA surveys were emailed
ality and Interpersonal Roles Study (PAIRS; Vazire et al., 2015). The
to participants six times per day for approximately six days, totalling E
data used in Study 2 are from the initial wave of data collection.
34 possible surveys. This repeated-measures design was implemented
to provide an ecologically valid measure of personality states and be-
2.2.1. Participants
havior as they occurred in approximately real time (Mehl & Conner, T
Participants in Study 2 (N = 434) were recruited from the Wash-
2011).
ington University in St. Louis student population. However, an ef-
The surveys included an adapted state version of the Ten Item
fort was made to recruit students outside of the Psychology Depart-
Personality Inventory (TIPI) to assess the Big Five personality states C
ment participant pool through flyer advertisements and classroom an-
(TIPI; Gosling, Rentfrow, & Swann, 2003). We also included two sin-
nouncements. The current sample (n = 415) includes participants who
gle-item measures to assess state positive and negative affect (e.g.,
completed at least one EMA survey that met our inclusion criteria (de-
“from 5 to 6 pm, how much positive (negative) emotion did you expe-
Escribed below). Participants (68% female) ranged in age from 18 to
rience?”). In addition, the surveys included 16 items assessing charac-
32 years (M = 19.3, SD = 2.0). They were paid $20 for the in-lab por-
teristics of the situation. To address our research question, we exam-
tion of the first assessment and entered into a lottery with the opportu-
ined the following six situational variables. We assessed whetherRthe
nity to win $100 for completing EMA surveys (odds of winning were
participant (1) was working (vs. doing something fun) (2) how much
1 in 10 if all EMA surveys were completed). Self-reports of ethnicity
s/he liked the people s/he was with (3) how much s/he wanted to be
indicate that 210 (50%) participants identified as Caucasian, 92 (22%)
in the situation, and (4) how much s/he cared about the impression s/
as Asian, 40 (10%) as Black, 59 (14%) as other, and 10 (2%) did not
he made (1–5 scale). Finally, we assessed the extent to which the situ-
report their ethnicity.
ation was (5) common/familiar to the participant, and (6) constrained
the participant’s behavior. Many of these situations parallel systematic 2.2.2. Procedure and materials
taxonomies of situations (e.g., Sherman, Rauthmann, Brown, Serfass, The tasks completed by participants in Study 2 were similar to
& Jones, 2015). However, we do not claim that these six situations the tasks completed by participants in Study 1. The first portion of
represent a comprehensive list of situations relevant to the Big Five. the study involved a two-hour laboratory session during which par-
Rather, these six situations were selected a priori because they seemed ticipants completed a variety of questionnaires and a series of other
likely to explain some variance in the Big Five after controlling for af- tasks unrelated to the current research questions. After the labora-
fect, which was the main justification for including them in the analy- tory session, participants were instructed on the EMA portion of the
ses. study. Participants were emailed surveys four times per day for ap-
Participants used a 5-point Likert-type scale for all responses. Par- proximately 14 days, for a total of 59 possible surveys per participant.
ticipants were asked to rate how they were thinking, feeling, or be- As in Study 1, text messages were sent to participants’ cellphones to
having during the hour just preceding when the survey was sent (e.g., remind participants when to complete the surveys.
U Unlike Study 1, the personality items were drawn from the BFI-44
(John, Naumann, & Soto, 2008). The shortened BFI scale was com-
prised of two items per construct taken from the original BFI-44, mak-
Qualtrics makes it difficult to specify the exact number of surveys sent to ing sure that each item (a) made sense at the state level; (b) assessed
each participant. Therefore, we added participants to a Qualtrics Panel once they
a different facet of the respective Big Five construct; (c) avoided dif-
completed the in-lab session, and each participant received EMA surveys six times
ficult vocabulary words, and (d) had a comparatively high item to-
a day until removed from the Qualtrics Panel on the seventh day. Therefore,
tal correlation (see Appendix A). The item stems were changed to
participants may have received a slightly different number of EMA surveys based
refer to the specific time period covered by the EMA survey (e.g.,
on the time of day that they finished the in-lab session or the time of day that they
“From 2 to 3 pm, how lazy were you?”) and responses were
were removed from the Qualtrics Panel on the seventh day of the study.
Journal of Research in Personality xxx (2016) xxx-xxx 5
given on a 5-point Likert-type scale. Unlike Study 1, the items used to 3. Results
measure agreeableness (i.e., ‘rude’ and ‘considerate, kind’) were only
assessed if the participant indicated that they were interacting with 3.1. Within- and between-person variance in personality and affect
others. Study 2 did not include EMA items for the Big Five construct
of openness. Thus, the EMA surveys in Study 2 measured personality To account for the nested structure of the data (i.e., EMA survey
states for four of the Big Five personality dimensions. responses nested within participants), all analyses were run using mul-
As in Study 1, we included two single-item measures to assess state tilevel modeling. Multilevel modeling estimates within- and between-
positive and negative affect (e.g., “from 8 to 9 pm, how much positive person effects simultaneously (Krull & MacKinnon, 2001) while ac-
counting for any missing data (Snijders & Bosker, 1999). We modeled
(negative) emotion did you experience?”). These affective items were
all MLM analyses in lme4, a package in RO(Bates, Maechler, Bolker,
added after the study began, and the first 55 participants did not com-
& Walker, 2014).
plete the state affect items. The surveys included 36 items designed to
Before testing our main research question, we first assessed the in-
measure the situational context and daily behaviors that occurred dur-
ternal consistency of the TIPI and BFI-short Big Five items used in the
ing the specified hour block. To address our research question, we ex-
amined the same six situations variables as in Study 1 with one addi-
item-level correlations for the Big Five ranged from 0.19 to 0.71, in-
tional situational variable: participants’ perception of their status rela-
dicating that, for some constructs, items hung together more strongly
tive to their interaction partner.
than for others. The TIPI andPBFI-short scales were designed to cap-
All responses were made on a 5-point Likert-type scale, except the
ture broad domains with two items and maximize validity, not create a
‘Studying/working’ item, which was a yes/no question in Study 2. Par-
scale with high internal reliability (Gosling et al., 2003). Therefore, we
ticipants were asked to rate how they were thinking, feeling, or be-
report the aggregated results for the Big Five based on the two items
having during the hour just preceding when the survey was sent (e.g.,
given that such composites can still be appropriate despite low internal
the 11 am survey read: “From 10 to 11 am, how ‘reserved, quiet’ were D
consistency (Gosling et al., 2003). Second, we assessed the proportion
you?”). The surveys were emailed to participants at exactly 12 pm,
of variance in personality states at the between- and within-person lev-
3 pm, 6 pm, and 9 pm using Qualtrics. Text messages were sent to par-
els. The overall variance is the sum of the between- and within-person
ticipants’ phones at these times as a reminder to complete the surveys.
The surveys took 3–4 min to complete and could be completed on a
portion of variance at the within- and between-person levels, we fol-
smartphone or any other device with access to the Internet.
lowed the procedure used by Church et al. (2013) to calculate an intr-
Participants completed a total of 15,563 EMA surveys. As with
aclass coTrrelation (ICC) and divided the variance at each level by the
Study 1, a number of exclusion criteria were applied, and these were
determined before analyzing the data. Specifically, EMA surveys were
sults are consistent with previous research examining the proportion of
excluded from analysis if: (a) a survey was completed more than three
witChin- and between-person variance in personality and affect (Church
hours after it was sent (the exclusion criterion differs from Study 1 be-
et al., 2013; Fleeson, 2001). Specifically, the results showed that there
cause the surveys were spaced further apart in Study 2); (b) the partic-
is more within-person variance than between-person variance (though
ipant indicated that they were sleeping during the hour block; (c) less
the within-person variance also contains all the error in each model),
than 75% of the items on the survey were completed; or (d) if the par-
and that the proportion of within-person variance in personality states
ticipant gave the same response for 70% or more of the items. Based
was as similar to the proportion of within-person variance in affect.
on these criteria, 11,540 surveys qualified for inclusion (75.0%). Of
the 434 participants who participated in the EMA portion, 415 partic-
3.2. How much of the variance in personality states can be accounted
ipants completed at least one survey that met our criteria (mean num-
for by state affect?
ber of surveys completed per participant = 29.7, SD = 15.2).
Next, we examined the extent to which fluctuations in personality
states can be statistically accounted for by fluctuations in affect. To
Proportion of variance in personality and affect at the within- and between-person level.
Measures Study 1 Study 2
Internal
consis n M SD Internal consis n M SD
Between- Within-
Level 1 Level 2 person person Level 1 Level 2 Between persons Within persons
Extraversion 0.63 2351 124 2.95 0.36 (26%) 1.00 (74%) 0.67 11,501 415 2.79 0.39 (26%) 1.12 (74%)
Neuroticism 0.71 2351 124 2.06 0.48 (0.39%) 0.73 (61%) 0.51 11,502 415 2.41 0.48 (36%) 0.86 (64%)
Agreeableness 0.19 235U1 124 3.68 0.40 (38%) 0.64 (62%) 0.20 9530 415 3.98 0.40 (42%) 0.54 (58%)
Conscientiousness 0.41 2351 124 3.64 0.41 (36%) 0.72 (64%) 0.24 11,501 415 3.62 0.46 (37%) 0.80 (63%)
Openness 0.29 2351 124 3.13 0.41 (36%) 0.74 (64%) – – – – – –
Positive affect – 2349 124 3.42 0.41 (33%) 0.85 (67%) – 9478 360 3.41 0.46 (35%) 0.86 (65%)
Negative affect – 2350 124 2.16 0.48 (37%) 0.83 (63%) – 9478 360 2.15 0.47 (34%) 0.89 (66%)
Note. Internal Consis = within-person association of the two items measuring each respective personality construct. Level 1 = measurement occasion within person. Level 2 = person.
All ratings were completed on a 1–5 Likert-type scale. Percentages shown in the SD columns reflect the proportion of variance at each level, with within- and between-person variance
summing to 100%. State openness was not measured in Study 2. State agreeableness in Study 2 was only assessed when participants reported that they were interacting with others.
State affect in Study 2 was added to the EMA assessments partway through the study, and so is missing for some participants. All other fluctuations in sample size are due to missing
data (i.e., non-responses).
6 Journal of Research in Personality xxx (2016) xxx-xxx
do so, we ran a series of multi-level models predicting each of the Because EMA items were answered on a 5-point Likert-type scale,
Big Five personality constructs from (a) positive affect; (b) negative an increase of one unstandardized unit represents a one-point increase
affect, and (c) positive and negative affect entered simultaneously. on this 5-point scale. For example, the results for extraversion show
All predictors were person-centered, and all models were random ef- that, on average, for every 1 unit increase (on a 1–5 scale) in positive
fects models (i.e., intercepts and slopes were allowed to vary), and affect, extraversion increased by 0.64 units in Study 1 and 0.61 units
we report parameter estimates with robust standard errors. Ideally, we in Study 2. Because these coefficients are unstandardized, it is inad-
would report standardized effect sizes that could be compared across visable to compare the magnitude of effects across rows (i.e., across
models. However, the standardization of within-person coefficients in models) as each personality state DV has a different amount of within-
multi-level modeling is more complicated than single-level multiple person variance. For example, extraversion has more within-person
regression because of the nested structure of the data. One option was variance than the other domains (see TableO1 for specific variance es-
to standardize across all completed surveys, but such an approach ig- timates). However, we can compare the coefficients (e.g., positive and
nores the hierarchical structure of the data, alters the variance com- negative affect) within a given row. Fig. 1 also shows a visualization
ponents of the model, changes the p-values slightly, and does not set of the relationship between positive and negative affect for each of the
the within-person standard deviation for each participant to 1.0 (Hox, Big Five constructs.
2010; Nezlek, 2012). A second option was to standardize within each In addition, although we cannot compare the coefficients across
from the model (Nezlek, 2012). Therefore, we have followed the most portion of variance explainedPby the different models. To do this, we
common recommendation of multi-level experts and reported the un- calculated how much of the variance in state personality (e.g., state ex-
Five personality construct was modeled as a function of positive af- ically, we modeled the respective and joint associations between state
fect, negative affect, and positive and negative affect, for Study 1 and positive and negative affect (IVs) and state personality (DV) for each
Study 2. The within-person relationship between personality and pos- Big Five construct.
itive and negative affect were examined using the following model: Finally, we assessed the proportion of variance explained using
2 2 2 2 2
marginal R (ER ) and conditional R (R ). The R indicates the
m c m
proportion of variance explained for only the fixed effects of the
model, whereas the R can be interpreted as the overall proportion
of explaTined variance when including the random effect estimates
(Nakagawa & Schielzeth, 2013; Sherman et al., 2015). The discrep-
2 2
ancy between R and R gives an indication of the variability ac-
m c
counted for by allowing slopes to vary across individuals. For ex-
ample, although the fixed effect (i.e., main effect) of positive af-
In this model, β is a random coefficient representing the inter-
0j
fect explains essentially no variance in conscientiousness (R = 0.01;
cept of state personality for person j across all completed EMA data m
Study 2: R = 0.01), the random effect estimates of positive affect ex-
points; β (PA) is a random slope coefficient representing the state m
1j
plain relatively large amount of variance in conscientiousness (Study
level within-person relationship between positive affect and each re-
2 2
1: R = 0.41; Study 2: R = 0.29). This suggests that positive af-
spective personality state; β (NA) is a random slope coefficient repre- c c
2j
fect accounts for 29–41% of the variance in state conscientiousness
senting the state level within-person relationship between negative af-
for each person, but the association between positive affect and con-
fect and each respective personality state; r represents the error term
ij 2
scientiousness differs across individuals, hence the low marginal R
in the model (Nezlek & Plesko, 2001). Time was not included in our
2 2 2
(R = 0.01; Study 2: R = 0.01). Despite the usefulness of R and
models because there was no theoretical reason to expect tRime to in- m m m
2 2
R , as with other measures of R , we do not know how much of the
fluence personality states or affect differentially. c
Within-person associations between state affect (IVs) and state personality (DV).
Positive affect Negative affect Positive (b ) & Negative (b ) affect
01 02
2 2 2 2 2 2
b R R b R R b b R R
01 m c 01 m c 01 02 m c
Study 1
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Extraversion 0.64 0.25 0.40 −0.29 0.05 0.19 0.64 0.00 0.25 0.40
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Neuroticism −0.33 0.10 0.46 0.46 0.18 0.55 −0.15 0.41 0.21 0.57
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Agreeableness 0.34 0.14 0.46 −0.32 0.12 0.44 0.24 −0.21 0.18 0.50
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎ ⁎
Conscientiousness 0.09 0.01 0.41 −0.10 0.01 0.27 0.05 −0.07 0.01 0.28
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Openness 0.36 0.12 0.41 −0.20 0.04 0.31 0.34 −0.03 0.12 0.41
Study 2
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Extraversion 0.61 0.19 0.32 −0.28 0.04 0.17 0.62 0.02 0.19 0.33
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Neuroticism −0.46 0.15 0.42 0.53 0.22 0.48 −0.25 0.41 0.25 0.52
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Agreeableness 0.18 0.05 0.42 −0.17 0.05 0.43 0.12 −0.11 0.07 0.45
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Conscientiousness 0.12 0.01 0.29 −0.06 0.00 0.28 0.11 −0.02 0.01 0.30
2 2
All variables were measured at the within-person level (Level 1). R = Marginal R indicates the proportion of variance explained for only the fixed effects of the model;
2 2
R = Conditional R indicates the overall proportion of explained variance when including the random effect estimates. All coefficients are unstandardized. All ratings were
completed on a 1–5 scale. All predictors were person-centered prior to analysis to control for between person variance in affect. All predictors were allowed to randomly vary.
⁎⁎
p < 0.05.
⁎⁎⁎⁎
p < 0.01.
Journal of Research in Personality xxx (2016) xxx-xxx 7
Fig. 1. The within-person associations between state affect and state personality. Note. The lines represent each participant’s assPociation between respective personality states and
positive affect (top row) and negative affect (bottom row), with the fixed effect displayed as the bold line in each spaghetti plot. Data from Study 1 (N = 124).
within-person variance in each personality state is true (vs. error) vari- spectively) are independent of each other – both state positive and
ance and therefore interpret these estimates with caution. state negative affect remain significant predictors of state agreeable-
ness when entered as predictors simultaneously. These results also
show that when both positive and negative affect are entered simulta-
3.2.1. Extraversion
neously, more variance is explained than when either is entered alone.
Consistent with previous research, we found that within-person
Affect explained a large proportion of the within-person variance in
fluctuations in state extraversion were strongly associated with fluc- E
state agreeableness (R = 0.50 and 0.45 in Studies 1 and 2, respec-
tuations in state positive affect. State extraversion was also associated
tively). Once again, the results are consistent across both studies de-
with state negative affect, but across both studies, this association be-
spite different items being used to measure state agreeableness, and
came negligible when positive and negative affect were entered si- T
once again, we cannot tell whether there is valid within-person vari-
ance in agreeableness leftover despite the high degree of overlap with
is, at the within-person level, state extraversion shares more unique
affect.
variance with state positive than negative affect. These results suggest C
that, to a large extent, state extraversion covaries within-person with
3.2.4. Conscientiousness
state positive affect – when people experience positive affect, they are
Our results for conscientiousness suggest the people, on average,
also likely to report being more extraverted. However, affect did not
do not tend to be more or less conscientious as a function of their af-
explain all of the within-person variance in extraversion (R = 0.40
fect. That is, the fixed effects (i.e., average slopes) between state con-
and 0.33 in Studies 1 and 2, respectively). These results are quite con-
scientious and state affect at the within-person level were quite small.
sistent across the two studies, despite different items being used to
However, this could obscure strong but opposing within-person asso-
measure state extraversion.
ciations, such that some people are more conscientious when they are
experiencing more positive affect whereas other people are more con-
3.2.2. Neuroticism R
scientious when they are experiencing less positive affect. This is con-
Consistent with previous research, we found that within-person
sistent with the conditional R coefficients which indicated that posi-
fluctuations in neuroticism are strongly associated with fluctuations
tive and negative affect explained a sizable proportion of variance at
in both state positive and state negative affect. The associations with
O the within-person level when random effects were included (Study 1:
negative affect were, descriptively, somewhat larger than with posi-
R = 0.28 and 0.30 in Studies 1 and 2, respectively). However, even
tive affect, but both predictors remained significant when entered si-
in the conditional models much of the within-person variance in con-
multaneously. Our results suggest that, to a large extent, state neuroti-
scientiousness remains unexplained after accounting for affect, and
cism covaries with state affect – when people experience more nega-
these results are quite consistent across the two studies.
tive affect and less positive affect, they are also likely to report being
more neurotic. Affect explained a large proportion of the within-per-
3.2.5. Openness
son variance in neuroticism (R = 0.57 and 0.52 in Studies 1 and 2,
Because we did not measure state openness in Study 2, the es-
c N
respectively). These results were consistent across both studies despite
timates for openness are based on the Study 1 sample. We found
different items being used to assess neuroticism. Because we do not
that within-person fluctuations in openness were associated with fluc-
know how much of the within-person variance in neuroticism is true
tuations in positive affect. State openness was also associated with
variance (vs. error), we cannot tell whether affect is accounting for all
state negative affect, but this association became much smaller and
the valid within-person variance in neuroticism, or whether there is
non-significant when positive and negative affect were entered simul-
some valid variance leftover, but in any case the amount of overlap
taneously as predictors. That is, state openness shares more unique
between state neuroticism and state affect is very high.
variance at the within-person level with state positive affect than
with state negative affect. Our results also show that the propor-
tion of variance in state openness that is explained by positive af-
3.2.3. Agreeableness
fect alone (R = 0.41) is very similar to the proportion of variance in
Our results for state agreeableness suggest that people are more
state openness that is explained jointly by positive and negative affect
agreeable when they are experiencing more positive and less negative
(R = 0.41). These results suggest that when people experience a lot
affect. These two associations (with positive and negative affect, re
8 Journal of Research in Personality xxx (2016) xxx-xxx
of positive affect, they are also likely to report being more open to new variance. Therefore, studying/working has the potential to predict state
experiences. However, some of the within-person variance in open- personality above and beyond.
ness remains unexplained after accounting for affect. Next, we needed to establish whether studying/working predicted
within-person fluctuations in each Big Five domain. We ran a se-
3.3. Is there meaningful variance in personality states leftover after ries of multilevel models predicting the Big Five states from study-
accounting for affect? ing/working (i.e., with no other predictors in the model). Again, in-
The results in Section 3.2 suggest that the state Big Five domains person fluctuations in studying/working were significantly associated
vary in the extent to which they are associated with affect at the with within-person fluctuations in all of Big Five states across both
within-person level. However, for all Big Five domains, a substan- studies (see first data column). SpecificalOly, when participants were
tial amount of within-person variance could not be accounted for by studying/working, they reported being less extraverted, less agreeable,
fluctuations in affect. It is important to know how much, if any, of more conscientious, more neurotic, and less open than when they were
the residual within-person variance in personality states is meaningful not studying/working. This suggests that we succeeded in identifying
(i.e., true) variance. An indirect (and conservative) way of testing this a situational variable that was associated with personality states.
possibility is to predict the residual variance with variables other than We ran a series of multilevel models predicting each Big Five
affect. personality state from positive affect, negative affect and studying/
We attempted to predict residual personality state variance using working—all entered simultanPeously, with all intercepts and slopes al-
situation variables that should exert a strong influence on college stu- that, in both Study 1 and 2, studying/working predicted extraversion
dents’ personality states and then tested whether these situation vari- and conscientiousness above and beyond what was predicted by af-
ables predicted fluctuations in Big Five states above and beyond what fect. The addition of studying/working as a predictor of conscientious-
was already predicted by affect. If the situation variables were sig- ness, along with positive and negative affect, increased the amount of
2 2
nificant predictors of within-person fluctuations in personality states variance explained by 7% in Study 1 (from R = 0.28 to R = 0.35;
c c
person variance in personality states leftover after accounting for state R = 0.34). HEowever, the addition of studying/working as a predic-
affect. We first identified, a priori, one situation variable that we rea- tor of extraversion, along with positive and negative affect, only in-
soned should influence a broad range of personality states: whether creased the amount of variance explained by 4% in Study 1 (from
2 2
c c
2 2
model predicted one of the Big Five personality states from positive (from R = 0.33 to R = 0.35). Study 1 found that studying/working
c c
affect, negative affect, and studying/working entered simultaneously. did not predict state neuroticism above and beyond affect, but Study
2 did find a significant association (b = 0.23, p < 0.001); however,
3.3.1. Studying/working the addition of studying/working as a predictor, along with positive
Before testing our key models that include studying/working, pos- and negative affect, only increased the amount of variance explained
2 2
itive affect, and negative affect predicting the Big Five personality for neuroticism by 2% in Study 2 (from R = 0.52 to R = 0.54), in-
c c
states, we needed to examine how studying/working was related to dicating a small to trivial effect. These results indicate that study-
state affect. For studying/working to serve our purposes, it should not ing/working does not explain much variance in states above and be-
be strongly related to affect. To test this, we ran two multi-level mod- yond affect for most of the Big Five personality states, except con-
els, predicting state positive affect and state negative affect (DVs) scientiousness (though it is important to remember that this model
from studying/working (IV). These results, which are presented in the assumes no error in our measurement of affect, and thus may over-
next section), indicate that studying/working and affect are weakly to Westfall & Yarkoni, 2016). This suggests that state conscientiousness
moderately associated at the state level, and do have some non-shared may not be merely a function of affect but can perhaps also be pre
Situation variables and the associations with state positive and negative affect.
Studying/working Liking others Want to be there Status Care about impr. Common/familiar Constraining
b b b b b b b
01 01 01 01 01 01 01
Study 1
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Positive affect −0.29 0.35 0.40 – 0.13 0.04 −0.24
⁎⁎ ⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Negative affect 0.15 −0.15 −0.26 – −0.03 −0.13 0.17
Study 2
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Positive affect −0.34 0.35 0.42 0.11 0.19 0.04 −0.20
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Negative affect 0.22 −0.22 −0.33 −0.03 −0.10 −0.09 0.17
All variables were measured at the within-person level (Level 1). All coefficients were unstandardized. All predictors were person-centered prior to analysis to control for between
person variance in affect. All predictors were allowed to randomly vary. Situational variables were the IV; affect was the DV. All variables were self-reported in the EMA surveys.
Studying/working was measured on a 1–5 Likert-type scale (“fun” vs. “work”, recoded so that 5 = work) in Study 1 and as a checkbox (0 = not studying/working, 1 = studying/
working) in Study 2. All other situation items were rated on a 1–5 Likert-type scale. Liking = liking one’s interaction partners; Want to be there = wanting to be in the situation one
is in; Status = having low (1) vs. high (5) status relative to one’s interaction partner; Care about impr = caring about the impression one makes; Common/familiar = how common/
familiar the situation is; Constraining = how much the situation constrains one’s behavior.
⁎⁎
p < 0.05.
⁎⁎⁎⁎
p < 0.01.
Journal of Research in Personality xxx (2016) xxx-xxx 9
Studying/working as a predictor of fluctuations in big five states.
presented in Tables 5 and 6.
Studying/working PA (b ) & NA (b ) & studying/
01 02
3.3.3. Predicting fluctuations in agreeableness
(b ) Working (b )
01 03
2 2 2 2
b R R b b b R R
01 m c 01 02 03 m c
being more agreeable when they (a) were interacting with others that
Study 1 they liked, (b) wanted to be in the situation they were in, and (c)
⁎ ⁎ ⁎
Extraversion −0.29 0.14 0.29 0.52 0.01 −0.14 0.27 0.44
cared about the impression they made. These effects became small
⁎ ⁎ ⁎
Neuroticism 0.08 0.01 0.34 −0.17 0.40 −0.03 0.20 0.59
but mostly remained significant once affect is included in the model
⁎ ⁎ ⁎
Agreeableness −0.11 0.04 0.35 0.23 −0.20 −0.01 0.17 0.52
(0.03–0.07), and the pattern appears robuOst across both studies. The
⁎ ⁎ ⁎ ⁎
Conscientiousness 0.10 0.03 0.28 0.18 −0.08 0.16 0.07 0.35
Openness −0.13 ⁎ 0.05 0.33 0.31 ⁎⁎ −0.04 −0.04 0.13 0.43 relative status of the people with whom they were interacting did not
Study 2
predict agreeableness. Despite the initial evidence that some of our
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Extraversion −0.50 0.04 0.17 0.59 0.02 −0.29 0.20 0.35
selected situations explained variance in state agreeableness, a com-
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Neuroticism 0.40 0.04 0.30 −0.22 0.40 0.23 0.26 0.54 R
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
Agreeableness −0.06 0.00 0.36 0.13 −0.11 0.02 0.07 0.45 c
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ pared to the R when only positive and negative affect were included
Conscientiousness 0.26 0.02 0.29 0.14 −0.02 0.31 0.04 0.34
All variables were measured at the within-person level (Level 1). R = Marginal
m P
model; R 2 = Conditional R 2 indicates the overall proportion of explained variance Within-person associations between situations, affective states, and agreeableness.
when including the random effect estimates. All coefficients are unstandardized. All
Liking PA & NA & Liking
predictors were person-centered prior to analysis to control for between person variance
in affect. All predictors were allowed to randomly vary. PA = Positive affect.
b R R b b b R R
NA = Negative affect. Situational variables and affect were the IVs, personality states 01 m c 01 02 03 m c
were the DV. Studying/working was measured on a 1–5 Likert-type scale (“fun” vs.
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
S1: 0.13 0.02 0.28 0.19 −0.26 0.03 0.18 0.51
“work”) in Study 1 and as a checkbox (0 = not studying/working, 1 = studying/working)
Agreeableness
in Study 2. ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
S2: 0.12 0.03 0.37 0.10 −0.11 0.06 0.07 0.44
⁎⁎ Agreeableness
p < 0.05.
Wanting Positive & Negative & Wanting
⁎⁎⁎⁎
p < 0.01.
b R R b b b R R
01 m c 01 02 03 m c
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎
S1: 0.18 0.07 0.38 0.22 −0.20 0.03 0.17 0.52
Agreeableness
dicted by relevant situational variables, specifically, whether a per-
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
S2: 0.13 0.04 0.42 0.09 −0.10 0.05 0.07 0.46
son is studying/working. The results for extraversion and neuroti-
Agreeableness
cism were small but provided some tentative evidence that variance
C Status Positive & Negative & Status
for these constructs may be explained by situations such as studying/ b R R b b b R R
01 m c 01 02 03 m c
S1: – – – – – – – –
working; however, the effects for agreeableness and openness pro-
Agreeableness
vided no evidence that studying/working influenced these personality
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
ES2: 0.00 0.00 0.36 0.12 −0.11 −0.01 0.07 0.45
states, beyond what was already explained by affect; these null results
Agreeableness
do not determine whether there is meaningful within-person variance
Impression Positive & Negative & Impression
in state agreeableness and openness remaining after accounting for af- b R R b b b R R
01 m c 01 02 03 m c
⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎
S1: 0.07 0.01 0.27 0.19 −0.26 0.04 0.19 0.50
fect.
Agreeableness
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎
S2: 0.11 0.02 0.39 0.10 −0.11 0.07 0.07 0.46
3.3.2. Other situation variables
Agreeableness
The analyses with studying/working were especially inconclusive
Note. All variables were measured at the within-person level (Level 1). R = Marginal
for agreeableness and openness. Studying/working not predicting fluc- m
R indicates the proportion of variance explained for only the fixed effects of the
tuations in these personality states above and beyond affect could 2 2
model; R = Conditional R indicates the overall proportion of explained variance
mean that (a) affect explains all of the meaningful witOhin-person vari- when including the random effect estimates. All coefficients are unstandardized. All
predictors were person-centered prior to analysis to control for between person variance
ance in these constructs, or (b) we have not identified the right situa-
in affect. All predictors were allowed to randomly vary. Liking = liking one’s
tion variable(s) to predict the meaningful leftover variance. Thus, we
interaction partners; Wanting = wanting to be in the situation one is in; Status = having
conducted further tests to examine whether other situation variables
low (1) vs. high (5) status relative to one’s interaction partner; and Impression = caring
could predict within-person variance in state agreeableness and open-
about the impression one makes. Situational variables and affect were the IVs,
ness. Of course, the more models we test, the more we are at risk of
personality states were the DV.
Type I errors. Thus, the results presented below should be interpreted
⁎⁎
p < 0.05.
with caution (as should all results, but these even more so).
⁎⁎⁎⁎
p < 0.01.
We selected additional situation variables that were targeted
specifically to predict fluctuations in agreeableness and openness. To
attempt to predict fluctuations in state agreeableness, we used the
Within-person associations between situations, affective states, and openness.
following situation variables: how much the participant reported lik-
Common PA & NA & Common
ing the people s/he was with, how much the participant reported s/he
wanted to be in the situation, the participant’s report of his/her sta-
b R R b b b R R
01 m c 01 02 03 m c
tus relative to his/her interaction partner(s), and how much the partic-
⁎⁎ ⁎⁎ ⁎ ⁎⁎
S1: Openness −0.13 0.02 0.27 0.33 −0.07 −0.15 0.15 0.45
ipant reported caring about the impression s/he made. To attempt to
Constrain Positive & Negative & Constrain
predict fluctuations in state openness, we used the following situation
b R R b b b R R
01 m c 01 02 03 m c
variables: how common/familiar the participant reported the situation ⁎⁎ ⁎⁎
S1: Openness −0.08 0.01 0.28 0.34 −0.05 0.02 0.12 0.43
was, and how much the participant reported that the situation con-
Note. All variables were measured at the within-person level (Level 1).).
strained his/her behavior. These situation variables were measured as
2 2
R = Marginal R indicates the proportion of variance explained for only the fixed
part of the EMA surveys and were measured on a 5-point Likert-type 2 2
effects of the model; R = Conditional R indicates the overall proportion of explained
variance when including the random effect estimates. All coefficients are
unstandardized. All predictors were person-centered prior to analysis to control for
between person variance in affect. All predictors were allowed to randomly vary.
PA = Positive Affect NA = Negative Affect; Common = how common/familiar the
situation is; Constrain = how much the situation constrains one’s behavior. Situational
variables and affect were the IVs, personality states were the DV.
⁎⁎
p < 0.05.
⁎⁎⁎⁎
p < 0.01.
10 Journal of Research in Personality xxx (2016) xxx-xxx
2 2
c c
shows that these situation variables explained very little in state agree- perhaps not completely, attributable to fluctuations in affect.
ableness above and beyond affect (Study 1: ⩽2%; Study 2: ⩽1%). Notably, the marginal R coefficients for positive and negative af-
2 2
These results suggest that, although there may be meaningful within- fect (Study 1: R = 0.01–0.25; Study 2: R = 0.01–0.25) were de-
m m
person variance in state agreeableness that is not entirely accounted scriptively much smaller than the conditional R coefficients (Study
2 2
for by affect, the current evidence does not provide much support for 1: R = 0.28–0.57; Study 2: R = 0.30–0.52), indicating that much of
c c
the notion that how agreeable a person is in the moment can also be the influence of affect on personality states occurs at the person-spe-
predicted from relevant situation variables. cific level. For example, conscientiousness showed only very weak
fixed effects for positive and negative affect at the marginal level
3.3.4. Predicting fluctuations in openness (Study 1: R 2 = 0.01; Study 2: R 2 = 0.01 O ) but strong associations at
m m
2 2
c c
to new experiences when they were in situations that were less com- indicates that only focusing on the fixed effects of affect on personal-
mon/familiar and less constraining. The association between common/ ity states may obscure important individual differences in how affect
familiar and state openness remained significant after accounting for and conscientiousness (and other personality states) are related – some
affect. The addition of common/familiar as a predictor of openness
people may be more conscientious when they are feeling better (or
with positive and negative affect increased the amount of variance ex-
may feel better when they are being more conscientious); while others
2 2
may be more conscientious when they are feeling worse (or may feel
c c
2 for reference). These results show that there is a small but poten-
worse when they are being more conscientious; see Fig. 1).
tially meaningful within-person variance in state openness that is not
This pattern of results for the fixed effects of affect on the Big Five
entirely accounted for by affect.
personality states is also consistent with results from similar analyses
reported by Ching et al. (2014). When they included Big Five states
4. Discussion
as simultaneous predictors of positive affect, they found that extraver-
sion, and, to a lesser extent, agreeableness, neuroticism, and openness
4.1. Summary of results
tended to covary with positive affect. When they included Big Five
states as simultaneous predictors of negative affect, they found that
The results from two independent samples indicate that fluctua-
neuroticism, and, to a lesser extent, extraversion, agreeableness, and
tions in personality states may be more than fluctuations in affect for
conscientiousness, tended to covary with negative affect. The substan-
some Big Five constructs, although affect clearly plays an important T
tial consistency across our studies is notable given that they used af-
role in the fluctuations in our personality states we go about our day.
fect as the outcome rather than the predictor, included all five Big Five
Overall, our results are consistent with previous research that examin-
domains as simultaneous predictors, and their samples came from five
ing the associations between affect and personality at the within- and
cultures.
between-person levels: extraversion and neuroticism are both strongly
We also replicated previous research (Church et al., 2013; Fleeson,
related to affect. However, we also found that agreeableness and open-
2001; Fleeson & Gallagher, 2009) that found a great deal of within-
ness strongly covaried with affect at the within-person level, and that
Eperson variance in Big Five personality states – as much as the within-
affect accounted for a moderate amount of within-person variance in
person variance in affect. This was true across both studies, despite
conscientiousness as well, though the average slope was quite small.
different items being used to measure Big Five states in the two stud-
Our primary research question was whether fluctuations in Big
ies. Consistent with past research, there was more within-person vari-
Five states could be accounted for by fluctuations in affect. Across
ance than between-person variance for both personality traits and af-
both studies, all Big Five constructs showed strong associations with
fect.
affect at the within-person level (Study 1: R = 0.28–0.57; Study 2:
c R
R = 0.30–0.52). There was significant heterogeneity in slopes for all
associations between the Big Five states and affect states, suggesting 4.2. Strengths and limitations
there may be individual differences in how (or how strongly) affect is
related to fluctuations in personality states. These results suggest that One important strength of this research is that we were able to con-
the within-person variability in personality states cannot be accounted duct parallel analyses in two different samples. This allows us to test
for entirely by fluctuations in affect, but we could not be sure that the the stability of our effect estimates and achieve a relatively large to-
remaining within-person variance in personality states was true vari- tal sample size (N = 539). In addition, the items used to measure state
ance (and not error variance). personality were different in the two studies, providing some evidence
To test whether there was remaining true variance in personal- of the generalizability of the findings to various operationalizations of
ity states after accounting for affect, we searched for situational vari- the core constructs. However, it is possible that two items per con-
ables that would be likely to predict fluctuations in personality states struct was not sufficient to capture the full content of each personality
above and beyond affect. We started by examining the situation vari- construct, making it difficult to precisely answer the question of what
able studying/working. We reasoned that studying/working likely im- it means to say that personality states are “more than” positive and
pacts a broad range of college students’ thoughts, feelings, and behav-
U negative affect. In addition, one assumption of the current research is
iors (i.e., state personality). Even after accounting for fluctuations in that the structure of personality at the state level mirrors the between-
affect, we found that studying/working predicted fluctuations in con- person Big Five structure, an assumption that requires further exam-
scientiousness and had small effects for predicting neuroticism and ex- ination (Borkenau & Ostendorf, 1998; Cervone, 2005). We hope the
traversion. We next tested situation variables that we expected to im- current studies provide a first step towards understanding the relation
pact state agreeableness and openness but found little evidence that between personality states and affect, but more work is needed to un-
variance in these personality states could be predicted by situation derstand the structure of state personality and validate state personal-
variables even after accounting for affect. These findings suggest that ity scales.
Journal of Research in Personality xxx (2016) xxx-xxx 11
A related limitation of our design was that positive and negative states in order to examine the (likely multi-directional) causal associ-
affect were only assessed with one item per construct. Future research ations between situation characteristics, affect, and personality states.
should examine the more nuanced aspects of affect and emotions by Second, our results suggest that, on average, people tend to be
using a broader range of items, such as varying arousal levels, in or- more extraverted, emotionally stable, open to new experiences, and (to
der to increase the reliability of these measures and capture the full af- a lesser extent) conscientious when they are feeling better (i.e., lower
fective circumplex (Barrett & Russell, 1999; Larsen & Diener, 1992). NA and higher PA). These associations are not entirely surprising –
Ongoing research (e.g., Chung & Denissen, 2016) continues to pur- there is a good deal of content overlap between extraversion and pos-
sue the goal of constructing and validating a measure of emotions at itive affect and between neuroticism and negative affect. However,
the within-person level. Such advancements will improve our ability our results suggest that state affect may also be an important com-
to understand how the specific affective and emotional components in- ponent of state agreeableness and opennesOs. The association between
fluence personality states. state openness and state positive affect is consistent with existing the-
Our studies used EMA to capture within-person fluctuations in per- ories of state openness and positive affect (Fredrickson, 2001) but has
sonality, affect, and situations as they were happening in participants’ not, to our knowledge, been examined before (c.f., Ching et al., 2014).
real lives over 1–2 weeks. EMA is arguably the best available method Likewise, the association between state agreeableness and affect raises
for capturing within-person processes, especially for internal states interesting possibilities about the underlying causes of prosocial be-
such as affect and some personality states (e.g., neuroticism). How- havior. Future research should explore the dynamic interplay between
ever, our surveys were ultimately self-reports, and many of the limi- state affect and state personalPity. Moreover, these results suggest that
tations of global self-report measures apply. For example, EMA self- researchers conducting studies on within-person personality dynamics
reports reports are susceptible to response set effects, self-deception, should include measures of state affect to examine how much of their
and self-presentation (Scollon, Kim-Prieto, & Diener, 2009). Future findings can be accounted for by affect.
research should supplement EMA with other, non-self-report meth- It is also likely that other factors, besides affect and situational
ods. Specifically, the Electronically Activated Recorder (EAR; Mehl variables, predict fluctuations in personality states. For example, mo-
et al., 2001) provides an observer-based measure of overt behavior tives and roles may play a large influence in explaining why people’s
(e.g., talkativeness, kindness) and some features of the situation (e.g., personality states vary from moment to moment (McCabe & Fleeson,
socializing vs. working, topic of conversation, etc.). Of course, the 2012; Wood, 2E007; Wood & Roberts, 2006). People may fluctuate in
EAR has its own set of methodological limitations, but a combina- their daily desire to do well academically, and this may influence state
tion of EMA and EAR methods would allow researchers to untangle conscientiousness. Our results suggest that exploring such explana-
which results are specific to the self’s perspective and which are ro- tions for fluctuations in personality states may be warranted because
bust across methods. there is still unexplained variance in personality state fluctuations re-
Both samples in the current study were drawn from the same popu- maining after accounting for affect and situational variables.
lation of college students, and, ideally, we would like to know whether Finally, our results, like those of other researchers examining
these findings generalize to people of a different age, socioeconomic within-person variability in personality (e.g., Sherman et al., 2015) in-
status, and culture (though see Ching et al., 2014, for evidence that dicate that there are substantial individual differences in the within-
culture may not be a strong moderator of the association between Eperson associations we examined. People have varying degrees of as-
personality states and affect). In addition to ensuring generalization sociations between state affect and state personality (or between situ-
across populations, it is possible that assessing affect and personality ation characteristics and state personality). For example, a closer ex-
states over an hour did not capture important processes that occurRon amination of our results, depicted in Fig. 1, indicate that the weak av-
the timescale of seconds or minutes. Adjusting the time scope of as- erage slopes between state conscientiousness and state affect might
sessment would enhance our ability to accurately assess the relation belie important individual differences. That is, high state conscien-
between personality states and affect. tiousness seems to be associated with high levels of positive affect for
Lastly, the focus of the current article was on assessing the degree some and low levels of positive affect for others. The test of hetero-
to which affect explained the variance in state personality, but the re- geneity in slopes predicting state conscientiousness was significant for
lation between personality states and affect is likely bi-directional. In both positive affect (Study 1 τ = 0.02, p = 0.004; Study 2 τ = 0.03,
01 01
addition, social-cognitive theory suggests that situations play an im- p < 0.001) and negative affect (Study 1 τ = 0.01, p = 0.041; Study
portant role, triggering affective processes that mediate the influence 2 τ = 0.03, p < 0.001), suggesting that future research should exam-
of situations on behavioral responses (e.g., Downey & Feldman, 1996;
ine whether these individual differences in the association between
Downey, Freitas, Michaelis, & Khouri, 1998; Downey, Mougios,
conscientiousness and affect are reliable, and if so, identify modera-
Ayduk, London, & Shoda, 2004). Future research using intensive lon-
tors. Indeed, the random effects for slopes were significant in all of
gitudinal data is needed to reach firm conclusions regarding the direc-
our models, indicating that there were individual differences in slopes
tion and flow of these complex processes (Back & Vazire, 2015; Vater
across all models, though as Fig. 1 shows, except for the conscien-
& Schröder-Abé, 2015; Wilson et al., 2015).
tiousness models, people’s slopes tended to be in the same direction
and varied mostly in degree rather than direction.
4.3. Implications and future directions
Future research should examine potential moderators of these in-
dividual differences – for whom is openness strongly associated with
These results have several implications for personality theory and
positive affect, and for whom is the association weaker? Individual
research. First, these results suggest that people’s momentary fluctua-
differences in these slopes may be explained by trait personality, cul-
tions in personality states are mostly due to fluctuations in their pos-
ture, age, well-being, and other factors that may subsequently predict
itive and negative affect. There may be reliable within-person vari-
important outcomes. For example, people with a strong positive asso-
ance for some personality constructs even after accounting for af-
ciation between state conscientiousness and positive affect (i.e., peo-
fect, but affect seems to play a leading role in explaining variance in
ple who are happiest when they are being organized and responsible)
personality states. Future research should continue to search for sit-
uational variables that predict fluctuations in affect and personality
12 Journal of Research in Personality xxx (2016) xxx-xxx
may experience greater success in school and work or greater in- How much did you care about how you came across to them?
How superficial (i.e. shallow) to substantive (i.e., deep) were the conversations?
creases in conscientiousness, over time.
4.4. Conclusion
Appendix B. Study 2 Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA)
Across two studies, we found that within-person fluctuations in
personality are mostly accounted for by fluctuations in affect. The
associations between state personality and affect were substantial
enough that personality researchers studying within-person dynamics “Please take a moment and think of what you were doing from 11 am-noon (2–3 pm,
5–6 pm, 8–9 pm).”
should include measures of affect and examine whether accounting O
I was asleep the entire hour (Yes/No)
for affect alters their observed results. Of course, affect is a compo-
Were you…(Completely alone/Around others)
nent of personality, so we do not advocate always removing the shared
Were you interacting with other people? (0, 1, 2, 3–5, 3+5)
variance between state affect and state personality when studying the
The following items were answered on a 1–5 Likert-type scale:
latter. Recognizing that part of being more agreeable (or extraverted,
Motivated to do well academically
emotionally stable, or open) than usual is being in a good mood will
Authentic
help us better understand these dynamic personality processes. Outgoing, sociable
Quiet
In addition, there may be meaningful within-person variance in P
Self-esteem (low to high)
personality leftover after accounting for affect, or a mediating process
Lazy
where situations influence affect, which then influences personality
Reliable
states. This suggests that personality and social psychologists should Happy
Worried
continue our quest to identify situational triggers of personality fluc-
Relaxed
tuations, and individual differences in these ‘if… then’ contingencies.
Depressed, blue
This research will help answer some of the most fundamental ques-
Lonely
tions in our field. The work presented here serves as part of the foun- Close, connected
Keep your emotions to yourself
dation necessary to explore these more complex questions. E
Positive emotion (not at all to a lot)
Negative emotion
Willpower/self-control
5. Uncited references T
Feel like being around others
Considerate, kind
Rude
Kreft, Kreft, and de Leeuw (1998) and Nezlek (2010).
In a few words, what were you doing from 8 pm–9 pm? (Open Response)
In this situation, were you free to behave however you wanted?
How stressful was the situation?
Appendix A. Study 1 Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA)
How common/familiar was the situation?
How much did you want to be there?
From 8 pm to 9 pm, check the items that occurred:
Stayed mostly in your room/house
Studied/worked
“Please take a moment and think of what you were doing from 10 to 11 am
R Listened to music
(noon-1 pm, 2–3 pm, 4–5 pm, 6–7 pm).”
Felt tired
In a few words, what were you doing from 8 pm to 9 pm? (Open Response)
In pain/sick
Were you interacting with other people?
Did something for someone else
(0, 1, 2, 3−5, 3+5)
R Passively looked at Facebook
How much did you want to be there?
Actively did something on Facebook
Is what you were doing….(1 = Work, 5 = Fun)
Talked on the phone/Skype
The following items were answered on a 1–5 Likert-type scale:
Watched a video/tv/movie
dependable, self- disciplined
O Went to class
anxious, easily upset
Interacted with family
open to new experiences, complex
Interacted with romantic partner
reserved, quiet
Interacted with local best friend
sympathetic, warm
Interacted with another close friend
disorganized, careless
Something good happened
calm, emotionally stable
Something bad happened
conventional, uncreative
What was the good/bad thing that happened?
happy
Good (Open Response)
extraverted, enthusiastic
Bad (Open Response)
critical, quarrelsome
Please refer to the people you interacted with for the following questions:
depressed, blue
How well do you know them?
lonely
How much do you like them?
How much positive emotion did you experience
Compared to them, how much power/social status do you have?
How much negative emotion did you experience
How much did you care about how you came across to them?
How high was your self-esteem
How superficial (i.e. shallow) to substantive (i.e., deep) were the conversations?
How biased was your perception of yourself
How much did you self-disclose
How stressful was the situation?
How common/familiar was the situation?
How much did the situation constrain your behavior?
How much did you want to be there?
Effects of Subtitles, Complexity, and Language proficiency on
Learning from Online Education Videos
Tim van der Zee, Wilfried Admiraal
Leiden University
Fred Paas
Erasmus University Rotterdam, University of Wollongong
Nadira Saab
Leiden University
Bas Giesbers
Erasmus University Rotterdam
Abstract
Open online education has become increasingly popular. In Massive Open
Online Courses (MOOCs) videos are generally the most used method of
teaching. While most MOOCs are offered in English, the global availability
of these courses has attracted many non-native English speakers. To ensure
not only the availability, but also the accessibility of open online education,
courses should be designed to minimize detrimental effects of a language
barrier, for example by providing subtitles. However, with many conflicting
research findings it is unclear whether subtitles are beneficial or detrimen-
tal for learning from a video, and whether this depends on characteristics
of the learner and the video. We hypothesized that the effect of 2nd lan-
guage subtitles on learning outcomes depends on the language proficiency
of the student, as well as the visual-textual information complexity of the
video. This three-way interaction was tested in an pre-registered experimen-
tal study. Using Bayesian analyses, no main effect of subtitles was found,
nor any interaction. However, the student’s language proficiency and the
complexity of the video do have a substantial impact on learning outcomes.
Tim van der Zee, ICLON Leiden University Graduate School of Teaching, Leiden University; Wilfried
Admiraal, ICLON Leiden University Graduate School of Teaching, Leiden University; Fred Paas, Department
of Psychology, Education Child Studies, Erasmus University Rotterdam; Early Start Research Institute,
University of Wollongong; Nadira Saab, ICLON Leiden University Graduate School of Teaching, Leiden
University; Bas Giesbers, Rotterdam School of Management.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Tim van der Zee, ICLON Leiden University
Graduate School of Teaching, Leiden University, PO Box 905, 2300AX Leiden, The Netherlands. E-mail:
t.van.der.zeeiclon.leidenuniv.nl
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 2
Introduction
Open online education has rapidly become a highly popular method of education.
The promise – global and free access to high quality education – has often been applauded.
With a reliable Internet connection comes free access to a large variety of Massive Open
Online Courses (MOOCs) found on platforms such as Coursera and edX. MOOC partici-
pants indeed come from all over the world, although participants from Western countries
are still overrepresented (Nesterko et al., 2013). In all cases there are many non-native
English speakers in English courses. This raises the question to what extent non-native
English speakers can benefit from these courses, compared to native speakers. Open on-
line education may be available to most, the content might not be as accessible for many
due to language barriers. It is important to design online education in such a way that it
minimizes detrimental effects of potential language barriers to increase its accessibility for
a wider audience.
MOOCs typically feature a large number of videos which are central to the student learning
experience (Guo, Kim, & Rubin, 2014; Liu et al., 2013). The central position of educa-
tional videos is reflected by students’ behavior and their intentions: most students plan
to watch all videos in a MOOC, and also spend the majority of their time watching these
videos (Campbell, Gibbs, Najafi, & Severinski, 2014; Seaton, Bergner, Chuang, Mitros, &
Pritchard, 2014). In this study, we investigate the impact of subtitles on learning from
educational videos in a second language. Providing subtitles is a common approach to cater
to diverse audiences and support non-native English speakers. The Web Content Acces-
sibility Guidelines 2.0 (WCAG, 2008) prescribe subtitles for any audio media to ensure a
high level of accessibility. Intuitively there seems nothing wrong with this advice and many
studies have indeed found a positive effect of subtitles on learning (e.g., Markham, Peter,
McCarthy, et al., 2001). However, a different set of studies provides evidence that subtitles
can also hamper learning (e.g., Kalyuga, Chandler, & Sweller, 1999). In the current study
the effects of subtitles will be further examined.
This paper is organized as follows: First, conflicting findings on the effects of subtitles on
learning will be discussed. Secondly, a framework will be proposed which can explain these
conflicting findings by considering the interaction between subtitles, language proficiency,
and visual-textual information complexity (VTIC). In turn, an experimental study will be
described which tests the main hypothesis of the framework.
Although this study is situated in an online educational setting, the results may also be of
relevance for other media-orientated fields, such as film studies and video production.
Subtitles: Beneficial or Detrimental for Learning?
Research on the effects of subtitles typically differentiates between subtitles in some-
one’s native language, called L1, versus subtitles in one’s second language, or L2. A meta-
analysis of 18 studies showed positives effects of L2 subtitles for language learning (Perez,
Noortgate, & Desmet, 2013). Specifically, enabling subtitles for language learning videos
substantially increases student performance on recognition tests, and to a lesser extent on
production tests. Other studies have found similar positive effects of subtitles on learning
from videos and there appears to be a consensus that subtitles are beneficial for learning
a second language (e.g., Baltova, 1999; Chung, 1999; Markham, 1999; Winke, Gass, &
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 3
Sydorenko, 2013). However, these are all studies which focus on learning a language and
not on learning about a non-linguistic topic in a second language. There are important dif-
ferences between language learning, and what we will call content learning. When learning
a language, practicing with reading and understanding L2 subtitles is directly relevant for
this goal. In contrast, when learning about a specific topic, apprehending L2 subtitles is
not a goal in itself but only serves the purpose of better understanding the actual content.
As such, we would argue that findings from studies focusing on language learning are by
themselves not convincing enough to be directly applied to content learning, as subtitles
have a different relationship with the content and the learning goals.
In contrast to studies on language learning, there are only a few studies which investigated
the effects of subtitles for content learning. These studies have shown positive effects for
subtitles for content learning in a second language. For example, when watching a short
Spanish educational clip, English-speaking students benefited substantially from Spanish
subtitles, but even more so from English subtitles (Markham et al., 2001). Another study,
focused on different combinations of languages, similarly show that students performed
better at comprehension tests when watching a L2 video with subtitles enabled (Hayati &
Mohmedi, 2011).
Although several studies did find positive effects of subtitles, a range of other studies yielded
contradictory findings. For example, Kalyuga et al. (1999) found that narrated videos with-
out subtitles are better for learning than videos with subtitles. In this study, subtitles were
shown to lead to lower performance, an increased perceived cognitive load, and more reat-
tempts during the learning phase (i.e., re-watching videos). This is in contrast with the
earlier discussed studies, which showed positive effects of learning from videos with subti-
tles. In a different study on learning from narrated videos, two experiments showed that
enabling subtitles led to lower knowledge retention and transfer (Mayer, Heiser, & Lonn,
2001). With Cohen’s d effect sizes ranging from 0.36 to 1.20, the detrimental effects of subti-
tles in these studies were quite substantial. A range of other studies found similar evidence
that for content- and language-learning alike, narrated explanations are typically better
than showing only subtitles, or narration combined with subtitles. (Harskamp, Mayer, &
Suhre, 2007; Mayer, Dow, & Mayer, 2003; Mayer & Moreno, 1998; Moreno & Mayer, 1999).
Finally, some studies showed neither a positive nor a negative effect of subtitles on learning
(e.g., Moreno & Mayer, 2002a).
Explaining Conflicting Findings on the Effects of Subtitles
The previously discussed literature provides a confusing paradox for instructional
designers: are subtitles beneficial, detrimental, or irrelevant for learning? Here we will
present an attempt to explain the conflicting findings using a framework built on theories
of attention and information processing. In short, we propose that the conflicting findings
can be integrated by considering the interaction between subtitles, language proficiency,
and the level of visual-textual information complexity (VTIC) in the video.
Working memory limitations. An essential characteristic of the human cognitive
architecture is that not every type of information is processed in an identical way. Work-
ing memory is characterized by having modality-specific channels, one for auditory and
one for visual information (Baddeley, 2003). Both have a limited capacity for information,
which can only hold information chunks for a few moments before they decay (Baddeley,
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 4
2003). During learning tasks, working memory acts as a bottleneck for processing novel
information; as more cognitive load is imposed on the learner, less cognitive resources are
available for the integration of information into long-term memory, effectively impairing
learning (Ginns, 2006; Sweller, Van Merrienboer, & Paas, 1998). For novel information, the
cognitive resources required for processing appears to be primarily dictated by measurable
attributes of the information-in-the-world such as the amount of words and their interac-
tivity (Sweller, 2010). As each channel has its own capacity it is generally more effective to
distribute processing load between both channels, instead of relying only on one modality
(Mayer, 2003). When two sources of information are presented in the same modality this
can (more) easily overload our limited processing capacity (Kalyuga et al., 1999). This
provides an explanation of why a range of studies found negative effects of subtitles when
learning from videos, as both are sources of visual information.
Textual vs non-textual visual information. Up to now we did not distinguish between textual
and non-textual visual information. As previously discussed, auditory and visual informa-
tion are initially processed in separate channels. However, after this initial processing, any
language presented either visually or verbally will be processed in the same working mem-
ory sub-component: the phonological loop (Baddeley, 2003). In contrast, non-textual visual
information is processed in a different component, the visuospatial sketchpad. This notion
can further clarify the earlier presented findings. Specifically, the presence of textual visual
information, as compared to non-textual visual information becomes an important variable
to account for. A video which contains three different sources of language - narration, sub-
titles, and in-video text - is likely to induce cognitive overload. If the visual information
in the video does not have a language component we can expect a reduced, or no detri-
mental effect. More precisely, subtitles are expected to be detrimental to learning when a
video already has a high level of VTIC. However, when a video has a relatively low level of
VTIC, adding subtitles will not necessarily lead to cognitive overload. Should the addition
of subtitles be desired, it then becomes necessary to ensure that the VTIC of a video is low
enough to prevent detrimental effects due to cognitive overload. We propose two ways how
the VTIC of an educational video can be manipulated whilst maintaining the educationally
relevant content.
Amount of visual-textual information. The first, and most straightforward aspect of VTIC
is the amount of visual-textual information shown in a video. That is, a video in which
much more text is shown is arguably more complex to process than a video with much less
text. However, while removing information which is vital to understand the topic of the
video might reduce the complexity, it will also harm the educational value of the video.
However, removing or adding visual-textual information which is not strictly relevant for
the learning goals can be used to respectively decrease or increase the VTIC of a video.
Given that such information does not benefit the student in mastering the learning goal, the
validity of the video as an educational tool is fully maintained. For example, take a complex
image such as a schematic representation of the human eye, with many labels referring to
each individual part of the eye. Labels which are not relevant to the learning goals can
be effectively removed, possibly greatly limiting the amount of visual-textual information
presented to the student. Evidence for the beneficial effect of removing irrelevant informa-
tion has been found by several studies and is typically referred to as the ’coherence effect’
(Mayer et al., 2001; Moreno & Mayer, 2000; Butcher, 2006).
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 5
Presentation rate of visual-textual information. The second proposed component of VTIC is
the presentation rate of the visual-textual information. As discussed earlier, working mem-
ory is limited in how much information it can hold and process at any given time. Therefore,
introducing many concepts simultaneously risks overloading a student with more informa-
tion than (s)he can effectively handle. This can be prevented by spreading the information
over time, while maintaining the same of overall amount of information. For example, detri-
mental effects of subtitles disappear when verbal and written text explanation are presented
before the visual information is shown (Moreno & Mayer, 2002b). With such a sequential
presentation the student does not need to process the spoken word, written word, as well
as the visual information simultaneously. Instead, first the narration and subtitles are pro-
cessed, and only afterwards the visual information is shown. This effectively removes the
role of split-attention effects as well as spreading out cognitive load over time, thus reducing
the risk of cognitive overload. However, while this form of information segmentation makes
videos easier to process and understand, it also increases the video duration which is often
not a desired consequence. Visual-textual information can be segmented without affecting
the video duration by only showing new information from the moment it is mentioned in the
narration and becomes relevant. Using the previous example of a complex schematic image
with many labels: at the start of a video segment the complex image can be shown without
any labels, with labels becoming visible from the moment they are verbally discussed. In
this format the total duration as well as the narration remain unchanged, while decreasing
overall VTIC through a segmentation presentation style.
Split-attention effects. As discussed, subtitles add an additional source of infor-
mation which needs to be processed, leaving less cognitive resources for learning processes.
Additionally, subtitles also draw visual attention, such that less attention is spent on other
- possibly important - aspects of the video. Like other cognitive resources, attention is
limited. That subtitles can cause a so-called split-attention effect has been made clear by
several eye-tracking studies. In general, viewers spend a substantial amount of time paying
attention to subtitles (Schmidt-Weigand, Kohnert, & Glowalla, 2010). In a video with a
lecturer and subtitles, non-native speakers spend 43% of the time looking at the subtitles
(Kruger, Hefer, & Matthew, 2014). The finding that subtitles draw so much attention
further signifies their importance. Even when in certain circumstances subtitles are benefi-
cial for learning, it should be taken into account that students will have less attention for
other visual information. In situations where subtitles do not significantly aid the learner,
a substantial amount of attention will have been wasted. We propose two additional factors
contributing to the VTIC of a video.
Attention Cuing. When presented with novel information, it can be difficult to immediately
understand where to look. Profound differences in visual search and attention anticipation
has been reported for expertise differences in many areas, such as in chess, driving, and clin-
ical reasoning (Chapman & Underwood, 1998; Krupinski et al., 2006; Reingold, Charness,
Pomplun, & Stampe, 2001). Given the already high attentional load present in visually
complex videos, the presence of subtitles can be expected to have detrimental effects. How-
ever, to lower the attentional load, attention can be guided by using attentional cues such
as arrows pointing to the most relevant area in a video, or by underling or highlighting
these sections. Such attentional cues help novice learners to more effectively direct their
attention when and where it is necessary (Boucheix & Lowe, 2010; Ozcelik, Arslan-Ari, &
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 6
Cagiltay, 2010), possibly lowering detrimental effects of subtitles.
Physical distances. The final proposed factor of VTIC relates to the physical organization
of related information in a video. Specifically, the physical distance between a header (such
as a label) and its referent. Non-trivial physical distances between headers and referents
are detrimental for learning, as longer distances require more cognitive resources to hold
and process information (Mayer, 2008). Additionally, longer distances can induce a split-
attention effect, as the increased distances require more attention, which can thus not be
spent on other, more relevant parts of the video (Mayer & Moreno, 1998). A split-attention
effect can further explain the contradictory findings: subtitles will cause a split-attention
in the presence of other visual information, such as graphics, texts, annotated pictures, or
diagrams with textual explanations. Furthermore, physical distances can be manipulated
to increase or decrease the VTIC without affecting the educational content itself. Using
the earlier example of the complex image with labels: the physical distances between the
labels and the respectively position in the image can be changed to manipulate the VTIC
of a video.
The possible role of language proficiency. It is argued that subtitles (whether
L1 or L2) are beneficial for the comprehension of L2 video content because they help students
bridge the gap between their language proficiency and the target language (Chung, 1999;
Vanderplank, 1988). More specifically, it is often easier to understand L2 written text
over spoken word, as reading comprehension skills are typically more developed in students
(Danan, 2004; Garza, 1991). Perez et al. (2013) report different learning gains based on L2
proficiency, although this study provides insufficient evidence to verify a moderating role of
L2 proficiency. Furthermore, L2 subtitles typically draw more attention than subtitles in
one’s native language, presumably because L1 subtitles can be processed more automatically
and require only peripheral vision (Kruger et al., 2014). A final reason to consider L2
proficiency as an influential factor is because information which is known by a person
requires much less, or possible no cognitive resources to operate in working memory (Diana,
Reder, Arndt, & Park, 2006; Sweller et al., 1998). As such, processing L2 subtitles can be
expected to require less cognitive resources when a student has a higher L2 proficiency. At
first sight, this appears to be in conflict with the argument that subtitles specifically help
students with a lower L2 proficiency to bridge the language barrier. A possible integration
of these findings would be that with a lower L2 proficiency subtitles do indeed require more
effort to process, but can also aid learning only if no other visual information is present.
Putting the pieces together
Based on the discussed literature, we would argue that to better understand the
effects of subtitles on learning it is essential to consider both language proficiency and the
complexity of visual-textual information. For example, consider videos showing a teacher
explaining a topic simultaneously with a written summary, annotated pictures, or diagrams
with textual explanations. The inclusion of subtitles in such videos can be detrimental for
learning, especially for students with a low English proficiency. The amount of different
visual sources of information will put more strain on the limited capacity of the visual
working memory channel. Not only do the subtitles potentially cause a cognitive overload,
but also a split-attention effect.
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 7
Hypothesis
The main hypothesis of the proposed model is a three-way interaction effect, specifi-
cally:
• There is a three-way interaction effect between English proficiency, subtitles, and
visual-textual information complexity (VTIC) on test performance. Additionally, we predict
specific directions in this three-way interaction:
• For low-VTIC videos, lower English proficiency is related to a higher performance
gain when subtitles are enabled, and
• For high-VTIC videos, lower English proficiency is related to a higher performance
loss when subtitles are enabled.
Note that the hypotheses concern relative differences in performance change. No
claim is made about absolute difference between students with different levels of English
proficiency, or between videos with different levels of visual-textual information. The un-
derlying reasoning is that the presented framework predicts different effects of subtitles
depending on the amount of additional visual information and level of English proficiency,
but it does not necessarily predict absolute differences.
Methods and Materials
Videos
A total of four types of videos have been used; videos with high/low Visual-Textual
Information Complexity (VTIC), and with/without subtitles. To ensure ecological validity,
actual videos from MOOCs from the Coursera platform have been used as base material;
however, to make the videos usable for this experiment they have been extensively edited
as further described below. A total of four videos have been used as raw material, which
have been manipulated to create the four versions of each video, resulting in 16 videos. To
manipulate the complexity of the videos, the four proposed VTIC components have been
kept the same for each video. The duration of each video is approximately seven minutes,
with no differences between the versions of each video. None of the videos in any version
show the narrator or teacher. Each video was narrated by the same person to exclude a
narrator-effect. In the versions with subtitles, the subtitles will are shown in the bottom
part of the screen where it does not overlap with any other content. The narration and
subtitles are verbatim identical. The video topics are: The Kidney, History of Genetics,
The Visual System, and The Peripheral Nervous System.
English proficiency test
To test the hypothesis of the proposed model it was necessary to estimate the English
proficiency of the participants. As the goal of this study is to generate results, which can be
easily implemented in online education, a short and easy to implement test was preferred.
With this in mind, the English proficiency placement test made by TrackTest has been
used (TrackTest, 2016). TrackTest is a placement test which is used to estimate the user’s
English proficiency at the level of the widely used CEFR scales (Council of Europe, 2001).
The CEFR identifies 6 levels, from A1 to C2, signifying beginner to advanced proficiency
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 8
Overview of the manipulations to create more and less complex versions.
Complexity Factor High complex version Low complex version
Irrelevant information Included Removed
Segmentation None Segmented
Attentional cues No cues Cues
Physical distances Increased Minimal
levels. The TrackTest is adaptive, meaning that subsequent questions are based on the
performance on earlier questions. In total, each participant was presented 15 multiple-
choice questions, from a pool of 90. The test takes less than 10 minutes to complete. In a
pilot test with 800 users who took the test twice, the test-retest reliability was satisfying
with a Spearman’s ρ of .736.
Procedure
Upon registration, each participant was randomly allocated to one of four counter-
video versions with decreased and increased levels visual-textual information complexity,
respectively. Likewise, S+ and S- refer to videos with and without English subtitles, re-
spectively. As shown, each participant views one video in each condition. Before the study,
the participants were asked to rate their prior knowledge about each of the four topics. For
example, regarding the video about the organization of the human eye, the participants
were asked how much they know about the different parts and the organization of the hu-
man eye. For these questions 5-point Likert scales were used; participants who scored a 3
or higher (e.g. who self-report a moderate amount of prior knowledge) were excluded from
the study, to exclude a confounding influence of expertise. The participants were allowed
to watch a video only once. After every video, the participants were asked to rate how
much mental effort they had to invest to understand the video, on a 9-point Likert scale.
The difference in average mental effort ratings for the videos high and low in VTIC serve
as a measure of manipulation success. Subsequently, they were presented with a knowledge
tests of 10 multiple-choice questions, containing factual questions about the content of the
video. After completing the questions participants continued with the next video, until all
videos and tests were completed. Afterwards, the participants were asked to take the short
English proficiency placement test. Finally, they completed some questions about possible
technical issues while watching the videos; these questions were asked for quality assurance.
No relevant technical issues were reported.
Participants
As this study focuses on online education, participants were recruited and tested
online, using the Prolific platform (Prolific Academic, 2015). Participants were considered
eligible when they are over 18 years of age and are non-native English speakers. Upon
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 9
Counterbalance list.
List Video 1 Video 2 Video 3 Video 4
1 C+ S+ C- S- C+ S- C- S+
2 C- S- C+ S- C- S+ C+ S+
3 C+ S- C- S+ C+ S+ C- S-
4 C- S+ C+ S+ C- S- C+ S-
Note. C+ and C- refer to more and less complex
versions of a video, respectively. S- and S+refer to
the absence and presence of subtitles, respectively.
completion of the study the participants received 6.50 Euro per hour as compensation.
Instead of doing a power analysis to a-priori decide on a fixed sample size, the study started
with an initial sample size of 50 participants, and sampling continued in batches of 25 until
there was sufficient evidence present in the data, as further explained in the next section.
Pre-Registered Analysis Plan
To test the hypothesis, a Bayesian Repeated Measures ANOVA has been performed
on the mean test scores with subtitles (yes/no) and visual information (yes/no) as
within-subject variables, and English proficiency as between-subject variable (1-5). A
Bayesian model comparison has been used to decide on the model with the strongest
evidence compared to the other models. This analysis was performed in JASP version 0.7.5
(Love et al., 2015), which uses a default Cauchy prior on effect sizes, centered on 0 with a
scaling of 0.707, as argued for by Rouder, Morey, Speckman, and Province (2012). A Bayes
Factor of 3 to 10 of one model over another will be interpreted as moderate evidence, 10 to
30 as strong, and above 30 as very strong. This analysis was performed after every batch
of participants, and sampling continued until one model had a Bayes Factor of at least 10
compared to every other model. This was the case after 125 participants. All the analyses
described below were done using the data from all 125 participants.
Results
First the descriptive statistics will be shown, followed by the con-
firmatory analysis, and several exploratory analyses. The data and
the analysis scripts are available on the Open Science Framework here:
Descriptive Statistics
A total of 125 participants successfully completed the entire study. As is shown in
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 10
proficiency is skewed, with 43% of the participants having a high level, but all levels of
language proficiency are sufficiently represented in the sample. Note that all participants
are non-native English speakers, including the students with the highest proficiency level of
C.
Descriptive statistics.
Gender Age Language Proficiency
67 Male (54%) Min: 17yr A1: 14 (11%)
56 Female (46%) Max: 53yr A2: 16 (13%)
Mean: 27.62yr B1: 23 (18%)
Sd: 7.24yr B2: 18 (14%)
C1-2: 54 (43%)
Notes. Language Proficiency: A1 is the lowest level
In the study, the participants watched four videos, each in a different condition.
ratings for each condition pair.
Within-subject differences between conditions.
Conditions Test difference (Sd) Mental Effort difference (Sd)
Complex: Subs - No Subs 0.10 (2.04) 0.09 (2.06)
Simple: Subs - No Subs -0.17 (2.10) -0.06 (1.71)
Subs: Complex - Simple -0.50 (2.04) 0.32 (2.33)
No Subs: Complex - Simple -0.77 (2.33) 0.18 (2.00)
These descriptive results give a mixed image. The mean differences between the
conditions with the same complexity but subtitles enabled or disabled are the smallest,
both for the test scores and mental effort ratings. The differences between conditions with
the same setting for subtitles but different levels of complexity are larger, suggesting a
main effect of complexity. Furthermore, this difference appears larger when subtitles are
disabled, which might mean there is an interaction between complexity and subtitles. Note
The analysis of the full model with all the main effects and interactions is reported below.
Confirmatory Analysis
In accordance with the pre-registered Analysis Plan, a Bayesian Repeated Measures
ANOVA was performed on the test scores, with the following predictors: video complex-
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 11
ity (high/low), subtitles (yes/no), and the participant’s language proficiency (1-5). These
results are in the form of model comparison; all the possible combinations of main effects
and interactions between the three predictors are compared in terms of how well they can
explain the data. Note that in contrast to frequentist ANOVAs, multiple comparions be-
tween all models can be performed without the need for corrections. The results of the
in descending order of evidence.
Bayes Factors of all models relative to the null model.
# Model BF(M, 0) % error BF(M, M+1) P(M|D)
1 C + L 99980000.00 1.48% 10.30 0.868
2 C + S + L 9704000.00 1.35% 3.98 0.084
3 C + L + C*L 2439000.00 1.44% 1.17 0.021
4 C + S + L + C*S 2086000.00 2.51% 3.98 0.018
5 C + S + L + S*L 524242.34 1.67% 2.10 0.005
6 C + S + L + C*L 250015.78 1.98% 2.09 0.002
7 C + S + L + C*S + S*L 119737.40 2.77% 1.93 0.001
8 L 62108.53 0.62% 1.17 <0.001
9 C + S + L + C*S + C*L 52917.54 2.37% 3.97 <0.001
10 C + S + L + C*L + S*L 13331.75 2.19% 2.18 <0.001
11 S + L 6125.66 1.06% 2.17 <0.001
12 C + S + L + C*S + C*L + S*L 2818.57 2.33% 1.31 <0.001
13 C 1747.43 8.04% 5.43 <0.001
14 S + L + S*L 321.62 1.64% 1.29 <0.001
15 C + S + L + C*S + C*L + S*L + C*S*L 249.57 2.80% 1.61 <0.001
16 C + S 155.37 1.26% 3.97 <0.001
17 C + S + C*S 39.09 13.77% 39.09 <0.001
0 Null (intercept + subject) 1.00 n/a 10.10 <0.001
18 S 0.10 1.13% n/a <0.001
Note. C = Complexity (high/low). S = Subtitles (yes/no). L = Language Proficiency (1-5).
BF(M, 0) = Bayes Factor of Model compared to Null Model. BF(M, M+1) = Bayes Factor of Model
compared to next model. P(M|D) = Posterior probability of model given the data, if each model
had equal probability of being true before this study.
The results show that model 1 has the most evidence, which consists only of the main
effects of complexity and language proficiency, no main effect of subtitles, and no interactions
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 12
between any of the factors. This model has nearly 10 times more evidence than the null
model. Importantly, the evidence provided by this study favors the complexity + language
proficiency model over complexity + subtitles + language proficiency model (which is the
nd
2 best model) by a factor of 10.30 : 1. In other words, there is 10.3 times more evidence
for the C + L model than the C + S + L model. Furthermore, every model which does not
contain a main effect of subtitles is stronger than its counterpart which includes an effect
of Subtitles.
The pre-registered hypothesis was that the data would be best explained by the full three-
way interaction model (model 15). While there is more evidence for this model than for a
null model, the data favors the simpler C + L model by a factor of 400, 000 : 1.
considering only these models, and having no preference for any model before the study,
the P(M|D) gives the probability that the model is true, given the data and priors.
Exploratory Analyses
While the Bayes Factors quantify the amount of relative evidence provided for the
models, it does not provide information about estimations of population parameters such
as means and effect sizes. Using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods from the
BayesFactor Package in R, we estimated population parameters using all the available
data with all the factors and their interactions (Morey & Rouder, 2015; R Core Team,
2016). Chains were constructed with 10 iterations; Visual inspection of the chains and
auto-correlation plots revealed no quality issues. We put Cauchy priors on the effect size
parameters with a scaling factor of 1/2, as further described in Rouder et al. (2012). A
Cauchy with a scaling factor of 1/2 has half the probability mass between -0.5 and 0.5, and
the remaining half on the more extreme values. In other words, we expect effect sizes of
around (-)0.5, but the prior is diffuse enough to be sensitive to more extreme effects. Using
much wider or more narrow scaling factors (from 1/6 to 4) does not affect the estimations in
a consequential manner. As these priors cover all the effect sizes in the discussed literature,
we consider the results to be insensitive to all plausible alternative priors. Complexity
and subtitles were entered as factors (yes/no), while language was entered as a continuous
variable (1-5). This analysis was done separately for effects on test scores (described in the
next section) and on mental effort ratings (described in the subsequent section).
Effects on test scores. A visualization of the the posterior probability densities
main effects, the entire model with all factors and interactions were used to generate these
posterior distributions.
The density plot shows the most likely values of each effect size parameter, such that
any point in the plot which is twice as high as another point is twice as likely. Note how the
effect of subtitles is centered around 0, with higher and lower values becoming increasingly
unlikely. In contrast, the effect size of complexity is much stronger, and most likely to be
around -0.62 (compared to simple). Language has a positive effect, with an effect size slope
of around 0.55. Note that these are unstandardised effect sizes measures in grade points, on
a scale of 0 to 10. In other words, while the effect of subtitles is mostly likely to be (close
to) zero, both complexity and language have a noticeable effect on test scores. Compared to
complexity and subtitles, the effect of language proficiency can be estimated with relatively
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 13
little uncertainty. The parameter estimations of the main effects and all interactions are
differ in complexity, is 0.62 grade points (as the difference between low and high complexity
is 0.62). Dividing this by the standard deviation results in a Cohen’s d effect size of 0.31.
The slope of language proficiency (measured on a scale of 1 to 5) is 0.55 (Cohen’s d of 0.27),
with a 95% Credible Interval of 0.43 to 0.68. However, the effect of subtitles is 0.04 grade
points (Cohen’s d of 0.02), and we cannot even be certain about the direction of the effect
as the credible intervals span both negative and positive values. This means that it is very
likely to be (close to) zero. All the interaction effects are similarly centered around 0, with
credible intervals which span both negative and positive values. These findings are fully
consistent with the Confirmatory Analysis, which suggested that the best model includes
only the main effects of complexity and language proficiency, but not the effect of subtitles
or any of the interactions. Only complexity and language proficiency have 95% credible
intervals which do not include zero, such that we can be confident about the direction of
the effect, while the effects of the other factors are close to zero.
Effects on mental effort ratings. In addition to the effects on test scores, we
analyzed the effects of complexity, language proficiency, and subtitles on the participants’
self-reported mental effort ratings of the videos. This analysis is identical to the previous
analysis in every aspect other than the different outcome variable. As described earlier,
the participants were asked how much mental effort they had to invest in watching and
understanding each video on a 9-point Likert scale, higher meaning more invested effort.
A visualization of the the posterior probability densities of the three main effects on mental
participants’ mental effort ratings are both centered near 0. For subtitles, the effect is
estimated at a 0.015 difference in mental effort ratings, 95% Credible Interval [−0.16, 0.19].
The effect of language proficiency is estimated at 0.017, 95% Credible Interval [−0.10,
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 14
Parameter estimations of intercept and factor effects.
Parameter Estimation 95% Credible Interval
Intercept 4.81 [4.63, 4.98]
Standard Deviation 2.00 [1.88, 2.13]
C0 0.31 [0.13, 0.48]
C1 -0.31 [-0.48, 0.13]
S0 0.02 [-0.16, 0.19]
S1 -0.02 [-0.19, 0.16]
Lang 0.55 [0.43, 0.68]
C0 * S0 0.06 [-0.11, 0.24]
C0 * S1 -0.06 [-0.24, 0.11]
C1 * S0 -0.06 [-0.24, 0.11]
C1 * S1 0.06 [-0.11, 0.24]
C0 * Lang 0.03 [-0.10, 0.15]
C1 * Lang -0.03 [-0.15, 0.10]
S0 * Lang -0.04 [-0.17, 0.08]
S1 * Lang 0.04 [-0.08, 0.17]
C0 * S0 * Lang -0.05 [-0.18, 0.07]
C0 * S1 * Lang 0.05 [-0.07, 0.18]
C1 * S0 * Lang 0.05 [-0.07, 0.18]
C1 * S1 * Lang -0.05 [-0.18, 0.07]
Notes. C = Complexity (1 = high, 0 = low).
S = Subtitles (1 = yes, 0 = no).
Lang = Language Proficiency (slope).
0.14]. Of the three effects, complexity is the only one not centered around zero, and is
estimated at 0.24, 95% Credible Interval [0.06, 0.41]. When transformed into standardized
Cohen’s d effect sizes, the effect of subtitles is 0.008, for language proficiency it is 0.010, and
complexity has an effect of 0.120. The (unstandardized) effects of the interactions are all
smaller than 0.02, which - on a scale of 1 to 10 - is so small they will not be further discussed.
Discussion
Open online education plays an important role in the globalization and democratiza-
tion of education. To ensure not only the availability, but also the accessibility of open online
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 15
education, it is vital to remove potential obstacles and biases which put certain students at
a disadvantage, for example students with lower levels of English proficiency. This is not yet
a given, as Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are still provided primarily in English.
In this study, we investigated whether the presence of English subtitles has beneficial, or
possibly detrimental effects on students’ understanding of the content of English videos.
Specifically, we tested the hypothesis that the effect of subtitles on learning depends on the
English proficiency of the students and the Visual-Textual Information Complexity (VTIC)
of the video. Contrary to this hypothesis, we found strong evidence that there is no main
effect of subtitles on learning, nor any interaction, but only a main effect of complexity and
language proficiency. We will discuss these findings in that order.
No main effect of subtitles
Contrary to a range of previous studies, we found strong evidence that subtitles
neither have a beneficial nor detrimental effect on learning from educational videos. In
addition, the presence or absence of subtitles also appear to have no effect on self-reported
mental effort ratings. This is surprising given an apparent consensus that enabling subtitles
increases the general accessibility of online content, as is stated by the Web Content Acces-
sibility Guidelines 2.0 (WCAG, 2008). These null findings contradict two lines of research,
one showing beneficial effects of subtitles, the other showing detrimental effects.
Earlier research which has shown beneficial effects of subtitles are primarily studies on sec-
nd
ond language learning, which show that 2 language subtitles help students with learning
that language (e.g., Baltova, 1999; Chung, 1999; Markham, 1999; Winke et al., 2013). While
this appears conflicting with the results of the present study, the important difference is
that the current study did not use language learning videos but ’content’ videos, and did
nd
not measure gains in 2 language proficiency. Based on the current study it seems that
for content videos there is little to no benefit of enabling subtitles, even for students with a
low language proficiency and for visually complex videos.
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 16
A different body of research has shown detrimental effects of subtitles. This is often labeled
the Redundancy Effect, as the reasoning is that because the subtitles are verbatim identical
to the narration they are redundant and can only hinder the learning process (e.g., Mayer
et al., 2001, 2003). This is in clear contrast with the findings of the current study, which
estimates the effect of subtitles to be (close to) zero. Importantly, the English language
proficiency of the students did not moderate the effect of subtitles, even though the study
included participants with the full range of English proficiency levels. As noted before, it
might be possible that the subtitles helped the students with lower proficiency levels to in-
crease their understanding of English, but it did not affect their test performance. With the
Bayesian analyses we showed that subtitles do not merely have a non-distinguishable effect
(e.g., a non-significant effect in frequentist statistics) but that there is strong evidence for
the absence of a subtitle effect on learning and mental effort. While these conclusions are
only based on the selection of videos used in the current study, it puts the generalizability
of the Redundancy Effect in question by showing that it does not hold for these specific
videos, but arguably also for a wider range of similar videos. More research is needed to
further establish the potential (lack of) effects of subtitles on learning from videos; both
in highly controlled settings as well as in real life educational settings. Specifically, it is
essential to study the generalizability of findings like the Redundacy Effect, and establish
boundary conditions. Even though the current study used four different videos, each with
four different versions, this is not sufficient to be able to generalize to all kinds of educa-
tional videos. However, by manipulating the complexity of the videos, we were able to show
that the null effect of subtitles cannot be explained by complexity or element interactivity
(Paas, Renkl, & Sweller, 2003; Sweller, 1999). Furthermore, we compared the amount of
evidence for a wide range of different models and found that every model which does not
include a main effect of subtitles is stronger than its respective alternative model which
does include subtitles. In addition, the within-subject design of the study severely reduces
the plausibility of confounding participant characteristics. Finally, it is noteworthy that
nd
the current study only used 2 language subtitles, meaning that providing subtitles in the
native language of students can still have an positive effect on learning and accessibility
(Hayati & Mohmedi, 2011; Markham et al., 2001).
Main effect of complexity
The effect of video complexity shows how video design can have a noticeable effect
on test performance, either positively or negatively. In this study, the effect was estimated
at 0.62 grade points (on a scale of 0-10), which translates to a Cohen’s d of 0.31. In addi-
tion, the self-reported mental effort ratings was 0.24 higher for complex videos (on a scale
of 1-10), which is a Cohen’s d of 0.12. As the quizzes took place immediately after each
video, the current study only provides insight in how visual-textual information complexity
affects short-term performance on tests. Effects on long-term learning are unknown, but
it is plausible that the performance gap remains stable, or even worsens as the test delay
increases, as initial (test) performance typically strongly predicts future (test) performance
(e.g., Gow et al., 2011; Harackiewicz, Barron, Tauer, Carter, & Elliot, 2000; Karpicke &
Roediger, 2007). Furthermore, the current study used individual videos while most online
courses have multiple related videos which build on each other. Whether such inter-video
dependency strengthens or weakens the effect of visual-textual information complexity is
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 17
yet unknown, but warrants further investigation.
In this study, the complexity of the videos was manipulated based on four principles ex-
tracted from the literature on multimedia learning. These are the Segmentation Effect, the
Signaling effect, the Spatial Contingency Effect, and the Coherence Effect, all of which are
further explained and discussed in the Introduction, as well as by Mayer and Moreno (2003).
This resulted in two different versions of each video which differ only in the (mainly visual)
complexity of the presentation of information. While the mentioned manipulations have
each been investigated independently, this is - to the best of our knowledge - the first study
which combined all four to experimentally manipulate the complexity of videos. Surpris-
ingly, while the individual manipulations had effect sizes ranging from Cohen’s d’s of 0.48
to 1.36, the combined effect is estimated at a Cohen’s d of 0.31. We note several plausible
interpretations for this discrepancy; the effect of the manipulations varies with 1) video
characteristics, 2) student characteristics, 3) different implementations, and/or varies with
4) study design. First, while the current study used multiple videos and different versions
of each video, a moderating effect of video characteristics cannot be ruled out. For exam-
ple, the size of the effect might partly depend on characteristics such as the video’s length,
educational content, or other aspects which were not manipulated in this study. Should
this be the case, this would mean that the generalizability of the four effects are limited
by these moderating variables. Secondly, characteristics of the students in the different
studies might partly explain the discrepancy in effect sizes. While many of the cited studies
used the relatively homogeneous sub-population of Psychology students, the current study
used participants from various countries, with varying levels of education as well as levels
of English proficiency. Given the wider and less selective range of participants, one would
typically expect a more accurate estimation of the size and generalizability of the studied
effects. Furthermore, given the within-subject design of the current study, it seems unlikely
that potentially relevant participant characteristics confounded the results, which would be
more likely in a between-subject design. Thirdly, it is important to note that the current
study necessarily employed a specific operationalization of the four effects. For example,
there are many ways how one could operationalize the Signaling Effect by using attentional
cues of different kinds, such as underlining, highlighting, or different kinds of arrows or
circles. Given the wide range of possible operationalizations, it is to be expected to see
variation in the effects of these manipulations. While this is likely to be of influence, it
remains unclear whether it is a sufficient explanation. Finally, the fourth potential explana-
tion of the difference in effect sizes is based in differences in study design and methodology.
For example, the current study took place online, and not in an physical location such as
a university. Another potential explanation is the way how Cohen’s d is calculated, as well
as different estimations of the standard deviation, or other choices in statistical procedures
which can differ between studies (Baguley, 2009).
In sum, while there are many plausible reasons for the differences in effect sizes, it remains
unclear what the exact causes are, and whether these are systematic or due to random vari-
ation. This further emphasizes the need to study these instructional design guidelines for
videos using a wide range of videos, in different educational contexts, and with a representa-
tive sample of participants. While it is unrealistic to expect to be able to accurately predict
the effect size of such manipulations with great precision across many different situations, it
is paramount to better understand moderating variables and boundary conditions to make
EFFECTS OF SUBTITLES ON LEARNING 18
better recommendations of how to make high quality educational videos.
Main effect of language proficiency
Students with a higher English language proficiency scored substantially higher
than students with a lower proficiency. The slope of this effect was estimated to be 0.55
grade points. Given the range of language proficiency of 1-5, the grade point difference
between the students with the highest and lowest proficiency levels will be over 2.5 grade
points. This further signifies the issue that open online courses such as MOOCs are not
equally accessible to everyone, as the majority of the courses are provided in English.
By extension, this calls for research on investigating interventions or design strategies
which might help close this performance gap. However, it is important to mention that
the design of the current study does not directly translate to how non-native English
speakers engage with online courses. For example, the participants in this study were not
allowed to re-watch or pause videos, take notes, or use any other strategy which might be
particularly helpful for non-native speakers in online courses. Students who experience
trouble with understanding a video might choose to use such strategies to counteract their
initial disadvantage. However, it is also plausible that non-native English speakers are put
off by the mainly English online courses, and choose to not engage at all, or drop-out early
in such courses, which should be prevented.
Summary and consequences for practice
To summarize, the visual-textual information of a video and especially the language
ability of the student are both strong predictors of learning from content videos. In contrast,
English subtitles neither increased nor decreased the student’s ability to learn from the
videos. However, this does not lead to the conclusion that English subtitles should not
be made available, as they are vital for students with hearing disabilities. Furthermore,
students might prefer watching videos with subtitles for other reasons, even though this
might not directly affect their learning. The extent to which subtitles in the students’ native
language might help them cope with lacking English proficiency is as of yet unknown, and
remains to be investigated. Another possibility would be to provide dubbed versions of each
video to cater to more languages, but this is a costly intervention. Overall, we have shown
that both the language proficiency as well as the video’s complexity can have a substantial
effect on learning from educational videos, which deserves attention in order to increase the
quality and accessibility of open online education.
The Puzzle of Abu Ghraib: Are Democratic Institutions a
Palliative or Panacea?
Christian Davenport Will H. Moore
christiandavenport@mac.com will.moore@fsu.edu
University of Maryland Florida State University
Dave Armstrong
david.armstrong@politics.ox.ac.uk
Oxford University
December 8, 2007
Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the International Studies Association, 28 February–3 March
2007, Chicago, IL and the Annual Meeting of the Peace Science Society (International), 10-12 November 2006,
Columbus, OH. DISCUSSION DRAFT : Moore had last shot at this; Armstrong and Davenport have not yet had
an opportunity to correct his gaffes. Victor Asal, Matt Baum, Bill Berry, Andreas Beger, Julie Brown, Sean
Ehrlich, Justin Esarey, Ben Fordham, Kathleen Gallagher, Doug Gibler, Matt Golder, Sona Golder, Kristian
Gleditsch, H˚avard Hegre, Jason Jordan, John King, Monica Nalepa, Eric Neumayer, Chris Reenock, Jackie Rubin,
Courtenay Ryals, Dave Siegel, Jeff Staton, Doug Van Belle, Joe Young, and the participants at a colloquium at
the University of California, Riverside have offered useful feedback on the project. As is common, we have only
been able to take limited advantage of their comments and suggestions.
Abstract
The events of Abu Ghraib exposed politicians, journalists, military and law enforcement
personnel, NGOs, activists and ordinary citizens to the potential brutality of state repression.
Many were left stunned that the agents of a liberal democracy would perpetrate such horrific
acts against individuals in the state’s control. Such shock makes sense if one believes that
liberal democratic institutions constrain leaders from acting on the utilitarian incentive
to employ torture during interrogations. While such a belief is apparently widespread, is
it consistent with the recent historical record? Extant theories of repression and global
evidence about torture suggest that it is not. We distinguish among three mechanisms
that might constrain the use of torture in liberal democracies: voice, veto, and freedom
of expression. We then argue that voice is unlikely to have a strong effect when the state
is faced with violent dissent, and that the effect of veto and freedom of expression will
be substantially reduced when the state is faced with a violent challenge. To test our
hypotheses we use data from 146 countries covering the years 1980-1999 and investigate
the extent to which voice, veto, or freedom of expression inhibit countries’ use of torture
both in times of quiescence and in times when dissidents challenge the state with violence.
We find that rather than being aberrant, state-sponsored torture like that in Abu Ghraib is
perfectly consistent with both theory and previous experience. More specifically, democratic
institutions reduce the probability that a state uses torture in only limited circumstances.
Is the use of torture by the agents of a liberal democratic state aberrant or common? Re-
sponses to the April 2004 disclosure of the acts of torture perpetrated by U.S. soldiers in Abu
Ghraib prison seem to indicate a difference of opinion about this question. The revelations
commanded tremendous amounts of global attention from politicians, journalists, military and
law enforcement personnel, NGO activists, and ordinary citizens. The responses across these
distinct communities varied significantly, highlighting different levels of surprise and outrage
about what occurred as well as different explanations for why the events took place. For some,
the use of torture was shocking: they could not believe that the United States in particular, and
a liberal democracy in general, would engage in such reprehensible behavior. Many such people
attributed the behavior to “rogue” military personnel and/or “abnormal” circumstances, sug-
gesting that there was no systematic practice of torture employed by the U.S. government. For
others, the events were not startling at all (e.g., Zimbardo 2007). These observers argued that
the events at Abu Ghraib were not aberrant; rather, they are representative of the interrogation
practices of democratic states generally, and the U.S. government in particular, especially when
the people being interrogated are believed to be involved in violent challenges to the state.
These charges did not simply concern recent foreign policy but also addressed earlier discus-
sions about U.S. domestic activity concerning the treatment of “political prisoners” in the 1970s
and 1980s (e.g., Zwerman 1988, 1990) as well as the general practices of U.S. officials within
American prisons (e.g., Brody 2004).
The two perspectives identified above are important because they not only raise specific is-
sues about why prisoner abuse occurred at Abu Ghraib, but more importantly raise larger ques-
tions about whether the institutions of liberal democracies (i.e., popular participation, checks
on majority rule, and freedom of expression) can effectively counter an executive’s incentive to
torture or are palliatives that fail when the state is threatened with violent dissent.
The differences between these perspectives are quite stark. In the former view, democracies
For example, various news reports offered the following from US government officials in May, 2004. “I want
to tell the people of the Middle East that the practices that took place in that prison are abhorrent and they
don’t represent America,” President George W. Bush (Stevenson 2004). “I would like to apologize for our nation
and for our military for the small number of soldiers who committed illegal or unauthorized acts here at Abu
Ghraib,” Major General Geoffrey Miller (Filkens 2004). “It was pretty disgusting, not what you’d expect from
Americans.” Senator Norm Coleman(Chuckman 2004).
rarely use this type of repression, and when it is used it can be attributed to largely idiosyn-
cratic factors (e.g., rogue soldiers and a misunderstanding of political directives). The other
perspective submits that, though democracies respond with considerably less repression than
nondemocracies (Davenport 1995, Davenport and Armstrong 2004), all states have an incentive
to use torture (Wantchekon and Healy 1999, Walzer 2004). This puzzling bi-modal response
to the revelation of Abu Ghraib leads us to investigate the following question: Which, if any,
liberal democratic institutions increase the probability that the executive ignores her incentive
to resort to torture?
The solution to the puzzling bi-modal response lies in recognizing that while executives in
states with liberal democratic institutions are more likely to honor their self-imposed constraints
on publicly visible repressive responses to violent dissent, they have an opportunity to “cheat
behind closed doors” where the public and other actors are not watching. Wantchekon & Healy
(1999) propose a model which shows that the incentive to cheat exists across all regime types,
and we build on their work to argue that while democratic states will exhibit reduced rates of
torture when they are not challenged with violent opposition, they will relax the prohibition
when faced with violent dissident activity. Our argument clashes not only with those who blame
torture on idiosyncratic causes, but also scholars who contend that liberal democracies rarely
use torture (e.g., Einolf 2007).
To investigate this topic, we examine the influence of liberal democracy and dissident be-
havior on torture within 146 countries from 1980 to 1999. To begin, we review the literature on
human rights violation–discussing what we know about why states repress and how democracy,
in particular, has played a prominent role in this explanation. Next, our focus shifts to torture
as a strategy of repressive behavior and the limits–if any–that liberal democratic institutions
might place on executives’ willingness to adopt torture. Within the third section we discuss
the data and methodological techniques, and then we present the empirical results. The results
largely support our expectations about the impact of liberal democratic institutions on the use
of torture, but there are a couple of surprises. The takeaway message is that liberal democratic
institutions are a palliative, not a panacea. In the conclusion we explore the implications of these
findings for human rights/repression research, public policy and social activism. Although we
highlight numerous issues, we submit that the most important implication of our study is that
it suggests a shift away from discussions about democratic exceptionalism and rogue repressive
agents to a broader discussion about the conditions under which liberal democracies engage in
torture and other forms of repression. In short, the analysis compels a serious re-thinking of
the relationship between regime type and repressive action.
1 The Literature on Torture and Repression
The literature on torture is dominated by philosophical debate (e.g., Levinson 2004), re-
ports of abuse (e.g., Amnesty International 1984), studies of the impact of torture on victims
(e.g., Quiroga and Jaranson 2005), and a large body of descriptive-historical monographs (e.g.,
Solzhenitsyn 1974, Ignatieff 1978, Foucault 1979, Peters 1985, Andrews 1991, Millett 1994, Re-
jali 1994). There is little broadly comparative research (though see Einolf 2007, Rejali 2007
for recent exceptions) and few inquiries into the cross-national correlates of torture have been
conducted: only one published study is available (Hathaway 2002).
The study of torture confronts a conceptual problem–the word is applied in a variety of dif-
ferent ways, thereby hindering understanding. While numerous definitions have been advanced,
we accept the UN’s characterization where torture represents:
(a)ny act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intention-
ally inflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining from him or a third person
information or a confession, punishing him for an act he or a third person has com-
mitted or is suspected of having committed or intimidating or coercing him or a
third person, or for any reason based on discrimination of any kind, when such pain
or suffering is inflicted by or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence
of a public official or person acting in an official capacity.
As conceived, this includes a wide range of activities, encompassing both those that might
be “dirty torture” which leaves marks on the body (e.g., beatings, branding, burning, dog
Article 1 (1), Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of Punishment,
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 39/46 of December 1984 and entered into force on
26 June 1987.
attacks, hanging by limbs, sexual assaults), those referred to as “clean torture” (e.g., submersion,
suffocation, electric shocks, forced painful positions, beatings that leave no marks; see Ron
1997, Rejali 2007) and “torture lite” (e.g., denial of food/water, binding/shackling of limbs,
blindfolding, water boarding, exposure to excessive heat/cold, humiliation, mock executions,
rough handling, sleep deprivation, solitary confinement, stripping, and threats; see Bowden
2003). As Rejali (2007) documents, “clean torture” techniques were developed in democratic
countries during the 20th Century and had diffused widely by the turn of the 21st Century.
While much of the policy debate about torture in democratic countries such as the Israel or
the United States centers on “torture lite,” this public discussion obscures the problem of the
widespread use of “clean torture” throughout all countries (Ron 1997, Rejali 2007).
1.1 Extant Theory
The earliest theoretical explanations for repression relied upon rather simplistic structuralist
notions (e.g., Arendt 1973, Dallin and Breslauer 1970, Walter 1969). Within this work, au-
thoritarian political systems compelled political leaders to use coercion in order to proactively
eliminate challengers, create ideal citizens and/or transform political, economic and cultural
systems. Later theories employed what can best be thought of as a structuralist-rationalist
hybrid (e.g., Gartner and Regan 1996, Gurr 1986, Lichbach 1987, Stohl 1983, Wantchekon and
Healy 1999). This work argues that political authorities engage in a decision calculus where
they assess the costs, benefits, probability of success, and existing alternatives to coercion be-
fore deciding whether or not and at what level to use state repression. If the perceived benefits
(behavioral quiescence and political survival) outweigh the expected costs (forgone political le-
gitimacy and resources), the probability of successfully using repressive behavior was high (e.g.,
because of some technological innovation) and alternative mechanisms of control were limited
(e.g., normative influence), then repressive behavior was likely. If, however, the anticipated
costs outweighed the expected benefits, the probability of successfully applying repression was
low, and alternative mechanisms of control were readily available, then repressive behavior was
unlikely.
Both approaches contend that democratic institutions reduce a state’s reliance on repression.
Drawing upon the literature in comparative politics (e.g., “new institutionalism” and “demo-
cratic performance”) as well as research in international relations (the “democratic peace”),
the pacifying influence of this type of political system is largely attributed to the cost that it
imposes on government personnel who engage in relevant activity.
This literature has tended to treat democracy as a whole: rather than disaggregate the
specific institutions that might change an executive’s decision to use repression, democracy has
largely been treated as a single institution. Our reading of the literature suggests that the
implicit mechanism underlying most of this work is the ballot: popular suffrage might serve as
a check on executive authority. Following the direction charted by Davenport and Armstrong
(2004), Bueno de Mesquita et al. (2005), Gates et al. (2006) and Davenport (2007b) we eschew
that conceptualization in favor of a liberal conceptualization of democracy (see below) that
focuses on three mechanisms that might reduce an executive’s incentive to engage in torture:
voice (i.e., suffrage and contestation), veto (i.e., separation of powers), and freedom of expres-
sion (i.e., the ability to criticize). Doing so permits us to make explicit what we believe are
the mechanisms people implicitly have in mind when they argue that liberal democracy reduces
the use of repression, but also allows us to build on those mechanisms to propose hypotheses
explaining why the human rights activists were correct to expect that liberal democratic insti-
tutions have a palliative impact on the use of torture. We then appeal to data covering the
period 1981-1999 to test our expectations.
1.2 Extant Findings
An absence of relevant data has limited our ability to examine the correlates of torture.
Historically, most databases on repression have ignored torture (e.g., Fein 1995, Harff 2003,
Taylor and Jodice 1983). More recent data collection efforts have generally included torture as
one of many different types of repressive behavior considered at the same time (e.g., Cingranelli
and Richards 1999a, Mitchell and McCormick 1988, Poe and Tate 1994, Gibney and Dalton
There are numerous explanations offered for the pacifying influence of democracy on repression but this is
the most compelling (Rosato 2003, Gates et al. 2006).
1996). Only in the past few years have the diverse components of repression been disaggregated
so that torture - as one type of violation, could be identified and examined relative to other
forms of repressive behavior (Cingranelli and Richards 2004b), and it was only a few years prior
that Hathaway (2002) created the first cross-national database specifically focused on the use of
torture. We briefly review the three studies of the cross-national correlates of torture (Hathaway
2002, Gilligan and Nesbitt 2006, Powell and Staton 2007) before turning our attention to the
broader literature on repression.
Using a five-point scale of torture generated from State Department Country Reports, Hath-
away examined 165 countries from 1985 to 1998 with a fairly standard human rights model that
included a measure of democratic institutions. She was most interested in the influence of hu-
man rights treaty ratification, and found that ratification of the Convention Against Torture
(CAT) only reduces the use of torture among democracies. In other words, signing a treaty had
no influence on state torture and, indeed, in certain cases it made it worse, unless the regime
had reached the highest levels of democratic government.
Gilligan and Nesbitt (2006) report the same findings at the system level. They are interested
in the impact of norms and thus focus on the impact that the percentage of states that have
ratified the CAT has on each state’s likelihood of using torture (they control for whether each
individual state has signed the CAT). They find that the global proportion of signatories either
has no effect or, in several specifications, actually increases the likelihood that a state uses
torture. Further, whether an individual state is a signatory has no effect on torture probability,
but democratic states do have a lower probability.
Following related work by Hathaway (2003, 2004), Powell and Staton (2007) study compli-
ance with the Convention Against Torture and report that the effectiveness of a state’s judiciary
is a key variable for understanding the intersection of ratification and compliance. They argue
Cingranelli and Richards (1999b) is an early publication using disaggregated physical integrity rights data
from what became the CIRI data set (discussed below), but while they examine the global trend in torture during
the post cold war period, they only report the correlates of political imprisonment.
More specifically, Hathaway uses an interaction term between ratification and “full democracy,” which she
defines as a country-year with a Polity score > 7.
Hathaway’s finding is generally consistent with the work of Davenport and Armstrong (2004) and Bueno de
Mesquita et al. (2005) who maintain that only the highest level of democratic institutions reduce repression, a
point to which we return below.
that states that have weak judiciaries will ratify the treaty and fail to comply. States with strong
judiciaries, on the other hand, will decline to ratify for fear that their ability to use coercion
during interrogation will be constrained by domestic courts. Both Hathaway (2003, 2004) and
Powell and Staton (2007) thus argue, and produce evidence to support their arguments, that
treaties have no effect because those states that can ignore them are considerably more likely
to sign, and those that cannot ignore their treaty commitments are considerably less likely to
sign. This work also suggests that the reported relationship between democracy and torture is
based on a mis-specification (i.e., was produced by the failure to appreciate the selection effect).
Beyond the Hathaway, Gilligan and Nesbitt, and Powell and Staton studies there is a consid-
erable literature on state repression and human rights violations (e.g., Bueno de Mesquita et al.
2005, Cingranelli and Richards 1999a, Davenport 1995, 1999, Davenport and Armstrong 2004,
Fein 1995, Hibbs 1973, Krain 1997, Mitchell and McCormick 1988, Poe and Tate 1994, Regan
and Henderson 2002, Zanger 2000). All of these studies have found that democracy decreases
human rights violations. This, and similar, findings are commonly referred to as the “domestic
democratic peace” (Hegre et al. 2001).
Like Hathaway (2002) the domestic democratic peace seems to favor the first characterization
offered above: torture is the product of a “few bad apples.” Yet, because they conceptually and
operationally combine distinguishable forms of repression these studies fail to shed light on the
differential use of particular techniques.
Finally, few of these studies considered the possibility that context matters: they do not
examine the possibility that violent dissent has a conditional impact on the use of repression.
Yet Davenport (1995) reports that while all regimes respond to violent dissent with repression,
states with democratic institutions employ lower levels of repression than non-democratic states.
Unlike the other research on this topic, his finding is ambivalent toward the question asked here.
On the one hand it suggests that democratic institutions have a negative impact on repression.
On the other hand, however, it demonstrates that states with democratic institutions respond to
violence with repression, but do so at lower levels. We build on that ambivalence to ask whether
See, also, Abbott and Snidal (2000, 432-3) for a similar argument.
Two exceptions–Davenport (1997) and Richards (1999)–report that elections fail to reduce levels of human
rights violations, a finding to which we return below.
democratic institutions are palliative when it comes to torture: they “reduce the symptoms”
under some conditions, but fail to “cure the disease.”
2 Liberal Democratic Institutions and Torture
We begin by developing the implicit claims supporting the expectation that liberal democ-
racies will eschew torture. To do so we lay out an explicit argument about the mechanisms that
might eliminate an executive’s incentive to use torture. Our argument advances four claims.
First, all states respond to violent dissent with repression, one form of which is torture. Sec-
ond, all states that hold a prisoner they believe has information about planned future acts of
violent dissent have an incentive to use torture if the prisoner will not volunteer the information
(Wantchekon and Healy 1999). Third, we suggest that the effect of voice is more likely than
veto or freedom of expression to be palliative: when dissidents challenge the state with violence
the people to whom an executive is responsible for retention of her office are unlikely to hold
her accountable for “dirtying her hands” with torture to keep them safe (Walzer 2004). Fourth,
unlike voice, institutions that contain veto points are populated with actors who have an incen-
tive to challenge an executive who uses torture. Similarly, in states that guarantee freedom of
expression people with an incentive to challenge the executive will also exist (i.e., reporters and
activists). Put differently, there is an incentive compatibility between the executive and the
median voter (or winning coalition members) with respect to torturing someone the executive
believes is involved in violent dissent. However, veto points populated by partisans of another
party or justices who desire independence from the executive, and reporters and human rights
activists have an incentive incompatability vis-´a-vis the executive who tortures suspected vio-
lent dissidents. We thus expect that while all three liberal democratic institutions will reduce
the use of torture when the state is not challenged with violent dissent, we expect that effect to
be strongly curtailed–especially for voice–when dissidents engage in violent protest or rebellion.
Below we elaborate each claim and present testable hypotheses.
2.1 Hypotheses
We begin with the conventional wisdom about regime type and torture that, as the shocked
response to Abu Ghraib revealed, suggests that democratic states rarely resort to torture and
certainly do so with far less frequency than autocratic states. The key to developing the nascent
argument that likely underlies the conventional wisdom lies in laying bare the extent to which
liberal democracies have institutions that [1] enhance participation such that the population can
respond to moral and legal concerns about torture and threaten the executive who uses torture
with removal via the ballot and/or [2] protect minorities by enabling other political actors
outside the executive who have an incentive to challenge an executive who resorts to torture to
do so. We follow Davenport (2007b) and suggest that two implicit causal mechanisms support
the conventional wisdom: voice (an open and competitive political system with elections that
provide politicians with an incentive to heed popular opinion) and veto (constraint on executive
authority created by a dispersion of power). We further follow the lead of those who emphasize
the important role of free speech in democracy (e.g., Mueller 1992, Van Belle 2000) and argue
that the legal guarantee of freedom of expression enables the emergence of another group of
actors who have an incentive to check executive power, thus giving the executive cause to think
twice before (tacitly) approving the use of torture.
Gallie (1956) identified democracy as the most contested of political concepts, and we readily
recognize the rocky shoals on which any given definition rests. We elide that debate to some
extent by focusing less on democracy than on democratic institutions. That said, we embrace
a conceptual definition that includes liberal democratic rather as well as classic democratic
institutions. Many scholars prefer a definition of democracy that focuses attention exclusively
on rule by the people (e.g., DeTocqueville 1835; Schumpeter 1962; and Dahl 1971). In our
approach voice refers rule by the people and includes both the extent of suffrage in elections
Other examples of definitions of democracy as liberal democracy include Collier and Levitsky (1997), Zakaria
(1997) and Gates et al. (2006). Collier and Levitsky (1997) propose a procedural definition that adds civil liberties
to Dahl’s (1971) two dimensions of suffrage (participation) and contestation. Zakaria (1997) defines liberal
democracies as those that hold free and fair elections, are governed by the rule of law, separate government
power across different branches, and protect civil liberties and property. Gates et al. (2006) add executive
constraints to Dahl’s two dimensions. We lump Dahl’s participation and contestation dimensions into voice.
Our veto is similar to Gates, et. al’s (2006) executive constraints. As we explain below we treat freedom of
expression, which Collier and Levitsky include under civil liberties and Gates, et. al. do not consider, as a
distinct characteristic that influences both voice and veto.
and the absence of restrictions on the ability of politicians to enter the electoral arena and
compete for office. Veto, on the other hand, identifies the extent to which actors other than the
executive are able to exercise authority. It thus includes the extent to which an independent
legislature and/or judiciary can check executive authority.
While previous work ion democracy and human rights violations has limited attention to
those two characteristics of democratic regimes (e.g., Davenport and Armstrong 2004, Bueno de
Mesquita et al. 2005, Davenport 2007b) we add a third characteristic that others conceive of as
a distinct characteristic of democracy (e.g., Collier and Levitsky 1997, Zakaria 1997, Mueller
1992, Van Belle 2000): freedom of expression and alternative sources of information. We treat
freedom of expression as a distinct characteristic of (liberal) democracies because free speech
and press make it possible for activists and, especially, reporters to challenge or expose illegal
executive activity.
To the extent that the conventional wisdom is correct one would expect to find that at least
one of these three democratic institutions–voice, veto, or freedom of expression–would reduce
the probability that an executive uses torture. That appears to be the type of expectation
(implicitly) held by those who were shocked by the revelation of Abu Ghraib. We offer an
alternative argument and suggest that while liberal democratic institutions may be associated
with lower probabilities of torture, the extent to which they have such an impact will be strongly
mediated by the presence of violent dissent. Put another way we are quite circumspect that
liberal democratic institutions will substantially reduce the likelihood of torture when the state
is challenged with acts of dissident violence. More specifically, we argue below that voice is
unlikely to have any effect in the presence of violence, and that the negative effects of both
veto and freedom of expression will be strongly diminished by the presence of violent dissident
activity.
We begin our case by noting that a large body of studies have uniformly found that all
governments respond to dissident violence with repression (see Davenport 2007a). When we
combine that finding with the emphasis governments place on intelligence collection as a counter-
insurgency tactic we are led to conjecture that what holds for the broad class of repressive
behavior will also hold for the more specific practice of torture. That said, Davenport (1995)
found that not all forms of violent dissent affect government repression equally. That leads us to
focus our attention on the most threatening forms of violence–acts of guerrilla war or a state of
civil war–and anticipate that this type of violent dissent will dramatically raise the propensity
of executives to authorize the use of torture.
Two arguments produce dramatic conclusions with respect to the incidence of torture when
a state is threatened with violent dissent. First, Wantchekon and Healy (1999, 599) develop
a game theoretic model that demonstrates that once a state concludes that a captive has in-
formation it could utilize to thwart attacks “torture takes place with probability 1.00.” Their
conclusion–that all states that have a utilitarian justification for using torture will end up doing
so–is based on the incentives of the actors involved: a state, an interrogator, and a dissident. In
their game the state believes that the dissident likely has information about the planned acts
of guerrilla struggle or civil war. Questioning under the guidelines established by the human
rights regime (i.e., the International Bill of Human Rights, the Geneva Conventions, and the
Convention against Torture) often fails to yield useful information. In such a situation the state
can either instruct the interrogator to use torture or it can accept that it cannot access the
information it believes the suspected dissident has. Wantchekon and Healy (1999) show that
because [1] the innocent person cannot divulge information and [2] the dissident has an incentive
to hide the truth, the state always has a utilitarian incentive to employ torture because there
is a chance that doing so will yield useful information
Walzer (2004) and Levey (2007) argue that liberal democracy and torture can co-exist
comfortably. They argue, in effect, that politicians in liberal democracies are agents hired
by the voters to provide protection for the body politic. While voters in liberal democracies
prefer to behave ethically, they also expect politicians to ‘dirty their hands’ when doing so is
manuals from the 1960s and 1980s.
Among other things their model demonstrates that the interrogator need not be a sadist. In the model a
professional interrogator who places obligation to duty over ethical concerns will follow orders to torture.
These arguments implicitly assume that torture is effective for eliciting information or eliminating dissent.
To our knowledge neither relationship has been examined systematically (Fein, Lehner and Vossekuil 2006).
Individuals point to specific instances but they have not attempted to investigate the issue rigorously across
space and time. Instead, our argument assumes that authorities believe it to be an important strategy for
practical as well as symbolic reasons in countering specific types of contentious behavior.
needed to provide adequate security. Politicians know this, and respond accordingly, but try to
do so in secret because they cannot be certain whether the voters will approve of any given use
of torture (i.e., agree that the threat to security warranted torture). As long as voters reject
politicians who are too eager to ‘dirty their hands’ when such politicians fail to adequately deny
and hide their behavior, democracy can function properly. Discussions of the ‘ticking time
bomb scenario’ provide similar arguments (e.g., see Dershowtiz’s (2002) discussion of ‘torture
warrants’ and the discussion in Bowden (2003)).
These arguments and the evidence on repressive responses to dissident violence lead us to
question the conventional wisdom that liberal democratic institutions will always reduce the
likelihood that a state turns to torture.
That said, while the literature reports that all states respond to dissident violence with
repression, Davenport (1995) reports that nondemocratic states have a stronger repressive re-
sponse than anocratic states, and anocratic states have a stronger repressive reaction than
democratic states. In their studies of human rights behavior Davenport and Armstrong (2004)
and Bueno de Mesquita et al. (2005) find that regime type has an essentially binary effect: only
highly democratic institutions systematically violate fewer of their citizens’ human rights. Yet
none of those studies, the other work we have reviewed, nor Hathaway’s study, has considered
the possibility that Wantchekon and Healy (1999) are right when they contend that all states
facing a dissident threat will act on their incentive to employ torture. We rely upon both the
Wantchekon & Healy model and the “dirty hands” argument to produce our first hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1: The probability that a state uses torture is, within measurement error, one
when the dissidents use violent action to challenge the state, but less than one in the
absence of violent threats to state rule.
We can express hypothesis one more formally as: p(T | ∼ V D) < p(T |V D) ≈ 1, where T rep-
This argument has interesting implications for democratic performance, a point to which we return in the
conclusion.
Democratic states often justify the use of “coercive interrogation” as a necessary response to particularly
elusive challenges–forms of dissent, which are unconventional in their approaches (e.g., using “hit and run” tactics,
relying upon avoidance of authorities until conflict occurs) and that are not believed to be well countered with
other strategies of repression. This was particularly true with respect to the Bush Administration’s policy toward
the interrogation of enemy combatants in Guantanamo Bay, which then spread to other US detention centers
such as Abu Ghraib (Hersh 2004, Mayer 2006, Hersh 2007).
resents the use of torture, V D indicates violent dissident activity, and the ∼ symbol represents
“not.”
Having presented the first hypothesis, note the following tension in the arguments we
have advanced thus far. First, the empirical work on states’ repressive responses to threats,
Wantchekon & Healy’s (1999) game theoretic model, Walzer’s (2004) and Levey’s (2007) ar-
guments about “dirty hands,” and the counterinsurgent literature all suggest that states will
respond to violent threats with torture. Yet second, the argument above suggests that at least
one, and perhaps all three, institutional characteristics of democracies–voice, veto, and free-
dom of expression–will inhibit the executive’s use of torture. Are these palliative institutions
that operate effectively only in the absence of a violent dissident threat, or are they closer to
a panacea that effectively constrains executives from violating human rights despite the utili-
tarian incentive to do so? We present two reasons to believe that while veto and freedom of
expression will provide some constraint on executives in liberal democracies challenged with
violent dissent, voice is considerably less likely to do so.
First, if we assume that [a] the executive, and [b] veto players in other branches of government
and/or the median voter (or winning coalition member) have different preferences across the
issue of human rights versus the instrumental value of torture, and [c] the press has professional,
ethical, or pecuniary incentives to investigate allegations of torture, then we would expect liberal
democratic institutions to make a difference.
Yet, is there reason to believe that the torture preferences of the median voter (or winning
coalition member) will diverge from a democratically elected executive when the state is faced
with violent dissent? We take a pessimistic view and suggest that this is not likely. A repre-
sentative mechanism motivates our expectation. We conjecture that the (relative) openness of
the political system in countries with democratic institutions will tend strongly to produce the
outcome that only groups that have little, if any, effective representation will resort to violent
We need not assume that veto players necessarily have different policy preferences from the executive. If the
median voter (or winning coalition member) has a preference with respect to the use of torture that differs from
the executive, then the veto players who desire to displace or replace the executive have an incentive to punish
an executive who breaks the law by using torture (recall that torture is illegal in international and virtually all
national law). The executive knows this and will take it into account when deciding whether to (implicitly) order
the use of torture.
tactics to press their claims about changes in policy. Further, if this view is shared by other
actors in democratic polities it will undermine the legitimacy of the use of violence to achieve
political ends. As such, the median voter (much less the winning coalition member) is unlikely
to punish an executive ruling a democratic polity who (tacitly) orders torture against suspected
dissidents in the government’s control when those dissidents have used violence to advance their
claims.
Second, these processes are reinforced by the more philosophical arguments advanced by
Foucault (1979) and Walzer (2004). Foucault argues that people want the state to protect them
without having to acknowledge that fact. [CD: Please revise/amplify] As noted above,
Walzer makes a similar, though distinct, argument that the public wants executives who will
“dirty their hands” to protect the body-politic, but ethical and moral considerations entice
the public to (desire to) punish executives who get caught with “dirty hands.” Walzer thus
concludes that executives realize that publics tacitly expect them to use torture, but expect
them to do so secretly and issue public denials.
Third, though studies by Davenport (1998), Davenport and Armstrong (2004), and Bueno de
Mesquita et al. (2005) find that elections are associated with lower levels of repression, Dav-
enport (1997) finds that elections only reduce repression in autocratic countries, and Richards
(1999) reports that elections have no effect on the likelihood that a state uses repression. The
positive results notwithstanding, when we combine the arguments listed above with the negative
findings reported by Davenport (1997) and Richards (1999), we are led to expect voice to be
ineffective when the state is faced with violent dissent. Dissidents who use violence are unlikely
to be voters (much less winning coalition members), and thus–given their use of violence–are
unlikely to receive widespread public support. Further, executives are likely to believe that the
voters (and especially the winning coalition members) expect them to use torture when “neces-
sary.” Both of these arguments suggest that the executive and the median voter (and winning
coalition member) have largely compatible incentives when it comes to security and torture.
One can build upon the theoretical results of Bueno de Mesquita et al. (2003) to extend this argument to
states with autocratic regimes. Their selectorate theory implies that states with autocratic institutions will have
small selectorates (and even smaller winning coalitions), and it is difficult to imagine members of the winning
coalition pressuring the executive not to torture dissidents who are using violence.
We therefore offer the following:
Hypothesis 2: When states are confronted with violent acts of political dissent, voice will lose
its effectiveness at reducing the probability that the state uses torture.
We can express hypothesis two more explicitly in two parts.
2a: p(T |V c, ∼ V D) (cid:28) p(T | ∼ V c, ∼ V D)
2b: p(T |V c, V D) (cid:39) p(T | ∼ V c, V D)
where V c represents voice, the (cid:28) symbol indicates considerably less than, and the other terms
are as defined above.
What of veto? Here, our proposed mechanism is different: unlike the executive and the
median voter (or member of the winning coalition), the executive and veto players have dif-
ferent incentives. While our argument about the ineffectiveness of voice depends on the policy
preferences of the median voter and the perceived legitimacy of the tactics of those demanding a
change in policy, we invite the reader to consider that the exercise of veto will be a function of [1]
constituent representation and/or [2] careerism. That is, an actor in a position to exercise veto
would need to be motivated to do so because she represented a constituency who is opposed to
the executive’s behavior or, even in the absence of such a constituency, believes that she might
be able to advance her career interests by challenging the executive. Our argument about the
likely ineffectiveness of voice limits the likeliness that the first mechanism operates, though
the second is still available, and we suggest that while it will operate, it will do so with only
limited impact when the state is challenged with violent dissent. Specifically, we anticipate
that only partisans who are not members of the executive’s party will respond to the careerism
incentive. For example, independent courts will have an incentive to retain their independence
(should they have any), and politicians outside the executive’s party have an incentive to either
We argue above that the median voter is unlikely to be sympathetic to victims of torture. Politicians who
wish to displace the executive will thus make their charges on moral and legal grounds whereas the executive
will either deny the charges or defend her behavior on utilitarian grounds, emphasizing the evil goals of the
dissidents and their violent activities. Judges will make their case on legal grounds, likely buttressed by moral
claims. Which of these actors mounts the more effective media campaign is outside the bounds of our study. Our
argument merely requires that veto players from other parties, or the judiciary, have an incentive to persuade the
median voter that the executive should not have used torture and that the executive believe that there is some
chance that such efforts will persuade the median voter to sanction the executive. The more veto players there
are in a polity, the more wary the executive should be about adopting a policy that would lead her to need to
wage such a public relations campaign.
weaken, or perhaps displace the executive. The executive should anticipate that the greater
the levels of separation of power and/or number of veto players in a polity the greater will be
the likelihood that one of them will expose the executive’s (implicit) sanction of torture. This
recognition should lessen the likelihood that the executive will respond to the strong incentive
to (implicitly) approve torture when dissidents use violence.
Hypothesis 3: When states are confronted with violent acts of political dissent the effective-
ness of veto will be considerably reduced.
Hypothesis three can be presented more formally as
3a: p(T |V t, ∼ V D) (cid:28) p(T | ∼ V t, ∼ V D)
3b: p(T |V t, V D) < p(T | ∼ V t, V D)
where V t represents veto, and the other terms are as defined above.
Finally, freedom of expression produces a group of actors whose incentives are incompatible
with an executive who is breaking the law. That human rights activists have goals at odds
with an executive using torture is readily apparent. Mueller (1992) argues that the greater
the freedom of expression in a polity the greater the ability to petition (or lobby). Activist
groups–in our case, human rights and legal activists–will have a greater impact on public policy
the greater the freedom of expression.
Turning to the press we assume that news reporters and editors respond to the dictum
that “if it bleeds it leads.” We further assume that torture both disgusts and titillates, and
that scandal sells. Thus ambitious reporters and editors working in a polity with freedom of
expression have a career incentive to uncover, and report, stories of an executive’s (implicit)
sanction of torture. Activists further have an incentive to make charges to reporters. Thus, the
greater the freedom of expression protections in a polity, the more we expect activists and the
press to challenge executives that overstep legal boundaries.
As noted above, that the median voter is unlikely to be sympathetic to victims of torture does not undermine
our argument. Because the size of the audience is likely to be a positive function of the sensational aspects of
the story, many (and, we submit, the modal) reporters and editors will look to interview activists who will make
emotional appeals to ethics, norms, and the law. Again, whether the executive is able to win a public relations
battle in the face of such reports is immaterial to our argument. We merely require that the executive believe
that she might lose, and act accordingly. In such a circumstance she will take that into account, and thus will
be increasingly less likely to use torture the greater the protections of freedom of expression in the polity over
which she rules.
We suggest that the outcome of activists and the press being more likely to publicly challenge
an executive of a state that protects freedom of expression is that executives in such states will
be less likely to (tacitly) endorse torture for doing so might trigger public attacks that could
threaten their tenure in office. Nevertheless, we return to the arguments of Wantchekon and
Healy (1999) and Walzer (2004) and observe that when the state is threatened with violent
dissident activity, the executive has a strong incentive to (tacitly) authorize torture of captured
suspected dissidents. Yet, while all executives will have an incentive to torture a suspected
dissident in the security forces control, executives in states with freedom of expression guarantees
will be less likely to act on that incentive than executives in states with fewer or no such
guarantees. This discussion leads us to offer the following hypothesis.
Hypothesis 4: When states are confronted with violent acts of political dissent the negative
impact of a free press on the likelihood of torture will be considerably reduced.
Like the preceding two hypotheses, hypothesis four can be expressed more explicitly as follows:
4a: p(T |F A, ∼ V D) (cid:28) p(T | ∼ F A, ∼ V D)
4b: p(T |F A, V D) < p(T | ∼ F A, V D)
where F A represents freedom of expression, and the other terms are as defined above.
If our arguments are on target, they not only solve the puzzle of Abu Ghraib, but also illu-
minate what may prove to be one of the biggest weaknesses in the domestic democratic peace.
The interactive influence identified here is crucial to the current discussion because it reveals
the potential fragility of the domestic democratic peace. For instance, if liberal democratic
institutions only diminish repression in certain circumstances, then this is an important finding
for academic research, public policy, and advocacy. Moreover, the democracy-violent dissent
interaction is consistent with broader discussions about socio-political control within modern,
democratic societies which emphasize the importance of reducing public scrutiny of govern-
ment coercive action while simultaneously allowing authorities to pursue political order (e.g.,
Donner 1980). This last point is particularly interesting for it suggests that liberal democratic
institutions do not eliminate state repression; they merely change its form. Discussions of this
transformation tend to focus on non-violent techniques like electronic surveillance (e.g., Gid-
dens 1987), but the same argument can be applied to torture as well (e.g., Rejali 1994, Einolf
2007). To summarize, while democratic institutions likely depress an executive’s incentive to
use torture, that effect is likely palliative when the state is threatened with violence. Further,
we suspect that voice is even less likely than veto or freedom of expression to have an impact
during periods of armed protest and rebellion.
3 Research Design, Data and Methodology
Because our argument focuses on a comparison between states with democratic and auto-
cratic institutions we need a sample with substantial variation across those institutions. We
also require variation in both violent activity targeting the state (i.e., violent dissent) and state
uses of torture. A cross-national sample is most appropriate, and though we do not restrict
our hypotheses to the final quarter of the 20th Century, data availability limits our attention
to that time frame. Our unit of observation, then, is the country-year, and we have a pooled
cross-sectional time-series data structure. Below we discuss the estimation issues that arise.
Our research design has an important bias issue: our measure of torture is a biased under
count of torture events. This is not our choice; under counts are inevitable in any empirical
measure of an event that conspirators wish to hide from public view. Importantly, this bias is
not a serious problem for our research design. As King, Keohane and Verba (1994, 130) explain,
truncation in the dependent variable produces biased inferences of the size of the effect of any
independent variable on that dependent variable. In other words, our study will underestimate
the substantive effect of regime type and threat on torture. More specifically, given that we
develop a dichotomous indicator of torture (see below) our measure will misclassify states that
successfully hide their use of torture as states that did not use torture. This type of measurement
error is biased against our hypothesis and is thus the conservative sort of bias that one wants if
one’s design or measures must contain bias.
At a recent meeting H˚avard Hegre expressed his belief that these data suffer from another, more tenacious,
form of measurement error that we will call conditional bias: the extent to which the data have a downward
bias is not constant across press freedom. Bollen (1992, 200) and Goodman and Jinks (2003, 175-6) assert that
this is a serious problem in all human rights performance data, and Drakos and Gofas (2006) produce evidence
to support the claim that the same measurement bias exists with respect to data that record the number of
acts of terror (i.e., states that ensure freedom of the press will have systematically less under-reporting of terror
3.1 Measuring Torture
To measure our dependent variable, we use data from the Cingranelli and Richards (CIRI)
Human Rights database which codes the State Department and Amnesty International country
reports in 146 countries from 1980 to 1999. The CIRI project defines torture as
the purposeful inflicting of extreme pain, whether mental or physical, by government
officials or by private individuals at the instigation of government officials. Torture
includes the use of physical and other force by police and prison guards that is
cruel, inhuman, or degrading. Torture can be anything from simple beatings, to
other practices such as rape or administering shock or electrocution as a means of
getting information, or a forced confession (Cingranelli and Richards 2004a, 12).
It thus includes acts of “dirty torture,” “clean torture,” and “torture lite,” and is thus a valid
indicator for our study. The CIRI project codes an ordinal variable based on the number of
torture events reported in a given country-year, thus producing an under count of the real
number. As noted above this bias works against finding support for our hypothesis and is thus
conservative. The original indicator is a trichotomous measure of the number of incidents (with
one and 50 as the two thresholds). We collapse the two non-zero values to create a binary
indicator scored one when there is at least one reported case of torture in a given country-year
and zero when there are none.
events than states that restrict the press). Interestingly, Li (2005) argues that–with respect to acts of terror–the
conventional wisdom is misplaced, and produces statistical results consistent with his expectations. Leaving
the measurement bias in the terror data aside, measurement bias in our project this suggests that we have a
systematic over-reporting of zeros (no torture) in countries that restrict the press. This is a different type of bias
and requires a solution. We are unaware of work that reports and addresses this issue, and have set out to write
a zero-inflated logit model. Zero-inflated models for event counts are well developed, but we are unfamiliar with
efforts to extend this type of model to a logit setting. One of the authors of this study has recently developed,
with others, an alpha version of such an estimator. Should we successfully develop this estimator, a future version
of this study will report the results obtained when one uses that estimator. We should also note that Hathaway
and Ho (2004) use a Bayesian factor analytic approach as a solution to generic measurement error (as opposed
to the specific measurement bias considered here).
measure physical integrity rights, which combined distinct strategies of repression (e.g., Cingranelli and Richards
1999a, Henderson 1991, Mitchell and McCormick 1988, Poe and Tate 1994), CIRI is an important project because
it disaggregates human rights violations, individually identifying torture, extra-judicial killings, disappearance,
political imprisonment, freedom of speech and press, freedom of religion, freedom of movement, freedom of
assembly and association, political participation, worker’s rights, women’s political rights as well as women’s
economic and social rights (Cingranelli and Richards 2004b).
We selected CIRI rather than the Hathaway (2002) data for several reasons. First, Hathaway
uses only U.S. State Department reports, which Poe et al. (2001) suggest has a particular bias.
Cingranelli and Richards (2004b) use both the State Department and Amnesty International
data to code countries on human rights practices. Second, the Hathaway measure includes fewer
countries (likely as a function of using the State Department Country Report). In particular,
one of the countries excluded from Hathaway’s sample is the United States. Though this is
not necessarily a fatal flaw, the fact that the behavior of the United States is motivating this
investigation requires us to take lengths to ensure the U.S. is in the sample. Finally, the
Hathaway sample includes fewer years (she starts at 1985 and CIRI starts at 1980). We prefer
to leverage all of the data possible to test our argument.
3.2 Empirical Measures of Democratic Institutions
A sizeable number of empirical measures of democratic institutions has become available in
recent years, and as such we have a number of potential operational indicators for our voice,
each concept.
A proper discussion of these indicators exceeds the space available for an article, so we have
moved that discussion to an Appendix that we will make available online with publication, but
for the present is attached as part of this document. Three of the variables require clarification
here. The ACLP binary measure of democracy comes from the updated version in Cheibub and
Gandhi (2004) We reversed the scale so that 0 is an autocratic polity and 1 is a democracy.
CIRI’s Speech Restriction variable we reversed the scale such that it still ranges from 1–3, but
one is now severe restrictions and three is no restrictions. For Van Belle’s Media Restriction
indicator we collapsed the scale to a binary indicator where a value of one indicates a free press.
3.3 Violent Dissent and other Exogenous Variables
To examine our hypotheses we also need to operationalize violent political dissent. To do
so we use two different sources. First, we use data on civil war coded by the Correlates of War
Project (Sarkees 2000, Singer and Small 1972). Second, we use a dichotomous variable signifying
Concept Source Variable Range
Voice Alvarez et al. (1996) aclpreg 0–1
Bernhard, Nordstrom and Reenock (2001) democracy 0–1
Polyarchy Index (Vanhanen 2000b) PolyDemoc 0–47
Gates et al. (2006) Polyarchy Recoding logpartcomp 0–4.3
Polity’s Openness of Executive Recruitment xropen 0–4
(Marshall and Jaggers 2001)
Polity’s Competitiveness of Executive xrcomp 0–3
Recruitment (Marshall and Jaggers 2001)
Polity’s Competitiveness of Participation parcomp 0–5
(Marshall and Jaggers 2001)
Veto Veto Points (Keefer 2005) checks 1–18
Judicial Independence (Political Risk Group nd) J 0–1
Law & Order (Political Risk Group nd) Law Order 2-6
Legislative Veto Points (Henisz 2002) PolConIII 0–0.893
sub-Federal Veto (Henisz 2002) F 0–1
Legislative/Judicial/sub-Federal Veto PolConV 0–0.893
Points (Henisz 2002)
Polity’s Executive Constraints xconst 0–7
(Marshall and Jaggers 2001)
Freedom Speech Restriction (Cingranelli and Richards 2004b) speech 1–3
of Expression Media Restriction (Van Belle 2000) fpressd2 0–1
the presence of guerrilla war in any given country-year taken from the Cross-National Time-
Series Data Archive (Banks 2001). Since these events are relatively rare, and in this context
providing estimates with any precision would be difficult, we create a variable we name violent
dissent that is a dichotomous variable coded 1 when either of the violent conflict measures
identified above exist and 0 when neither is present. We thus have a binary measure of violent
dissent, and we multiply voice, veto, and free speech, respectively, by this measure to create the
variables that are used to evaluate our three hypotheses.
We also include two control variables that have been found to effect the use of repressive
strategies in a broad range of empirical studies: GDP per capita and Population and are also
known to co-vary with our other variables of interest. To measure these variables we use the
replication data from Fearon and Laitin (2003).
3.4 Statistical Methodology
Building on the advice of Beck et al. (2002), we use a dynamic logit model. The dynamic
modifier suggests that the logit incorporates temporal dynamics. We use this model for both
substantive and statistical reasons. First, we are interested in how violent challenges make
governments change their repressive strategy with respect to torture. This model allows us to
investigate the probability that an executive (implicitly) endorses torture across two contexts:
when it has not been (implicitly) endorsing torture, and when it has already been (implicitly)
endorsing torture. Second, this type of analysis has been suggested by Beck et al. (2002) as a
reasonable way to deal with discrete pooled time-series cross-section data. We now present our
empirical results.
Sambanis (2004, 822) argues that population is likely robust in studies of civil war onset because studies
do not normalize deaths by population (i.e., use a ‘per capita deaths’ threshold rather than ‘deaths’ threshold).
Given that we use a binary measure based on a count of torture events rather than torture events per capita, we
include population in our study.
While “we can omit a control variable if. . . [t]he omitted variable is uncorrelated with the included variable,”
we must control for variables we know to be correlated with our primary variables of interest (King, Keohane
and Verba 1994, 170). See, also, Ray (2003, 13-15). A number of studies have shown that both regime type and
the presence of violent dissent are associated with per capita national income and population.
4 Findings
We begin with some descriptives. Cingranelli and Richards (1999a, 411) report that in the
final twenty years of the twentieth century states respected the physical integrity right of freedom
from torture less than any other such right. We use those data, and in our study torture is
depressingly common: between 1981 and 1999 79 percent of the country-years exhibited at least
one reported case of torture. Moving to bi-variate relationships, we established the plausibility of
our hypotheses by first examining the joint distribution of torture with each of our independent
variables using cross-tabular contingency tables. We do not report those results here, except to
note that when a state was faced with at least one act of violent dissent the observed frequency
of torture is 0.97. While that is not quite the 1.0 value predicted by Wantchekon and Healy
(1999), it is important to reiterate that this is almost surely an under count (i.e., some countries
in some years likely were successful hiding their use of torture), and for practical intents and
purposes can be treated as consistent with their expectation. We thus interpret it as bi-variate
evidence consistent with hypothesis one.
prior to any given year has a substantial impact. 93 percent of the states that tortured in the
previous year continue to torture in any given year, yet 33 percent of those states that did not
torture in the preceeding year use torture in any given year. These figures underscore the point
highlighted by Cingranelli and Richards (1999a): torture is not only common, but states that
use it have a very strong tendency to keep using it. Further, states that did not use it have a
non-trivial probability of using it in the following year. This matrix also foreshadows a finding
we report below: when a state used torture last year there is rather limited variation to explain
in the probability that it uses torture this year.
on the absence/presence of violent dissent. A handful of points are worth highlighting. First, we
see that the transition to/from torture is effectively the same in the absence of violent dissent as
Earlier versions of this paper that were reported at professional meetings contain some of those results, and
all of them can be reproduced using a replication data set that we plan to make available upon publication of
this study.
In the absence of violent dissent the relative frequency of torture during this period is 0.72.
No Torture Torture
t t
No Torture 418 208
t−1
row % 67% 33%
Torture 160 2,170
t−1
row % 7% 93%
No Viol Diss Viol Diss
No Torture Torture No Torture Torture
t t t t
No Torture 412 192 6 16
t−1
row % |Viol Diss 68% 32% 27% 73%
Torture 153 1,620 7 550
t−1
row % |Viol Diss 9% 91% 1% 99%
transition pattern is radically different in the presence of violent dissent: 73 percent of those
country-years that did not use torture in the preceding year use it in the current year, and
99 percent of those that used it in the prior year continue to use it. Put another way, given
violent dissent states that were not using torture are very likely to begin using it and those that
have been will almost certainly continue. This is broadly consistent with hypothesis one. It
also suggests that because we control for both the use of torture in the preceding year and the
absence/presence of violent dissent in our statistical models below when both past torture and
violent dissent are present there is very limited variance to explain.
4.1 Statistical Model
Turning our attention to the multivariate model, we estimate parameters for a dynamic logit
model (Beck et al. 2002) and calculate robust standard errors by clustering on country. To use
a dynamic logit one estimates two equations separately, each conditioned on the lagged value
of the dependent variable. In our case we estimated one equation for those cases where there
was no torture in the preceding year, and another for those cases where there was torture in the
previous year. The estimated effects are thus conditional (i.e., the log-odds of observing torture
given a change in the independent variable given that we observed (or did not observe) torture
in the preceding year), and we report two results for each independent variable.
The parameter estimates from a logit model are not directly interpretable and, as is well
known, the effects are not constant over different values of the other independent variables (King
1989, Long 1997). As such, there is a wide variety of quantities of interest one might report
to communicate the substantive effects. To keep the interpretation of our results manageable
we focus on the magnitude of the impacts of our independent variables on the likelihood that a
state used torture, and the statistical significance of those effects, across three settings:
• Torture Averse State: we set the independent variables of interest such that the likeli-
hood of torture is as small as possible.
• Typical state: we set the independent variables of interest at their median (for discrete
variables) or mean (for continuous variables) values.
• Torture Prone state: we set the independent variables of interest such that the likelihood
of torture is as large as possible.
The fact that we have multiple interaction terms adds a final wrinkle of complexity to
our interpretation. Fortunately, one can use Clarify (Tomz, Wittenberg and King 2003) and
the techniques described in (Braumoeller 2004, Brambor, Clark and Golder 2006) to simulate
the quantities of interest, including those for the interaction terms. We used Clarify and our
own code to simulate 100,000 iterations and then calculated the predicted probabilities for
Our torture averse state does not exist in our dataset and thus is an example of what King and Zeng (2006,
2007b) refer to as an ‘extreme counterfactual,’ which is to say a counter factual instance that does not exist in
the dataset. There is debate about whether the King and Zeng concern is well placed (e.g., Sambanis and Doyle
2007, Schrodt 2007, King and Zeng 2007a), and we do not take a strong position here. Instead, we observe that
the torture averse state does not exist in our data. This is, perhaps, most important when there is violent dissent,
and we revisit this issue when discussing results below.
Specifically, this is a country with elections, a veto score of 0.89, a fully free press, and no violent dissent
(control variables–logged population and logged GDP/capita–are set to their mean).
Specifically, this is a country without elections, a veto score of 0.34, a somewhat free press, and no violent
dissent (control variables–logged population and logged GDP/capita–are set to their mean).
Specifically, this is a country without elections, a veto score of 0, no free press, and violent dissent (control
variables–logged population and logged GDP/capita–are set to their mean).
given changes in our independent variables. We also used Scott Long’s SPost command to
produce marginal effects for the two control variables. Given the number of interaction terms
the coefficient estimates do not provide much information. Further, since there are 13 models,
each of which is estimated twice (once for when there was torture in the preceding year, and a
second time when there was not), we produced 26 sets of estimates and related model statistics.
The simulated substantive effects produce a large volume of additional output for each of the
equations. Rather than try to present that material in an Appendix we will make all of it
available in a replication dataset upon publication. Here we first summarize all of the findings
and then present the simulated results for the variables that produced a statistically significant
effect.
Recent work reports that the relationship between democratic institutions and repression is
not linear: only states with high scores on various measures of democratic institutions exhibit
lower levels of rights violations (Davenport and Armstrong 2004, Bueno de Mesquita et al. 2005,
Davenport 2007b). As Davenport and Armstrong (2004, 551) state,
(b)elow certain values, the level of democracy has no discernable impact on human
rights violations, but after a threshold has been passed (varying in accordance to
which measure one is considering), democracy decreases state repression.
To explore whether the effects of voice and freedom of expression operate only at high levels is
trivial given our binary and trichotomous operational indicators of those concepts: we simply
examine the maximum value. Veto is another matter. To explore whether it only has an
influence at high levels we calculated the impact of changing the values across its range.
4.2 Overview
of interest and the cell entries represent the sign of any statistically significant marginal effects
found across the three baseline states (torture averse, typical, and torture prone). A dash in
Because of the interaction terms it was necessary to calculate the change in value for each interaction and
include those value changes in the Clarify runs. The files needed to reproduce these results will be made available
in a replication dataset we will post once the study has been accepted for publication.
None of the signs of the quantities of interest reverse direction over the range of the independent variables.
the cell indicates that we could not reject the null hypothesis of no impact on the probability
of torture.
Torture =0 Torture =1
t−1 t−1
No Threat Threat No Threat Threat
Voice
ACLP Regime — — — —
BNR Democ — — — —
Polyarchy — — Neg —
Gates, et al. — Neg — —
ParComp — — — —
XrComp — — — —
XrOpen — — — —
Veto
PolConIII — — — —
PolConV — Neg — —
J — — — —
F — — — —
Checks — — — —
Law & Order Neg — Neg —
Xconst — — — —
Press/Speech
CIRI Speech Neg — — —
Free Press Neg — Neg —
cratic institutions have an impact on the probability that a state uses torture. This is especially
preceding year and the state is faced with violent dissent: none of the variables registers an
effect in such a circumstance. Further, when dissidents engage in at least one act of violence
only two of the variables (Gates, et al’s indicator of Polyarchy and PolConV) have a statis-
tically significant effect on the probability that the state uses torture. Four other variables
(CIRI Speech, Van Belle’s Free Press, VanHanen’s Polyarchy, and ICRG’s Law & Order) have
an impact, but only in the absence of a violent threat.
4.3 Voice
We have seven operational measures of Voice, and two of them produce a statistically signifi-
cant impact on the probability that the state uses torture. Four of the variables measure both the
competition and participation dimensions that Dahl (1971) uses to define classical democracy:
Vanhanen’s Polyarchy index, Gates, et al’s revised Polyarchy index, ACLP’s regime indicator,
and Bernhard, et al’s Democracy variable. The first two variables are continuous over the inter-
vals 0–47 and 0-4.3, respectively, and the other two are binary. Neither binary measure registers
an effect on the likelihood that the state uses torture, but both of the continuous variables do,
though only in some circumstances.
Hypothesis two states that Voice will not have an effect on the probability that a state
uses torture when dissidents engage in violence, and that we do not expect it to have much of
an impact–relative to Veto or Freedom of Expression–in the absence of violent dissent. More
explicitly, hypothesis 2a fails to receive support in 13 of the 14 opportunities. VanHanen’s
Polyarchy variable is the only measure of Voice that leads to a substantial decrease in the
probability that a state uses torture in the absence of violent dissent. The other six measures
of voice fail to produce a statistically significant impact on the the probability of torture given
the absence of violent dissent, and VanHanen’s measure only has an impact when the state used
torture in the previous year.
Absence of Violent Dissent, Presence of Torture
t−1
Baseline 0 to 50th 50th to 75th 75th to 90th 90th to max
Averse -0.006∗ -0.02∗ -0.02∗ -0.04∗
[0.90] (-0.02, -0.0001) (-0.07, -0.0004) (-0.08, -0.0005) (-0.13, -0.0009)
Typical -0.006∗ -0.02∗ -0.03∗ -0.05∗
[0.94] (-0.01, -0.0003) (-0.04, -0.0007) (-0.06, -0.0007) (-0.14, -0.001)
Prone -0.006∗ -0.02∗ -0.02∗ -0.05∗
[0.95] (-0.01, -0.0002) (-0.05, -0.0005) (-0.07, -0.0004) (-0.15, -0.0007)
the percentile of the distribution assigned to the value of VanHanen’s Polyarchy variable given
the results over all three baseline settings for the other independent variables–a torture averse
Increasing the value of Polyarchy reduces the probability of torture across all three settings. We
also report, in square brackets, the predicted probability for each baseline given a value of zero
for Polyarchy. When there is violent dissent and the state used torture in the preceding year
the predicted probability ranges from 0.90 to 0.95. The entries in the cells indicate that the
impact of Polyarchy increases as one approaches the maximum value in the dataset. Further,
the impact of Polyarchy on the likelihood of torture is effectively the same across all three
settings: a change to the maximum value reduces the probability to a range of 0.81 to 0.85,
depending on the baseline values of the other variables.
Consistent with hypothesis 2a, this is a fairly sizeable effect (given the baseline rate). That
the size of the effect grows every time we move up the percentile suggests that the intersection
of participation and a competitive party have a greater impact on reducing the continued use
of torture than either alone.
Interestingly, hypothesis 2b is supported across 13 of the 14 opportunities in which it was
tested, but the one estimate inconsistent with 2b uses a non-linear measure of Polyarchy (a
measure has a large effect in the presence of violent dissent, though only when the state did not
use torture in the preceding year. This result is inconsistent with hypothesis 2b which expected
little, if any, relationship.
Threat, No Torture
t−1
Baseline 0 to 25th 25th to 50th 50th to 75th 75th to 90th 90th to max
Averse -0.13∗ -0.21∗ -0.08∗ -0.04∗ -0.04∗
[0.88] (-0.31, -0.009) (-0.40, -0.02) (-0.16, -0.005) (-0.07, -0.001) (-0.08, -0.002)
Typical -0.11∗ -0.18∗ -0.07∗ -0.03∗ -0.04∗
[0.90] (-0.36, -0.003) (-0.41, -0.009) (-0.15, -0.003) (-0.07, -0.001) (-0.08, -0.002)
Prone -0.14∗ -0.24∗ -0.07∗ -0.03∗ -0.04∗
[0.93] (-0.31, -0.01) (-0.49, -0.01) (-0.15, -0.004) (-0.06, -0.002) (-0.07, -0.002)
Given the presence of violent dissent and an absence of torture the year before, the baseline
predicted probabilities when the Gates, et al. variable has a value of zero ranges from 0.88
to 0.93. The rescaled Polyarchy variable not only has a larger overall effect–the predicted
probabilities range from 0.39 to 0.48 when the Gates, et al. variable is set to its maximum (result
not shown)–but the size of the effect is large, grows, and then declines over its distribution.
to be different from the relationship between democratic institutions and all rights found by
Davenport and Armstrong (2004) and Bueno de Mesquita et al. (2005). More specifically, while
they report that institutions only influence rights at the highest portion of the former’s range,
we find here that the change from the 25th to 50th percentile has the largest impact across
all three baselines (-0.18 to -0.24), and the second largest is the change from zero to the 25th
percentile (-0.11 to -0.14). The focus on percentiles–rather than the range of values–is a bit
that reported in Davenport and Armstrong (2004) and Bueno de Mesquita et al. (2005).
As explained in the Appendix, the rescaling involves a logarithmic transformation of the participation com-
ponent and a truncation of the competition component.
The key point here is that the values are skewed to the right with a long tail: the big change at low percentiles
takes place at relatively high values in the range.
The Polyarchy result suggests that for a linear conceptualization high levels of both com-
petition and participation can provide a non-trivial, though less than desirable, check on an
executive’s incentive to continue to use torture if there is no violent dissent. Relatively low lev-
els of competition and/or participation produce an imperceptibly small check on the executive.
The Gates, et al. result, on the other hand, suggests a rather different dynamic in a distinct
setting. An executive that was not using torture and is faced with violent dissent will have
a substantial reduction in her incentive to torture given non-linear increases from low levels
of competition or participation. The size of the decrease falls off rather dramatically as the
product of competition and participation crosses the 50th percentile of the non-linear distri-
bution. Though it is an oversimplification, it is not a distortion of these findings to suggest
that high levels of both competition and participation can modestly reduce the incentive to
continue torturing when violent dissent is absent, but increases from low levels of either or both
can considerably reduce the executive’s incentive to start torturing in the presence of violent
dissent.
This is an important set of results. Previous results reporting that democracy reduces
the incidence of torture (Hathaway 2002) fail to disaggregate democracy into constituent parts.
Further, work that does make such distinctions but studies aggregated indicators of state repres-
sion have often found that voice reduces repression (Davenport 1999, Davenport and Armstrong
2004, Bueno de Mesquita et al. 2005, Davenport 2007b). Two other studies, however, report
results that challenge those findings (Davenport 1997, Richards 1999), and we further refine
that challenge by showing that elections and the successful transfer of power across parties–
as measured by Alvarez et al. (1996) and Bernhard, Nordstrom and Reenock (2001)–do not
reduce the probability that a state uses torture. The work of Wantchekon and Healy (1999),
Walzer (2004) and Levey (2007) provides cause to expect this, and when we combine it with
the argument that dissidents who use violence are unlikely to vote (much less be members of
the winning coalition), we have an explanation that can account for the limited impact of voice.
Stated more broadly, the failure of 26 of the 28 attempts to establish a relationship between
voice and the use of torture suggests that there a robust relationship between the two does not
exist.
On the other hand, that the original and rescaled Polyarchy indices do reduce the probability
that the executive (tacitly) endorses the use of torture offers a challenge to hypothesis 2a. The
Gates, et al. rescaled variable produces surprisingly large effects. Interestingly, the large effects
exist in the low to mid rang of the distribution, a finding quite at odds with previous work that
has found that only the highest levels of democratic institutions are systematically associated
with lower levels of rights violations. This finding suggests not only that the relationship between
Dahl’s classical two-dimensional conceptualization of democracy and the probability of torture
is non-linear, but that moving from very non-competitive party systems to more competitive
ones, and very low relative turnout to more mid-range levels has a much larger effect than
moving from mid-range to high range levels. Further, shifts from low levels of participation
and/or party competition to medium levels apparently only have an effect in the presence of a
threat, yet only when the state did not use torture in the preceding year. The ability of the
people to use the ballot to constrain the executive’s use of torture, then, is very limited indeed.
To summarize, this set of results strongly indicates that blanket statements about the ef-
fectiveness of popular suffrage and competitive party systems (i.e., classic democracy) to deter
the use of torture have no foundation in evidence from the late 20th Century. This finding will
not surprise human rights activists, but it is an important finding with respect to democratic
performance, a literature that tends to pay scant attention to state repression. Those who sub-
scribe to a classical, as opposed to liberal, conceptualization of democracy must confront this
argument and finding when considering democratic performance. Of course, they have Walzer
(2004) and Levey (2007) to provide philosophical support for the view that torture is justifiable
(though not necessarily justified) in a democracy, and that will perhaps satisfy most who wish
to advance the classical perspective.
4.4 Veto
We examine seven operational indicators of the veto concept and find that two of them
have an impact: both ICRG’s Law & Order variable and Henisz’s PolConV indicator reduce the
probability that a state uses torture in some settings. Hypothesis 3a anticipates that greater
levels of veto will be associated with substantially reduced likelihoods of torture given the
absence of violent dissent. Only the Law & Order variable produced a result consistent with
3a: the other six indicators failed to produce a statistically significant impact. Hypothesis 3b,
on the other hand, anticipates a much smaller impact of veto given the presence of violent
dissent, and none of our measures of veto produce a result consistent with 3b. Indeed, six of the
measures fail to produce an impact, and the PolConV measure produces a large negative impact
in the presence of a threat, but no torture in the preceding year, and no effect when there was
no torture in the preceding year. We discuss the two substantive effects and then consider the
broader results.
that depict the marginal effect for the typical baseline case. The variable reduces the probability
that the state uses torture only when there is no violent dissident threat. In years following one
where the state did not use torture Law & Order has a large substantive impact reducing the
probability from a baseline range of 0.7 to 0.91 to a range of 0.17 to 0.46.
Absence of Violent Dissent, No Torture
t−1
Baseline 2 to 3 3 to 4 4 to 5 5 to 6
Typical -0.12∗ -0.12∗ -0.11∗ -0.08∗
[0.70] (-0.18, -0.04) (-0.21, -0.03) (-0.19, -0.03) (-0.13, -0.03)
Prone -0.07∗ -0.09∗ -0.12∗ -0.12∗
[0.91] (-0.13, -0.02) (-0.18, -0.03) (-0.21, -0.03) (-0.20, -0.03)
No Violent Dissent, Presence of Torture
t−1
Baseline 2 to 3 3 to 4 4 to 5 5 to 6
Averse -0.02∗ -0.03∗ -0.04∗ -0.05∗
[0.93] (-0.04, -0.005) (-0.05, -0.004) (-0.08, -0.005) (-0.11, -0.05)
Typical -0.01∗ -0.02∗ -0.02∗ -0.03∗
[0.96] (-0.02, -0.003) (-0.04, -0.003) (-0.06, -0.003) (-0.08, -0.003)
Prone -0.01∗ -0.01∗ -0.02∗ -0.03∗
[0.97] (-0.02, -0.002) (-0.03, -0.002) (-0.05, -0.002) (-0.08, -0.002)
When the state engaged in torture in the prior year, however, the impact of the Law &
Order variable is severely curtailed. From a baseline range between 0.93 and 0.97 at a value of
two the range drops between 0.80 and 0.91 when Law & Order has a value of six. While this is a
there is very little variance to explain for countries that used torture in the previous year.
the Averse and Typical baselines are sometimes the same in the absence of violent dissent. They are equivalent
in this case.
upon publication.
To our surprise the PolConV result contradicts hypothesis 2b. We expected veto to lower
the likelihood of torture when the state was not challenged with violent dissent (2a), and that
records that PolConV does not affect the likely use of torture in the absence of violent dissident
activity, but reduce it considerably when dissidents do engage in violence (though only in
years in which the state did not use torture in the preceding year).
Further, the unexpected result holds across all three baselines: most friendly, typical, and
most hostile. Finally, the results are substantively large. In particular, moving from zero
through the 75th percentiles produces strong decreases in the predicted probability. Contrary
to previous work that finds that the effect of democracy only kicks in at high values, the size of
this marginal effect.
the Averse and Typical baselines are sometimes the same in the absence of violent dissent. They are equivalent
in this case.
The PolConV variable has no effect when the state used torture in the previous year (results not reported for
space considerations).
parentheses below it.
Because Henisz’s PolConV has a skewed distribution–roughly 40% of the cases have a value of zero, indicating
an absence of veto points–we calculated change from the minimum to the 43rd percentile, the 43rd to the 50th
percentile, the 50th percentile to the 75th percentile, the 75th percentile to the 90th percentile, and the 90th
percentile to the maximum. Previous research would lead us to anticipate that the effect of veto will not appear
until, perhaps, the 75th percentile and above.
Absence of Violent Dissent, No Torture
t−1
Baseline 0 to 43rd 43rd to 50th 50th to 75th 75th to 90th 90th to max
Typical -0.02 -0.07 -0.003 -0.008 -0.003
[0.33] (-0.07, 0.02) (-0.26, 0.09) (-0.01, 0.01) (-0.03, 0.01) (-0.01, 0.01)
Prone -0.01 -0.07 -0.004 -0.01 -0.005
[0.58] (-0.07, 0.03) (-0.10, 0.12) (-0.01, 0.01) (-0.03, 0.02) (-0.01, 0.01)
Presence of Violent Dissent, No Torture
t−1
Baseline 0 to 43rd 43rd to 50th 50th to 75th 75th to 90th 90th to max
Averse -0.02 -0.05∗ -0.24∗ -0.04∗ -0.13∗
[0.93] (-0.07, 0.003) (-0.19, -0.0001) (-0.41, -0.02) (-0.07, -0.01) (-0.24, -0.01)
Typical -0.03∗ -0.06∗ -0.29∗ -0.04∗ -0.12∗
[0.93] (-0.09, -0.001) (-0.18, -0.0004) (-0.58, -0.02) (-0.08, -0.005) (-0.25, -0.009)
Prone -0.05∗ -0.12∗ -0.41∗ -0.03∗ -0.08∗
[0.93] (-0.10, -0.01) (-0.31, -0.0001) (-0.73, -0.01) (-0.06, -0.004) (-0.15, -0.01)
Returning to the hypotheses, 2a receives support from one of the six indicators, and 2b fails
to receive any support. Further, 2b is contradicted by Henisz’s PolConV variable. How might
one account for the unexpected PolConV finding, and how confident should we be in either
the Law & Order or PolConV results? In other words, should we take the more scientifically
conservative approach and infer that Veto has no impact on the likely use of torture?
The first question to ask is: why would an executive be increasingly responsive to the
potential threat of a veto player’s challenge only when she is faced with violent dissent? We
had expected that the incentive to use torture would trump the potential veto threat, but
the PolConV variable tells a different story. To be sure, it is a normatively appealing story,
particularly for champions of liberal democracy and offers an opportunity to consider what
differences exist among the operational indicators.
The discussion in the Appendix offers a description of each variable; here we emphasize the
differences. PolConV takes into account partisan composition of the legislature vis-´a-vis the
executive, and it also accounts for an independent judiciary and sub-federal control of fiscal
policy. We are least interested in the sub-federal fiscal policy dimension, F, and studied whether
it has an independent impact. It does not. PolConIII is the legislative–executive component of
PolConV, but it does not have an impact. Finally, the judicial independence sub-component, J,
fails to influence the probability that the state uses torture. Thus, we were unable to decompose
PolConV and identify a sub-component that was responsible for the result.
DPI’s Checks variable, which Henisz recommends as a robustness check for PolConV, also
fails to influence the likelihood of torture, as does Polity’s executive constraints (XConst) vari-
able. Given these results it is difficult to make a case that the number of veto points in either
the legislature or the judiciary are systematically related to the use of torture. The PolConV
finding–which is the only variable that is a composite measure of both legislative and judicial
veto points–seems to suggest that both are needed, but it needs to be viewed as a provisional
finding.
The Law & Order variable has two components, both of which are judgmentally scored by
the staff of a private firm. One dimension is the extent to which the judicial system is free of
corruption. The second dimension scores the extent to which the citizenry respects the law (i.e.,
eschews crime). Each dimension contributes equally to the variable. We are interested in the
former, though not the latter. Unfortunately, one cannot decompose the variable into its two
dimensions. One wonders, as a result, whether the finding in support of hypothesis two is due
to the inclusion of the “order” (or crime) dimension. One imagines that it likely plays some
role in the effect. Thus, this result should also be treated with caution.
There are three take-away points from our examination of several measures of veto points.
First, these results suggest that both judicial veto as well as legislative veto points are needed to
reduce the likelihood of torture, and then only when the state did not use torture in the previous
year and there was violent dissent. That we only observe an effect in the absence of torture
in the preceding year suggests that veto–as conceptualized and measured with PolConV–has a
deterrent effect on the executive’s incentive to torture, but not a reactive one. Second, the lack
of an impact of five of the indicators, and the uncertainties about the Law & Order variable,
suggest that the most appropriate inference may be to reject hypothesis 2a. Third, and most
importantly, there is limited cause for optimism about the extent to which institutions that
produce veto points–an important component of liberal democracy that should constrain the
executive–will reduce an executive’s incentive to torture. All of the results suggest that when
a state is already using torture and is faced with at least one act of violent dissent, veto points
are irrelevant. Only when there is no threat, or when the state was not using torture the year
prior, do we find some tentative support for the expectation that veto points will constrain a
state’s use of torture.
4.5 Freedom of Expression
Hypothesis four, which anticipates that the effect of freedom of expression will be diminished
in the presence of violent dissent, is strongly consistent with the data: the level of free speech
reduces the likelihood of torture when there is no violent dissent. More explicitly, the results are
consistent with both 4a and 4b. The Van Belle measure produces a reduction in the predicted
probability regardless of whether the state tortured in the previous year, though only when
there is no violent dissent. The CIRI variable produces a statistically significant reduction in
the predicted probability of torture when there is no dissent and no torture in the preceding
violent dissent and no torture in the preceding year a change from “restricted” to “free” press
reduces the predicted probability from a baseline range between 0.38 and 0.49 to a range between
reduced when the state tortured in the previous year: a drop of four to seven percentage points
from a baseline range between 0.83 and 0.94.
No Violent Dissent, No Torture
t−1
Baseline Restricted to Free
Averse -0.19∗
[0.49] (-0.30, -0.05)
Typical -0.17∗
[0.38] (-0.28, -0.06)
Prone -0.18∗
[0.43] (-0.29, -0.07)
No Violent Dissent, But Torture
t−1
Baseline Restricted to Free
Averse -0.07∗
[0.83] (-0.21, -0.003)
Typical -0.05∗
[0.94] (-0.11, -0.003)
Prone -0.04∗
[0.94] (-0.11, -0.003)
torture in the preceding year change in the level of press/speech freedom reduces the predicted
probability of torture from a baseline range of 0.55 to 0.67 to a range between 0.20 and 0.34.
The size of the drop in predicted probability is similar over both changes (i.e., from “not free”
to “partly free,” and from “partly free” to “free”).
No Violent Dissent, No Torture
t−1
Baseline Not Free to Partly Free Partly Free to Free
Averse -0.19∗ -0.15∗
[0.67] (-0.31, -0.08) (-0.23, -0.07)
Typical -0.18∗ -0.16∗
[0.61] (-0.28, -0.05) (-0.28, -0.05)
Prone -0.18∗ -0.15∗
[0.55] (-0.30, -0.05) (-0.23, -0.05)
As we have seen with many of the other variables, freedom of expression has no effect when
the state used torture in the preceding year, regardless of the presence or absence of violent
dissent (results not reported for space considerations).
These results are interesting in part because, partially echoing Mueller (1992), they suggest
that freedom of expression has an important impact on reducing the likelihood of torture in-
dependent of competitive elections. That said the positive normative import of the findings is
diminished by the fact that the result only holds in cases when the state had not resorted to
torture in the prior year. This suggests that freedom of expression has only a deterrent effect.
We discuss the implications of this finding below.
4.6 Control Variables
taneous rate of change in the dependent variable is properly signed (negative for GDP/capita
and positive for population) and considerably higher for years following the absence of torture
than the presence of torture.
Variable No Torture Torture
t−1 t−1
log of GDP/capita -0.08∗ -0.02∗
log of Population 0.07∗ 0.01∗
4.7 Discussion
The empirical analysis highlights one important point and reveals another. First, torture is
very common. This is well known among human rights activists, but less well known among
students of politics, pundits, and the average citizen. Second, though democracy–and elections
in particular–have been found to substantially reduce the abuse of human rights writ large,
we have shown that democratic institutions–and elections in particular–are remarkably poor at
checking the executive’s incentive to use torture. One novel point is important to underline.
Our analysis has shown that in the context of violent dissent liberal democratic institutions
at best deter the (implicit) sanction of torture. Put more directly, once an executive (implicitly)
sanctions the use of torture in the context of violent dissident activity, liberal democratic insti-
tutions fail to lower the likelihood that she will continue to use it in the following year. This is
an unhappy finding for champions of the positive normative impact of democratic institutions,
particularly with respect to the protection of human rights.
Einolf (2007, 104-5) argues that “[t]oday torture is rarely practiced by liberal democracies
against their own citizens, but occasionally practiced by liberal democracies against suspected
terrorists and prisoners of war.” Our results strongly contradict Einolf’s claim that democracies
faced with violent threats only resort to torture rarely or occasionally. The data available for
this study do not permit one to distinguish between citizens, terrorists and prisoners of war.
But we wonder whether such data would support his claim that when democracies use torture,
they limit it to these groups. Perhaps they would, but we wonder whether leaders of democratic
states restrain themselves as much as Einolf would have us believe.
As a rival possibility we suggest that non-voters in a democracy are at risk to becoming
the victims of torture, especially if a small number of an identifiable ethnic (defined broadly)
or political group that has high non-voting rates is willing to employ violence to press claims
on behalf of the group. Several scholars have maintained that democracy does not eliminate
repressive behavior; rather, democracy transforms its application from more overt to covert
strategies (e.g., DeJouvenal 1945, Donner 1980, 1990, Cunningham 2004, McPhail, Schwein-
gruber and McCarthy 1998). For example, within the United States, McPhail, Schweingruber
and McCarthy (1998) document a phase-shift from World War I to the 1970s away from overt
and aggressive repressive techniques employed by police against protestors (involving isolation,
large-scale arrests as well as violence [beating, pepper-spraying and shooting]), toward a more
negotiated strategy (involving communication, coordination and selected arrests as well as less
violence). Concurrently, Goldstein (1978) and Donner (1980, 1990) document a phase-shift
Even here one can see an influence of democracy and democratization. Although America maintained numer-
ous elements of a democracy from its founding (e.g., elections, separation of the executive and judicial branches
and so forth), it has been argued that it was between the years of World War I (1918) and the 1970s, that the
United States solidified its existence as a full-fledged democracy (Goldstein 1978, Hill 1994). During this period,
women and blacks were given the right to vote (in 1920 and 1965, respectively), workers were given the right to
upward in the amount of political intelligence (i.e., physical and electronic surveillance) applied
by the U.S. government against those challenging it and those uninvolved in these activities.
We do not have adequate data to challenge Einolf with evidence, but we suggest that our study,
in combination with the above referenced work, gives cause to call for further investigation of his
assertion that democracies rarely torture their own citizens, except when those citizens commit
treason.
5 Conclusion
The events at Abu Ghraib prison shocked most observers. How could such behavior be
associated with one of the most liberal democracies in the world? Opinions on this question are
mixed. For some, the torture was explained by idiosyncratic factors (e.g., rogue soldiers and a
misunderstanding of political directives) and this type of action was atypical for the U.S. or any
other liberal democracy. For others, the events were explained by more systematic factors (e.g.,
an instrumental response to political threat that led to (implicit) political directives), and it was
suggested that this was exactly how liberal democracies like the U.S. would behave under the
circumstances. A recent journalistic account strongly supports the latter explanation (Mayer
2006).
To investigate this issue and gauge the influence of liberal democracy on torture, conditioned
on civil conflict, we examined 146 countries from 1980 to 1999. Our results contextualize
revelations like those of the Abu Ghraib case. By most accounts, the United States was a
liberal democracy that did not employ torture. The country experienced terror attacks at the
World Trade Center in New York, the Pentagon in Washington, DC, and the plane that was
crashed in Pennsylvania. Given the unified partisan control of the executive and legislature our
model would predict that a country in this situation would almost certainly resort to torture
when interrogating suspected members of Al Qaeda. By most accounts, this is exactly what
strike (1935) and a wave of public forum and protest law was established at a level previously unseen in U.S.
history - granting citizens the right to protest in a wide variety of venues: commons, state institutions, airports,
university campuses, post offices and parks (McPhail, Schweingruber and McCarthy 1998, 57-59). Indeed, by the
1970s, U.S. democracy had never been as robust.
These tactical shifts have been noted in many other countries as well.
took place at Abu Ghraib, Guantanamo Bay and diverse prisons where suspected terrorists
or their sympathizers were held. The events at these locales were thus neither aberrant nor
inexplicable. Quite the contrary, this is generally how states with the highest levels of voice,
veto and free speech have behaved in such situations. These results push us to move away from
discussion of rogue agents and misunderstood political directives to a more systematic analysis
of the role that torture plays within liberal democratic as well as non-democratic governments.
Returning to Walzer (2004) one could argue that the Bush administration responded pre-
cisely as it should have. Indeed, the administration has behaved precisely as Walzer’s argument
would have it behave: they have vigorously denied that the executive has (tacitly) approved
the use of torture, despite ample public evidence that it has done so. That strategy has
proven successful: the voting public has yet to penalize Bush. Yet that said, while the admin-
istration’s efforts to curtail the use of torture have fallen dramatically short of the standards
expected by human rights activists, even activists would have to admit that the administration
has restricted its use of torture, particularly following the change in the partisan composition
of Congress following the 2006 elections (Stolberg 2006).
A second potential implication was put nicely by Diego Gambretta (2004, 33): “the bigger
and nastier the threat is (or is thought to be) the harsher are the infringements on civil liberties
that can be justified and accepted by the public. One way to defend our civil liberties is to be
alert to the forces that could exaggerate and distort the threat.” Our study does not consider
the interpretation of the threat, but it strikes us as likely that Gambetta has put his finger on
an important issue. We have found that given a violent threat the propensity to use torture
is not reduced by voice or free speech, and is only constrained by veto when the state had
not used torture in the preceding year. Fittingly a considerable amount of post 9/11 public
discussion has focused on whether the Bush, Blair, and other Administrations are exaggerating
the threat (Williams 2004, Mueller 2005, Winkler 2007). This is an interesting question that
See Stolberg (2007) for the most recent administration denial that it condones torture. For evidence that
the administration (implicitly) condones the use of torture see, for example, Mayer (2006) who documents the
unsuccessful efforts of a senior US Naval Attorney to persuade Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld to revoke his order
to use “coercive interrogation” in Guantanamo Bay. That debate took place at the Department of Defense a
year prior to the public revelations of torture at Abu Ghraib and since then the Bush Administration has yet to
indict a single high ranking official involved in issuing the order to torture detainees.
merits attention in future research.
Turning to the existing literature our research suggests that future inquiry into the “domes-
tic democratic peace” should investigate the influence of democracy on repression conditional
upon levels of violent dissent. Human rights activists have long argued that it is one thing
for political authorities to respect human rights when they are not being challenged, but it is
quite a different situation to maintain this position when existing policies, personnel, institu-
tions and constituents are directly being threatened. Indeed, violent challenges to the state
provide the ideal opportunity to observe a government’s commitment to human rights and the
power of democracy to serve as a mechanism of non-violence and tolerance. Many of us be-
lieve that democracies respond to political dissent in very different ways than non-democratic
governments, but extant work on the “domestic democratic peace” has failed to consider the
possibility that this difference erodes across different levels of threat to the state. There needs
to be more systematic investigation of this major revision to the “domestic democratic peace.”
Finally, our analysis compels us to further examine not only torture but other forms of
repressive behavior as well. For example, previous research tends to aggregate distinct forms
of repression: political imprisonment, execution, disappearances, restrictions on speech, associ-
ation, assembly as well as torture. This ignores the possibility that authorities do not view the
techniques as comparable to one another and that there is something unique about different
combinations (causal determinants and aftereffects). Although the comment from Davenport
(2004, 539) that “some governments restrict the rights of those under their territorial jurisdic-
tion, some governments kill their citizens, some restrict and kill, and some do not engage in
either” moves us in the right direction, we should move beyond–as well as further into–this point.
Simple linear relationships between regime type and the behavior of states may well prove to
be woefully inadequate. We have identified one area of inquiry where that is the case and thus
joined a small but growing body of work that has produced such findings. Greater theoretical
and empirical attention to conditional and non-linear relationships between variables of interest
and the disaggregated repressive behavior of states would not only be important for scholars
but also for ordinary citizens (who are subject to a wide variety of abuses), those concerned
with ending these activities (who need to understand the circumstances under which diverse
rights are violated), as well as those concerned with treating the victims of these activities (who
need to understand what happens in as much detail as possible so that they can better treat
those who have suffered).
6 Appendix
6.1 Operational Indicators
As noted in the text, we have three concepts that we need to measure: voice, veto, and
freedom of expression. Below we discuss, in turn, the indicators we use to measure each.
6.1.1 Voice
We have identified seven operational measures for our voice concept, by which we mean the
extent to which the polity is subject to rule of the people. Dahl (1971) famously identified two
dimensions of what he called polyarchy: competition and participation. We understand the
former to be the extent to which entry costs to run for political office are the same across all
citizens and groups of citizens. The closer to parity, the greater the level of competition. We
conceptualize the second dimension to be the extent to which all adults have the right to vote.
While none of the measures we use in this study are ideal operational indicators of these two
dimensions, all of them measure at least one of the two dimensions, and each has been used by
others to measure classical democracy (i.e., rule by the people).
The Political Regimes (aka ACLP) project adopts a classical conceptualization of democ-
racy as a polity where competitive elections determine who holds the executive and legislative
government offices (Alvarez et al. 1996, Przeworski et al. 2000). To be a democracy a regime
must meet two criteria: first, the state must select its executive via (indirect) election, and
second opposition parties must have a realistic chance of winning elections. Note that this
conceptualization focuses on competitiveness and does not take into consideration Dahl’s sec-
ond dimension: participation. Several of the other indicators we use explicitly measure both
We use the recently updated data from Cheibub and Gandhi (2004), and invert their scale to create a variable,
aclpreg, that has a value of zero for non-democracies and a value of one for democracies.
More specifically, there must be at least one successful transfer of power from one political party to a second.
All regimes that fail to meet these two criteria are coded as dictatorships
dimensions.
Like Przeworski et al. (1996), Bernhard, Nordstrom and Reenock (2001) are interested
in the durability of democratic rule. They produce a binary measure of democracy that ex-
plicitly builds on Dahl’s (1971) minimalist definition. They begin by identifying cases that
are coded as democratic by each of the following datasets: Gurr and Jaggers’ (1995) Polity
III, Gasiorowski’s (1996) Political Regime Change Dataset, Freedom House’s Freedom in the
World, and ACLP’s Political Regime Data (p. 783). They then excluded cases that failed to
include at least 50% suffrage rates, those where fraud was judged to be sufficiently large to
have changed the outcome, and those cases where extensive violence was judged to influence
the outcome (pp. 784-5). The resulting variable, which we label BNRdemoc, is available online
Vanhanen (2000a) is the most recent in a string of work on the venerable Polyarchy dataset
that he has constructed to measure Dahl’s conceptualization of democracy. Vanhanen measures
two dimensions: competitiveness and participation. To measure competitiveness he subtracts
from 100 the number of legislative seats won by the largest party, thus yielding the number
of seats held by the smaller parties. He measures participation with the percentage of the
population that cast ballots in the elections (represented over the interval 0 to 100). He then
produces his polyarchy index by multiplying the two and dividing the product by 100.
Gates et al. (2006) are also interested in the duration of regimes, and they use a revised ver-
sion of Vanhanen’s polyarchy index as one measure of institutional characteristics. They raise
two issues. First, they note that Vanhanen’s Participation dimension is linear, and argue that
a log transformation of participation is needed as changes in turnout of, say, five percent are
more consequential given a baseline of 20 percent turnout than 75 percent. Second, concerned
that Vanhanen’s index is biased toward highly fragmented party systems they leave the index
unaltered when the plurality winning party garnered more then 70 percent of the vote. When
Note that much of the focus of their study is distinguishing among democracies. To make such distinctions
they conceptualize along two dimensions: macro-institutional structure and party system. By macro-institutional
structure they refer to executive–legislative configuration and, more specifically, the distinction between Presiden-
tial and Parliamentary systems (p. 778). They distinguish four types of party systems: predominant party; two
party; moderate multiparty; and extreme multiparty. Following Colomer (1995) they conceptualize the interaction
of the two dimensions along a single dimension anchored by Majoritarian and Pluralism (with quasi-majoritarian,
the plurality winning party polled less than 70 percent they multiply participation by the value
of competition divided by 30 percent (pp. 897-8). Put another way, when the plurality winning
party receives at least 70 percent of the votes their index is the same as Vanhanen’s: (Competi-
tion * log(Participation))/100, where Competition is 100 minus the number of seats won by the
largest party and Participation is the percentage of the population that cast ballots. When the
plurality winning party receives less than 70 percent of the vote they weight Participation by
30 percent: (Competition * log((Participation/0.3)))/100. We label this variable logpartcomp.
Finally, we use three components of the Polity project’s measure of Democracy: Competi-
tiveness of Participation, Competitiveness of Executive Recruitment, and Openness of Executive
Recruitment. These three are measures of Dahl’s competition dimension. Competitiveness of
Participation, parcomp, “refers to the extent to which alternative preferences for policy and
leadership can be pursued in the political arena” (Marshall and Jaggers 2005, 25). It has a six
point scale ranging over the following values: 0, Unregulated (i.e., no competition); 1, Repressed;
2, Suppressed; 3, Factional; 4, Transitional; and 5, Competitive.
The second Polity indicator we use, Competitiveness of Executive Recruitment, xrcomp,
measures the extent to which political advancement paths provide equal opportunities to non-
incumbent individuals and groups. It has three values: 1, Selection (e.g., hereditary); 2,
Dual/Transitional (e.g., dual executives, one selected via each); and 3, Competitive (e.g., multi-
party elections; Marshall and Jaggers 2005, 20).
Finally, the Openness of Executive Recruitment variable, xropen, measures “the extent
[to which] all the politically active population has an opportunity, in principle, to attain the
position through a regularized process” (Marshall and Jaggers 2005, 20). It has five values: 0,
Unregulated (i.e., power transfers via coercion); 1, Closed (e.g., hereditary succession); 2, Dual
Executive/Designation (e.g., two executives, neither elected); 3, Dual Executive/Election (e.g.,
two executives, one elected); and 4, Open.
6.1.2 Veto
We have identified seven indicators of the extent to which actors other than the executive
can exercise some level of veto over policy change. Henisz’s (2002) Political Constraints project
offers four measures of veto points in the political system. His PolConIII indicator measures
the extent to which the legislature can constrain the executive. He uses a spatial model and
by assuming that preferences are uniformly distributed across both chambers and the executive
the PolConIII indicator is, in effect, what Heller and McCubbins’ 1996 refer to as a procedural
(as opposed to substantive) measure of veto points.
Henisz (2002) also produces a substantive veto point variable, PolConV, that adds the judi-
ciary (including sub-Federal level courts) to the legislature, and abandons the uniform distribu-
tion assumption of PolConIII. Instead, PolConV weights the number of veto points by partisan
composition (i.e., when a veto point is occupied by an actor with the same party affiliation as
the executive it does not count).
Henisz’s data also provide a binary Judicial Independence variable, J, and a binary sub-
Federal veto point indicator as a separate variable, F. The judicial independence measure is
based on two variables discussed below: the Political Risk Group’s measure of law and order
and the Polity Project’s measure of executive constraints. Henisz considers country years with
an executive constraint score 2 and (where data are available) a law and order score greater
than 3 to have an independent judiciary. The sub-federal indicator, F, focuses on veto over fiscal
policy only. To code his F variable Henisz reviewed The Statesman’s Yearbook or The Political
Handbook of the World and judgmentally assigned a value of one to those country years in
which sub-federal entities such as states, provinces, or regions imposed substantive constraints
on fiscal policy. The F variable is of less direct interest for our project, except to the extent to
which we can use it to refine our inference with respect to PolConV, for which F is a component.
The World Bank’s Database of Political Institutions (DPI) also provides measures of veto
points (Keefer 2005). Like PolConV their Checks variable is a measure of substantive veto
points, though like PolConIII it focuses only on the legislature. Larger values indicate larger
numbers of legislative veto points (Keefer 2005, 18–19).
Political Risk Group is a private firm that produces the International Crisis Risk Guide,
a report of indicators of political risk to which many firms subscribe. They produce a Law
and Order variable, law order, that is composed of two dimensions, each of which has three
possible values ranging from low to high. One dimension, Law, is “an assessment of the strength
and impartiality of the legal system,” while the other, Order, is “an assessment of popular
observance of the law” (Political Risk Group nd, 33). The composite law order variable
is the sum of the two components and thus ranges from 0 to 6. The specific coding rules
are unavailable as Political Risk Group considers them proprietary. Despite this considerable
validity and reliability shortcoming, these data have been widely used in academic research,
in part because their demonstrated market value confer both validity and reliability on them
as a large number of Fortune 500 firms continue to subscribe to the service.
The seventh indicator, executive constraints, from the Polity data set, is an ordinal mea-
sure with a range from zero to seven. It is one of several sub-components to the well known
Democracy and Autocracy variables. Executive constraints, xconst, “refers to the extent of in-
stitutionalized constraints on the decisionmaking powers of chief executives, whether individuals
or collectivities” (Marshall and Jaggers 2005, 23). A value of one indicates unlimited executive
authority; three represents slight to moderate limitations; five indicates substantial limitations;
and seven represents institutions where the executive is at parity with, or subordinate to, other
actors.
6.1.3 Freedom of Expression
We use two measures of the freedom of expression. The CIRI measure focuses on restric-
tions on both speech and press. It has three values: 0, no restrictions; 1, some restrictions; and
2, complete restriction (Cingranelli and Richards 2004a, 16). As noted in the text, we reverse
the order of the scale so that it is an indicator of freedom rather than restriction. The US State
Department Country Reports on Human Rights Practices is the source for these data.
Van Belle’s data focuses exclusively on press freedom. He uses a five category scale, but
cautions that “these categories should probably be collapsed into a dichotomous measure of free
and restricted presses” (Van Belle 2000, 141). The values in his scale are: 0, nonexistent; 1,
Though only nine of 2,355 country-years with valid values have a value of zero, 205 have a value of one. It
is unclear how any country-year could have a value less then two: low on Law and low on Order should produce
1 + 1 = 2.
The values two, four, and six are used to code polities that are intermediate between one and three, three
and five, and five and seven, respectively.
The Freedom House project also has a freedom of press indicator, but it only covers a limited portion of our
study’s temporal domain (Verify This!!), so we do not include it.
free; 2, imperfectly free; 3, restricted; and 4, controlled. We follow Van Belle and assign those
country-years with a value of 0, 3 or 4 as ineffective/restricted and those country-years with a
value of 1 or 2 as free. Van Belle relies upon the International Press Institute’s World Press
Freedom Review and a wide variety of country histories and other texts (p. 138).