Can You See It in a Different Colour? Visual Imagery Control Predicts
Consecutive Interpreting Performance
Alper Kumcu (alperkumcu@hacettepe.edu.tr)
Department of Translation & Interpreting, Hacettepe University
Ankara, Turkey
Asiye Oztu¨ rk (asiye.ztrk@gmail.com)
Department of Translation & Interpreting, Yas¸ar University
Izmir, Turkey
Abstract tivity that has demanding memory and cognitive control re-
quirements and involves language comprehension.
Mental imagery plays a critical role in memory. However,
the link between the different types and components of im-
Role of Mental Imagery in Memory
agery and efficiency in tasks involving recall is not clear as
the direction of the effect (facilitation/deterioration) usually A plethora of evidence indicates that different aspects of men-
depends on the task in question. We investigate the role of
tal imagery such as vividness (i.e., how clear the mental im-
visual and auditory mental imagery in consecutive interpret-
ages are), control (i.e., how easily one can change the mental
ing, an underrepresented yet product-oriented and ecologically
valid activity with high individual variability due to exacting images) and spontaneous use (i.e., how frequently one prefers
memory and cognitive control demands. Mental imagery of 38
referring to mental images in daily life) play pivotal roles in
translation-interpreting undergraduates was measured on four
memory retrieval: Superior recall in various tasks among in-
self-reported scales and a mental rotation test with the vivid-
ness, control, and preference components. Participants were dividuals with vivid mental imagery, typically measured with
then asked to consecutively interpret 10 speeches from English
the Vividness of Visual Imagery Questionnaire (VVIQ), has
into Turkish. Mixed-effects models revealed that only control
been reported in several studies (see Marks, 1983, 1999; A.
of visual mental imagery measured with Gordon’s Test of Vi-
sual Imagery Control predicts consecutive interpreting perfor- Richardson, 1977; Schwitzgebel, 2002; Sheehan & Neisser,
mance. Results were discussed as per the nature of imagery
1969 for reviews). For example, vividness resulted in bet-
and the cognitive architecture of consecutive interpreting.
ter performance in discrimination tasks measuring visuospa-
Keywords: mental imagery; consecutive interpreting; work-
tial memory particularly when imagery was employed as a
ing memory; vividness; control; individual differences
retrieval strategy (Berger & Gaunitz, 1979; Gur & Hilgard,
1975). The vividness of mental images also predicts fa-
Introduction
cial recognition memory performance (McKelvie, 1994) and
Mental imagery is the mind’s ability to evoke multimodal memory for pictures (Marks, 1973). To account for the re-
sensory or motor experiences in the absence of actual, ex- sults, Hanggi (1989) showed that vivid imagers tend to use
ternal stimuli. It is typically defined as a “quasi-perceptual visual coding strategies allowing them to store information
experience” that resembles the perceptual experience but oc- contained in real-life pictures (see also Rodway et al., 2006).
curs without it (Thomas, 1999). Mental imagery is dubbed Further, growing neural evidence indicates that visual im-
as the ability to see with the “mind’s eye” and the literature agery and visuospatial working memory share common char-
on mental imagery is largely dedicated to visual mental im- acteristics and rely on similar representations (Pearson et al.,
agery. That said, mental images can be formed in nonvisual 2015).
modalities such as the auditory (Lima et al., 2015), kinaes- Mental imagery, in general, seems to be also effective in
thetic/motor (Driskell et al., 1994), tactile (McNorgan, 2012) the retrieval of non-visual, verbal information. First, research
or olfactory (Stevenson & Case, 2005). Importantly, imagery has shown that actively generating clear, vivid images during
is a multidimensional construct involving not only the gener- narratives leads to substantial improvements in comprehen-
ation but also the control and manipulation of images. With sion and recall (Bagri & Jones, 2018; Joffe et al., 2007). For
these properties, mental imagery is involved in many every- instance, good-imagery individuals in de Beni & Moe` (2003)
day tasks when retrieving or representing new information had a better memory of passages when presented orally. Fur-
irrespective of the type of image (Paivio, 1986). There are ther, mental imagery training promotes verbal memory per-
clear individual differences in various components of men- formance in healthy young (J. T. E. Richardson, 1980) and
tal imagery (e.g., Floridou et al., 2022). However, how these older adults (Verhaeghen et al., 1993). Personalised men-
differences translate into cognitive tasks is controversial since tal imagery, in particular, has been shown to be effective in
the effect of imagery seems to change dramatically depending reducing false memory in the Deese-Roediger-McDermott
on the task and task-related conditions (McDougall & Pfeifer, (DRM) paradigm. Participants in Foley et al. (2006), for
2012). The current article investigates the effect of individual instance, were less susceptible to false memory for words
differences in mental imagery on performance in consecutive when they were instructed to generate mental images of the
interpreting (CI), an ecologically valid, product-oriented ac- words-to-be-remembered that connect in some way to their
life (see also Oliver et al., 2016; but Robin, 2011). One Cornoldi, 1991). As McDougall and Pfeifer (2012) noted,
strong piece of evidence for the mental imagery advantage in the nature of the task, task conditions and the imageability
verbal memory within the framework of embodied cognition of the to-be-recalled material are critical factors in identify-
comes from Marre et al. (2021). Participants were asked to ing whether there will be a link between mental imagery and
memorise a 30-words list using different strategies on an em- retrieval performance. In this regard, CI stands out as an un-
bodiment continuum from low-embodied to high-embodied derrepresented candidate to measure the potential effect of
strategies: mental rehearsal, visual imagery, third-person mo- imagery as discussed in detail below.
tor imagery or first-person motor imagery. When probed im-
Consecutive Interpreting, Memory, and Mental
mediately and 48 hours later, memory efficiency improved
Imagery
gradually from low-embodied to high-embodied strategies in-
Language interpreting is composed of two distant modes:
volving first-person mental imagery.
simultaneous and consecutive. CI is mainly a two-
On the other hand, there is also evidence showing no ben-
phase language interpreting process with (1) the listening-
efit of vivid mental images in memory retrieval (Chara &
comprehension-analysis phase (with note-taking, if neces-
Hamm, 1989). For example, Dickel and Slak (1983) di-
sary) and (2) the reformulation-production phase. Listen-
vided participants into two groups as good and poor imagers,
ing and production are performed almost at the same time
who were then asked to study noun pairs. Results demon-
in simultaneous interpreting. However, the consecutive in-
strated that the number of pairs recalled was not related to
terpreter carries out the two phases sequentially, hence the
imagery vividness at all. Similarly, McDougall and Pfeifer
name. Based on the duration of source speech, CI is typically
(2012) found no correlation between imagery vividness and
divided into two modes as long and short consecutive. The
performance in word recall and they argued that the nature
task can be called as “short consecutive” if the source speech
of the task (i.e., simple retrieval without cognitive control)
ranges from one or two words to a few sentences (Russell &
might have mitigated the effect of imagery. Imagery vivid-
Takeda, 2015). Although consecutive interpreters can take
ness played a negligible role in memory efficiency in Marre
notes while listening in both modes, trying to write down ev-
et al. (2021) as well. Likewise, recall accuracy of childhood
erything the source speaker says is somewhat distractive and
memories has been shown to be unrelated to either imagery
cognitively uneconomical considering the constraints on cog-
vividness, imagery control measured with Gordon’s Test of
nitive capacity. Note-taking is less helpful in short CI, the
Visual Imagery Control (TVIC) or spontaneous use of im-
main task of the current study, and interpreters rely on their
agery (Lorenz & Neisser, 1985). Lastly, some researchers re-
memory capacity for transferring the source message into the
ported memory deterioration with vivid mental imagery. Par-
target language.
ticipants in Eberman and McKelvie (2002) listened to a se-
Resources of working memory (WM) are employed im-
ries of criminal events (i.e., source memory) and read the text
mensely as interpreters perform multiple tasks during CI such
version of the events covering both correct and additional and
as listening, comprehension, information retention, retrieval,
thus, incorrect information. Participants then took a recog-
reformulation, production, language switching and monitor-
nition memory test probing whether a list of statements ap-
ing (Mizuno, 2005). Sequential processing in CI puts an ad-
peared in the radio-broadcast, in the text or both. High-
ditional and increasing load on WM and retrieval operations.
imagers performed more poorly than low-imagers when in-
Several studies have repeatedly indicated that cognitive con-
structed to form visual images of the to-be-recalled material.
trol, in particular, lies at the centre of the CI (see Wen &
They argued that individuals with more vivid imagery mis-
Dong, 2019 for a meta-analysis). For example, individuals
attributed the recognised text to the audiotape due to vivid
with interpreting experience including CI performed differ-
images they created during initial encoding. In a similar
ently in the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST), which tests
vein, Reisberg and Leak (1987) showed that vivid imagers are
mental set shifting in cognitive control, as a function of the
more prone to false visual memory but more confident in their
years of interpreting training. However, there was no such
judgements. They put forward that high-imagers generate im-
group difference between general bilinguals differing in L2
agery with considerable detail and clarity, which are difficult
proficiency (Dong & Xie, 2014). Similarly, longitudinal re-
to distinguish from real memories and which, in turn, lure
ports revealed that even short-term CI training enhances up-
them into false-alarm responses (see also Cohen & Saslona,
dating efficiency in WM measured with the N-back test as
1990).
compared to general training in a second language (Dong
Overall, the above-mentioned studies present a mixed pic- et al., 2018) and translation training (Dong & Liu, 2016) re-
ture although it is clear that mental imagery and mental im- sulting in a “consecutive interpreter advantage”.
agery skills play certain roles in memory retrieval: Although Against the accumulating loads on WM and additional op-
individuals with more vivid imagery surpass “low-imagers” erations, as discussed above, any means of memory prompts
in tasks involving visuospatial memory (e.g., picture or fa- are deemed helpful to make the most use of the memory. In
cial recognition etc.) the link between mental imagery, par- this regard, visual prompts involving the mental models of
ticularly with self-reports of imagery, and accuracy in ver- speech can be considered one of the most frequently used
bal memory seems to be more complicated (Marschark & memory techniques. Visual prompts, relating to personal ex-
periences, in particular, allow interpreters to imprint the seg- agery” might correspond to one or more dimensions of vi-
ments of source speech more firmly in the memory (Setton & sual and/or auditory mental imagery and one or more com-
Dawrant, 2016). In turn, these prompts function as a tool to ponents might predict success in CI. (2) Student interpreters
create a rich model of the source speech toward a detailed and with worse mental imagery will have better performance in
faithful reformulation of the message (Gillies, 2019, p. 47). CI. As in the first prediction, one or more components of
In this context, mental imagery can be regarded as instrumen- visual and/or auditory mental imagery might negatively pre-
tal for relieving the memory overload against the processing dict CI performance. As much counter-intuitive as it sounds,
limitations and thereby, enhancing the quality of the output. there is evidence as discussed above to predict such an out-
This might be especially the case for student interpreters with come. To be more precise, interpreters with better, particu-
limited experience (see Arum´ı Ribas, 2012). larly more vivid imagery might add extra information in their
interpretations, which are not available in the source speech,
Current Study
which then will lead to lower accuracy scores. Both predic-
The present study was designed to investigate how different
tions will have implications for the relationship between men-
aspects of visual and auditory mental imagery (i.e., vividness,
tal imagery and, CI and consequently, working memory.
controllability, and spontaneous use) affect accuracy when
Method
consecutively interpreting speeches varying in imageability,
difficulty, and familiarity. Vividness refers to the clarity and
Participants
liveliness of the visual mental images simulating an actual
The experiment was carried out with 38 3rd and 4th-year un-
perception (Auvinen-Lintunen et al., 2022). On the other
dergraduate translation and interpreting students (17 males;
hand, controllability refers to the ability to manipulate mental
Mage = 23.32, SD = 3.22, range: 21 – 39). The participants
images at will. There is compelling evidence in imagery lit-
were recruited from three universities in two cities: Hacettepe
erature that such transformations are possible in close confor-
University (n = 17; Mage = 23, SD = 2.25, range: 21 – 31),
mity to actual perceptual experiences (Finke, 1989; Kosslyn,
Yas¸ar University (n = 11; Mage = 24.09, SD = 5.19, range:
1980). Lastly, spontaneous use corresponds to the tendency
21 – 39), and Izmir Economy University (n = 10; Mage =
to use visual mental imagery in daily life (Nelis et al., 2014).
23, SD = 1.49, range: 22 – 26). All participants were na-
CI was chosen as the main experimental task on several
tive speakers of Turkish (speaking/learning only Turkish from
grounds: As discussed above, CI is a task that naturally
birth and currently using Turkish as their primary language)
involves language comprehension and production, requires
with English as the foreign language. In interpreting terms,
high working memory capacity (updating skills, in particu-
participants’ A language was Turkish and B language was En-
lar) and demands effective cognitive control. Thus, CI out-
glish. The pre-experiment questionnaire documented that all
put has arguably the potential to be modulated by individ-
participants took undergraduate-level courses on CI in which
ual differences in mental imagery due to the abovementioned
they practised short CI without notes, the main experimen-
link between imagery and memory. Mental imagery can en-
tal task in the current study. Mean current grade point av-
able interpreters to process complex parts of speeches such
erage (CGPA) of the sample was 3.27 out of 4.00 (SD =
as technical descriptions and interpret those challenging parts
0.45, range = 2.03 – 3.96). Participants reported normal or
consecutively not only thanks to retrieval benefits as briefly
corrected-to-normal vision, no speech or hearing difficulties
discussed above but also possible facilitation in language
and no history of any neurological disorder. All participants
comprehension (Chmiel, 2019). As a matter of fact, there
were fully informed about the details of the experimental pro-
is already considerable individual variability in CI perfor-
cedure and gave online consent. Post-experiment debriefing
mance among students and professionals alike (Stachowiak-
revealed that all participants were na¨ıve to the purpose of the
Szymczak, 2019). Further, CI is a natural activity with eco-
experiment. Ethical review and approval for data collection
logical validity and the student interpreters in the current
were conducted and granted by Hacettepe University.
study have already practised the task to a more or less sim-
ilar extent. That being said, CI is critically underrepresented
Stimuli
in mental imagery research and to our knowledge, no experi-
mental study has systematically investigated the relationship 10 speeches on different topics varying in length and termi-
between the two. nological density were selected as source speeches to be in-
terpreters with better mental imagery will have better perfor- dated on imageability, familiarity, difficulty, and speed by all
mance in recreating the message of the original speech in an- participants of the study on a scale from 1 (not imageable,
other language. We measure not only the well-established di- not familiar, very easy, and very slow) to 5 (highly image-
mensions of visual mental imagery, namely, vividness, con- able, very familiar, very difficult, and very fast). Imageability
trollability and spontaneous use but also the vividness and was also externally validated by 15 language specialists on a
controllability aspects of auditory mental imagery since CI scale from 1 (not imageable) to 10 (highly imageable) (see
speeches were highly correlated; r(8) = .89, p = 0006. As a trol/manipulation component of visual mental imagery. Par-
result, internal imageability evaluations were included in the ticipants are presented a visual imagery prompt (i.e., “Can
following analyses. you see a car standing in the road in front of a house?”) in
the first item and then they are asked to control and/or ma-
nipulate their mental images step by step in the following 11
items (e.g., “Can you see it in colour?”, “Can you see it in a
Deviations) of Source Speeches
different colour?”, “Can you now see the same car lying up-
side down?” etc.). The ease of visual mental imagery control
is evaluated on a five-point scale from 1 (“No, I can’t see it”)
Speech title Length Duration Imageability
to 5 (“Yes, I can see it”). IV. The Bucknell Auditory Imagery
Benefit of Pets 112 45 6.00 (1.25)
Scale (BAIS) (Halpern, 2015): The BAIS focuses on auditory
Poisonous Plants 329 112 5.73 (0.96)
mental imagery and assesses both the vividness and control
Invention of Telescope 338 120 6.00 (1.31)
aspect of imagery in two subscales encompassing 14 items
Alexander the Great 109 40 5.00 (1.46)
each. Items describe an auditory scenario (e.g., “Consider
League of Nations 109 42 3.93 (1.53)
listening to a rainstorm: the sound of gentle rain”). In the
Magna Carta 306 122 3.87 (1.68)
vividness section (BAIS-V), participants are tasked to imag-
Genealogy 280 120 3.47 (1.46)
ine the scenario and rate the vividness of their auditory im-
Use of Money 102 40 4.07 (1.62)
agery on a scale from 1 (no image present at all) to 7 (as vivid
Communication 105 42 2.87 (1.60)
as the actual sound). In the control section (BAIS-C), partici-
Culture 300 118 2.93 (1.71)
pants are asked to read and imagine an auditory scenario first,
and then consider how easily they could change their image
Note. Speeches are ordered as per internal imageability of the first sound to that of the second sound and hold this im-
evaluation from the highest imageable (Benefit of Pets) to age (e.g., “Consider listening to a rainstorm: first, the sound
the highest lowest imageable speech (Culture). Length is in of gentle rain and then, the gentle rain turns into a violent
the number of words. Duration is in seconds. Imageability- thunderstorm”) on a scale from 1 (no image present at all) to
E (External) is the imageability value given by the language 7 (extremely easy to change the image). (3) Mental rotation
specialist (n = 15). test: Participants were administered an online mental rotation
test (Cooper, 1975) in which they were shown two images
Procedure
(word string “RED”) in 28 trials and asked to decide if the two
The main experimental task was CI without notes. As
stimuli are identical or one is a mirror image of the other one
spelt out below, the study was composed of five consecutive
(with 30, 60, 90, 120 and 150 degrees of rotation). Half the
phases: (1) pre-experiment questionnaire, (2) mental imagery
time mirror images were shown. Participants’ accuracy and
scales, (3) mental rotation test, (4) CI without notes, and (5)
reaction times were collected. (4) CI without notes: Partici-
post-experiment questionnaire.
pants were asked to interpret 10 speeches consecutively from
(1) Pre-experiment questionnaire: Participants were asked
English into Turkish without taking notes. Participants did
14 questions about their demographic (age and gender) and
not receive any prior information about the speeches and their
academic background (university, year, CGPA, courses and
terminological backgrounds. Speeches were presented in a
interpreting experience). (2) Mental imagery scales: Partic-
counterbalanced order as per speech length in the number of
ipants were administered four well-established, reliable and
words. To measure the CI performance as the target variable,
consistent imagery scales. The scales can be accessed at
we followed the “idea unit” scoring protocol (Dunlosky et al.,
2011) with the idea unit approach from Riley and Lee (1996):
counterbalanced across participants: I. The Spontaneous Use
An idea unit is each piece of information that corresponds to
of Imagery Scale (SUIS) (Reisberg et al., 2003): The SUIS
a proposition or phrase and adds meaning to the recall. Ac-
measures the use of mental imagery in daily situations (e.g.,
cordingly, the idea units for each speech were classified on
finding directions) in 12 questions on a five-point scale from
the transcripts and scores were calculated for each idea unit:
1 (never appropriate) to 5 (always completely appropriate).
Participants received “0” if the unit was entirely omitted, “1”
II. The Vividness of Visual Imagery Scale (VVIQ) (Marks,
if the unit was partially recalled and interpreted and “2” if the
1973): Participants are verbally prompted to form mental
unit was fully recalled and interpreted. CI performance was
pictures (e.g., “visualise a rising sun”) in 16 items and are
assessed by two evaluators (researchers themselves). Inter-
asked to evaluate the vividness of the mental picture that
rater reliability between raters was found to be 0.87 based on
came before their mind’s eye about the details of the scene
Krippendorff’s alpha, indicating a strong level of agreement.
(e.g., “the sun rising above the horizon into a hazy sky”) on
(5) Post-experiment questionnaire: Participants were admin-
a five-point scale from 1 (no image at all, you only “know”
istered a questionnaire in which they evaluated the perceived
that you are thinking of the object) to 5 (perfectly clear and
imageability, familiarity, difficulty and speed of the source
vivid as real seeing). III. The Gordon Test of Visual Imagery
speech and also, their own CI performance.
and Mental Rotation Test
Results
Scale/Test Mean SD
Data Analysis
SUIS 3.64 0.58
VVIQ 4.11 0.60
Data were analysed using linear logit mixed-effects mod-
TVIC 4.53 0.57
elling to reveal the predictive factors of CI performance. Fac-
BAIS-V 6.02 0.79
tors were added as fixed effects while participants and items
BAIS-C 5.98 0.77
were added as random effects into models. The contribution
MRT Accuracy (%) 0.75 0.17
of a fixed effect was investigated by comparing a full model
MRT RT (ms) 3050.14 1697.76
containing the effect in question against a reduced model in
which only that effect was removed, or a null model without
any fixed effects (Winter, 2013). For findings to be compa-
Note. SUIS: The Spontaneous Use of Imagery Scale,
rable, we also followed the tradition in the literature and di-
VVIQ: The Vividness of Visual Imagery Scale, TVIC: Gor-
vided the participants into high and low groups based on the
don’s Test of Visual Imagery Control, BAIS-V: The Bucknell
imagery scales and investigated the difference between the
Auditory Imagery Scale - Vividness, BAIS-C: The Bucknell
groups in CI scores using t-tests.
Auditory Imagery Scale - Control. SUIS, VVIQ and TVIC
Data were analysed and visualised in the R programming
are on a 5-point (from lower to higher) Likert scale. BAIS-
language and environment (R Core Team, 2022). Mixed-
V and BAIS-C are on a 7-point Likert scale (from lower to
effects models were constructed with the lme4 package
higher).
(Bates et al., 2015). Significance values of the coefficients
in models were computed based on the t-distribution using Predictive Factors of CI Performance
the Satterthwaite approximation with the lmerTest package
Models were fitted with participant-related factors, that is,
(Kuznetsova et al., 2017). Bayes factors (BFs) were com-
age, gender with two levels, the university with three levels
puted with the BayesFactor package (Morey & Rouder, 2018)
(Hacettepe University, Yas¸ar University, and Izmir Economy
and effect sizes were computed with the effsize package
University), the year with two levels (Year 3 and Year 4), and
(Torchiano, 2020).
CGPA. Results revealed that only CGPA improved the null
model and thus predicted the CI performance; x (1) = 6.16, p
Descriptive Results
= .013, BF = 3.55. Participants with higher CGPA produced a
more accurate interpretation of the source speech; B = 0.09, t
The mean performance of all participants in the main exper-
= 2.59, p = .014. Models were also fitted with speech-related
imental task, that is, CI without notes was 0.34 (SD = 0.10,
factors, that is, imageability, familiarity, difficulty, speed, and
range = 0.14 – 0.54). Mean performance per speech was pre-
length in words. Results revealed that self-perceived diffi-
culty; x (1) = 5.74, p = .017, BF = 2.1, self-perceived speed;
2 2
x (1) = 5.68, p = .017, BF = 2.04, and imageability; x (1) =
4.5, p = .034, BF = 1.49 predicted the CI performance. The
tions) in Consecutive Interpreting Task ier; B = -0.12, t = -2.79, p = .019, slower; B = -0.32, t = -2.77,
p = .020 and more imageable, B = 0.08, t = 2.39, p = .038.
Speech title Score (%)
Mental Imagery Scales
Benefit of Pets 0.48 (0.17)
Poisonous Plants 0.47 (0.14)
The correlations between the scales and performance in the
Invention of Telescope 0.42 (0.18)
Alexander the Great 0.37 (0.19)
fitted with mental imagery scales as the fixed effects to in-
League of Nations 0.33 (0.15)
vestigate the main research question of the current study: the
Magna Carta 0.32 (0.13)
functional relation between mental imagery and CI. Five in-
Genealogy 0.29 (0.16)
dividual models with each mental imagery scale were com-
Use of Money 0.28 (0.12)
pared against the null model. Chi-squared tests indicated that
Communication 0.23 (0.11)
only TVIC improved the null model and thus, predicted CI
Culture 0.23 (0.09) 2
performance; x (1) = 4.63, p = .034, BF = 1.76. Partici-
Mean 0.34
pants who reported better visual imagery control also pro-
duced more accurate interpretation; B = 0.06, t = 2.18, p =
.036. That is, with a one-unit increase in TVIC score, the
Note. Speeches are ordered from the highest (Alexander expected score in CI increases by 0.06 units. To comply the
the Great) to the lowest percentage score (Culture). results, a Welch’s t-test showed that participants with better
mance between mental imagery groups based on self-reported
measures. The box plots within the violins show the whole
range (vertical line), the mean (black square), and the median
(horizontal line). Grey dots represent data points for individ-
ual participants. *p < .05.
mental rotation test
Discussion
imagery control (M = 0.38, SD = 0.08) did better in the CI
test on average than participants with worse imagery control The present study investigated the effect of individual differ-
(M = 0.3, SD = 0.11) with a large effect size and moderate ences in vividness, controllability and spontaneous use as-
Bayes evidence; t(36) = 2.57, p = .015, d = .83, BF = 3.75 pects of visual and auditory imagery on CI performance. To
tion of TVIC with participants and speech variables did not tematically examines the link between mental imagery and
have a significant effect on CI performance (all ps ¿ .05). In- CI through an array of visual and auditory mental imagery
teraction of imageability evaluations and other imagery scales scales and a mental rotation test. As CI demands consider-
did not significantly improve the model either (all ps ¿ .05). ably high working memory capacity and specific cognitive
Welch’s t-tests comparing CI performance between partici- control skills, our findings can ultimately be considered to
pants with higher and lower imagery control showed that the communicate the link between mental imagery and working
effect size is larger during interpretation of low imageable, memory.
abstract speeches; t(36) = 2.71, p = .01, d = .88, BF = 4.87
Results from mixed-effects models revealed that control of
compared to high imageable, concrete speeches; t(36) = 2.32,
visual mental imagery is the only dimension that predicts suc-
p = .026, d = .75, BF = 2.43.
cess in CI. On the other hand, the vividness of visual or audi-
On the other hand, VVIQ; x (1) = 0.0004, p = .984, SUIS; tory imagery measured with VVIQ and BAIS-V, respectively,
2 2
x (1) = 1.92, p = .166, BAIS-V; x (1) = 1.63 p = .226, and control of auditory imagery measured with BAIS-C, sponta-
BAIS-C; x (1) = 1.09, p = .296 were not predictive of CI neous use of visual imagery measured with SUIS, or accu-
performance. Welch’s t-tests also revealed a similar picture racy/RT in the mental rotation test did not predict CI perfor-
between high and low groups: VVIQ; t(36) = 0.1, p = .924, mance. Further, two-sample t-tests showed that when divided
SUIS; t(36) = 1.66, p = .106, BAIS-V; t(36) = 2.02, p = .051, into two groups, participants with better visual imagery con-
within high and low imageable speeches also revealed non- message from one language to the other, and importantly,
significant differences between high and low imagery groups even so, when interpreting less imageable speeches. In this
based on mental imagery scales (all ps < .05). Accuracy; regard, we partly accept our first prediction that better mental
2 2
x (1) = 1.37, p = .242 or RTs; x (1) = 1.99, p = .159 in mental imagery leads to better performance in CI. We argue that the
rotation test, as an objective measure of visuospatial mental advantage of individuals with better visual imagery control in
imagery control, did not predict CI performance either. That CI can be explained by the cognitive architecture of the CI
said, the positive correlation between TVIC and accuracy in process: As briefly discussed in the Introduction, the consec-
the mental rotation test (r = .24) albeit being non-significant utive interpreter, especially in short consecutive mode, listens
is noteworthy, particularly when compared to the correlations to a spell of source language input, stores/recalls it in chunks
with other self-reported measures. and transforms the verbal information into the target language
under great time pressure. As the source speaker continues, interpreted has semantic content that can be imagined visu-
the process resumes with new stretches while the interpreter ally. In support of this explanation, there is much evidence
deletes the previous information and store/recall new ones demonstrating that BAIS results correlate with performance
to continue interpreting the speech into the target language. in musical imagery tasks (e.g., Herholz et al., 2012). That be-
Overall, the CI process involves constant control and manipu- ing said, BAIS-C scores were positively and strongly (r = .63)
lation of verbal information and injects progressively increas- correlated with TVIC scores in the current study suggesting
ing loads in WM, particularly between the languages with in- a similar control mechanism behind the visual and auditory
verse syntactic structures such as English (S+V+O) and Turk- imagery skills.
ish (S+O+V) (Chou et al., 2021; Collard et al., 2018). As a
It is also important to highlight that mental imagery con-
matter of fact, CI itself is a control/manipulation task and re-
trol improved CI efficiency in the current study without ex-
quires considerable cognitive flexibility when the entire pro-
plicit instructions to use imagery as a retrieval strategy or
cess is considered (Dong et al., 2018; Dong & Liu, 2016;
without specific training beforehand. Further, informal quar-
Dong & Xie, 2014; Wen & Dong, 2019). We argue that par-
ries showed that participants were na¨ıve to the purpose of the
ticipants with better visual mental imagery control in the cur-
experiment. Thus, the advantage of better-control individ-
rent study performed better in the CI task because imagery
uals appeared more or less automatically in the interpreting
control is closely related to manipulation and updating effi-
output. The finding might be explained with the embodied
ciency in WM. Importantly, the difference between partici-
simulation account of memory and mental imagery (Barsa-
pants in mental imagery control became more salient when
lou, 1999). The embodied approach views retrieval as an
interpreting low-imageable speeches, which supports our ex-
automatic reinstatement of the original verbal content with
planation: Participants with better mental imagery control
its sensorimotor, affective, introspective, and contextual de-
were able to compensate for the transfer difficulty stemming
tails (Zwaan & Madden, 2005) and thus explains the criti-
from the abstractness of the speeches with their richer inter-
cal role of mental imagery in memory (Buckner & Wheeler,
nal sources. As a result, the contribution of having better con-
2001; Ian`ı, 2019). During a simulation, retrieval of informa-
trol skills became more pronounced against such a difficulty.
tion is coupled with sensorimotor components. Importantly,
Our previous results have shown similar trade-offs between
processing involves not only retrieval of information but also
the “internal capacity” of individuals and the retrieval that is
transformations of it. Accordingly, cognitive agents can en-
modulated by the imageability of the to-be-retrieved infor-
large, shrink, stretch, rotate or reshape retrieved information
mation (Kumcu & Thompson, 2016, 2020). In this respect,
during a simulation as in mental imagery control (Barsalou,
the results can be said to comply with the previous studies to
1999). In this regard, control and manipulation of the to-be-
some extent. Although several reports indicate that vividness
retrieved verbal information during CI might offer a natural
also improves verbal memory (e.g., de Beni & Moe`, 2003) it
account of flexibility in WM.
did not in the present study. In other words, individual differ-
Results have implications for both mental imagery and CI
ences between participants in visual or auditory vividness do
as a language task. As to mental imagery, our findings high-
not make a difference in CI performance neither in high nor in
light the link between mental imagery control and updating
low imageable speeches. It can be argued that imagery vivid-
ability in WM through CI. Although TVIC scores were pos-
ness might be linked to the other components in WM, such as
general memory span, especially in predominantly visuospa-
2), which is consistent with the previous findings (Kihlstrom
tial tasks. In support, Dong et al. (2018) found a weaker
et al., 1991), only results from TVIC predicted CI perfor-
relationship between verbal span and CI performance than
mance in our study, suggesting that vividness and control-
updating efficiency and CI training made no unique contri-
lability are two individual dimensions of mental imagery in
bution to verbal span. The mental rotation test did not predict
contrast to the claims that mental imagery is one single con-
CI performance either, which might suggest that visuospatial
tinuum (Harvey et al., 2004). In line with this argument,
thinking measured by the mental rotation test in the current
growing research demonstrates that vividness and controlla-
study does not strictly correspond to the requirements of CI.
bility of mental images are associated with different psychotic
One question as to our findings could be the reason why and severe mood disorders (Auvinen-Lintunen et al., 2022).
auditory mental imagery control measured with BAIS-C did Our findings also provide evidence that visual imagery con-
not predict CI performance as participants were also asked trol rather than visual imagery vividness or auditory imagery
to control and manipulate mental images on this scale. How- is important for CI, which goes against the intuitions of pro-
ever, mental imagery questions in BAIS-C are directly related fessional interpreters. Previous analyses suggested that the
to sounds such as the sound of tap shoes on the stage during level of interpreter expertise is a significant moderator in the
a tap-dance performance or the loud sound of a dentist’s drill. presence of an “interpreter advantage” and such advantages in
As a result, we might argue that cognitive operations involved cognitive control and WM spans are observed predominantly
in CI do require the manipulation of visual information rather among professionals with longer experience (Wen & Dong,
than acoustic information. Although the verbal information 2019). However, our results show that even minor differences
is received and produced auditorily in CI, the message to be in mental imagery control among interpreting students could
lead to significant changes in the output. This might pave the Buckner, R. L., & Wheeler, M. E. (2001). The cognitive neu-
way for the use of mental imagery control exercises in addi- roscience of remembering. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
that short CI without notes is a highly widespread modality Chara, P. J., & Hamm, D. A. (1989). An inquiry into the con-
in the industry. struct validity of the vividness of visual imagery question-
In summary, the current study shows that unlike the clar- naire. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 69(1), 127–136. https:
ity of mental images or how frequently one prefers to use //doi.org/10.2466/pms.1989.69.1.127
them in daily life, the ability to control and manipulate visual Chmiel, A. (2019). Mental imagery in interpreting – a neu-
mental images voluntarily and flexibly is an important feat in rocognitive perspective. POLISSEMA – Revista De Letras
involves the rendering of verbal information from one lan- Chou, I., Liu, K., & Zhao, N. (2021). Effects of directionality
guage to the another. As CI is a mainly memory-dependent on interpreting performance: Evidence from interpreting
task that is practised in the “real world” rather than being an between chinese and english by trainee interpreters. Fron-
artificially designed and isolated task for experimental aims, tiers in Psychology, 12. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg .
the findings could also suggest how mental imagery skills are 2021.781610
translated into cognitive performance in a complex operation Cohen, B. H., & Saslona, M. (1990). The advantage of being
with multiple sub-tasks. an habitual visualizer. Journal of Mental Imagery, 14(3),
101–112.
Acknowledgements
Collard, C., Przybyl, H., & Defrancq, B. (2018). Interpreting
We like to thank all students who participated in our research. into an sov language: Memory and the position of the verb.
Special thanks to Prof. Dr Ricardo Munoz Martin from the a corpus-based comparative study of interpreted and non-
University of Bologna and Asst. Prof. Dr Duygu C¸ urum from mediated speech. Meta: Translators’ Journal, 63(3), 695–
Cooper, L. A. (1975). Mental rotation of random two-
Disclosure statement
dimensional shapes. Cognitive Psychology, 7(1), 20–43.
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
de Beni, R., & Moe`, A. (2003). Imagery and rehearsal as
Data availability statement
study strategies for written or orally presented passages.
The data that support the findings of this study are openly
org/10.3758/BF03196561
Dickel, M. J., & Slak, S. (1983). Imagery vividness and mem-