Disentangling the contribution of individual and social learning processes in
human advice-taking behavior
Maayan Pereg*1,2,3,4, Uri Hertz5,6, Ido Ben-Artzi1,2,3, Nitzan Shahar1,2
1 School of Psychological Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
2 Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
3 Minducate Center for the Science of Learning, Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel
Aviv, Israel
4 Department of Psychology, Achva Academic College, Israel
5 Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel
6 Institute of Information Processing and Decision Making, University of Haifa, Haifa,
Israel
* Correspondence should be addressed to:
Maayan Pereg
Sagol School of Neuroscience
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, Israel
Email: maayanru@tauex.tau.ac.il
Abstract
The study of social learning examines how individuals learn from others by means of
observation, imitation, or compliance with advice. However, it still remains largely
unknown whether social learning processes have a distinct contribution behavior,
independent from non-social trial-and-error learning that often occurs simultaneously.
153 participants completed a reinforcement learning task, where they were asked to
make choices to gain rewards. Advice from an artificial teacher was presented on 60%
of the trials, allowing us to compare choice behavior with and without advice. Results
showed a strong and reliable tendency to follow advice (test-retest reliability ~.73).
Computational modeling suggested a unique contribution of three distinct learning
strategies: (a) individual learning (i.e., learning the value of actions, independent of
advice), (b) informed advice-taking (i.e., learning the value of following advice), and
(c) non-informed advice-taking (i.e., a constant bias to follow advice regardless of
outcome history). Comparing artificial and empirical data provided specific behavioral
regression signatures to both informed and non-informed advice taking processes. We
discuss the theoretical implications of integrating internal and external information
during the learning process.
Keywords: advice-taking, social learning, computational modeling, reinforcement
learning.
Introduction
Two forms of learning are predominant in the process of understanding our
environment. The first is an unguided trial-and-error learning process, whereby
individuals learn from personal experience (henceforth individual learning)1. The other
form of learning falls under the broad definition of social learning, in which we learn by
observing and imitating others, or the main focus of this study - by following explicit
advice or instructions 2–4 (see Lind et al.5 for a short discussion on the terminology and
diversity concerning social learning). Social learning is considered one of the primary
ways by which we learn, especially in humans but also in animals6. Despite the
distinction between these two forms of learning, it is not simple to decipher and
disentangle the unique contribution of each of these processes in explaining human
choice behavior. For example, imagine that a friend suggests that you order a
particular dish at a restaurant. You might order the advised dish but, from an
observer’s perspective, it is impossible to know whether this behavior was due to (a)
your own personal prior experience with that type of cuisine irrespective of the advice,
(b) the value you assigned to your friend’s advice because her advice panned out
before due to her culinary knowledge, or (c) your tendency to comply with advice
received from others, regardless of the specific context. Thus, to better understand
human choice behavior in following advice, it is critical that we disentangle and
estimate the influence of both social and non-social learning processes.
The literature on social learning strategies has dealt extensively with the influence of
a single piece of advice on human choice behavior7,8. For example, Biele et al.9
demonstrated that participants have a general tendency to behave in accordance with
a single piece of advice provided to them just one time. In their study, participants were
shown to be more likely to choose a card from an advised deck of cards relative to a
card deck with a similar positive value but for which they did not receive advice. Biele
et al. 9,10 suggested that individuals have a positive bias when evaluating the outcomes
of recommended options relative to options that are not specifically recommended.
Several studies support this assumption, having demonstrated that, remarkably, even
a single piece of advice or instruction can influence and bias human choice behavior
9–14. However, it is important to note that most natural environments consist of
repeating socially transmitted information, where advice is given more than once, and
often by the same individual.
Indeed, previous studies have suggested that individuals tend to keep track of and
assess the value of repeating socially transmitted information. For example, one
adaptive social learning strategy involves copying the choices of successful
individuals, as the knowledge they hold is assumed to be more valuable than that of
others 15,16.
Furthermore, Behrens et al. 17 found that the associative neural mechanisms that are
responsible for processing social information are similar to those at play during
individual learning and are subject to updating and learning. Taken together, these
studies suggest that agents engage not only in learning the value of their own choices,
but also in learning the value of social information. However, it is not clear how these
two processes interact and how one might influence the other. For example, Bonawitz
et al. 11 demonstrated that pedagogical teaching (e.g., instructing about the specific
use of a toy) limits children’s own exploration when the teacher is assumed to be
knowledgeable. However, the same study also showed that children still engaged in
exploration when they believed there was more to learn about the toy.
In a related line of research, researchers have explored the specific computational
process that underlies individuals’ responses to repeated social advice. For example,
Najar et al. 4 demonstrated that individuals perceive the choices of a demonstrator in
a similar manner to how they perceive a positive reward. Hence supposedly, the
advice acts as a driving force for behavior. In addition, they showed that only
demonstrators who have proven to be knowledgeable are imitated, further supporting
the idea that individuals consistently engage in a process of evaluating the information
presented to them. Other works were able to demonstrate that the same reward
circuits that are activated during individual learning are also activated when receiving
advice in a decision-making situation 18. Moreover, Diaconescu et al. 19 suggested that
people deliberate between social and individual information, while also accounting for
the level of certainty or uncertainty they have in the information source. Finally, Rybicki
et al. 20 exhibited support for the assumption that social and individual learning
processes rely on similar neurochemical mechanisms (while also indicating the
importance of the temporal primacy of the social information21). However, these
studies used designs that make it difficult to disentangle the influence of different
facets of social learning and individual learning on decision-making.
These studies improve our understanding of the processes by which individuals utilize
one-time or repeated socially transmitted information when making choices. However,
to the best of our knowledge, no study to date has examined whether a bias to follow
advice (such as the one that was observed in one-time advice-giving paradigms)
remains present in an environment in which advice is repeating. In the current study,
we assumed that in a repeating advice-giving environment, wherein individuals are
learning the values of different actions (e.g., whether they lead to a positive or a
negative outcome), participants will behave in accordance with the advice given for
one of three reasons. The first is due to individual learning, which reflects an internal
value that was learned in a non-social manner, regardless of whether advice was
provided or not. A second option is informed social learning, whereby the individual
assigns value to an advised option due to a previous positive experience with the
advisor. The third and final option is non-informed social learning, whereby the
individual assigns value to complying with advice in general. Whereas individual
learning and informed advice-taking often result from trial-and-error learning, non-
informed social learning may be due to social norms, such as reciprocity or respect
13,22–24, or epistemic trust in “advisors”/”teachers”, people who are assumed to have
relevant knowledge on which to base their advice 25.
In the current study, we aimed to disentangle, in a single reinforcement learning task,
the influence of advice-taking from individual value-based learning. To do so, we
employ a prediction-error based modeling approach, which was shown to predict and
describe human and animal choice behavior across different domains26. For example,
reinforcement learning has been found to explain algorithmic processes in
computational science27, simulate and predict human decision-making and learning28–
30, and shed light on animal behavior31. Moreover, the correlation between prediction
errors and activity in the human striatum32, a key region in the brain's reward and
reinforcement system, underscores the neurobiological relevance of PE-based
models in understanding the neural underpinnings of behavior.
We introduced a novel experimental paradigm in which we randomly interleaved trials
with and without advice to allow us to disentangle individual learning from social
advice. We estimated individuals’ bias towards following advice in a reinforcement
learning task in which advice was either revealed to or concealed from participants.
Specifically, participants had to choose between two cards (from a deck of four) that
rewards ($0 or $1) probabilistically, and participants were asked to make choices to
maximize their return. On some of the trials, an artificial teacher gave advice regarding
which card should be chosen. Regression analyses demonstrated an influence of the
teacher’s advice on participants’ choice behavior, such that participants were more
likely to choose the card offered by the teacher when the advice was presented on
screen. Furthermore, the tendency to follow advice showed good test-retest reliability,
suggesting robustness across two time points. Of main interest in this work, we
conducted formal computational models that mimicked the hypothesized cognitive
mechanism and tested its fit to the observed data. We found evidence to suggest that
participants’ behavior reflect a combination of non-informed social learning, informed
social learning, and non-social individual learning. We then conducted analyses that
compare simulated with empirical data to identify unique signatures for these
processes using dedicated regression analyses. We conclude that individuals have a
predominant bias to follow advice when advice from a social agent is repeated and
when individual learning occurs. We discuss the theoretical implications of integrating
information learned from personal experience with external advice.
Results
Analyses overview. We examined the contribution of informed and non-informed
advice-taking to participants’ choice behavior in a sequential reinforcement learning
causal influence of revealing the teacher’s advice to the participant on choice behavior
by-trial independent learning, which was explored both at the group level and at an
individual level (i.e., between sessions test-retest estimates). We then continue to
describe the mathematical processes underlying individuals’ choice behavior.
Specifically, we used computational modeling to estimate the contribution of three
internal latent processes to participants’ choice behavior: (1) individual learning (i.e.,
learning from experience with the cards, independent of any advice), (2) informed
advice-taking (i.e., trial-by-trial learning of the value of following the teacher’s advice),
and (3) non-informed advice-taking (i.e., a fixed internal bias to follow advice
regardless of choice and outcome history). Finally, we will show further support for the
necessity of the two advice-taking processes. We used participants’ estimated
computational parameters to simulate data. We independently discouraged
participants’ informed or non-informed advice-taking tendencies and demonstrated
unique regression signatures for these processes. Overall, we found strong and
compelling evidence suggesting a causal effect of advice on participants’ choice
behavior, both via informed and non-informed advice-taking processes.
reinforcement learning task, in which two cards were randomly selected and offered to
participants on each trial. The cards led to a reward according to a reward probability, unknown
to the participant. On each trial, the teacher’s advice was generated by the computer with
differing degrees of accuracy. In the revealed advice conditions, the advice was displayed to
the participant by presenting the teacher’s avatar next to the advised card (left box in the offer
stage). Note that in the revealed advice trials, a red X was presented next to the unadvised
card to perceptually balance the cards with a flanking stimulus. Teachers’ choices were also
generated during the concealed advice trials, as in the revealed advice trials, but were not
presented to the participants. This approach allowed us to examine whether participants’
choices were the same as the teachers’ when the advice was revealed vs. when it was
concealed, based on learning and prior experience.
Theory-independent analysis examining the influence of receiving advice on
compliance. We first assessed whether participants demonstrated a bias towards
advice-taking across trials and sessions. For this aim, we first calculated a coherence
rate as the dependent variable to reflect whether participants chose the same card as
the teacher (coded 0/1 when teacher and student selected two different/same cards,
respectively), both when the teacher’s choice was revealed and when it was
concealed. The coherence rate in the concealed condition served as a baseline, as it
reflects the contribution of an individual learning process to the likelihood of agreement
with the teacher’s choice, i.e., the likelihood of the participant reaching the same
choice as the teacher independently. This is plausible when the participant has learned
to identify the more valuable offer, which was often aligned with the choice of the
teacher (concealed or revealed). This approach enabled us to examine the unique
contribution of the teacher’s advice by comparing coherence rates across the revealed
advice and concealed advice conditions, which we termed the reveal effect.
We therefore performed a hierarchical Bayesian logistic regression analysis,
predicting participants’ coherence rates as a function of advice presentation
(concealed/revealed). We found that coherence rates in the revealed advice condition
were higher than the baseline rates in the concealed advice condition, suggesting a
causal influence of advice on compliance. Specifically, participants were more likely
to choose the card advised by the teacher when the teacher’s advice was revealed
(66% coherence rate) compared to when the advice was concealed (48% coherence
rate; posterior median estimation for the difference in the population was 0.29, HDI
89%
= 0.25 to 0.33 probability of direction (pd) ~100% suggesting all of the distribution was
To further substantiate the estimation of the causal influence of advice on participants’
choice behavior, we examined the test-retest reliability of the tendency to follow
advice. Participants performed the task in two separate experimental sessions across
two adjacent days (visual stimuli of cards and artificial teachers were changed across
blocks and sessions). We performed a hierarchical Bayesian regression analysis and
89%
2 c/d). Overall, these results demonstrate a strong and reliable causal influence of
receiving advice on individuals’ choice behavior in a reinforcement learning task during
which advice was given repeatedly. However, these analyses did not allow us to
disentangle the effects of informed from non-informed advice-taking. For this purpose,
we turned to computational analyses that can explicitly model the contribution of
different learning and decision-making processes.
on participants’ behavior. We calculated participants’ coherence rates and
participants’ tendency to choose the same card as the teacher on trials in which the
advice was revealed vs. trials in which the teacher’s choice was concealed. Coherence
rates during concealed trials reflect the contribution of individual learning processes to
choose the same (high value) card as the one that the teacher recommended.
Comparing coherence rates between revealed and concealed trials therefore results
in the reveal effect – i.e., the influence of advice on participants choice behavior, above
and beyond individual learning processes. (a) Coherence rates as a function of
revealing/concealing advice (yellow dots represent the empirical mean coherence
levels, black dots represent the mean posterior predictions, and gray ovals represent
HDI ). Evidence shows that revealing advice dramatically increased participants’
89%
tendency to choose the same option as the teacher. Thus, advice seems to have a
causal effect on participants’ choices, above and beyond any teacher-participant
choice alignment. (b) The posterior distribution for presenting the teacher’s advice on
the probability to choose the same card as the teacher (gray line indicates HDI ). (c)
89%
Test-retest reliability of the reveal effect across two sessions, performed across two
adjacent days (posterior median = 0.73). Scatter plot indicates standardized scores
for the reveal effect for each session. Gray lines reflect posterior predictive correlations
across the whole posterior distribution. (d) Posterior distribution for the test-retest
Pearson correlation coefficient.
Computational Modeling. We hypothesized that participants’ choice behavior
integrates three sources of information: individual learning, informed advice-taking and
non-informed advice-taking. We formulated a saturated model that included all three
types of information and tested it against three nested models. Specifically, in these
models we predicted the agents’ choices based on reward history and experimental
conditions. For each trial, we updated the subjective values of the cards (Q-values)
based on the prediction error signal32. Prediction error is an internal signal by which
the agent refines its prediction during the learning and decision-making process. It
refers to the discrepancy between the predicted outcome (value or action) and the
actual outcome that occurs during the learning process. It plays a crucial role in
reinforcement learning as it guides the agent's learning by indicating how well its
predictions align with reality32–34. For clarity, we will describe the models we computed.
The first model is a baseline model which only had an individual learning component
(Model 1). We then added non-informed advice-taking (Model 2) and informed advice-
taking (Models 3 and 4) to the models, and lastly, we computed a full model with all
three components (Model 5).
Model 1 (null model): This model assumes that participants learned the cards’ values
from their own experience without considering the presented advice:
(1) δ = (reward – Q )
chosen_card chosen_card
(2) Q = Q + α * δ
chosen_card chosen_card chosen_card
where α is a learning-rate (free-parameter) and δ represents the prediction
chosen_card
error for the card selected by the agent (this equation is used in all models). Thus, this
model ignores any advice revealed to the participant. In order to choose between the
cards, we used a softmax policy:
𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝛽⋅𝑄 )
𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑛_𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑑
(3) p(choice) =
𝛴𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝛽⋅𝑄𝑖)
where β is an inverse noise parameter (free parameter), and Q denotes the Q-values
of each card offered in a current trial. Thus, this model had two population-level free
parameters (α , β).
chosen_card
Model 2 (fixed non-informed advice-taking): This model is similar to the baseline
model only with an additional fixed bias in favor of teacher advice, when it was
presented. When the teacher’s advice was presented, action values were calculated
according to:
(4) Qnet = Q + φ
advised_card advised_card
(5) Qnet = Q
unadvised_card unadvised_card
where φ is a free parameter (unrestricted and could be positive or negative) describing
the individual tendency to follow advice regardless of any choice-outcome history
during the task.
These Qnet values were then entered into the softmax:
𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝛽⋅𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡 )
𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑛−𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑑
(6) p(choice) =
𝛴𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝛽⋅𝑄𝑛𝑒𝑡 )
Overall, this model has three population-level free parameters (α , β, φ).
chosen_card
An additional model (Model 2b) tested dynamic non-informed advice taking, where the
bias is moderated by choice difficulty. See Supplementary information for a full report
of this model.
Model 3 (Informed advice-taking): This model assumes that instead of having a
general preference for the advised card, participants evaluated the advice during the
experimental block via Q-learning. The two options, to follow or not to follow the advice,
were updated via Q-learning using a prediction error and learning rate (the same free
parameter α from the other models), as shown below (Equation (7) and Equation (8)):
(7) δ = (reward – Q )
follow_advice follow_advice
(8) Q = Q + α *δ
follow_advice follow_advice follow_advice
Next, we calculated Qnet, which incorporated the Q-values of the cards and of
following (or not following) advice, and weighted them using ω:
(9) Qnet = ω*Q + (1-ω)*Q
advised_card advised_card follow_advice
We note that the Q-values of the cards were updated using Equation (1) and Equation
(2), and that the softmax decision function in this model is the same as in Model 2
(Equation (6)). This model involves 3 free parameters: learning rate for the cards and
for following advice (α), inverse noise parameter (β), and weighing between the Q-
values of the cards and of following advice (ω).
Model 4 (Moderated informed advice-taking): In the previous model, participants
were assumed to update the value of following advice based on the observed
outcome. However, the outcome (reward vs. unrewarded) is not only a function of how
accurate the teacher was, but also depends on the expected value of the selected
card. Participants might thus moderate their value update for the teacher’s advice
based on their current expectation for a reward given a specific chosen card. We
therefore included a model that also includes a moderation of the Q-values for
following advice as a function of the prediction error for the chosen card (see Equation
(1)). According to this model, updating the value for following advice is a function of
both the observed outcome and the Q-values of the specific choice at hand. Hence, if
the prediction error for the cards is relatively small (in absolute values) based on
individual learning, less updating of the value of the teacher is required, and vice versa.
To update of the Q-value to follow (or not follow) advice, Equation (7) was replaced by
Equation (10), as follows:
(10) Q = Q + α *δ * |δ |
follow_advice follow_advice follow_advice chosen_card
This model involves the same three free parameters as the previous model: learning
rate (α), inverse noise parameter (β), and weighing between the Q-values of the cards
and of following advice (ω).
Model 5 (informed and non-informed advice-taking): This model combines Models
2 and 3 and assumes both a general preference for the advised card, and an
evaluation of the teacher through the reward history (Equation (11)).
(11) Qnet = ω*Q + (1-ω)*Q + φ
advised_card advised_card follow_advice
Model fitting. We performed a model comparison using a leave-one-block-out
approach, as described in the Method section. We calculated a difference distribution
for each paired model comparison and estimated the expected log probability density
(elpd) difference and the standard error of the difference distribution (using ‘loo’
package; with an elpd difference of 2 times the standard-error considered
recovery is depicted in Supplementary Information.
Model Expected log probability difference
compared to the winning model
(Model 5 – informed and non-informed advice-
taking)
Null model -4147.2 (88.4)
Model 2 (fixed bias) -514.1 (33.4)
Model 3 (teacher -701.3 (48.8)
evaluation)
Model 4 (moderated
-490.7 (47.0)
teacher evaluation)
Note. Elpd (expected log probability density) was calculated using a leave-one-
(block)-out cross-validation approach. An elpd difference that is larger than 4 and at
least twice the standard error is considered to be significant evidence for the
winning model35.
Elpd difference standard errors are noted in brackets.
Estimated parameters. The estimated parameters for the winning model highlight the
contribution of individual learning, informed advice-taking and non-informed advice-
a reliance on individual learning, but also on informed advice-taking, which tracked the
accuracy of the teacher. This value indicates that a highly accurate teacher could
influence the decisions made by participants beyond individual learning, a finding that
is in line with the reveal effect discussed above. Parameter φ was estimated to be ~0.2
teacher’s accuracy. This fixed contribution is the basis of non-informed compliance
and contributed to the reveal effect as well. This tendency increased the likelihood of
following advice even when it went against one’s individual experience and/or when
the teacher’s accuracy was low.
Associations between the winning model and empirical data. To demonstrate the
association between the winning model parameters and the model-agnostic results,
we estimated the individual bias to follow advice for each participant and for each
simulated agent. To do so, we simulated artificial data with the same number of trials
as the empirical data using individuals’ parameter estimation (we used the mean
posterior for each individual and parameter). We then calculated and plotted the
'reveal effect’ from empirical data and artificial data for each subject based on the
model and examined the correlation between them. We found a strong positive
89%
the model successfully replicated the behavioral results.
the winning model parameters: The fixed effect posterior distribution of the learning rate (α,
panel a), inverse temperature (β, panel b), informed advice-taking (ω, panel c) and non-
informed advice-taking bias (φ, panel d). Overall, results suggest that participants clearly
engaged in both types of advice-taking. This can be seen in an ω population parameter
centered at ~0.70 (1 represents only individual learning with no informed advice-taking, 0
represents only informed advice-taking with no individual learning). Furthermore, the φ
parameter suggests a positive tendency to follow advice regardless of any task experience (0
represents no non-informed advice-taking, a negative value indicates a tendency to not
choose advised cards). The blue dashed line represents median values, the gray horizontal
bar represents 89% CI. (e) To create a visual illustration of our model’s ability to capture choice
behavior, we simulated artificial data based on the empirical data and individuals’ parameter
estimation. We then calculated and plotted the 'reveal effect’ from empirical data and artificial
data for each subject. The scatter plot clearly indicates an excellent fit, such that the
individuals’ estimated parameters generated a very similar reveal effect to the one observed
in the empirical data.
1) show clear evidence suggesting that individuals are using both informed and non-
informed advice-taking mechanisms. Specifically, elpd suggested that using both
informed and non-informed processes substantially increased our ability to predict left-
out blocks. To illustrate the existence of both types of advice-taking in the empirical
behavioral data, we additionally performed a set of analyses that compare simulated
results based on the winning computational model with the behavioral data. We first
simulated two data sets for each individual, based on the individual empirical
parameters’ estimation that was gained from the winning model. This set of analyses
serves as two private cases of Model 5: One in which ω =1 (and so only non-informed
advice-taking takes place here); and the second in which φ = 0 (and thus only informed
advice taking takes place in this dataset). In the first set (non-informed advice-taking),
we fixated the ω parameter (i.e., ω was set to 1), thus forming a simulation by which
only non-informed advice-taking underlies the learning process. In the second data
set, (informed advice-taking) we muted the φ parameters (i.e., φ was set to 0), thus
forming simulated data in which only the informed advice-taking underlies the learning
process, and there is no bias to follow advice. This allowed us to examine the reveal
effect in datasets that were artificially constructed using only one of the advice-taking
processes at a time, and compare them to the empirical behavioral data. Therefore,
these analyses were constructed in order to show behavioral signatures for both
learning processes that constitute the winning computational model: non-informed and
informed advice-taking.
(1) Signature for non-informed advice-taking: We calculated the ‘reveal effect’ using
only two trials for each participant, per block – the first time a conceal trial was
presented and the first time a reveal trial was presented. We reasoned that during
such an early stage in the task, informed advice-taking would not be able to produce
a reveal effect. Note that each block included a novel teacher, with whom the
participant did not have prior experience. For the empirical data, we found a substantial
89%
Panels a and d). We found a similar effect in the non-informed artificial dataset (median
89%
Importantly, we found evidence against a reveal effect for the complementary informed
advice-taking artificial data set (median = -0.03, CI between -0.0555 to 0.11, pd =
89%
non-informed advice-taking and posterior distributions. We analyzed three data sets: (1)
empirical data, (2) artificial informed advice-taking (simulated using individuals’ estimated
parameters after muting the non-informed advice-taking by setting φ=0 across subjects), and
(3) artificial non-informed advice-taking (simulated using individuals’ estimated parameters
after discouraging the informed advice-taking process by setting ω=1 across subjects). The
‘reveal effect’ calculated only from two trials per block and per subject; the first trial in which
advice was revealed and the first trial in which advice was concealed. Thus, informed advice-
taking should not be able to produce a reveal effect in this analysis. As hypothesized, we found
a substantial reveal effect in the empirical data (Panel a, and its posterior distribution in Panel
d), which was mimicked only by the non-informed artificial data (Panel c, and its posterior
distribution in Panel f), but not the informed artificial data (Panel b, and its posterior distribution
in Panel e).
(2) Signature for informed advice-taking: To capture a unique signature for informed
advice-taking, we examined the influence of outcome on choice behavior. Specifically,
we calculated a coherence repeat rate dependent variable, which reflected whether
participants exhibited the same behavior (following the teacher’s advice or not) across
two consecutive trials, n and n+1 (coded 0/1 for different/same behavior, respectively).
We then used Bayesian logistic regression analyses to predict coherence repeat as a
function of previous outcome (rewarded vs. unrewarded) and advice presentation
(concealed vs. revealed on both n and n+1 trials), as well as their paired interaction.
Note that we did not include trials in which advice presentation was different across n
and n+1 trials to allow for a more precise comparison. We reasoned that the interaction
of previous outcome X advice presentation would be present only for informed advice-
taking. Specifically, when advice is presented, a reward on trial n should increase
coherence on trial n+1 compared to unrewarded n trials (as can be seen in the
updating of the Q value in the winning Model 5). However, in concealed
follow_advice
advice trials, the value for taking/rejecting advice should not be updated, and so the
reward on trial n should not affect coherence rates. Note that we also added teacher
accuracy in the nth trial as a fixed effect only with no Interaction, allowing us to control
for overall coherence baseline rates which might change with teacher accuracy.
For the empirical data, we found evidence in favor of a previous outcome X advice
89%
5, Panels a and d). This suggests, as we predicted, higher coherence repeat rates
after a rewarded vs. unrewarded n trial, but only when advice was revealed. When the
advice was concealed, the outcome of trial n had no influence on coherence repeat
rates. A similar (but smaller) positive interaction was found for the informed artificial
data (in which non-informed advice-taking was lesioned; median = 0.03, CI = 0.01
89%
data set (in which informed advice-taking was halted) did not show evidence in favor
of a previous outcome X advice presentation paired interaction (median = 0.01, CI
89%
informed advice-taking and posterior distributions. We analyzed three data sets: (1)
empirical data, (2) artificial informed advice-taking (simulated using individuals’ estimated
parameters after muting the non-informed advice-taking by setting φ=0 across subjects), and
(3) artificial non-informed advice-taking (simulated using individuals’ estimated parameters
after discouraging the informed advice-taking process by setting ω=1 across subjects). We
estimated the likelihood of observing a repetition in coherence from trial n to n+1 as a function
of outcome in trial n (unrewarded vs. rewarded) and advice presentation (concealed vs.
revealed on both trials). We found a significant paired interaction suggesting that previous
reward increased coherence repetition, only for trials in which the teacher’s advice was
presented (Panel a, and its posterior distribution in Panel d). This suggests that participants
assigned value to teacher’s advice as a function of the observed outcome. Importantly, this
interaction was mimicked only by the informed advice-taking artificial data (Panel b, and its
posterior distribution in Panel e) and not the non-informed advice-taking artificial data (Panel
c, and its posterior distribution in Panel f). These results clearly mirror our model comparison
results, suggesting that participants engaged in both informed and non-informed advice-
taking.
Overall, these analyses were able to show two unique regression signatures: one that
is predicted only by informed, but not non-informed advice-taking and one that is
predicted only by non-informed but not informed advice-taking. Importantly, both
effects were observed in the empirical data set, providing further evidence for our
model comparison conclusion which suggests that both types of advice-taking are
required to explain the data.
Yet, one might argue that these data could have been gained due to non-social
aspects of the task as well (such as demand characteristics). To control for this
alternative explanation, we also tested a non-social version of the student-teacher
task, in which we replaced the virtual teacher with a lottery wheel. The experimental
procedure was the same, except that the virtual teachers were replaced with a non-
human lottery wheel (see Supplementary information). The results indicated a smaller
reveal effect in the non-social experiment (i.e., increased tendency to choose the
advised card in trials where the advice was revealed vs. concealed), suggesting that
advice that is symbolically framed as social information holds a greater causal
influence on participants’ tendency to follow advice.
Discussion
Previous studies have demonstrated that learners integrate social information into
their value-based decision-making. However, one prominent unresolved issue with
prior studies concerns the inability to separate unguided internal decisions (individual
learning) from decisions based on external advice. Moreover, we argue that following
advice could be further differentiated into informed advice-taking (learning the value
of following advice), and non-informed advice-taking (bias to follow advice regardless
of an advisor’s previous accuracy). In the current study, we therefore opted to
approach these two issues using a reinforcement learning design comprising repeated
advice. With this experimental design, we were able to disentangle individual from
social-based decisions, while also investigating the reliability of advice-taking
behavior.
The results showed that, behaviorally, participants demonstrated a robust bias
towards following advice, which was a rather stable bias across separate
measurements. Computational modeling enabled us to identify the underlying
mechanisms and showed that the results are likely due to both non-informed advice-
taking (i.e., a fixed bias towards following advice), and informed advice-taking (i.e.,
learning the value of following the teacher’s advice). Analysis of the empirical data
showed two complementary findings for the non-informed and informed processes,
respectively: (1) participants demonstrated a bias to follow advice even on their very
first encounter with the teacher; and (2) reward history had a causal effect on future
advice-taking behavior. Signatures from simulations analyses comparing artificial and
empirical data showed a double dissociation supporting the necessity of considering
both processes in order to explain the empirical data. Taken together, the results
suggest that an intelligent process occurs in which teachers’ outcome history (i.e.,
accuracy) contributes to participants’ tendency to follow their advice.
It should be noted that in this work we aim to study processes involved in following
advice during social learning, which are considered to be different than processes
involved in other forms of social learning, such as observational learning. For example,
it was shown that in observational learning there are separate prediction error
mechanisms involved for actions and outcomes at both the behavioral and neural
level33. However, observational learning often involves observing not only the choices,
but also the resulting outcomes; whereas advice is different, since the information is
intentionally transmitted to the learner usually without incurring personal costs on the
advisor, and thus these differential prediction processes might not be relevant in
advice taking. In support of this dissociation, Hertz et al.13, showed that participants
deliberated less and were more willing to follow advice than to copy the choices of
another player. That study also indicated that following advice is related to trust in
others, thus raising the issue of the role that the intentions of the advisor play in this
type of learning36. Therefore, we note that the results gained in the current study do
not necessarily expand to other forms of social learning that were not explicitly
examined here.
The computational mechanism found in the current study resembles that of
Diaconescu et al.19, which showed that people have a social bias towards following
advice, accompanied by an arbitration between social and individual sources of
information. In that study, participants played in a lottery game where they could base
their predictions for the raffle’s results based on their individual experience and/or on
advice. Importantly, the advisor’s intention to help varied throughout the experiment,
such that participants were hypothesized to adjust the source of information that they
rely on based on this volatility (i.e., based on the perceived precision of each source
of information). Using a Hierarchical Bayesian model, they showed that participants
tracked the volatility of each information source and arbitrated between them, taking
into consideration the advisor’s precision and stability. The current work affirms and
extends their findings by showing that a simple experimental manipulation can
disentangle the causal effect of advice from individual learning. That is, by measuring
the difference in coherence rate for trials where advice was revealed vs. concealed,
we can measure the causal effect of advice on choice behavior in a continuous
learning paradigm, without having to use computational modeling. Furthermore, our
RL modeling supported Diaconescu et al.21 showing that indeed individuals tend to
engage in both individual learning and advice-taking. We further show that this is true
in a much less volatile environment and suggest that both informed and non-informed
types of learning affect the value of the individual to follow advice.
Najar et al.4 also showed that the demonstrator’s choices directly influenced those of
the player, but it was shown in an imitation process such that the players mimicked
the previous choices of the demonstrator. Najar et al.’s4 winning value-shaping model
allows for long-lasting learning of social inputs, but importantly, similar to Diaconescu
et al.’s19 model, the socially oriented bias towards “advised” options is bound with the
specific choice made by the demonstrator. Hence, we suggest that the bias parameter
in our models (i.e., non-informed advice-taking) might capture a phenomenon that
relates to the normative aspect of following others’ advice since it demonstrates a
general bias that is not limited to a specific choice (see Mahmoodi et al.24 for a study
concerning the involvement of normative and informational conformity in change of
mind).
One explanation for a bias towards following advice comes from the work of Biele et
al.10, which showed that following advice was intrinsically rewarding in and of itself,
thus explaining the long-lasting influence of a single piece of advice provided one time.
Moreover, Doll et al.’s12 work supported a computational model by which learners favor
advice over individually-learned information, even when the advice was incorrect, and
in Najar et al.’s4 model, the demonstrator’s choice itself serves as a pseudo-reward in
the computational mechanism. Presumably, such a bias could rely on epistemic trust,
which represents a “trust in knowledge”, or a tendency to evaluate new social
information as accurate and reliable and to integrate it into one's own learning
environment 37,38. Epistemic trust has been extensively studied in young children 39–41,
and studies show that children are able to evaluate their informants during learning,
and estimate whether they are knowledgeable and trustworthy. For example, Woo and
Spelke42 showed that even toddlers are able to both learn from the outcome of an
agent’s behavior as well as to evaluate the intention of the social agent. A unified
framework by Eaves and Shafto37 suggests that epistemic trust complements
pedagogical inference, where informants are assumed to be trustworthy. By
integrating the results of these studies, we can conclude that adaptive learning results
from a combination of having trust in, and evaluating, a pedagogical agent. A social
learning strategy such as “copy when model successful” allows for this type of
evaluation of the informant43. Finally, trust has been shown to influence learning from
advice, but not from observation13; for example, one study showed that participants
with high levels of paranoia were less likely to comply with advice, but did not differ
from individuals with low paranoia levels in the extent to which they copied an
observed decision. It seems that both processes are mirrored in the current results,
which demonstrate a general bias to trust the advisor and follow advice (non-informed)
and form an evaluation of the teacher (informed advice-taking).
The current results also relate to other works concerning social learning across
different areas. For example, one line of research aims to theoretically distinguish
between different avenues through which one learns from others’ behavior. It was
found that, in young children, learning is often the result of “blind imitation”, such that
by simply copying others, one learns new behaviors44. In contrast to imitation, another
form of social learning is emulation, which is considered more resource-consuming
and involves the learning of the effects or goals of the actions (as opposed to the
actions themselves). A neuro-computational study concerning imitation and emulation
learning processes demonstrated that brain networks employ a highly adaptive and
dynamic approach to allocate control between choice imitation and goal emulation,
depending on emulation reliability, or the relative uncertainty in each strategy's
predictions45. In the current study, participants could have followed the teacher’s
selection by either blind imitation or emulation – i.e., copying the teacher’s choices in
order to maximize rewards. However, the interaction between a fixed bias to follow
advice and an observed pattern in which participants learned from the outcome history
goes against a “blind imitation” approach, suggesting that participants deliberated the
value of following advice and then made a choice of whether to emulate the teacher’s
behavior or not. This is supported in the simulation analyses showing the effect of the
informed advice-taking process. Nonetheless, the robustness of the bias to follow
advice also suggests that participants utilized both processes when making their
choices, such that the bias itself could be considered blind imitation.
Thus, one question that comes to mind concerns the boundary conditions for such a
strong bias to follow advice. It should be noted that the bias to follow the teacher’s
advice is highly related to what is termed informational conformity - i.e., the tendency
to conform with social information in uncertain/unknown environments, where we
believe that others hold valuable information46. Indeed, previous works have shown
that individuals have a higher tendency to use social information when it is harder to
reach a decision on their own, or when they are less confident in their own choice47.
In the current study, we used a probabilistic reinforcement learning task in which the
uncertainty level was high due to the shifting values of the cards across trials, which
also required that participants keep track of the outcome history per card. This was
done in order to increase learning demands48. Hence, it is possible that a different
(perhaps weaker) bias towards following advice would have been found with a different
design in which the learning demands were lower.
This study holds several limitations. The first involves a broad question regarding the
“social” nature of the task, given that participants were not deceived to think that an
online human agent was behind the virtual teachers. As per definitions, we refer to
social learning under a broad classification that concerns following/learning from
signals that originate from other agents. In contemporary naturalistic human social
settings, individuals are consistently subjected to social content that is circulated by
anonymous virtual entities (e.g., online reviews, social navigation applications, and
other similar social platforms). We would like to propose that the frequent exposure of
participants to such anonymous entities in social platforms, increases the likelihood
that participants will address symbolic virtual agents in empirical studies (such as a
virtual teacher in the current study) as social information49,50. This view is in line with
many other studies that conveyed information to participants using different
illustrations, images, and text (either symbolic or explicit) to study social learning
processes13,49–52. Specifically, Vélez and Gweon50 used a card game and incorporated
advice from an artificial agent to test how people integrate partial individual information
with incomplete advice. In another work, Atlas et al.52 examined fear conditioning to
test whether instructed knowledge modulates feedback-driven learning. The social
information was conveyed through emotionally charged faces and verbal instructions
to issue fear conditioning. Moreover, in previous works, such minimal instructions were
enough to elicit social behavior online that was similar to social behavior in the lab
under more elaborate social settings53 and even to induce online participants to
sacrifice some payment to gain social rewards54.
In search for further empirical support to the claim the virtual teachers were perceived
as providing social information, we performed an additional experiment using a non-
social cue, and found that when the advisor is framed as a lottery wheel, rather than a
virtual teacher, the reveal effect diminishes (see Supplementary Information). This is
in line with previous studies13, who found a small but significantly greater tendency to
follow advice than to mimic observed actions by others. Therefore, an advantage
towards following advice (over observation)13, taken together with the advantage we
found for following advice (over the lottery wheel) – might indicate that there is an
additional meaning for advice that is symbolically framed as social information.
However, more studies should be designed to directly examine this question, perhaps
as a matter of different social framings, ranging from overtly non-social to the presence
of another peer that provides advice.
Two methodological limitations concern the experimental design and the
computational modeling approach. We chose an experimental design that will suit
repeated interactions with the card game and the virtual teachers. Given that we aimed
to measure not only the bias towards the advice, but also the learning processes
concerning both the cards and the teachers, the blocks needed to include a rather
large number of trials that will enable a reliable measure. However, as opposed to
other studies that used a single advice, we had to keep participants on their toes and
encourage learning throughout the block, and so both the cards’ expected values and
the teachers’ accuracy gently drifted during the block (e.g., Daw55). Overall, the
accuracy level of the teachers was above 50% at all times, and with no sudden
changes. Also, we did find that the value of taking advice in the winning model followed
the teacher’s accuracy across trials (see Supplementary Information). However,
overall, the current study was mostly designed to allow a reliable measure of the
interaction with the teachers, rather than testing whether there were major alterations
in the participants’ responses to the teacher’s advice. This issue should be further
tested in future studies with a more deliberate experimental design.
Regarding the computational modeling approach, we exclusively examined a
prediction-error-based reinforcement learning model to elucidate the learning
processes. While this approach offers valuable insights into how agents update their
beliefs and actions in response to prediction errors, it is important to acknowledge the
existence of alternative decision-making frameworks that were not explored in this
study. One option could be active inference, which focuses on minimizing surprise by
iteratively updating beliefs and selecting actions that bring sensory inputs into
alignment with their internal generative models56. Another alternative could be forward
models that operate by generating predictions of sensory outcomes based on an
agent's planned actions57. Each of these alternative approaches offers distinct
perspectives on decision-making, and future research may benefit from investigating
their applicability to our research domain.
Moreover, the current findings demonstrate strong evidence for a mixture model where
two learning mechanisms are taking place simultaneously: non-informed and informed
advice-taking. The combined model (Model 5) involving both processes was
constructed by integrating the basic formulation of each of these mechanisms.
Specifically, in the winning mixture model (Model 5) non-informed advice-taking was
formulated as a value bonus assigned to the instructed card, and informed advice-
taking was updated based on the observed outcome. It is of course possible that a
more complex mixture process takes place during this type of learning. For example,
the moderated informed advice-taking mechanism described in Model 4 might even
further improve the predictive accuracy of the empirical data if combined within a
mixture, informed and non-informed, model. Further studies are thus required to
provide a more comprehensive examination of different informed learning
mechanisms that might subside with the non-informed advice-taking tendencies.
Future studies should also look further into the conditions that lead to such a strong
bias. As suggested, one thing that comes to mind is the influence of decision difficulty.
Second, the current experimental paradigm, which involves repeated interactions with
an advisor, is a good candidate for examining how people evaluate the value of the
advisor and whether and how the advice accuracy influences behavior throughout the
learning process. Although we found a positive correlation between the internal values
of following advice and the teachers’ accuracy rates (see Supplementary Information),
this is not the main focus of the current study. Future studies could also examine this
issue by formally modeling this type of learning, for example by using a full Bayesian
updating of the teacher’s accuracy rates.
To conclude, in this work we were able to disentangle two types of social learning:
informed and non-informed advice-taking. Our computational model supports the
involvement of both processes, alongside individual learning. Finally, advice-taking
was shown to be reliable across measurements, thus behaving as a trait-like decision
bias to follow external advice.
Methods
Participants. We recruited participants through the Prolific online platform for a two-
part experiment in return for monetary compensation. One hundred and sixty-six
Prolific workers completed Session 1, and 153 completed Session 2. The final sample
comprised 153 participants (mean age = 26.63, range 18 to 46; 90 men, 59 women, 4
other gender identification). Participants reported normal or corrected vision and no
current or past psychiatric or neurological diagnosis. The study protocol was approved
by the Research Ethics Council of Tel Aviv University and all participants signed an
informed consent form before participating in the study.
The student-teacher task. Participants completed two sessions of a multi-armed
bandit reinforcement learning task during which they were asked to choose between
trial, the computer randomly selected and offered two cards for participants to choose
from. Each card led to a reward according to a reward probability that changed
gradually across trials (the temporal profile of reward probabilities was generated
Information). Participants were informed regarding the drifting-value nature of the
cards (i.e., the cards’ changing value) and were instructed to try to do their best to gain
as many rewards as possible, which would be converted to a monetary bonus at the
end of the experiment. In addition, the task included avatars of teachers, that latently
chose a card on each trial based on a noisy estimation of the cards’ true expected
values (see Supplementary Information). During the instructions phase, we informed
participants about “virtual teachers” that will give them advice from time to time and
suggest which of the cards should be chosen. The “teachers” were represented by
instructed that the virtual teachers were familiar with the card game, but do not know
whether a card will produce a reward, and so it is up to the participant to decide
whether to follow their advice. Note that no deception was used, the participants knew
that the teachers were virtual and designed by the experimenter. Participants were
familiarized with the teacher’s avatar at the beginning of each block and were told that
the teacher would direct them from time to time, to help them choose the best card. In
practice the virtual teacher had access to the true expected value of the cards, and
made a decision using a noisy softmax (see Supplementary information). To
encourage participants to keep track of both the cards’ value and the teacher's advice,
we slowly and randomly changed the noise in the teacher's decision (changing the
softmax noise parameter using a slowly drifting random walk, see Supplementary
Information). On average the teacher accuracy was 63% and ranged between 53% to
77% accuracy.
An additional important detail is that the teachers’ choices were generated by the
computer on all trials but revealed to participants as advice only on 60% of the trials.
The rate at which the advice was revealed was chosen based on an assessment of
the required number of trials per condition. Hence, the task involved two primary
conditions, concealed advice and revealed advice, which alternated randomly
between trials. In “concealed advice” trials, participants were only presented with the
two offered cards, and did not observe the teacher’s choice. In the “revealed advice”
the advice, the teacher’s avatar appeared next to the advised card, and a red X
appeared next to the other card for perceptual balance. Finally, to encourage
participants to keep track on both the cards’ value and the teacher advice, we slowly
and randomly changed the teachers ability to pick the more valuable card (using a
random walk, see Supplementary Information). The teachers’ accuracy was based
on the Softmax function, such that the 𝛽 component followed a stochastic distribution
Softmax for teacher accuracy is provided in Equation 12.
𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝛽(𝑡) × 𝑝(𝑟𝑤,𝑖)) )
(12) p(i) =
∑ 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝛽(𝑡))×𝑝(𝑟𝑤,𝑖))
𝑛=1
The probability of the teacher choosing card i is a function of the 𝛽 of the teacher on
a certain trial t, and the true probability of that card i to lead to a reward. On average
the teacher accuracy was 63% with a range between 53% to 77% accuracy.
At the beginning of the session, participants were presented with task instructions, as
well as a multiple-choice quiz which they had to complete with 100% accuracy in order
to continue to the card game. Participants completed the student-teacher task across
two sessions (one day after the other), and at the end of the experiment, were paid a
fixed amount (£2.5 per session) plus a bonus [£0.75 per session, if they completed
both sessions (range: £0-£1.5, mean = £0.75)]. Each session involved three blocks
with 130 trials each, and a short break was provided after 65 trials. Each block
introduced a new set of visual stimuli - the cards and the avatar teachers were replaced
on each block in every session. Each trial began with a 500 ms fixation, after which
the cards (with or without the teacher’s advice) appeared until a choice was made or
until 6 seconds had elapsed. After participants made their choice, the chosen card
appeared on the screen for 500 ms, and the reward feedback was displayed alongside
the selected card for 1000 ms. Finally, a black screen appeared for 500 ms before the
Preprocessing. Preprocessing involved locating data points during which the
participant was unengaged with the task: Participants who kept pressing the same key
(key repetition on more than 90% of trials) were set for exclusion, yet none reached
this criterion (0 participants excluded). Trials with unreasonably fast or slow reaction
times (<200ms or >4000ms) were omitted (resulting in 3.75% of all trials). Participants
with more than 25% excluded trials due to fast/slow reaction times (13 participants)
were excluded from the analyses altogether. The remaining data set included 140
participants, with an average of 749 trials per subject, resulting in a total of 104,918
observations that were later used for Bayesian parameters updating in the main
analysis.
Bayesian parameters estimation. We performed Bayesian logistic regression and
reinforcement learning computational modeling analyses using 'brms', ‘rstan’, and ‘loo’
packages in R 35,58,59. Models included population-level (fixed effects) and individual-
level (random effects) parameters for all estimated models and sampled with weakly
informative priors. To estimate chain convergence, we visually examined trace plots,
pairs plots, and R-hat estimates and found them to show good chain convergence. We
report the median, 89% CI, highest density interval (HDI), and probability of direction
(pd) for parameters’ posterior distributions (logistic regression estimates are on the
log-odds scale; for prior robustness checks, see Supplementary Information). Note
that 89% CI was selected following recent recommendations for Bayesian posterior
estimates 60. Specifically, the 89% CI bares no special meaning, and is as arbitrary as
other estimates (i.e., 95%). Instead of using the CI as a single estimate for drawing
conclusions regarding the effect of interest, we made an effort to describe the full
posterior (including explicit figures) and provide more information regarding a range of
CIs where the conclusion of the analysis was not clear cut. All models were estimated
by comparing Expected Log-Probability Density (i.e., elpd). For computational models,
we performed model comparison using a leave-one-block-out approach. For each
model, we left out one of the six blocks and calculated the expected log predictive
density for each trial in the left-out block [i.e., we estimated the population and
individual parameter posteriors using hierarchical Bayesian modeling (using ‘stan’
Markov chain Monte Carlo) and then calculated the log predictive density for each trial
in the left-out block]. This procedure was repeated for all blocks resulting in pointwise
predictions for each posterior sample and across all observations (that is, an estimated
elpd for each observation). We then used the ‘loo_compare’ function (from the ‘loo’
package) to perform pairwise model comparisons between each model and the model
with the largest elpd. An elpd difference of 2 times the standard error was considered
substantial35. We further conducted posterior predictive checks to establish the
conclusions arising from our model comparison results (see Supplementary
Information).
Data availability
All the data gathered and analyzed during this study are publicly available on
Code availability
Regression analyses, computational modeling analysis codes and Supplementary
Acknowledgments
We thank Shay Kahn for his assistance with data collection. The study was funded
by the Minducate Center for the Science of Learning (Sagol School of Neuroscience,
Tel Aviv University), the Israel Ministry of Science and Technology, and the Israeli
Science Foundation (Grant 2536/20 awarded to the last author).
Competing Interests statement
The authors declare no competing interests.
Autor Contributions
The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: study conception and
design: M.P., U.H., and N.S. Data collection: M.P., and N.S. Analysis: M.P., I.BA.;
and N.S. Computational modeling: N.S. , I.BA., and M.P. Interpretation of results:
M.P., U.H., I.BA., and N.S. Manuscript preparation: M.P., and N.S. All authors
reviewed the results and approved the final version of the manuscript.