PREPRINT This manuscript has not been peer reviewed.
A Primer for Choosing, Designing and Evaluating Registered Reports
for Qualitative Methods
Veli-Matti Karhulahti* Peter Branney
University of Jyväskylä University of Bradford
Moin Syed
Miia Siutila
University of Minnesota
University of Jyväskylä
University of Turku
* Corresponding author. Email vmkarhwu@jyu.fi
Registered reports are a publication format that involves peer reviewing studies both before and after
carrying out research procedures. Although registered reports were originally developed to combat
challenges in quantitative and confirmatory study designs, today registered reports are also available
for qualitative and exploratory work. This article provides a brief primer that aims to help researchers
in choosing, designing, and evaluating registered reports, which are driven by qualitative methods.
Funding: This work received funding from the Academy of Finland (312397) and ERC (101042052).
Conflicts of interest: Veli-Matti Karhulahti and Moin Syed serve as recommenders in the Peer Com-
munity in Registered Reports.
Keywords: guidelines; open science; transparency; qualitative research; registered reports
Registered reports (“RRs”, Chambers & Tzavella may also be useful for editors and undergraduate and
2022) are a modification of the scientific publication graduate students. As a rule of thumb, we propose the
process that aims to shift publication decisions from be- following: the more qualitative researchers can com-
ing based on the nature of the results of the study and mit to research decisions before the study, the more
towards rigorous conceptualization and design. In so benefits they will harvest by using the RR format (Fig-
doing, RRs improve transparency and the timeliness of ure 1). In other words, not all qualitative designs benefit
peer review. The FORTT (2022) glossary defines RRs from using the RR format equally, but some may ben-
as a two-stage process, where peer review occurs at efit significantly.
study design (Stage 1) and, if ‘in-principle-accepted’
(IPA), study completion (Stage 2). While RRs were Choosing RRs for Qualitative Research
originally developed for research following the hypo-
thetico-deductive method (Chambers 2013), today they Frontloading Peer Review
are also open to explorative and qualitative studies
(Branney et al. 2022). In fact, some qualitative RRs are Choosing to carry out a research project in the RR
already emerging (e.g., Stage 1, Topor et al. 2022) and format allows one to receive peer review feedback in
at least two have already been published (Stage 2: the design phase. This can be helpful especially for
Karhulahti et al. 2022; Xiao 2022). early career researchers and teams with limited qualita-
As RRs are likely to be unfamiliar to those using tive expertise. Feedback alone can be a good reason for
qualitative methods, this is a brief primer on choosing, choosing the RR format if the study timeline allows.
designing and evaluating RRs for qualitative research. Projects that are carried out under severe time pressure
This primer is principally for people who design and should carefully consider whether they wish to use the
conduct research using qualitative methods, although it
RR format, as carefully reviewing the study design usu- …with Journal or review platform
ally takes time (see Evans et al., 2021). On the other
The RR format allows negotiating research decisions with
hand, RRs submitted via Peer Community in Regis-
editors before carrying out the study. As journals and re-
tered Reports (PCI RR) can schedule their review to
view platforms have many explicit and implicit policies re-
save time, or even start generating data before complet-
garding the studies they publish, using the RR format al-
ing Stage 1 by lowering the reported control level (PCI
lows pursuing an agreement with the journal at Stage 1.
RR 2022).
This can save valuable time and resources compared to tra-
ditional publication processes, which sometimes produce
month/year-long (desk) rejection loops.
Transparency
Due to the more flexible nature of decision-making in qual-
itative (vs. quantitative) research, authors may need to ap-
ply for a permission to make changes between Stage 1 and
2. Although this is generally against the philosophy of hy-
pothesis-testing RRs and increases editorial labor, it is also
a robust means for documenting the expected and unex-
pected events in the research process.
Designing Qualitative RRs
Analysis
Methods of analysis should be written in such detail that
editors and reviewers understand what will be done (Stage
possibilities to commit to decisions.
1) and what was done (Stage 2). Researchers should also
clearly explain how they plan to report the data and
results. In qualitative studies, methods tend to include
Negotiation…
flexible elements (see Haven & Grootel 2019). Such
elements should be identified and planned, i.e. if
…with fellow researchers and stakeholders
researchers cannot decide between multiple alternative
analyses, rules of decision making can be stated instead
In frontloading the design, an RR gives legitimacy to re-
(e.g., if X then we Y). If biases are of epistemological
searchers and stakeholders spending time transparently ne-
concern, it is also possible for teams to apply masked
gotiating the study design, including uncertainties and de-
analyses (Dutilh et al. 2021).
layed decision making. This could mean that the design is
collaborative and each person involved has agency in deci-
sion making. For example, in Button et al’s (2020) model Data Access & Stewardship
for consortium based empirical undergraduate disserta-
Qualitative research can include a wide range of different
tions, the academics collaboratively write the study proto-
data types such as audio, images, videos, and written text.
col and main hypothesis; once the new academic year com-
All data types are suitable for RRs. Qualitative data are
mences, the dissertation students join the consortium and
likely to present ‘legitimate sensitivities’ to participants'
they collaboratively develop the protocol further, with each
privacy (Branney et al., 2018), even through the ‘innocent
student having responsibility for adding one secondary hy-
collection of details’ (Branney, Woolhouse & Reid,
pothesis. While qualitative studies are unlikely to have test-
2017). Therefore, it is important to outline and negotiate
able hypotheses, this grassroots training model can be used
data sharing plans at an early stage, and RRs facilitate this
in qualitative RRs to negotiate better research questions and
the study design in ways that give those involved agency.
process (Karhulahti, 2022a). Two current trends being explicit to each about the amendments
contribute to the importance of these efforts. recommended by each process. If an ethics approval sets
The first trend is the digitisation of our research critical limits to a planned design, authors can also consult
and data protection legislation, which means that data can RR representatives before submission and report those
have a short life (Fang et al. 2013) and will be impossible limits in their Stage 1 proposal to minimize
to access without clear consent and data sharing misunderstandings in peer review.
agreements between all organisations (compared to
reading through letters or documents in a filing cabinet,
Hypotheses
for example where researchers had only a single copy of
their data but still shared it, see Craig & Reese, 1973).
It is uncommon (but not impossible) for qualitative
Organisations, for example, may be unable to grant access
research designs to test hypotheses. On the other hand, it
to archeologists of the future. The second trend is the
is also possible to set hypotheses without testing them.
range of data sharing and open data policies of research
These “qualitative hypotheses” (QHs) can be used in a
bodies, such as funders and professional bodies (see Riley
similar way as positionality statements, i.e. to report the
et al., 2019). From 2013, the UK Economic and Social
team’s prior beliefs and hypothetical biases, which can
Research Council had a policy that data should be
affect the study design and its procedures. So far, at least
available for reuse within three months of grant
two RRs (Karhulahti et al. 2022; Topor et al. 2022) have
completion (ESRC, 2013). In turn, the British
used qualitative hypotheses. Unlike positionality
Psychological Society has a ‘as open as possible; as
statements, QHs are based on previous data, literature,
closed as necessary’ position statement on open data
and theory, which have influenced the study design and
(BPS, 2020).
may influence data interpretation, thus being akin to
It is less common for qualitative studies to share
‘priors’ in Bayesian statistical designs (see Andrews &
data openly, especially in human research. On the other
Baguely, 2017).
hand, data sharing is also possible for qualitative studies,
and should be encouraged whenever possible (for an
overview, see DuBois et al. 2018). The Qualitative Data
Positionality
precisely this purpose, but authors can also consult
Because qualitative research is often highly interpretive
national and international repositories for assistance in
and reflective, it is important to disclose the position(s)
sharing procedures. Anonymization (or
from which the interpretations and reflections are made.
pseudonymization), consent procedures, and controlling
It may be useful to have separate positionality statements
data reuse are preferably carried out in collaboration with
for data generation (e.g., interviews) and analysis (e.g.,
archives and experts (Karhulahti 2022b). Clear reasons
coding). The APA Journal Article Reporting Standards
should be provided if data are non-shareable. Notably,
for qualitative research, for example, recommend
some qualitative data is not collected but rather generated
describing the researchers, how their perspectives were
(e.g., interviews), in which case the researchers’ own
used in methodological integrity of the data collection and
involvement should be recognized, for instance, via
analysis, and their understanding of the conclusions
positionality statements.
(Levitt et al. 2018; APA 2020).
Ethics Approval and IRBs
Research Questions
Different countries and universities apply different
As qualitative research is usually nonconfirmatory, one of
processes for reviewing research ethics, and each Stage 1
the most important parts of study design is the formation
submission should communicate how they meet the
of useful research questions. Specific types of qualitative
standards of their country or institution. When needed,
data and analyses are often suitable for producing answers
ethics approval for RRs should generally be applied
only to specific types of research questions, for which
before Stage 1 submission, but parallel and post-IPA
authors should carefully assess these relationships in their
approvals are negotiable as well in case in inflexible
also, PCI RR 2022). Authors can discuss with journal (or
PCI RR) representatives when applying for approval,
design. In general, good research questions ensure that the methodology. This means that reviewers have less con-
produced answers will contribute to the field. trol over the production of results compared to e.g., sta-
tistically driven studies. Because interpretations may
not always be fully reproducible (recall positionality),
Sample (size)
reviewers balance their assessment between ensuring
that authors communicate their interpretations clearly,
There are no universal sampling rules for qualitative
back up the interpretations with data, and draw reason-
studies, but samples should always be justified. Different
able conclusions from the analysis (see Josselson,
justifications apply to different types of data and methods.
2004).
When justifying the nature and size of a sample, authors
might also apply e.g., saturation, where the analytic
Evaluating Language (Stage 1 & 2)
process defines the sample during data generation (e.g.,
Qualitative studies, which are typically exploratory
Low 2019). In such cases, however, it can still be useful
by nature, should rarely use confirmatory language.
to preregister estimations, which facilitate editorial work
Likewise, as qualitative studies less commonly reach
and increase transparency.
high generalizability, language should be used with
care when discussing the findings in general contexts.
Reviewers should pay special attention to the language
Evaluating Qualitative RRs
of discussion and conclusions at Stage 2.
Evaluating Cost-benefit (Stage 1)
Evaluating Data/materials (Stage 1 & 2)
Because successful RRs receive in-principle ac-
Peer reviewers should generally be provided secure
ceptance after Stage 1, one of the special features in
access to data at Stage 2. Materials used or produced in
evaluating them is to assess whether the study is worth
analysis should be included as an appendix to the
carrying out. Importantly, this is not the same as “im-
shared data whenever possible; for instance, coding
pact”, but rather the degree to which a study can con-
manuals and documentation for establishing reliabil-
tribute, given resources. The value of expected findings
ity/trust should always be shared (when applicable). On
needs to be assessed against the current knowledge, e.g.
the other hand, data sharing is not a binary question, but
do the findings have potential to produce useful contri-
usually parts of the data can be shared whereas other
butions to knowledge or improve the understanding of
parts (e.g., with potential personal identifiers) cannot
a phenomenon? In most cases, this means carefully
(Syed, 2022). These dimensions must be assessed case
evaluating the research questions and their match with
by case. Agreeing upon a clear plan for data and mate-
the generated data as well as applied analyses. Because
rial sharing at Stage 1 and assessing them at Stage 2 are
many authors are pre-committed to asking specific re-
an important part of the evaluation process.
search questions (e.g., for funding bodies), even small
contributions can be worth pursuing. Primarily, review-
Discussion
ers should help authors to maximize the contribution
potential of their resources.
Registered reports are becoming increasingly popu-
lar across fields, and many of their benefits also apply
Evaluating Interpretations (Stage 2)
to qualitative studies. We hope this brief primer is help-
As authors must clearly spell out how they will re-
ful for authors, editors, and reviewers involved in qual-
port the data and results at Stage 1, reviewers should
itative registered reports, and we look forward to up-
start by assessing whether the plan was followed and if
dating these recommendations along with our accumu-
not, are possible deviations justified. A key difference
lating experience and knowledge.
between qualitative and other RRs is the former’s
strong affiliation with interpretative and reflective