Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
Using A Multi-Strategy Eye-Tracking Psychometric Model to Measure Intelligence and
Identify Cognitive Strategy in Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices
Yaohui Liu (刘耀辉), Peida Zhan (詹沛达),
Yanbin Fu (付颜斌), Qipeng Chen (陈琦鹏), Yikun Luo (罗熠坤)
School of Psychology, Zhejiang Normal University
Corresponding author:
Peida Zhan, E-mail: pdzhan@gmail.com, Room 731, Building 17, School of Psychology, Zhejiang
Normal University, Jinhua City, Zhejiang Province, China, 321004.
Funding:
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China [grant numbers
31900795].
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
Using A Multi-Strategy Eye-Tracking Psychometric Model to Measure Intelligence and
Identify Cognitive Strategy in Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices
Abstract
Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices (APM) is a valid measurement instrument of general
intelligence, and previous studies have found that participants use two cognitive strategies—
constructive matching and response elimination—in responding to items in the APM. This study
proposed a multi-strategy psychometric model incorporating eye-tracking measures, including but
not limited to the proportional time on matrix area (PTM), the rate of toggling (ROT), and the rate
of latency to first toggle (RLT). Our model has the ability to measure each participant’s intelligence
and identify the cognitive strategy used by each participant for each item in the APM. An eye-
tracking-based APM study using the model revealed several outcomes: (1) The effects of the three
eye-tracking measures on the constructive matching strategy selection probability were positive
and presented in the following order: PTM > RLT > ROT, and the effect of ROT was negligible.
(2) The average intelligence of participants who used the constructive matching strategy was
higher than that of participants who used the response elimination strategy, and participants with
higher intelligence were more likely to use the constructive matching strategy. (3) High-
intelligence participants increased their use of the constructive matching strategy as item difficulty
increased, whereas low-intelligence participants decreased their use as item difficulty increased.
(4) Participants took significantly less time to use the constructive matching strategy than to use
the response elimination strategy. Overall, the proposed model follows the theory-driven modeling
logic and provides a new way of studying cognitive strategy in the APM by presenting objective
and quantitative results.
Keywords: intelligence, cognitive strategy, eye movement, item response theory, Rasch model
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
1. Introduction
General intelligence is a core component of the intelligence structure and is considered to be
an important predictor of academic and professional success, which has been discussed for decades
(Kane et al., 2005; Marshalek et al., 1983; Vigneau et al., 2006). Raven’s Advanced Progressive
Matrices (APM; Raven et al., 1998) is a standardized cognitive ability test designed to measure
general intelligence or the aptitude to learn new concepts quickly and solve new and complex
problems without drawing on prior knowledge. As the APM is strictly visual, the issues of potential
language barriers and cultural contexts are circumvented, making it one of the most commonly
used measurement instruments for general intelligence (Loesche, 2020). Further, the APM has
been widely used in research on cognitive strategies (Laurence et al., 2018) that represent sets of
cognitive processes in the process of solving problems or achieving goals (Cameron & Jago, 2013;
Lemaire & Reder, 1999).
with figural elements in the matrix area and eight options in the alternative area. One of the cells
in the matrix area is missing and needs to be selected from the alternative area using analogy and
inductive reasoning. Two common cognitive strategies—constructive matching and response
elimination—were revealed in previous eye-tracking-based studies for participants to solve
diagrammatic reasoning items in the APM (Bethell-Fox et al., 1984; Snow, 1980; Vigneau et al.,
2006). In constructive matching, participants first construct a mental representation of the answer
and then make a choice, whereas in response elimination, participants eliminate implausible
alternatives until they reach a correct one.
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
The application of eye-tracking technology enhances our exploration and understanding of
cognitive processes (Wedel et al., 2022). Previous studies have found a correspondence between
the cognitive strategies used by participants in the APM and their visual search patterns inferred
from eye-tracking measures (e.g., Vigneau et al., 2016). Specifically, compared with participants
who use the response elimination strategy, participants who use the constructive matching strategy
typically spend proportionately more time in the matrix area than in the response area, display a
smaller number of toggles between the matrix and alternative areas, and take a longer time to look
from the matrix area to the alternative area for the first time. Further, when using the constructive
matching strategy, participants have a lower toggling rate, which indicates the number of toggles
between the matrix and alternative areas per second, but they toggle at a higher rate when using
the response elimination strategy (Laurence et al., 2018). Although these studies explored the
relationship between eye movements and cognitive strategies, they did not provide a specific
cognitive strategy identification method.
The identification of cognitive strategies is the basis for exploring the relationship between
cognitive strategy and other cognitive factors (e.g., cognitive style and working memory), as well
as for cognitive strategy training (e.g., Hessels et al., 2011; Hayes et al., 2015; Jarosz & Wiley,
2012; Kucharský et al., 2020; Li et al., 2022;). Previous attempts to identify participants’ cognitive
strategies used one of two self-reporting approaches. The first approach uses self-report
questionnaires to ask participants to report the cognitive strategies they use to solve problems
throughout the entire APM (Gonthier & Thomassin, 2015; Jastrzębski et al., 2018; Li et al., 2022;
Michum & Kelley, 2010). The main limitation of this approach is that individuals may not be able
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
to accurately and objectively recall the strategies they use, and the approach cannot ascertain
whether participants switch strategies throughout the test (Jarosz et al., 2019; Lemaire & Reder,
1999). The second approach involves utilizing the think-aloud protocol to ask participants to
continuously say their thoughts aloud at each step during problem solving (Jarosz et al., 2019).
However, participants may not be able to decipher all of their thoughts completely and accurately
during problem solving, and the unstructured nature of language makes it difficult to accurately
identify the cognitive strategies they employ.
Further, considering that different strategies may correspond to different visual search
patterns (Thibaut & French, 2016; Vigneau et al., 2006), some researchers have also tried to use
data-driven methods to distinguish different strategies from eye-tracking data. For example, to
analyze eye-tracking data (e.g., saccade), Hayes et al. (2011) proposed a semi-supervised
algorithm (i.e., successor representation scanpath analysis), which combines a higher-order
probability transfer matrix and a Markov model to visualize participants’ visual search patterns.
Although this algorithm can accurately predict participants’ test scores in the APM and can provide
insight into the differences in their problem solving, it is rarely used in other studies due to its
computational complexity, the subjective nature of the interpretation of results, and the ambiguity
of strategy identification (Hayes et al., 2015; Laurence, 2021). Kucharský et al. (2020) proposed
an unsupervised algorithm for mining eye-tracking data, which combines probability transfer
matrix and K-means clustering; however, they found that the visual search patterns obtained from
clustering by this algorithm did not match well with theoretically existing cognitive strategies,
probably due to the limited amount of data. Overall, the currently used eye-tracking data mining
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
algorithms are mainly limited by the low interpretability of the results and high data volume
requirements.
In general, because eye-tracking technology can capture participants’ eye movements in a
detailed and objective manner, eye-tracking-based cognitive strategy identification methods are
theoretically more accurate and objective than self-reporting approaches. Given the limits of
existing eye-tracking data mining approaches, we need a novel eye-tracking-based cognitive
strategy identification method with high interpretability of results and appropriately small data
volume requirements.
This study aimed to incorporate eye-tracking measures into the cognitive strategy
identification method in the APM from the perspective of psychometric modeling to propose a
multi-strategy eye-tracking model (denoted as MEM). The proposed model has the ability to
measure participants’ intelligence that is reflected by the latent ability, and to identify participants’
cognitive strategies using a combination of problem-solving outcome data (e.g., item response
accuracy) and eye-tracking measures. Theoretically, compared with eye-tracking data mining
approaches, the proposed model is more interpretable and has fewer data volume requirements,
which makes it more suitable for small-scale psychological experimental studies. Further,
compared with the self-reporting approaches, the proposed model can more objectively identify
participants’ cognitive strategies for each item. Another advantage of the proposed model over the
two existing approaches is that it allows for objective measures of intelligence while identifying
cognitive strategies.
In the rest of the paper, we illustrate the performance of the proposed model and the
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
corresponding findings from an eye-tracking-based APM study.
Example of the Raven item format and test sequence.
Note. (Left) The item can be divided into three interest areas: the total item interest area, the matrix
interest area, and the alternative interest area. The item consists of a three-by-three matrix with
figural elements in the matrix area and eight options in the alternative area. One of the cells in the
matrix area is missing and needs to be selected from the alternative area using analogy and
inductive reasoning. (Right) Each test has three phases: gaze point calibration, item presentation,
and response. Eye movements are collected during the item presentation phase. Pressing the
spacebar on the keyboard to enter the response page, only the alternatives are presented on the
screen, and the participant presses one of the number keys 1–8 on the keyboard to respond.
2. Methods
2.1. Instrument
The APM contains 48 homogenous items, which are divided into two sets: the first set of 12
items is intended to be used as a practice set to familiarize participants with the format, and the
second set of 36 items is the main test that is supposed to be scored. Typically, the first set is
omitted or reduced to one or two example items (e.g., Carpenter et al., 1990; Dehn, 2017; Hayes
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
et al., 2015; Kpolovie & Emekene, 2016). In this study, to prevent participants’ practice of the first
set of items from affecting their responses to the second set of items used in the formal experiment,
we used three easy items from Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices as warm-up items to
familiarize participants with the response process.
2.2. Participants
A total of 202 students participated in this study. All were randomly selected from a
university in a coastal province in China and had not participated in the APM before. A total of 10
students were excluded, 7 of whom had serious missing or unexplainable gaze points on many
items (see Appendix A), and 3 had test scores that were more than three standard deviations below
the average of all students’ scores (M = 25.12, SD = 4.92). The results from the final 192
participants (147 females and 45 males; M = 22.06, SD = 2.54) were used for further analysis.
age
2.3. Procedure
Before the test began, the participants were informed of the entire test process. Each
participant who completed the test carefully received a cash payment. The test program was carried
out with E-Prime software (version 2.0) to record the outcome data, including item response
accuracy and item response times1; Eye-tracking data were collected with a non-contact device,
1 According to the description of the study procedure below, the item response time only includes the time spent by the
participants in the item presentation page but not the time spent by the participants in the response page. The advantage of this
procedure is that it eliminates the time spent by the participant on the keystroke response and reduces potential error (e.g., Hayes
et al., 2011).
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
SR Research Ltd. EyeLink Portable Duo (EyeLink Portable Duo - SR Research (sr-research.com)),
set in monocular tracking mode with a sampling rate of 1000 HZ. Each participant was placed in
a quiet room, sitting approximately 60 cm from the computer screen, and chin support was used
to assist in fixing the participant’s head. A staff member operated the eye-tracking device not far
away to ensure the smooth running of the experiment (see Appendix B for the experimental
environment).
(three items to be exact, each repeated three times) to familiarize them with the purpose and
procedure of the test before the formal test began. In the calibration session, a 5-point calibration
method was used to calibrate the participant’s gaze point before allowing the participant to enter
the response procedure. In the response procedure inspired by Hayes et al. (2011), a cross mark
was first presented at the center of the screen. The participant was required to look at the cross
mark; if the gaze point deviation was larger than 2 cm, the participant returned to the calibration
session; otherwise, they moved forward to the next item presentation page. On the item
presentation page, there was no time limit for the participants to reason the answer. When they
were ready to respond, the participant pressed the spacebar on the keyboard to enter the response
page, where only the alternatives were presented on the screen; pressing one of the number keys
1–8 on the keyboard allowed them to respond. Furthermore, considering that the participants may
experience visual fatigue during the whole test, we allowed them to take a short break, usually less
than one minute, when the test was halfway through.
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
2.4. Interest Areas and Eye-tracking Measures
Eye-tracking techniques were used to analyze participants’ strategies in the APM, and specific
eye-tracking measures depended on the division of interest areas. In this study, three interest areas
(i.e., total item interest area, matrix interest area, and alternative interest area) were defined (see
Following existing studies on cognitive strategies and visual search patterns, three eye-
tracking measures were recorded and calculated in this study (Hayes et al., 2011; Laurence et al.,
2018; Li et al., 2022; Vigneau et al., 2006): the proportional time on matrix area (PTM), the rate
of toggling (ROT), and the rate of latency to first toggle (RLT).
2.4.1. Item latency and proportional time on the matrix area
!"#$
Item latency (𝑇 ) is the time that participants spend on the total item interest area, which
is recorded as the time that participants spend on the item presentation page (i.e., item response
time). The proportional time on the matrix of each item was calculated from the time spent on the
$%"&!’
matrix interest area (𝑇 ) divided by the time spent on the item interest area; that is, 𝑃𝑇𝑀 =
$%"&!’ !"#$
𝑇 ⁄𝑇 ; the higher the value, the higher proportion of time a participant spent in the matrix
interest area.
2.4.2. Number of toggles and rate of toggling
A shift of gaze from one area to another is considered a toggle. The rate of toggling was
!"#$
calculated by dividing the item latency (𝑇 ) by the number of toggles (G); that is, 𝑅𝑂𝑇 =
!"#$
𝑇 ⁄𝐺 (Laurence, 2021), which is more suitable for representing the strategies compared with
the number of toggles (Laurence et al., 2018) and reflects how long it takes to transition once
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
between the matrix interest area and the response interest area; the higher the value, the lower the
number of transitions of a participant’s gaze within the same time.
2.4.3. The latency to first toggle and the rate of latency to first toggle
The latency to first toggle is also an important measure, which is the time it takes the participant
to transfer his/her gaze point from the matrix interest area to alternatives for the first time (Vigneau
"())*#
et al., 2006). The rate of latency to first toggle is equal to the latency to first toggle (𝑇 )
!"#$ "())*# !"#$
divided by the item latency (𝑇 ); that is, 𝑅𝐿𝑇 = 𝑇 ⁄ 𝑇 ; the higher the value, the
higher proportion of time a participant spent on planning solutions to the problem. Compared with
"())*#
𝑇 , RLT additionally takes into account the processing speed of individuals, as reflected by
!"#$ "())*# !"#$
𝑇 . Suppose 𝑇 of two participants are both 5 seconds, one participant’s 𝑇 is 10
!"#$
seconds, and the other’s 𝑇 is 20 seconds. The latency to first toggle is 50% of the response
time for the first participant and 25% of that for the second participant, which indicates that it
would not be appropriate to assume that both participants use the same strategy.
Based on the findings of previous studies (e.g., Hayes et al., 2011; Laurence et al., 2018;
Vigneau et al., 2006), we assumed that participants who use the constructive matching strategy
would have a higher RLT, a higher ROT, and a higher PTM than those who use the response
elimination strategy, indicating that they spend more time analyzing the matrix before the first gaze
at the alternatives, take longer to each toggle between the matrix and the alternatives, and spend
more time on the matrix area throughout the entire response process.
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
2.5. Multi-strategy Psychometric Modeling Incorporating Eye-tracking Measures
Psychometric modeling is a theory-driven approach that constructs the probabilistic
relationship between observed data and latent variables through statistical distribution functions.
Currently, several multi-strategy psychometric models have been proposed to identify students’
problem-solving strategies in the field of educational achievement tests, such as mixture or
multigroup models (e.g., Mislevy & Verhelst, 1990; von Davier, 2010) and multi-strategy cognitive
diagnostic models (e.g., de la Torre & Douglas, 2008; Ma & Guo, 2019). One major limitation of
mixture or multigroup models is that participants are usually assumed to use one of multiple
strategies for all items in a test. Although multi-strategy cognitive diagnostic models eliminate this
non-switching strategy assumption, these models are still limited to traditional item response
accuracy data and categorial latent variables, ignoring the process of problem solving that can be
reflected by eye movements. Perhaps due to the lack of communication between researchers in the
field of intelligence and psychometricians, to our knowledge, no studies have attempted to use
multi-strategy psychometric models to identify participants’ cognitive strategies in the APM, let
alone involving eye-tracking measures.
In recent years, a few studies have combined eye-tracking measures and psychometric models
to assess participants’ visual engagement in educational assessments or to assess participants’
decision-making behavior in naturalistic settings (e.g., Man & Harring, 2019; Wedel et al., 2022;
Zhan et al., 2022). Although these studies did not involve the identification of cognitive strategy,
their idea of incorporating eye-tracking measures into psychometric models inspired the current
study to construct the MEM, namely, a multi-strategy psychometric model involving eye-tracking
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
measures (e.g., PTM, ROT, and RLT).
2.5.1. Generalized modeling and assumptions
Consider participants taking an intelligence test with J items and M predetermined cognitive
strategies. Based on the total probability theorem, the proposed MEM can be expressed as:
𝑃+𝑌 = 1.𝜃 0 = 1 𝑃+𝑌 = 1.𝜃 , 𝑚 0 × 𝑃+𝑚 0 , (1)
!+ ! !+ ! !+ !+
$-.
where 𝑃+𝑌 = 1.𝜃 0 denotes the correct response probability of participant i (i = 1, 2, ..., I) to
!+ !
item j (j = 1, 2, ..., J), given his/her intelligence (or latent ability in psychometrics) θ .
𝑃+𝑌 = 1.θ , 𝑚 0 is the strategy implementation model, which denotes the correct response
!+ ! !+
probability of participant i to item j, given his/her intelligence θ and the cognitive strategy m (m
i ij ij
= 1, 2, …, M) he/she used to item j. The proposed model allows participants to switch their
cognitive strategies across items.
Considering the limited number of participants in eye-tracking studies (usually just a few
dozen), a Rasch family model is used to define the strategy implementation model:
𝑒𝑥𝑝+𝜃 − 𝑏 + 𝑒 0
! + $+
𝑃+𝑌 = 1.𝜃 , 𝑚 = 𝑚0 = , (2)
!+ ! !+
1 + 𝑒𝑥𝑝+𝜃 − 𝑏 + 𝑒 0
! + $+
where b denotes the difficulty of item j, and e is the strategy sensitivity parameter, which
j mj
represents the variation in the correct response probability by using strategy m on item j; the larger
the value of .𝑒 ., the more sensitive item j is to strategy m.
$+
𝑃+𝑚 0 is the strategy selection model, and it denotes the probability of participant i applying
!+
strategy m on item j, and ∑ 𝑃(𝑚 ) = 1. It is inferred using eye-tracking measures in the
$-. !+
present study, and its value is constrained to a number between 0 and 1, with a logistic function as
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
follows:
𝑒𝑥𝑝+𝜔 × 𝑓 + 𝜔 × 𝑓 + ⋯ + 𝜔 × 𝑓 0
. .!+ / /!+ 0 0!+
𝑃+𝑚 = 𝑚0 = , (3)
!+
1 + 𝑒𝑥𝑝+𝜔 × 𝑓 + 𝜔 × 𝑓 + ⋯ + 𝜔 × 𝑓 0
. .!+ / /!+ 0 0!+
where f represents the c-th (c = 1, 2, ..., C) eye-tracking measure of participant i on item j, and
cij
ω is the corresponding weight parameter of it. The weight parameters reflect the magnitude of the
effect of different eye-tracking measures on the probability of strategy selection. Note that in the
strategy selection model, each eye-tracking measure for all participants can be standardized for
each item to put all weight parameters on the same scale. This allows for a comparison of the
extent of the impact of various eye-tracking measures on the probability of strategy selection.
Based on the model setup, some assumptions of the MEM can be summarized for a better
understanding of it. First, following the findings of existing studies on strategy choice in cognitive
tasks (e.g., the probability-matching perspective and the over-matching perspective [e.g., Lovett
& Anderson, 1995; Ma & Guo, 2020]), the MEM assumes that a participant will use different
cognitive strategies in proportion to their responses simultaneously, rather than definitively using
a specific strategy. Second, the MEM assumes that participants’ choice of cognitive strategy is not
theoretically related to their intelligence but is reflected by behavioral indicators (i.e., eye-tracking
measures in this study).2 Third, the MEM assumes that the impact of cognitive strategy on the
correct response probability is reflected in the item parameter via the strategy sensitivity parameter.
In other words, the impact on the correct response probability is the same for participants using
2 Note that since no latent ability parameter was involved in the strategy selection model in the MEM, the intelligence reflected
by latent ability and the choice of strategy are theoretically independent, but this does not mean that they are statistically
independent.
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
the same cognitive strategy on a given item; of course, this assumption could be released as
𝑒 ⟹ 𝑒 , but this would undoubtedly increase the complexity of the model and increase the
$+ $!+
demand on the amount of data volume.
2.5.2. Specific setting
Some specific settings can be made to the generalized function of the MEM to apply to the
analysis of APM data. In this study, M = 2 cognitive strategies were predetermined, namely, the
constructive matching strategy and the response elimination strategy. Specifically, m = 1 indicates
ij
that participant i applied the constructive matching strategy to item j, and m = 2 indicates that
ij
participant i applied the response elimination strategy to item j.
Prior studies generally accept that the constructive matching strategy is a more effective
strategy with higher accuracy or test scores relative to the response elimination strategy (Arendasy
& Sommer, 2013; Gonthier & Roulin, 2020; Gonthier & Thomassin, 2015; Mitchum & Kelley,
2010). Therefore, we assumed that the correct response probability for participants who use the
constructive matching strategy would be higher than that for those who use the response
elimination strategy, namely:
P+𝑌 = 1.θ , 𝑚 = 10 > P+𝑌 = 1.θ , 𝑚 = 20. (4)
!+ ! !+ !+ ! !+
More specifically,
𝑒𝑥𝑝+𝜃 − 𝑏 + 𝑒 0 𝑒𝑥𝑝+𝜃 − 𝑏 + 𝑒 0
! + .+ ! + +
P+𝑌 = 1.𝜃 , 𝑚 = 10 = = , (5)
!+ ! !+
1 + 𝑒𝑥𝑝+𝜃 − 𝑏 + 𝑒 0 1 + 𝑒𝑥𝑝+𝜃 − 𝑏 + 𝑒 0
! + .+ ! + +
𝑒𝑥𝑝+𝜃 − 𝑏 + 𝑒 0 𝑒𝑥𝑝+θ − 𝑏 0
! + /+ ! +
𝑃+𝑌 = 1.𝜃 , 𝑚 = 20 = = , (6)
!+ ! !+
1 + 𝑒𝑥𝑝+𝜃 − 𝑏 + 𝑒 0 1 + 𝑒𝑥𝑝+θ − 𝑏 0
! + /+ ! +
where 𝑒 = 𝑒 and is constrained to be positive (i.e., 𝑒 > 0), and 𝑒 = 0; in such cases, the
.+ + + /+
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
larger 𝑒 is, the greater the gain in the correct response probability of item j for participants who
use the constructive matching strategy compared to those who use the response elimination
strategy.
Three eye-tracking measures (i.e., PTM, ROT, and RLT) were used in the strategy selection
model, as follows:
𝑒𝑥𝑝+ω × 𝑓 + ω × 𝑓 + ω × 𝑓 0
. .!+ / /!+ 1 1!+
𝑃+𝑚 = 10 = , (7)
!+
1 + 𝑒𝑥𝑝+ω × 𝑓 + ω × 𝑓 + ω × 𝑓 0
. .!+ / /!+ 1 1!+
and
𝑃+𝑚 = 20 = 1 − 𝑃+𝑚 = 10, (8)
!+ !+
where f , f , and f represent participant i’s PTM, ROT, and RLT on item j, respectively. Given
1ij 2ij 3ij
the positive weight parameters, the higher the value of the three eye-tracking measures, the
participants are more likely to adopt the constructive matching strategy (Laurence, 2021; Li et al.,
2022).
In summary, Equations 1 and 4–8 together constitute the MEM used in this study.
2.6. Analysis
SR Research Ltd. EyeLink Data Viewer (Data Viewer for EyeLink Eye-Tracker Gaze Data –
SR Research [sr-research.com]) was used to analyze and export the recorded eye-tracking data.
Eye-tracking measures were calculated for 192 participants, and the mean-fill method was used to
handle the missing values (less than 1%) that occurred on a few items. We calculated the eye-
tracking measures for each participant on each item; further, the three eye-tracking measures for
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
all participants were standardized for each item to put the weight parameters on the same scale.
The parameters of the MEM and its sub-models can be estimated using the Bayesian Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm via Just Another Gibbs Sampler (JAGS) software (Version
4.3.0; Plummer, 2015). The process of parameter estimation was performed based on Python
software (Version 3.10.6). The prior distributions of all model parameters is provided in Appendix
C. To increase the repeatability of the current study, all relevant data and the JAGS code used in
More details about how JAGS is used for Bayesian estimation can be found in Zhan et al. (2019).
To present the advantages of considering the cognitive strategy, we compared the fit of the
MEM and the Rasch model (Rasch, 1960), which does not consider the cognitive strategy to the
APM data. 3 The widely available information criterion (WAIC) and leave-one-out cross-
validation (LOO) (Gelman et al., 2014; Vehtari et al., 2016) were used as the relative model-data
fit indices; smaller values indicate a better model–data fit. Further, posterior predictive model
checking (PPMC) (Gelman et al., 2014) was used to evaluate the absolute model–data fit; a
posterior predictive probability (ppp) value near 0.5 indicates that there are no systematic
differences between the predictive and observed data and thus an adequate fit of the model; by
contrast, when the ppp value smaller than 0.025 or larger than 0.975 indicates the model does not
fit the data. In this study, the differences between the observed data, 𝒀, and posterior predicted
The Rasch model has been used in some previous studies to analysis the APM data (e.g., Waschl et al., 2016)
#$%&’ () *
! "
and can be expressed as 𝑃"𝑌 = 1&𝜃 ( = , where 𝜃 is intelligence of participant i, and 𝑏 is the
!" ! ! "
+,#$%&’ () *
! "
difficulty of item j.
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
2(3"2&#4
data, 𝒀 , were compared in computing the PPMC; that is, 𝑝𝑝𝑝 =
7 2(3"2&#4(#)
∑ (𝑠𝑢𝑚(𝒀 ) ≥ 𝑠𝑢𝑚(𝒀))⁄𝐸 , where E is the total number of iterations in MCMC
#-.
2(3"2&#4(#)
sampling; 𝒀 indicates the predictive data in the e-th iteration, which were generated
from the item response function (e.g., Equation 1 of the MEM) based on the samplings of the
model parameters from the posterior distributions.
The validity of the identification results of the model was verified by manual judgment. First,
two staff members who had not participated in the study were trained and informed of the
definition of the two cognitive strategies and the corresponding typical eye movements. Second,
the eye-tracking diagrams (heat map and gaze plot) of five participants were randomly selected
from the eye-tracking diagrams of 192 participants for each item, and the corresponding model
identification results were extracted.4 Then, two staff members were independently asked to make
their judgment of whether to endorse the model identification results based on the eye-tracking
diagrams (see Appendix D). Lastly, we assessed the consistency of the two staff members’
judgment results.
3. Results
model. Both models fit the APM data well in terms of the ppp value, indicating that their analysis
results can be used to reflect the characteristics implied by the data. However, the MEM fit the
In this study, to identify the strategy used by participants, the strategy selection probabilities for all
participants to all items were dichotomized according to a cut-point of 0.5. Specifically, the participants were
identified as using the constructive matching strategy on item j by 𝑃"𝑚 = 1( > 0.5 and the response
!"
elimination strategy on item j by 𝑃"𝑚 = 1( ≤ 0.5.
!"
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
data better than the Rasch model according to the WAIC and LOO, indicating that additional
the scatterplot of intelligence (i.e., latent ability) estimates for the two models (𝜌 = 0.986, p <
0.001); such a high correlation indicated that the two models measured the same latent ability,
namely, the additional consideration of cognitive strategy did not change the latent ability
measured by the model. The following sections will focus on the analysis results of the MEM.
Summaries of absolutely and relatively model–data fit indices.
Analysis model ppp WAIC LOO
Rasch model 0.44 6485.43 6486.57
MEM 0.44 6395.67 6397.08
Note. MEM: multi-strategy eye-tracking model; ppp: posterior predictive probability; WAIC:
widely available information criterion; LOO: leave-one-out cross-validation.
Scatterplot of intelligence estimates for the Rasch model and multi-strategy eye-tracking model.
Note. Pearson correlation coefficient is 0.986 (p < 0.001).
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
Figures E1–E3 in Appendix E successively present the distribution of the three eye-tracking
measures—PTM, ROT, and RLT—on 36 items. The estimated weight coefficients of the three eye-
tracking measures were 𝜔 = 2.01 (95% highest posterior density [HPD] = [0.79, 3,42]) for
PTM, 𝜔 = 0.08 (95% HPD = [−0.77, 0.94]) for ROT, and 𝜔 = 1.32 (95% HPD =
/ 1
[0.64, 2.12]) for RLT, respectively, indicating that the predictions of constructive matching
strategy selection probability of the three eye-tracking measures were positive. Further, PTM, RLT,
and ROT were in descending order of importance for the constructive matching strategy selection
probability, with ROT having no significant effect.5
two strategy groups. It is clear that for most items, the mean of the intelligence estimates for
participants who used the constructive matching strategy was higher than that for those who used
the response elimination strategy. Further, the result of the paired samples t-test showed that the
mean of the intelligence estimates on the 36 items for the participants in the constructive matching
group was also significantly greater than that for the participants in the response elimination group
(t = 7.35, p < .001). In addition, the mean response time of participants using the constructive
matching strategy was significantly less than that of participants using the response elimination
strategy (t = -2.76, p = 0.005).
The function of the 95% highest posterior density in Bayesian statistics is similar to that of the 95%
confidence interval in frequentist statistics when its range contains zero, indicating that the estimate (i.e., the
posterior mean) is not significantly different from zero.
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
Descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) of intelligence estimates for participants in
the two strategy groups.
Note. The number of participants on each item was 192. There was no grouping of participants in
the proposed model. The two groups indicated here were categorized after the estimation, and they
came from the same population with the same prior distribution as when the intelligence
parameters were estimated. Given that the mean of the prior distribution of the intelligence
parameter was fixed to zero, it led to symmetry of the mean of the intelligence estimates of the
two groups of participants around zero.
in the APM. First, there was a tendency for the items to increase in difficulty as the test progressed,
which is in line with the setting of the APM. Second, the strategy sensitivity parameter varied by
item, indicating that participants had a greater relative advantage in responding to some items (e.g.,
items 9, 12, 16, 21, 22, and 36) using the constructive matching strategy than using the response
elimination strategy, whereas the impact of strategy use was small in responding to some other
items (e.g., items 1, 5, 8, 10, and 13).
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
Posterior mean and posterior standard deviation of item difficulty and strategy sensitivity
parameters of 36 Items.
Note. b = item difficulty; e = item strategy sensitivity.
(a) the mean constructive matching strategy selection probability per item ( 𝐶𝑀𝑆𝑆𝑃 =
8 8 !"#$
∑ 𝑃(𝑚 )⁄𝐼) , (b) the mean response time across participants per item (𝑀𝑅𝑇 = ∑ 𝑇 ⁄𝐼),
!-. !+ + !-. !+
(c) the difference between the mean abilities of two strategy groups per item
9!)9
8 *(:
(𝐷𝑀𝐴 = ∑ (𝜃 − 𝜃 )⁄𝐼), (d) item difficulty b , and (e) strategy sensitivity e .6 First, there
j j
+ !-. ! !
was a significantly high positive correlation between b and MRT , indicating that the higher the
j j
item difficulty, the longer the time participants took to respond. Second, there was a significantly
moderate positive correlation between e and DAM , indicating that the greater the relative
j j
advantage of using the constructive matching strategy over the response elimination strategy in
6 Some indicators do not meet the assumption of normal distribution required for Pearson correlation.
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
responding, the greater the difference between the mean abilities of the two strategy groups. Third,
there was a marginal significance moderate positive correlation between b and DAM , which
j j
seemed to indicate that the higher the item difficulty, the greater the difference between the mean
abilities of the two strategy groups. Lastly, there was no significant correlation between CMSSP
and any of the other four indicators, indicating that for all participants, the use of the constructive
matching strategy was not significantly influenced by item difficulty, strategy sensitivity, average
time spent, or the difference in ability between the two strategy groups of participants.
Spearman rank correlation among different indicators on the item level.
Note. CMSSP: the mean probability of participants using the constructive matching strategy per
item; MRT: the mean response time across participants per item; DMA: the difference between the
mean abilities of two strategy groups per item; e: strategy sensitivity parameter; b: item difficulty.
The number of elements in each indicator was 36. **: p < 0.01; *: p < 0.05; #: p = 0.055 (marginal
significant).
mean constructive matching strategy selection probability across all items
! !+
+-.
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
Pearson correlation between all participants’ intelligence estimates and their mean constructive
matching strategy selection probability across all items (ρ = .22, p < .001), indicating that
participants with higher intelligence were more likely to use the constructive matching strategy.
To further explore the relationship between intelligence and cognitive strategy use, we divided
the participants into high- and low-intelligence groups according to whether they fell into the top
and bottom 30% of the intelligence estimates. The mean constructive matching strategy selection
probability for all items was 55.7% for the high-intelligence group and 44.5% for the low-
intelligence group. As shown in Figures 5(b) to 5(e), we also calculated the Pearson correlation
coefficient between the constructive matching strategy selection probability and item difficulty
and the Pearson correlation coefficient between the constructive matching strategy selection
probability and strategy sensitivity parameter in the high-intelligence group and the low-
intelligence group, respectively. For the high-intelligence group, both of the correlation
coefficients showed a significant moderate positive correlation, 𝜌+∑ 𝑃(𝑚 )⁄𝐼 , 𝑏 0 = 0.493
!-. !+ +
(p = 0.002) and 𝜌+∑ 𝑃(𝑚 )⁄𝐼 , 𝑒 0 = 0.402 (p = 0.015). By contrast, for the low-intelligence
!-. !+ +
group, there was a marginally significant low negative correlation between item difficulty and
constructive matching strategy selection probability, 𝜌+∑ 𝑃(𝑚 )⁄𝐼 , 𝑏 0 = −0.298 (p =
!-. !+ +
0.078), and a non-significant low negative correlation between strategy sensitivity and constructive
matching strategy selection probability, 𝜌+∑ 𝑃(𝑚 )⁄𝐼 , 𝑒 0 = −0.207 (p = 0.226).
!-. !+ +
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
Relationship between participants’ intelligence estimates and probabilities of constructive
matching strategy use.
Note. CMSSP: constructive matching strategy selection probability.
on three APM items. The areas covered from green to red represent the distribution of fixation
time from short to long. The small bule circles are gaze points, and the yellow lines between the
gaze points represent saccades. This visual information offers a rough estimate of the participant’s
visual searching patterns, such as the time allocation and the number of toggles between the matrix
and alternative areas. The constructive matching strategy selection probability of three participants
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
on the three items is also presented above the diagrams. Taking Participant 1 as an example, the
eye-tracking diagrams revealed that for items 1 and 36, he/she spent much more time in the matrix
area than in the alternative areas, and we can roughly infer that he/she used the constructive
matching strategy on these two items. Such an inference matched the high selection probability of
the constructive matching strategy estimated by the MEM. By contrast, the small difference in
time spent by Participant 1 in the matrix and alternative areas of item 34 and the high number of
toggles between the two areas seemed to indicate that he/she used the response elimination strategy
on this item, which also matched the low selection probability of the constructive matching
strategy estimated by the MEM.
Of course, not all participants’ strategy selections were as clear as those of Participant 1. For
example, the estimated probability of Participant 3 choosing the constructive matching strategy on
item 1 was 0.45; his/her eye-tracking diagram also showed that he/she spent some time both in the
matrix and alternative areas and had a certain number of toggles between the two areas, which led
us to draw no easy conclusions about which one of the two strategies he/she actually used. One
possible reason for this is that this participant tried to use two strategies to respond to this item.
Finally, the two staff members endorsed 88% and 86% of the strategy identification results
from the MEM, respectively, and both endorsed 81% of the strategy identification results (see
results of the proposed model.
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
Eye-tracking diagrams (heat maps and gaze plots) of three participants on three items and
corresponding constructive matching strategy selection probabilities.
Note. P(m = 1): constructive matching strategy selection probability. The area covered from green
to red represents the distribution of fixation time, the small blue circles are gaze points, and the
line between the gaze points represents the saccade. The diagram (heat map and gaze plot) was
automatically generated using EyeLink Data Viewer software based on the recorded eye-tracking
data.
5. Summary and Discussion
5.1. Summary
The APM is a valid measurement instrument of intelligence, and previous studies have
investigated the role of cognitive strategies in responding to these items. This study proposes a
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
multi-strategy psychometric model incorporating eye-tracking measures (i.e., PTM, ROT, and
RLT). The model has the ability to measure each participant’s intelligence (or latent ability) and to
identify the cognitive strategy used by each participant on each item in the APM. The proposed
model follows the theory-driven modeling logic and provides a new way to study cognitive
strategy in the APM by presenting objective and quantitative results based on existing findings on
the correspondence between cognitive strategies and eye-tracking measures. Theoretically,
compared with eye-tracking data mining approaches, the proposed model is more interpretable and
has fewer data volume requirements, which makes it more suitable for small-scale psychological
experimental studies. Moreover, compared with self-reporting approaches, the proposed model
can more objectively identify participants’ cognitive strategies for each item. Another advantage
of the proposed model comes from the theoretical advantages of item response theory over
classical test theory; that is, the proposed model can make full use of the information on
participants’ responses to 36 items to infer the intelligence level of participants from the latent
ability estimates rather than the raw scores.
The findings of this study can be summarized as follows. First, the MEM fitted the data better
than the Rasch model while ensuring that the same latent ability (i.e., intelligence) was measured,
indicating that the participants do use different cognitive strategies in responding to items in the
APM. Second, the effects of the three eye-tracking measures on the constructive matching strategy
selection probability were positive and presented in the following order: PTM > RLT > ROT, and
the effect of ROT was negligible. Third, the average intelligence of participants using the
constructive matching strategy was higher than that of participants using the response elimination
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
strategy. Fourth, participants with higher intelligence were more likely to use the constructive
matching strategy. Fifth, the choice of strategy has different magnitudes of effect on different items
in the APM; namely, choosing to respond to items with the constructive matching strategy did not
result in significant gains on every item in the APM. Sixth, for all participants, there was no
significant correlation between item difficulty or strategy sensitivity and the probability of
participants choosing the constructive matching strategy. However, high-intelligence participants
increased their use of the constructive matching strategy as item difficulty increased and strategy
sensitivity increased, whereas low-intelligence participants decreased their use of the constructive
matching strategy as item difficulty increased. Seventh, participants took significantly less time to
use the constructive matching strategy than to use the response elimination strategy. Eighth, the
use of the two cognitive strategies coexisted in responding to the items in the APM. Some
participants were more likely to use one of them, while some participants might try both strategies.
In addition, the validity evidence based on manual judgment also indicated that the proposed
model was, to some extent, effective for identifying cognitive strategies in the APM.
5.2. Discussion
The findings of this study show consistency as well as disagreement with previous studies.
For example, consistent with the findings of Bethell-Fox et al. (1984) and Vigneau et al. (2006),
the use of the constructive matching strategy has a significant positive correlation with participants’
intelligences. Consistent with the findings of Vigneau et al. (2006), for all participants, the usage
of strategy was independent from item difficulty; however, for low-intelligence participants, our
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
findings support the findings of Jarosz et al. (2019) and Gonthier and Roulin (2020) that
participants decrease their use of the constructive matching strategy as item difficulty increases.
In this regard, Fox et al. (1984) explained that when responding to difficulty items, low-
intelligence participants tend to shift from using the constructive matching strategy to using the
response elimination strategy. Further, contrary to the findings of Gonthier and Roulin (2020) and
Gonthier and Thomassin (2015), we found that participants took significantly less time to use the
constructive matching strategy than to use the response elimination strategy; this may be because
the high-intelligence participants with faster processing speed were more likely to use the
constructive matching strategy in this study.
In contrast to Laurence et al. (2018), who argued that ROT is the best predictor of participants’
use of the constructive matching strategy, we found that there was no significant effect of ROT on
the selection probability of the constructive matching strategy. To further investigate the effect of
different eye-tracking measures on strategy choice, six sub-models of the MEM were additionally
used to analyze the APM data, including three sub-models containing any two of the three eye-
tracking measures in Equation 7 (denoted as MEM2) and three sub-models containing any one of
presents the estimated weight parameters and two relative model–data fit indices for the seven
models. The results showed that the weight parameter of ROT was not equal to zero only for the
worst-fitting MEM1 that contained ROT alone; the weight parameter of ROT in the other models
was not significantly different from zero. The MEM2 with ROT removed on the basis of MEM fit
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
E, the MEM and the MEM2 without ROT had the highest consistency in the identification of
cognitive strategies among the seven models. Overall, these results further confirm our finding
that ROT has no significant effect on the selection probability of the constructive matching strategy.
In addition to the two constructive strategies investigated in this study, Jarosz et al. (2019)
pointed out that participants may also use another cognitive strategy in the APM—the isolate-and-
eliminate strategy. The isolate-and-eliminate strategy can be treated as a combination of the
constructive matching strategy and the response elimination strategy, in which “participants would
establish the rules governing one feature of items in the problem matrix, use that rule to eliminate
potential responses from the response bank, and then proceed with another feature, until only one
item was left” (Jarosz et al., 2019, p. 5). In this study, we found that the estimates of the probability
of strategy selection of some participants (i.e., 𝑃(𝑚 )) were within the ambiguous region of about
!+
0.5. This outcome is plausible, as participants might use a combination of the constructive
matching strategy and the response elimination strategy. Such an interpretation may provide a new
perspective for understanding isolate-and-eliminate strategies.
Despite the promising results of this study, further research is needed. First, consistent with
most studies on cognitive strategy in the APM, this study focused on only two cognitive
strategies—the constructive matching and response elimination strategies. However, in practice,
more types of cognitive strategies may exist when responding to items on the APM (e.g., isolate-
and-eliminate strategy). The MEM proposed in this study is not limited to two strategies; thus, the
performance of the MEM with more than two strategies is worthy of further exploration. Second,
inspired by previous studies, only three eye-tracking measures were considered in the study—
Preprint Version: A MULTI-STRATEGY EYE-TRACKING MODEL
PTM, ROT, and RLT. However, there are many other eye-tracking measures that can be used to
infer the choice of cognitive strategy in the APM. The effect of other eye-tracking measures can
also be explored progressively in the future, based on the MEM. Third, participants were randomly
selected from the same university, and although the sample size in this study was larger than in
other related studies, the results may not be universal due to homogeneity among participants.