Lexical Processing Across the Visual Field
1,2 2,3 2,3 1
Aaron Veldre , Erik D. Reichle , Lili Yu , & Sally Andrews
1. School of Psychology, The University of Sydney, Australia
2. School of Psychological Sciences, Macquarie University, Australia
3. Macquarie University Centre for Reading, Sydney, Australia
Author Note
The data, analysis scripts, and stimulus materials from the present study are publicly
preregistered. The work reported in this article was supported by a Discovery Project grant
from the Australian Research Council (DP190100719). This work is dedicated to Sally
Andrews, who passed away in early May, 2022, prior to its publication. Sally’s career was
one marked by distinction, with many contributions to reading research and cognitive science
more generally. She was also well regarded for her dedication to mentoring students and
colleagues, and her integrity and kindness. She is very much missed. Correspondence
concerning this article should be addressed to Aaron Veldre, School of Psychology, The
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia; e-mail: aaron.veldre@sydney.edu.au.
©American Psychological Association, 2022. This paper is not the copy of
record and may not exactly replicate the authoritative document published in
the APA journal. The final article is available, upon publication, at Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance
Abstract
This article reports six experiments in which participants made speeded binary decisions
about letter strings that were displayed for 100 vs. 300 ms at different retinal eccentricities in
the left vs. right visual field to examine how these variables and task demands influence
word-identification accuracy and latency. Across the experiments, lexical-processing
performance decreased with eccentricity, but to a lesser degree for words displayed in the
right visual field, replicating previous reports. However, the effect of eccentricity was
attenuated for the two tasks that required “deep” semantic judgments (e.g., discriminating
words that referenced animals vs. objects) relative to the tasks that required “shallow” letter
and/or lexical processing (e.g., detecting words containing a pre-specified target letter,
discriminating words from nonwords). These results suggest that lexical and supra-lexical
knowledge play a significant role in supporting lexical processing, especially at greater
eccentricities, thereby allowing readers to extend the visual span, or region of effective letter
processing, into the perceptual span, or region of useful information extraction. The broader
theoretical implications of these findings are discussed in relation to existing and future
models of reading.
Public Significance Statement
This study examines how visual factors, such as visual acuity and visual crowding, affects the
identification of letters and words. We provide evidence that the impact of these low-level
factors depends on task demands, e.g., deciding whether a letter string is a word or nonword,
or deciding whether a word is an animal or object. The findings are relevant for developing
and discriminating between computational models of skilled reading.
Keywords
eye movements, perceptual span, reading, word identification
During reading, visual information is sampled at various locations around the point of
fixation. Readers extract detailed high spatial frequency information from letters and words
in the fovea—the central 2º of vision around fixation—but due to the physiology of the eye,
acuity is much lower outside foveal vision in the parafovea and periphery. Decades of
research on eye movements in reading has demonstrated that parafoveal information is
utilized in oculomotor planning (i.e., moment-to-moment decisions about where to move the
eyes; see Rayner, 2009 for a review). However, readers also use parafoveal information to
identify words. Eye-movement studies have shown that readers of English are sensitive to
lower-level orthographic and phonological features of upcoming words (see Schotter et al.,
2012; Vasilev & Angele, 2017 for reviews) as well as higher-level morphological, semantic,
and syntactic information from parafoveal words prior to fixation (Dann et al., 2021; Veldre
& Andrews, 2018; Veldre, Reichle et al., 2020; see Andrews & Veldre, 2019 for a review).
Although there is clear evidence that letter- and word-identification accuracy and speed are
impaired in the parafovea and periphery (e.g., Bouma, 1973; Lee et al., 2003; Legge et al.,
2001; Mishkin & Forgays, 1952; Morrison & Rayner, 1981; Rayner & Morrison, 1981), it
remains unclear precisely how the constraints imposed by retinal eccentricity, or distance
from the center of vision as measured using either visual angle or number of character spaces,
affect the processes underlying word identification.
Factors Contributing to Eccentricity Effects
At least two of the factors affecting lexical processing outside the fovea reflect
constraints of the early visual system. The first is visual acuity, which is related to the relative
density of the photoreceptors in the retinae, whose receptive fields have been estimated to
increase approximately ten-fold in size going from central vision to 3° eccentricity (Curcio et
al., 1990; see also Normann & Guillory, 2002). Because small receptive fields are necessary
to perceive the fine details that are in turn necessary to identify and discriminate letters (e.g.,
the small line segment that is used to distinguish between the letter O vs. Q), the rapid
increase in receptive field size with eccentricity contributes to the basic finding that word
identification becomes increasingly difficult with eccentricity. The second factor that
contributes to this finding is that, with increasing eccentricity, the processing of letters and
words becomes increasingly subject to lateral inference from spatially adjacent letters and
words. This effect, known as spatial interference or visual crowding, is more detrimental to
accurate letter and word identification than is the effect of visual acuity (Latham & Whitaker,
1996). Visual crowding is also more pronounced from spatially adjacent exterior than interior
letters and words, resulting in the paradoxical finding that the final letter of a word to the
right of fixation can be more clearly perceived than its initial letter, even though the former is
farther from the center of vision than the latter (Bouma, 1973; Legge et al., 2001; Scaltritti et
al., 2021). Other factors that modulate the influence of eccentricity on word identification
have been demonstrated most clearly in experiments that have investigated the spatial limits
on processing letters and words outside of foveal vision (for a discussion of these issues, see
Grainger et al., 2016).
Eye-movement studies using the gaze-contingent moving window paradigm
(McConkie & Rayner, 1975), in which the size of a window of available text around the
reader’s point of fixation is manipulated, have shown that skilled readers of English normally
use information from approximately 3-4 letter spaces to the left and up to 15 letter spaces to
the right (see Rayner, 2014 for a review). The asymmetry of the window reflects the role of
attention in reading rather than physiological limits of vision per se, as evidenced by the
reversed asymmetry of the perceptual span in languages read right to left, such as Hebrew
(Pollatsek et al., 1981) and Arabic (Jordan et al., 2014). The perceptual span is also affected
by properties of the text being read: Readers extract information from a narrower window
when reading more difficult text, such as a sequence of low-frequency words (e.g., Veldre &
Andrews, 2014), or when reading writing systems that have visually dense orthography, such
as Chinese (Chen & Tang, 1998). Perhaps the clearest evidence for the role of attention,
however, comes from Miellet et al.’s (2009) experiment that used a variant of the moving
window paradigm in which individual letters were magnified so that their size increased as a
function of their distance from each new fixation location. They showed that the estimated
size of the perceptual span did not vary with the size of the letters, providing additional
evidence that the perceptual span reflects the limited capacity of attention rather than only
visual acuity or crowding. Considered collectively, this evidence indicates that the perceptual
span is a composite measure of the impacts of eccentricity and attention on processing
information outside foveal vision (Frey & Bosse, 2018).
Other studies investigating how retinal eccentricity affects word identification have
examined the visual span, which arguably provides a purer estimate of the spatial extent of
letter processing. Visual span refers to the number of letters of a given size that can be
identified on either side of the point of fixation without moving the eyes, and is affected by
both visual acuity and visual crowding outside foveal vision (Bouma, 1973; Legge et al.,
2007; O’Regan, 1990). It is typically assessed by requiring participants to maintain a fixed
gaze while identifying letter trigrams presented briefly at various eccentricities. The visual
span has been estimated to be approximately five letters either side of the point of fixation
(see Frey & Bosse, 2018, for a review). However, by assessing letter identification in
isolation, the visual span arguably underestimates the amount of information readers can
extract from words in the parafovea and periphery because partial orthographic information
can be combined with top-down linguistic knowledge to compensate for limited visual acuity.
Word Identification Outside the Fovea
An influential study (Rayner & Morrison, 1981) compared lexical decisions and
naming responses to words presented between 0 and 5º eccentricity from fixation. Under
conditions in which participants were free to move their eyes toward the target stimulus,
performance was virtually unaffected by eccentricity. However, when participants were
instructed to maintain central fixation, word-identification accuracy declined and response
latency increased for items presented at eccentric positions. In the lexical-decision task,
performance accuracy was close to ceiling at 0º but was at chance-level at 5º eccentricity.
Although these findings demonstrate the limits of lexical processing in the parafovea and
periphery, the experiments suffer from a number of methodological problems (for a full
discussion, see Veldre et al., 2022). These methodological issues raised questions about the
validity of the absolute estimates of the effect of eccentricity on lexical-processing
performance.
As part of a recent effort to replicate and confirm Rayner and Morrison’s (1981)
findings, we developed an experimental paradigm for examining lexical processing across the
visual field to be administered online via a web browser (Veldre et al., 2022). In this
paradigm, letter strings were presented either centrally at the point of fixation (i.e., 0º
eccentricity), or at various eccentric positions to the left or right of fixation. Because the
target could appear at any position on a given trial, the optimal strategy for participants was
to maintain central gaze. To examine differences between conditions that either did or did not
permit eye movements, the targets were displayed for either 300 ms or 100 ms. Because it
takes approximately 150 ms to program an eye movement (Becker & Jürgens, 1979; see also
Reichle & Reingold, 2013), the 300 ms duration condition allowed participants sufficient
time to move their eyes and fixate on the target, providing a baseline equivalent to Rayner
and Morrison’s eye-movement condition. Given the uncertainty about stimulus location, the
100 ms duration condition precluded saccades to the target. This served as an analogue to
Rayner and Morrison’s fixed-gaze condition and provided an estimate of the impact of
eccentricity on word identification in the absence of eye movements. Veldre et al. compared
lexical-decision performance in this online paradigm to performance in a lab-based
experiment for the same set of items in which targets were presented for 300 ms and an eye-
the pattern of data in the 100 ms condition of the online experiment, which prevented eye
movements to the target, was very similar to the results obtained under laboratory conditions,
in which participants were required to maintain fixed gaze. The consistency of the results
obtained using the two methods motivated our use of the online paradigm in the experiments
reported below for investigating lexical processing across the visual field.
Visual Field Asymmetry
A noticeable feature of Veldre et al.’s (2022) data is the asymmetry in the effect of
eccentricity on performance for words displayed to the left and right of fixation. Both the
accuracy and latency data demonstrated a strong right visual field (RVF) advantage indicating
that words presented to the right were identified more accurately and rapidly than words
presented to the left of fixation. This finding is consistent with well-documented evidence of
a visual field asymmetry in studies of bilateral letter and word processing (e.g., Bouma, 1973;
Ducrot & Grainger, 2007; Hellige, 1976, 1993; Jordan et al., 2003; Scaltritti et al., 2021). The
RVF advantage for letter and word stimuli has been argued to reflect the lateralization of
language areas in the left cerebral hemisphere (see Josse & Tzourio-Mazoyer, 2004, for a
review). Information presented in the left visual field (LVF) that is projected to the right
hemisphere may be initially processed less efficiently (e.g., by serial orthographic analysis;
Brand et al., 1983; Ellis et al., 1988; Eng & Hellige, 1984), and must be transferred to the left
hemisphere via the corpus callosum, resulting in slower processing and/or some loss in
fidelity. Consistent with this account, evidence that orthographic neighborhood (N) effects
are larger and facilitatory in the LVF and weaker and inhibitory in the RVF (see Parker et al.,
2021, for a review) may reflect stronger top-down activation from the word level within an
interactive system for letter strings in the LVF. Words in the LVF would then suffer from
slower and more error-prone bottom-up processing due to interhemispheric transfer. The
lateralization account is supported by two additional kinds of evidence. First, brain-imaging
(fMRI) studies have demonstrated a correlation between hemispheric dominance of language
function and visual field asymmetry within participants (e.g., Hunter & Brysbaert, 2008).
Second, the RVF advantage has also been documented in languages that, like Arabic and
Hebrew, are read from right to left, suggesting that the advantage is not due to reading
experience or how attention is allocated (e.g., Almabruk et al., 2011; Faust et al., 1993;
Ibrahim & Eviatar, 2009).
Visual field asymmetry in lexical processing may also reflect the distribution of
information within words, such as the relative importance of word-initial letters in identifying
words (e.g., Briihl & Inhoff, 1995; White et al., 2008), and the fact that, in English, one-
letter-different word neighbors most often occur at the first letter position (e.g., bat, cat, eat,
fat, etc.; Andrews, 1997), which falls in the lowest acuity area for words in the LVF. These
acuity costs also likely trade-off against the impact of visual crowding that, as described
above, is more detrimental for spatially adjacent interior versus exterior letters.
Task Demands
It is also possible that eccentricity effects and visual field asymmetry depend on task
demands. Although the relative impact of eccentricity on lexical-processing performance
observed by Veldre et al. (2022) largely confirmed the findings of Rayner and Morrison
(1981), the RVF advantage was considerably more pronounced in Veldre et al.’s data. For
example, at 1º eccentricity, lexical-decision accuracy was approximately 20% higher, and
response latency was 20 ms faster in the RVF than the LVF in Veldre et al.’s eye-tracking
advantage and an approximately 30 ms LVF latency advantage in Rayner and Morrison’s
lexical-decision data. The discrepancy may be due to differences in task demands between
the two studies. Rayner and Morrison repeatedly presented a small set of items and used
orthographically illegal consonant-string nonwords. The easy word/nonword discrimination
in Rayner and Morrison’s experiments may have promoted shallower processing and/or been
more susceptible to a speed-accuracy trade-off than Veldre et al.’s experiments. It is known
that lexical-decision latencies increase when word/nonword discrimination is made more
difficult by, for example, using transposed-letter (TL) nonwords (e.g., JUGDE; Perea &
Lupker, 2004) or pseudowords that are orthographic neighbors of real words (e.g., BEEST;
Lupker & Pexman, 2010; Siakaluk et al., 2002; Stone & Van Orden, 1993). Such conditions
also result in larger effects of word frequency and neighborhood size, suggesting that difficult
word/nonword discrimination requires deeper lexical processing. In contrast, the use of
orthographically illegal nonwords results in faster overall response latencies (James, 1975;
Shulman & Davidson, 1977), suggesting that lexical decisions can be made on the basis of
familiarity or global lexical activity without full lexical access (Balota & Chumbley, 1984).
There is also evidence that visual field asymmetry in letter and word identification is
sensitive to task demands (e.g., Bryden & Allard, 1976; Geffen et al., 1972; Hatta, 1986). For
example, visual field asymmetry can change with the proportion of easy versus difficult trials
within an experiment, and over the course of an experiment as participants become more
practiced at performing a task (Hellige, 1976; Jonides, 1979; Nettleton & Bradshaw, 1983).
The depth of linguistic processing has also been shown to modulate the RVF advantage:
Semantic categorization (birds vs. fish) showed a stronger RVF advantage than physical
categorization of Japanese words (hiragana vs. katakana script; Hatta, 1986). The RVF
advantage was also more pronounced for rhyme detection versus phoneme detection, and for
categorization of words as “living” versus “edible” (Cousin et al., 2006). Thus, visual field
asymmetry in letter and word processing appears to be sensitive to the nature of the task and
the degree to which linguistic versus perceptual features of the stimuli are relevant to
discrimination decisions. One basic objective of this study is to gain a better understanding of
how task demands might affect the impact of eccentricity and visual field asymmetry that is
observed in letter and word processing.
Computational Models of Reading
As already discussed, the fact that the perceptual span extends up to 15 letter spaces
to the right of fixation (McConkie & Rayner, 1975) suggests that readers do routinely make
use of orthographic information outside of foveal vision to maintain reading fluency. This in
turn suggests that readers use lexical and higher-level linguistic knowledge to extend their
visual span, or region of effective letter processing, further into the parafovea, allowing
additional information corresponding to the perceptual span to be extracted from whatever
material is being read. Precisely how this is done is pedagogically important because it is
likely to differentiate skilled from less skilled readers (e.g., Veldre & Andrews, 2014). This
capacity is of course also theoretically important because the interplay of visual information
extraction, lexical knowledge, and higher-level language processing is central to
computational models of reading (see Reichle, 2021).
It is therefore perhaps surprising that most existing models actually say little about the
interactions between visual processing, on one hand, and lexical/language processing, on the
other. Most word-identification models adopt the auxiliary assumption that the “interesting”
part of lexical processing begins with abstract representations of the orthographic input. This
point is perhaps best illustrated with the interactive-activation model (McCelland &
Rumelhart, 1981; Rumelhart & McClelland, 1982) and models that adopt its core
assumptions (e.g., Coltheart et al., 2001; Davis, 2010; Grainger & Jacobs, 1996; Perry et al.,
interconnected nodes representing different types of lexical codes, with the “visual” input
consisting of abstract letter and/or letter-feature nodes arranged into fixed “slots” that
indicate their within-word spatial positions. For example, if presented with the word cat,
nodes corresponding to the letters c, a, and t are respectively activated in the first, second,
and third positions, which then propagate their activation to word nodes containing those
letters in those positions (e.g., cat, but also to a lesser degree cab, rat, etc.). Across time, the
propagation of activation via excitatory and inhibitory nodes in conjunction with the mutual
inhibition of word nodes will allow the most active word node (usually the one receiving the
most letter-node activation) to dominate the others in a “winner-take-all” manner. However,
because the letter nodes are activated to an equal degree irrespective of their relative
positions, the models are completely agnostic about how eccentricity affects word
identification, thus limiting their explanatory scope to experiments where words are
identified from central viewing locations.
In a similar manner, models of sentence and discourse processing are even further
removed from vision because their input typically consists of the meanings of already-
identified words (e.g., see Elman, 1991; Jurafsky, 1996; Lewis & Vasishth, 2005; Spivey &
Tanenhaus, 1998; Van Dyke & Lewis, 2003) and/or propositions representing entire phrases
or sentences (e.g., see Fletcher & Bloom, 1988; Kintsch, 1998; Langston et al., 1999; Myers
& O’Brien, 1998; van den Broek et al., 1996). These models are thus limited to making
coarse predictions about on-line reading behaviors, such as the relative difficulty associated
with reading sentences or regions of text, the types of representations that might be generated
from a sentence or text, or the types of errors that might be made in generating these
representations. In all cases, however, the role of eccentricity is ignored, presumably because
such concerns can be safely delegated to an earlier stage of word identification.
Finally, models that simulate eye-movement control in reading specify how visual
processing, attention, and lexical processing are coordinated with the oculomotor system to
guide the eyes. These models thus make specific assumptions about how eccentricity affects
the rate of lexical processing. For example, in the E-Z Reader model (Reichle et al., 2012),
the time that is required to identify a word in the absence of visual acuity constraints is
multiplied by a quantity that increases as a function of the mean distance of each of the
word’s letters from the current fixation location (i.e., center of vision). The time required to
identify words thus increases for longer words and words farther from the center of vision,
allowing the model to partially explain the influence of eccentricity on word-identification
latencies as indexed by eye-movement measures. Unfortunately, one limitation of many of
these models is that their assumptions about the mental processes that guide eye movements
are not specified in detail. For example, E-Z Reader uses simple equations to specify how
word-identification times are affected by a word’s frequency of occurrence in printed text and
within-sentence predictability rather than providing a detailed, computationally explicit
account of word identification (cf., the previously discussed word-identification models).
Another limitation is that the models fail to explain exactly why eccentricity affects the rate
of lexical processing, ignoring the roles of visual acuity versus crowding, for example.
Finally, all but one of these models are silent about how inter-hemispheric differences might
affect word identification. The models that provide exceptions to these caveats thus warrant
further discussion because they provide interesting (partial) accounts of the interplay of
visual information extraction, lexical knowledge, and higher-level language processing.
Four of the eye-movement control models (ASM: Reilly, 1993; CRM: Li & Pollatsek,
2020; Glemore: Reilly & Radach, 2006; OB1-Reader: Snell et al., 2018) incorporate variants
1 As will be discussed below, this limitation has been partially addressed in the most recent version of E-Z
Reader (Veldre et al., 2022).
additional assumptions about how attention and eye movements are coordinated with lexical
processing. Because eccentricity plays such a clear role in determining where the eyes move
during reading, these models adopt the assumption that visual acuity declines as a function of
eccentricity around the point of fixation, thereby slowing the rate of lexical processing as a
function of eccentricity. Additionally, the rate of letter processing is modulated by lateral
interference in the OB1-Reader model and inter-letter similarity in the ASM. None of these
models, however, provide an account of the RVF advantage.
Another noteworthy example is Über-Reader (Reichle, 2021; see also Veldre, Yu et
al., 2020). This model incorporates an instance-based model of word identification (e.g., Ans
et al., 1998) as the “engine” driving eye movements, with additional assumptions about
interconnected nodes that represent the salient features of past encoded experiences with
words. For example, in reading the word cat, information about its spelling, pronunciation,
and context-specific meaning might be encoded as a discrete memory trace comprised of an
instance node connected to nodes representing the features that were encoded during the
experience. In contrast to the previously discussed models, Über-Reader provides a detailed
account of sentence processing and the representation of discourse. The model also assumes
some degree of uncertainty about each letter’s spatial location that increases with eccentricity
(as per Gomez et al., 2008). This assumption slows the lexical processing of more distant
words and makes it more prone to error, affording the possibility of explaining both the
misperception of words and letter-transposition effects (e.g., see Johnson et al., 2007). The
model is silent, however, about the effects of visual acuity and crowding, as well as the
source of the RVF advantage.
One final model of eye-movement control (SERIF: McDonald et al., 2005) also
provides an explicit account of how hemispheric differences affect lexical processing. This
model incorporates a strict split-fovea assumption in that the left hemisphere only
accumulates visual information from the RVF and the right hemisphere only accumulates
visual information from the LVF. For example, if the eyes fixate the middle of a word, then
information about the letters on either side of the fixation will be propagated to contralateral
hemispheres, with more rapid propagation for the left hemisphere and different rates if the
letters differ with respect to their informativeness. The model is thus broadly compatible with
the RVF advantage for lexical processing that has been reported in the literature (e.g., Rayner
& Morrison, 1981; Veldre et al., 2022). Offsetting this, however, is the fact that SERIF
provides neither a deep account of lexical processing nor of how its rate and accuracy are
modulated by eccentricity; in the model, the base rate of visual information accrual is simply
a linear function of eccentricity.
Viewed collectively, the models provide only partial accounts of how the extraction
of visual information is modulated by eccentricity and lexical/linguistic knowledge. That is,
the models all posit that the rate of visual and/or lexical processing decreases with
eccentricity, but that this slowing can be reduced via the application of top-down knowledge.
For example, the models posit that lexical knowledge in the form of how often a word has
been encountered and represented in the lexicon affects the speed and accuracy of its
identification, especially when it is being processed from a distant viewing location.
Additionally, most of the models posit that higher-level linguistic knowledge (e.g., sentential
constraints that make a word highly predictable) can modulate the rate of lexical processing,
consistent with findings that, in the limit, extremely predictable words can be accurately
2 For example, E-Z Reader predicts a strong interaction between word frequency and eccentricity on word-
“guessed.” The application of higher-level linguistic knowledge is also broadly consistent
with it being used to aid the processing of parafoveal words, as evidenced by parafoveal
preview benefit.
Preview benefit has been long established for orthographically and/or phonologically
similar parafoveal previews (see Schotter et al., 2012, for a review), and more recently for
“higher-level” linguistic information, such as morphology (e.g., Dann et al., 2021), semantics
(e.g., Schotter & Jia, 2016; Veldre & Andrews, 2016, 2017), and syntax (e.g., Veldre &
Andrews, 2018). However, there is conflicting evidence about how early this parafoveal
information is available to the reading system. For example, some studies have failed to find
evidence that the semantic/syntactic acceptability affects word skipping (e.g., Angele &
Rayner, 2013; Angele et al., 2014), while other studies have observed that
semantically/syntactically implausible words are less likely to be skipped than plausible
words (e.g., Brothers & Traxler, 2016; Veldre & Andrews, 2018, see Veldre, Reichle et al.,
2020 for discussion). This failure to consistently observe early influences of parafoveal
semantic information may be because semantic processing, by virtue of being “deeper” than
orthographic and/or phonological processing, simply requires more time to complete (Craik
& Lockhart, 1972) and is thus less likely to be completed for words in the parafovea.
Evidence consistent with the claim was reported by Reichle et al. (2008) and White et al.
(2018, 2020) in experiments where participants made binary decisions about arrays of a
variable number of simultaneously displayed words. The key finding of these studies was that
decisions requiring only shallow processing (e.g., does a word contain an asterisk?) were
largely unaffected by the number of displayed words, but decisions requiring deeper
processing (e.g., does a word refer to an animal?) became increasingly difficult with the
number of displayed words. This pattern is consistent with the hypothesis that, when
identifying a printed word, its orthographic and/or phonological information is accessed prior
to its meaning, with the former information often being a necessary precursor to the latter.
The Present Study
Given the seemingly contradictory claims about depth of lexical processing in the
parafovea, the experiments reported below used Veldre et al.’s (2022) online paradigm to
explicitly examine the modulating effects of retinal eccentricity and visual field on the
performance of tasks that required varying degrees of lexical processing depth. Experiments
1A and 1B assessed shallow visual processing required for the extraction of low-level visual
features and the identification of letters, respectively. Intermediate orthographic processing
was assessed in Experiments 2A and 2B, in which participants made lexical decisions under
conditions of either easy or difficult word/nonword discrimination. Finally, Experiments 3A
and 3B assessed deep semantic processing using semantic categorization and
concrete/abstract semantic decision tasks, respectively.
Our initial intuitions were in line with the standard depth-of-processing account in
that we predicted graded effects of processing depth. That is, eccentricity effects and
evidence of visual field asymmetry in response accuracy and latency were expected to
depend on the depth of processing required in the task, particularly under conditions in which
participants are unable to bring the target into foveal vision due to brief presentation. Task
performance accuracy and latency were expected to be least impacted by eccentricity and
visual field for the discrimination of a non-letter characters embedded within letter strings.
Eccentricity was expected to impact task performance more substantially for letter
discrimination, followed by discrimination of words from illegal letter strings, and then
lexical decision between words and pseudowords. Performance on semantic categorization
and concrete/abstract semantic decision tasks were expected to be the most impaired outside
of foveal vision. The RVF advantage for processing letter and word stimuli was expected to
similarly increase in magnitude as the task became increasingly dependent on deeper lexical
and semantic processing.
As will become evident below, however, our results were more complex than
anticipated, with evidence that participants can use a single underlying semantic dimension to
inform their decisions, in line with predictions of instance-based word-identification models
(Ans et al., 1998; Kwantes & Mewhort, 1999; Reichle, 2021; Reichle & Perfetti, 2003;
Veldre, Yu et al., 2020). We will discuss the implications of these findings, as well as the
broader implications for models of reading, in the General Discussion.
EXPERIMENTS 1A & 1B
Experiments 1A and 1B used tasks requiring lower-level visual processing to
discriminate non-linguistic stimuli (Experiment 1A) and to discriminate letters (Experiment
1B) embedded within word and nonword strings. The targets in Experiment 1A were
presented 0-4º to the left and right of fixation to provide a baseline estimate of the spatial
limits of the extraction of visual information from letter strings in the absence of lexical
processing. Experiment 1B presented a subset of the same items 0-2º to the left and right of
fixation to compare the impact of eccentricity with later experiments that required lexical and
semantic processing. In both experiments, the target strings were flanked to the left and right
by distractor words and nonwords in order to provide an analogue of the conditions under
which visual processing occurs during reading of connected text.
Method
Participants
The experiments were conducted entirely online due to restrictions on face-to-face
research during the COVID-19 pandemic. To identify participants who failed to understand
or comply with task instructions, we excluded participants who failed to successfully
implement instructions for experimental set-up and participants who achieved accuracy of
less than 80% in the easiest condition (i.e., stimuli displayed at 0° for 300 ms). These criteria
led to the exclusion of one and nine additional participants in Experiment 1A and 1B,
respectively. The final samples were 44 undergraduate students from The University of
Sydney in Experiment 1A (M = 19.95 years; 30 identified as female) and a separate group
age
of 42 undergraduate students in Experiment 1B (M = 20.43 years; 29 identified as female).
age
All participants reported that they had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and that they
were either native English speakers or began speaking English by age 6. This type of
participant sample is standard for reading research but may limit the generalizability of our
findings to a population of university educated, native English speaking, adult skilled readers.
Ethical approval for this study was granted by the Human Research Ethics Committee
at The University of Sydney (protocol 2016/204). All participants provided informed consent
prior to commencement of the study. All experiments reported in this article were conducted
in 2020-2021.
Stimuli and Design
The critical stimuli in Experiment 1A were 360 four-, five-, and six-letter one-
syllable/morpheme words (120 of each length) that spanned a range of word frequencies, and
with lexical-decision response accuracy above 90% in the English Lexicon Project (ELP)
database (Balota et al., 2007). A set of 360 nonwords were selected from the ELP database to
pairwise-match the word targets: 92% were one-letter different from the matched word, 6%
differed by two letters, and the remaining 2% differed by three letters. All 360 nonwords had
ELP lexical-decision accuracies above 70%. Pseudo-homophones or orthographically illegal
nonword stimuli.
For each word and nonword target, a single internal letter was randomly selected and
replaced by a # or % symbol. Targets were randomly paired with two different words and
nonwords that served as flanker distractors to reproduce the effect of lateral interference that
would occur during natural reading. All words and nonwords were divided into nine matched
sub-lists to allow counterbalancing of the location of each stimulus across participants.
Experiment 1A tested the impact of retinal eccentricity on the visual processing of
letter features within letter strings in both the RVF and LVF. Stimuli were presented at one of
nine viewing positions: 0° (i.e., the center of the target letter string was located at the
horizontal and vertical midpoint of the display), 1° right, 2° right, 3° right, or 4° right (i.e.,
the beginning of the target letter string was located 1-4° of visual angle to the right of the
center of the display), and 1° left, 2° left, 3° left, or 4° left (i.e., the end of the target letter
string was located 1-4° of visual angle to the left of the center of the display). The role of eye
movements was assessed by counterbalanced blocks of trials that presented the targets for
either 300 ms or 100 ms.
Experiment 1B used a subset of 150 target words and 150 target nonwords from
Experiment 1A in a letter detection task. Half the targets contained a single occurrence of the
letter a in any position and the remaining targets contained a single occurrence of the letter e.
The targets were each paired with two words and two nonwords that did not contain either an
a or an e from the wider list of items that served as flanker distractors. Stimuli were presented
at five viewing positions: 0°, 1° right, 2° right, 1° left, and 2° left. Each target was presented
twice at different viewing positions in counterbalanced blocks of items displayed at 300 ms
and 100 ms. Viewing position was counterbalanced across participants.
Statistical Power
Target sample sizes were based on Brysbaert and Stevens’ (2018) recommendations
of a minimum 1,600 datapoints per condition to achieve adequate statistical power in within-
subjects designs with crossed subjects and items. Power analyses based on Veldre et al.’s
(2022) data conducted with 100 Monte Carlo simulations using the simR package in R
demonstrated >.9 power to detect a 20-ms effect of eccentricity on RT at this sample size. In
Experiment 1A, the sample size (n = 44 participants; n = 40 items per condition) yielded
1,760 datapoints per cell. In Experiment 1B, the sample size (n = 42 participants; n = 60
items per condition) yielded 2,520 datapoints per cell.
Apparatus and Procedure
The experiments were coded in JavaScript using the jspsych library (de Leeuw, 2015)
and administered online in a web browser via the participant’s personal desktop or laptop
device. Previous comparisons of laboratory-based and web-based data collection have
demonstrated highly comparable results (Hilbig, 2016; Zwaan et al., 2018), including
comparisons of reaction time tasks administered with jsPsych (de Leeuw & Motz, 2016;
Veldre et al., 2022).
The experiments began with the participant inputting the dimensions of their display
by resizing a box to match the size of a credit card held up to the screen using the resize
plugin. Participants were instructed to sit 60 cm from the screen and to maintain this viewing
distance throughout the experiment. The participant’s screen dimensions were used to scale
each trial began with a fixation cross presented at the center of the display for 500 ms,
followed by the target stimulus in lowercase at one of the target locations (i.e., either at 0, or
1, 2, 3 or 4 to the left or right of the center of the screen in Experiment 1A, and either at
0, or 1 or 2 to the left or right of the center of the screen in Experiment 1B) for 100 or 300
ms, and then finally a blank screen until 2000 ms elapsed or until the participant pressed a
key to make their response. Participants were instructed to press the Z key if the target letter
string contained a % (Experiment 1A) or the letter a (Experiment 1B), and the M key if the
target contained a # (Experiment 1A) or the letter e (Experiment 1B). The mapping of
response keys to target character was counterbalanced across participants. Feedback was
displayed following incorrect responses (“Wrong” in red text) for 500 ms before the start of
the next trial. The experiment began with 10 practice items, to familiarize participants with
the experimental procedure with feedback for both incorrect and correct responses (“Right”
in green text). The order of trials was individually randomized for each participant. Stimulus
duration was blocked, and the order of blocks was counterbalanced across participants.
Viewing position was randomized within blocks. Participants were given the opportunity to
take a break after completing 25%, 50%, and 75% of the experiment. The entire experiment
lasted approximately 25 minutes.
Transparency and Openness
The raw data, analysis scripts, and stimulus materials from the present study are
Results
Data Preparation and Analysis
Character/letter detection accuracy and (log transformed) RT data were analyzed with
(G)LMMs testing the fixed effects of stimulus duration and position. Trials on which the
participant failed to respond, or with outlier RTs (< 215 ms or > 1,955 ms) were discarded
(Experiment 1A: 0.66% of trials; Experiment 1B: 1.33% of trials). For all experiments,
models were initially fit with maximal random-effects structures corresponding to by-
participant and by-item random intercepts and random slopes for main effects and
interactions. All models failed to converge with maximal structures and were trimmed by
first removing the random correlation parameters and then iteratively removing random
slopes that accounted for the least variance until the model converged without a singular fit.
The final random-effects structures for each model and estimates of the random effects are
included in Supplementary Materials. The fixed effect of target length was entered as a mean-
centered predictor. Mean accuracy and mean correct RT are shown in Tables 2 and 3 and
Experiment 1A
The models tested the fixed effect of stimulus position nested under stimulus
duration, i.e., stimulus position effects separately at 300 ms and 100 ms duration. Stimulus
position was coded as a set of eight contrasts that tested the impact of both eccentricity and
visual field (i.e., the difference in the eccentricity effect between the RVF and the LVF): (1)
0° vs. 1°; (2) 1° vs. 2°; (3) 2° vs. 3°; (4) 3° vs. 4°; (5) Visual field × 0° vs. 1°; (6) Visual field
× 1° vs. 2°; (7) Visual field × 2° vs. 3°; and (8) Visual field × 3° vs. 4°.
Accuracy
There was a significant overall effect of stimulus duration with better performance
when participants had sufficient time to move their eyes to fixate on the target (in the 300 ms
condition) versus the condition in which planning and executing an eye movement to the
target was not possible (in the 100 ms condition).
At 300 ms, performance was effectively at ceiling with character detection accuracy
above 90% even for words presented at 4° eccentricity. Accuracy did not differ significantly
across the visual field. The only evidence of a visual field asymmetry was a significant
interaction with the difference between 1° and 2° eccentricity which reflected a slight
decrease in performance at 2° to the left of fixation and a slight increase in performance at 2°
to the right of fixation.
At 100 ms, performance declined significantly with each degree of eccentricity, but
accuracy was still well above 80% at 4° eccentricity. There was no evidence that the impact
of eccentricity differed in RVF versus LVF.
RT
Correct decision latency was significantly affected by stimulus duration. RT was
slower in the 300 ms versus 100 ms conditions, presumably reflecting the time to plan and
execute an eye movement before initiating a response in the former condition. In other words,
the 300-ms condition afforded eye movements, making the task easier but inflating the RTs
due to the additional time that was added by programming and executing the saccades.
In contrast to the accuracy data, eccentricity affected RT in both the 300 ms and 100
ms conditions, with slower responding at greater levels of eccentricity. The effect of
eccentricity on RT was essentially symmetrical in the RVF and LVF. The only evidence of
any effect of visual field was a significant interaction with the 1° vs. 2° contrast at 300 ms
which reflected the fact that RT only increased between 1° and 2° for targets presented to the
right but not the left. Given that the corresponding interaction was also observed on accuracy,
this may reflect the impact of a speed/accuracy trade-off.
Experiment 1B
The Experiment 1B data was analyzed in the same way as in Experiment 1A.
Stimulus position was coded as a set of four contrasts nested under stimulus duration: (1) 0°
vs. 1°; (2) 1° vs. 2°; (3) Visual field × 0° vs. 1°; and (4) Visual field × 1° vs. 2°.
Accuracy
The overall effect of stimulus duration was significant with more accurate
performance in the 300 ms versus 100 ms condition.
At 300 ms, performance was at or above 90% accuracy at all positions. There was a
significant decline in performance between 1° and 2° eccentricity. In contrast to Experiment
1A, there was clearer evidence of a RVF advantage in Experiment 1B. Visual field
significantly interacted with the 0° vs. 1° contrast because the decline in accuracy at 1° was
restricted to the LVF.
At 100 ms, there was a much more pronounced effect of eccentricity with large
declines in accuracy between 0° and 1° and between 1° and 2° eccentricity. There was also
clear evidence of a RVF advantage on letter detection accuracy with a significant Visual field
× 0° vs. 1° interaction.
RT
In contrast to Experiment 1A, the overall effect of stimulus duration on RT was not
significant in Experiment 1B.
However, at both 300 ms and 100 ms, RT increased significantly between 0° and 1°
and between 1° and 2° eccentricity. This increase was more pronounced in the LVF between
0° and 1° eccentricity at 300 ms, and between 1° and 2° eccentricity at 100 ms.
Discussion
Experiment 1A demonstrated a very modest impact of eccentricity on the
discrimination of non-letter stimuli embedded in letter strings. Performance accuracy was
above 80%, even for items displayed for only 100 ms at either 4º to the left or right of
fixation. These findings are consistent with evidence that visual processing of letter strings
occurs largely in parallel across the visual field (e.g., White et al., 2020). The unusual visual
features of the non-letter characters embedded in letter strings may have contributed to a
“pop-out” effect that facilitated performance in the task. However, the significant eccentricity
effects in the 100 ms condition suggest that participants did need to deploy visual attention to
perform the task accurately. Finally, the lack of a visual field asymmetry on performance is
consistent with the shallow processing required to discriminate the non-linguistic stimuli,
despite the target characters being embedded in letter strings.
In contrast to the results of Experiment 1A, Experiment 1B revealed that letter
discrimination within words and nonwords was strongly affected by retinal eccentricity.
Performance accuracy declined to approximately 70% for stimuli displayed 2º to the left of
fixation compared to approximately 90% accuracy for the same position in Experiment 1A.
There was also a pronounced visual field asymmetry in Experiment 1B with significantly
higher accuracy in the RVF versus LVF in contrast to the absence of a visual field difference
in Experiment 1A. The pattern of results is also qualitatively similar to Veldre et al.’s (2022)
appears to show somewhat more modest effects of eccentricity and visual field than lexical
decision. These differences may reflect the fact that identification of a single letter is an
easier task than discriminating words from (one-letter-different) nonwords. However,
although the task could logically be performed accurately without identification of the whole
word, the significant RVF advantage observed in Experiment 1B may indicate that, at least
on some trials, participants first identified the whole word and then determined if it contained
the target letter.
EXPERIMENTS 2A & 2B
Experiments 2A and 2B used a lexical-decision task to investigate eccentricity effects
and visual field asymmetry in word identification. These experiments also functioned as a
conceptual replication of the lexical-decision experiments reported by Veldre et al. (2022)
using a new set of stimuli comprising words that spanned a larger array of lengths (3-8 vs. 4-
6 letters). A further goal of these experiments was to assess whether task demands modulate
3 Supplementary analyses of Experiments 1A and 1B that included the fixed effect of flanker lexicality (word
vs. nonword flanker distractors) showed no significant effects of this factor on either accuracy or latency in
either experiment (|t|s/|z|s < 1.53). Furthermore, flanker lexicality did not significantly interact with stimulus
position or visual field on either measure in the two experiments (all |t|s/|z|s < 1.87). A supplementary analysis
of Experiment 1B that included the fixed effect of target lexicality (word vs. nonword) showed a significant
Lexicality × Visual field × 0° vs. 1° interaction on letter discrimination accuracy in the 300 ms duration
condition [b=-0.23, SE=0.11, z=-2.08]. This interaction reflected a slightly more pronounced RVF advantage for
word targets versus nonword targets. There were no other significant effects or interactions involving target
lexicality on either accuracy or latency [all |t|s and |z|s < 1.72].
eccentricity and visual field effects by manipulating the difficulty of the word/nonword
decision. In Experiment 2A, nonwords were created by replacing the vowels within the target
words with visually similar consonants. Thus, Experiment 2A required lexical decisions
about stimuli in a task that required shallow processing because the word/nonword
discrimination could be based solely on orthographic legality. In Experiment 2B, the task
required words had to be discriminated from one-letter-different pseudowords, arguably
requiring full lexical access. It was therefore anticipated that Experiment 2A would show
smaller eccentricity and visual field effects than Experiment 2B because the former could be
performed accurately by extracting partial orthographic information from target letter strings.
Method
Participants
The same criteria were used as in Experiments 1A and 1B to identify participants that
failed to follow the setup instructions or engage seriously with the experiment. Nine and 16
participants were excluded in Experiments 2A and 2B, respectively. The final samples after
exclusions comprised 61 undergraduate students from The University of Sydney in
Experiment 2A (M = 19.78 years; 49 identified as female) and a separate group of 59
age
undergraduate students from The University of Sydney (n = 13) and Macquarie University (n
= 48) in Experiment 2B (M = 21.10 years; 36 identified as female). All participants
age
reported that they had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and that they were either native
English speakers or began speaking English by age 6.
Stimuli and Design
The target stimuli used in Experiments 2A and 2B were 300 3-8-letter words. The
words were selected for inclusion in the semantic decision tasks reported in Experiments 3A
and 3B and therefore comprised 150 animal words (e.g., eagle, moose) and 150 matched
stimuli used in Experiments 2A and 2B.
For Experiment 2A, 300 orthographically illegal nonwords were created by replacing
all vowels within each of the target words with consonants.
For Experiment 2B, 300 orthographically legal, pronounceable pseudowords were
created by replacing a consonant within each of the target words with a different consonant.
The replacement occurred for a single medial letter except for 32 animal words and 38 object
words for which the replacement occurred for an initial or final letter because medial
replacement either produced a different word or resulted in an illegal letter combination. For
a further three animal words and nine object words, two consonants were replaced to avoid
retaining an animal/object morpheme (e.g., fish in starfish; suit in swimsuit).
Target words and nonwords were divided into matched sub-lists to allow
counterbalancing of the viewing position of each stimulus across participants. For both
experiments, stimuli were presented at five viewing positions: 0°, 1° right, 2° right, 1° left, or
2° left. Given the absence of any effects of flanker type in Experiments 1A and 1B (see
Footnote 1) and the minimal impact of the presence versus absence of flankers on lexical
decision performance in Veldre et al.’s (2022) data, stimuli were presented alone, without
flanker distractors, in all subsequent experiments. In both experiments, counterbalanced
blocks presented half the targets for 300 ms and the remaining items for 100 ms.
Statistical Power
In Experiment 2A, the sample size (n = 61 participants; n = 30 items per condition)
yielded 1,830 datapoints per cell. In Experiment 2B, the sample size (n = 59 participants; n =
30 items per condition) yielded 1,770 datapoints per cell. Power analysis based on Veldre et
al.’s (2022) data conducted with 100 Monte-Carlo simulations using the simR package
demonstrated sufficient statistical power (>.8) to detect a 15 ms between-experiment
difference on RT in the size of the eccentricity effect.
Apparatus and Procedure
Experiments 2A and 2B were administered the same way as Experiments 1A and 1B.
The procedure was also largely identical except that participants were instructed to press the
Z key if the target was a word and the M key if target was a nonword. Mapping of response to
key was counterbalanced across participants.
Results
Data Preparation and Analysis
Lexical decision accuracy and (log transformed) RT data were analyzed with
(G)LMMs. Trials on which the participant failed to respond, or with outlier RTs (< 242 ms or
> 1935 ms) were discarded (Experiment 2A: 1.21% of trials; Experiment 2B: 2.10% of
trials). Because Experiments 2A and 2B used the same target items, the data for both
experiments were combined and analyzed within the same models in order to directly assess
the effect of nonword type on lexical decision performance across the visual field. Nonword
type (illegal nonword vs. pseudoword) was tested as an effect-coded contrast. The effect of
stimulus position was tested with the same contrasts as Experiment 1B. Nonword type,
stimulus position, and their interactions were nested under stimulus duration. Random effects
are included in Supplementary Materials. The fixed effects of target word frequency (log
HAL) and word length were entered as mean-centered predictors. Means are presented in
Accuracy
Lexical decision accuracy was significantly higher in the 300 ms than in the 100 ms
condition.
At 300 ms, lexical decisions for word targets were significantly more accurate in
Experiment 2A (illegal nonwords) versus Experiment 2B (pseudowords). Although accuracy
was high across all positions, there were clear effects of eccentricity with performance
declining between 0° and 1° and between 1° and 2°. There was also a significant RVF
advantage. However, there was no evidence that the effect of nonword type differed by
stimulus position or visual field at 300 ms.
At 100 ms, there was a larger impact of nonword type on accuracy. The effect of
stimulus position was also more pronounced than at 300 ms. Accuracy declined significantly
between 0° and 1° and between 1° and 2° eccentricity. The RVF advantage was also more
pronounced at 100 ms. However, nonword type interacted with the visual field effect at 1°,
which reflected a stronger RVF advantage in Experiment 2B (pseudowords) versus
Experiment 2A (illegal nonwords).
RT
The overall effect of stimulus duration on RT was not significant.
At both 300 ms and 100 ms, there was a similar sized effect of nonword type on
lexical decision RT with faster decision latencies in Experiment 2A (illegal nonwords) versus
Experiment 2B (pseudowords). RT increased significantly between 0° and 1° and between 1°
and 2° eccentricity. This increase was more pronounced in the LVF between 0° and 1°. The
visual field effect was qualified by an interaction with nonword type because the RVF
advantage was larger in Experiment 2B (pseudowords) versus Experiment 2A (illegal
nonwords).
Discussion
The results of Experiments 2A and 2B replicated Veldre et al.’s (2022) relative effects
of eccentricity and visual field on lexical decision accuracy and latency using a new set of
stimuli. The novel finding of these experiments was that the magnitude of the RVF advantage
in word identification depended on the difficulty of the word/nonword discrimination. There
were overall costs to accuracy and latency for the more difficult word/pseudoword
discrimination in Experiment 2B relative to the word/nonword discrimination task in
Experiment 2A, consistent with evidence that nonword type affects the depth of lexical
processing in the lexical-decision task (Balota & Chumbley, 1984; West & Stanovich, 1982).
Notably, however, the difference in the effect of eccentricity between the two tasks was
largely restricted to the LVF. Participants were considerably more impaired in identifying
words in the LVF, but not the RVF, when the nonword foils were pseudowords compared to
orthographically illegal nonwords.
The larger RVF advantage in Experiment 2B could indicate that discriminating words
from pseudowords required deeper lexical processing compared to Experiment 2A, in which
accurate performance may not have required lexical access. That is to say, discriminating
words from one-letter-different nonwords in Experiment 2B depended on the extraction of
precise orthographic information, but this was not necessary for accurate performance in
Experiment 2A because nonwords could be rejected by detecting orthographically illegal
letter combinations. This task difference may implicate greater involvement of left-lateralized
language areas in Experiment 2B, benefiting stimuli presented in the RVF.
EXPERIMENTS 3A & 3B
Experiments 3A and 3B were designed to test the impact of eccentricity and visual
field on semantic processing. Experiment 3A used the same word targets as Experiments 2A
and 2B in a semantic categorization task (animals vs. objects). Experiment 3B used a subset
of these same items in a concrete/abstract semantic decision task.
If the magnitude of the RVF advantage depends on the depth of processing, as
suggested by the results of Experiments 2A and 2B, we should see an even greater decline in
performance for eccentric stimuli and for words presented in the LVF in the semantic-
processing tasks in Experiments 3A and 3B. In these tasks, words must first be identified
before a semantic discrimination can be made. Differences in the pattern of eccentricity
effects or visual field asymmetry between the tasks requiring discrimination of superordinate
categories (Experiment 3A; animals vs. objects) versus linguistically-defined categories
(Experiment 3B; concrete vs. abstract) will shed light on the source of hemispheric
differences in word processing.
Method
Participants
The same criteria were used as in the other experiments to identify participants that
failed to follow instructions or engage with the experiment, resulting in 16 and 10
participants being excluded from Experiment 3A and 3B, respectively. The final samples
after exclusions were 59 undergraduate students from The University of Sydney (n = 25) and
Macquarie University (n = 24) in Experiment 3A (M = 19.36 years; 47 identified as
age
female), and a separate group of 58 undergraduate students from Macquarie University in
Experiment 3B (M = 21.52 years; 39 identified as female). All participants reported that
age
they had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and that they were either native English
speakers or began speaking English by age 6.
Stimuli and Design
The target stimuli used in Experiment 3A were the same 150 animal words and 150
For Experiment 3B, 150 concrete words were selected, comprising 75 animal words
and 75 object words from Experiment 3A. All had mean concreteness ratings above 4.4 (out
of 5; M=4.86) in the norms collected by Brysbaert et al. (2014), apart from six words that
were not included in the database. The concrete targets were paired with 150 matched
abstract words (e.g., peace, anxious) that all had mean concreteness ratings below 1.9
(M=1.66) in the Brysbaert et al. norms. The abstract words were categorized as such by an
average of 89.19% of participants in the Calgary semantic decision mega-study (Pexman et
Stimuli were presented at five viewing positions: 0°, 1° right, 2° right, 1° left, or 2°
left. In both experiments, each target was presented twice, at different viewing positions, in
counterbalanced blocks of trials that presented the stimuli for either 300 ms or 100 ms.
Viewing position was counterbalanced across participants.
Statistical Power
In Experiment 3A, the sample size (n = 59 participants; n = 30 items per condition)
yielded 1,770 datapoints per cell. In Experiment 3B, the sample size (n = 58 participants; n =
30 items per condition) yielded 1,740 datapoints per cell.
Apparatus and Procedure
Experiments 3A and 3B were administered online in the same way as the other
experiments. In Experiment 3A, participants were instructed to press the Z key if the target
word was an animal and the M key if the target was an object. The following clarification
was also provided: “ANIMALS include mammals, reptiles, amphibians, insects, birds, and
sea creatures. On the other hand, OBJECTS are non-living physical items that can be seen
and touched.”
In Experiment 3B, participants were instructed to press the Z key if the target word
was concrete and the M key if the target was abstract. The following clarification was also
provided: “CONCRETE refers to something that can be seen and touched including objects,
materials, animals, or persons. For example, gorilla and cushion are CONCRETE words.
ABSTRACT refers to something that cannot be experienced by the senses. For
example, reality and justice are ABSTRACT words.” Mapping of response to key was
counterbalanced across participants in both experiments.
Results
Data Preparation and Analysis
Semantic decision accuracy and (log transformed) RT data were analyzed with
(G)LMMs. Trials on which the participant failed to respond, or with outlier RTs (< 250 ms or
> 1989 ms) were discarded (Experiment 3A: 1.32% of trials; Experiment 3B: 1.34% of
trials). The fixed effects of target word frequency (log HAL) and word length were entered as
mean-centered predictors. Stimulus position was coded as a set of four contrasts nested under
stimulus duration: (1) 0° vs. 1°; (2) 1° vs. 2°; (3) Visual field × 0° vs. 1°; and (4) Visual field
× 1° vs. 2°. Random effects are included in Supplementary Materials. Mean semantic
Experiment 3A
Accuracy
The overall effect of stimulus duration was significant with more accurate
performance in the 300 ms versus 100 ms condition.
At 300 ms, performance was close to, or slightly above, 90% accuracy at all positions
and there were no significant effects of eccentricity or visual field.
At 100 ms, accuracy declined significantly between 0° and 1° and between 1° and 2°
eccentricity. However, the significant Visual field × 0° vs. 1° interaction indicated that the
effect of eccentricity at 1° was restricted to the LVF.
RT
The overall effect of stimulus duration on RT was not significant in Experiment 3A.
At both 300 ms and 100 ms, RT increased significantly between 0° and 1° and
between 1° and 2° eccentricity. This increase was more pronounced in the LVF than the RVF
at both durations between 0° and 1° eccentricity.
Experiment 3B
Accuracy
Semantic decision accuracy was significantly higher in the 300 ms versus 100 ms
condition.
At 300 ms, performance was above 90% accuracy at all positions but there was a
significant decline in accuracy between 0º and 1º eccentricity. There were no significant
effects of visual field.
At 100 ms, accuracy was at or above 80% at all positions. Performance declined
significantly between 0° and 1° and between 1° and 2° eccentricity. The Visual field × 0° vs.
1° interaction was also significant, indicating poorer performance for words presented in the
LVF.
RT
Overall RT did not differ significantly between the 300 ms and 100 ms conditions.
At both 300 ms and 100 ms, RT increased significantly between 0° and 1° and
between 1° and 2° eccentricity. There was also a significant RVF advantage at both durations
between 0° and 1° eccentricity.
Discussion
Experiments 3A and 3B demonstrated that semantic processing of words was
surprisingly accurate at all positions. In the 100 ms duration condition, accuracy was close to
or above 80%, even for words presented at 2° to the left of fixation in making either semantic
categorization and concrete/abstract decisions. This level of performance is numerically
higher than that observed for lexical decision in Experiments 2A and 2B, even when
discriminating words from orthographically illegal nonwords in Experiment 2A. Performance
accuracy in Experiments 3A and 3B for eccentric targets is also numerically higher than that
observed for the letter-discrimination task in Experiment 1B. The superior performance in
Experiments 3A and 3B is notable given that, until relatively recently, it was assumed that
readers did not extract semantic information from parafoveal words during reading (see
Schotter et al., 2012), or only did so rarely (Schotter et al., 2014). The results of Experiments
3A and 3B indicate that any limits on the extraction of semantic information from the
parafovea in reading may not be due to eccentricity constraints, per se. Nevertheless, the
overall longer latencies in Experiments 3A and 3B relative to the other tasks reported above
indicates that semantic information is processed more slowly and/or that these tasks involve a
more elaborated decision component.
Despite the overall high level of accuracy in Experiments 3A and 3B, there was clear
evidence of RVF advantage in performance on both tasks. Unexpectedly, the magnitude of
the visual asymmetry in both tasks was similar to that observed in lexical decision in
Experiment 2A, and markedly smaller than that observed in Experiment 2B. Thus, to the
extent that Experiments 3A and 3B required deeper processing to activate semantic
information than was required for lexical decision, this was not reflected in a stronger RVF
advantage. We consider possible reasons for this pattern of results in the General Discussion.
General Discussion
The goal of the present research was to investigate how lexical processing is
constrained by retinal eccentricity in the left and right visual fields. It is known that visual
acuity and visual crowding affect the speed and accuracy of letter and word processing
outside foveal vision (Bouma, 1973; Lee et al., 2003; Legge et al., 2001; Mishkin & Forgays,
1952; Morrison & Rayner, 1981; Rayner & Morrison, 1981). Furthermore, letters and words
are processed more efficiently in the RVF than in the LVF (Ducrot & Grainger, 2007;
Hellige, 1976, 1993; Jordan et al., 2003; Scaltritti et al., 2021). However, methodological
differences between studies and the influence of task demands obscure precise estimates of
the impact of eccentricity on word identification across the visual field.
Across the experiments we observed that both the accuracy and speed of performance
in tasks tapping various components of lexical processing decreased with increasing
eccentricity under brief stimulus presentation conditions in which eye movements were
discouraged. Considering the results of Experiments 1 and 2, the impact of eccentricity was
more pronounced for tasks requiring deeper processing: character detection was fast and
accurate even at 4 degrees eccentricity, whereas letter detection and lexical decision were
more severely impacted outside of foveal vision.
Perhaps the most novel findings of the present study related to the discrepancy
between effects of eccentricity and visual field asymmetry in lexical-decision versus
semantic-decision tasks. The comparison of nonword type in Experiments 2A and 2B
replicated evidence of deeper processing when one-letter-different pseudowords were used
compared to orthographically illegal nonwords on overall accuracy and response latency.
This extended to a stronger effect of eccentricity in Experiment 2B that was restricted to the
LVF, consistent with evidence that deeper linguistic processing is associated with a larger
visual field asymmetry, which has been attributed to hemispheric lateralization of language
areas (Cousin et al., 2006; Hatta, 1986). These findings may at least partly explain the
discrepancy between the lexical-decision results of Rayner and Morrison (1981) and Veldre
et al. (2022) because the former study involved easy lexical discrimination of a small set of
repeated word targets from consonant-string nonwords and the latter study required more
difficult discrimination of words from pseudowords. It was expected that these effects would
be even more pronounced in Experiments 3A and 3B in which participants made semantic
categorization and concrete/abstract semantic decisions, respectively, to the same items.
However, these tasks showed substantially more modest impacts of eccentricity and a smaller
RVF advantage on performance accuracy, but not latency.
A possible explanation for the reduced eccentricity and visual field effects in the
semantic-processing tasks relative to lexical decision is that participants were able to make
semantic decisions using partial orthographic information (extracted from words in eccentric
positions) in combination with knowledge about the two decision categories (i.e., the
superordinate categories or coarse semantic information corresponding to the
concrete/abstract dimension). Such a strategy might account for why the accuracy data in
Experiments 3A and 3B were more similar to Experiment 2A, in which lexical decisions may
have been facilitated by detecting legal/illegal letter clusters in combination with knowledge
about what constitutes orthographically legal letter strings. This strategy would presumably
also require a more extensive decision process that was reflected in overall longer response
latencies relative to the other tasks. Notably, the longer response latencies in Experiments 3A
and 3B compared to Experiments 2A and 2B were uniform across the visual field, suggesting
that it was due to the decision component, rather than the processes involved in extracting
information from the parafovea. Finally, this strategy is compatible with the results of
Experiment 2B; because this experiment presumably required participants to analyze all of
the constituent letters to discriminate words from one-letter-different pseudowords, the
participants should not have been able to compensate for the impact of eccentricity and visual
field by using top-down information. The broader implications of this strategy in relation to
models of reading will now be discussed.
Implications for Models of Reading
The key implication of the aforementioned strategy is that it is seemingly supra-
lexical in nature—it entails the capacity to bring to bear knowledge that is not specific to
individual words to inform binary decisions about letter strings. For example, in the context
of Experiment 2A, participants seemingly used their knowledge of English orthography and
whether or not specific letter strings were orthographically legal to aid their lexical decisions.
Similarly, in Experiments 3A and 3B, participants used semantic information to inform their
decisions about the animacy of words in Experiment 3A and whether the words were
concrete/abstract in Experiment 3B. If this interpretation of our results is correct, then how
might such a supra-lexical strategy be instantiated within a model of reading?
architecture of the interactive-activation model (McClelland & Rumelhart, 1981) and its
progeny (e.g., Coltheart et al., 2001; Davis, 2010; Grainger & Jacobs, 1996; Perry et al.,
2007; Zorzi et al., 1998). These models posit that semantic information is represented outside
of the lexicon; for example, by a layer of semantic nodes connected to orthographic input and
phonological output nodes (see Coltheart et al., 2001, Fig. 7). These nodes might in principle
provide top-down support for particular cohorts of words (e.g., those related to animacy) and
thereby provide a tentative account of supra-lexical strategies. One possible problem with this
simple account is that top-down support for word cohorts would not facilitate the processing
or identification of any given word due to the inhibitory connections between word nodes.
For example, imagine that, in the context of having to decide whether a given word refers to
an animal (as per Experiment 3A), the concept animate partially activates the nodes for the
words fish, cat, and bird. Because this top-down support would presumably be applied in
equal measure to all of the words related to animacy, it would not be expected to reduce the
between-word inhibition among these words nor facilitate decisions about individual words.
Another possible implementation of the supra-lexical strategy can be illustrated in
identification (e.g., Ans et al., 1998; Kwantes, & Mewhort, 1999; Reichle & Perfetti, 2003).
According to these models, each word is represented by instance nodes that encode
individual experiences with the word and feature nodes that represent the features of those
experiences. By this account, the context-specific meanings of words are directly associated
with other types of lexical information, allowing any of a word’s features to be used as a cue
to retrieve its remaining features. Returning to our example of having to decide if a given
word refers to an animal (Experiment 3A), the semantic feature animate in combination with
other features (e.g., some of the word’s letters) would be expected to provide a more effective
retrieval cue than the same letters in isolation, providing a tentative account of supra-lexical
strategies—one consistent with compound cues affording more effective memory retrieval
than a simple cue (e.g., Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984).
Of course, our analysis of these two classes of word-identification models is not
exhaustive and we may have overlooked other possible accounts of supra-lexical strategies.
For example, one of the assumptions of the multiple read-out model (Grainger & Jacobs,
1996), which is an extension of the interactive-activation model (McClelland & Rumelhart,
strategically in the service of making lexical decisions. For example, words having many
lexical neighbors would be expected to activate more word nodes than words having fewer
neighbors, allowing the former to be discriminated from non-words more rapidly than the
latter using relative differences in total word-node activation. Although this type of
assumption might be adapted to allow rapid and/or accurate decisions to be made on the basis
of cohorts of words (e.g., those related to animacy), we suspect that such an account would
require other non-trivial assumptions.
Finally, it is worth noting that our results collectively provide a set of benchmark
findings that should be useful for evaluating and/or calibrating any model of word
identification or eye-movement control in reading. The findings speak to how the speed and
accuracy of lexical processing as measured using six different tasks varies with retinal
eccentricity, the degree to which lexical processing is modulated across the left versus right
visual fields, and is suggestive of the manner in which specific task demands might afford the
use of supra-lexical strategies to enhance task performance. As discussed in the Introduction,
no model of reading currently provides a comprehensive account of these findings. But we
suspect that future modelling efforts will be directed towards such efforts (see e.g., Grainger
et al., 2016).
Implications for Assessing Word Identification Outside the Fovea
The present findings highlight that caution is required when interpreting the results of
studies assessing the visual constraints on letter and word processing. Our experiments
suggest that estimates of the limits of extrafoveal processing are highly dependent on the task
used to assess performance. Tasks that require identification of individual letters, such as
visual span (see Frey & Bosse, 2018), likely underestimate the spatial extent of word
identification, at least relative to tasks that assess the ability to process semantic information
in the parafovea. The evidence that participants were more accurate at making semantic
decisions than identifying individual letters in eccentric words may provide insight into the
time-course of parafoveal processing during reading of connected text. For example,
evidence of early effects of an upcoming word’s plausibility on skipping or first-pass fixation
time (see Andrews & Veldre, 2019) may reflect the fact that readers are able to use
information extracted from the sentence context and prior knowledge together with partial
orthographic information extracted from the parafovea to plan forward eye movements prior
to full lexical retrieval of the upcoming word. This may also partly explain why estimates of
the perceptual span in reading diverge from estimates of the visual span: Readers are able to
use linguistic knowledge and supra-lexical information to extend the region of effective
vision in reading beyond the spatial extent of letter and word identification, which is limited
by factors such as visual acuity and crowding.
Limitations and Future Directions
Although the current experiments provide insight into the visual constraints on lexical
processing, it is important to acknowledge some methodological limitations. First, the
experiments were conducted entirely online, limiting experimental control over participants’
viewing conditions, hardware, operating system, or browser, which all can potentially affect
timing performance. However, recent studies have demonstrated comparable performance in
online and laboratory studies of lateralized word processing (Mills et al., 2022; Parker et al.,
2021; Veldre et al., 2022) and masked priming (Angele et al., 2022), suggesting that online
data collection is suitable for paradigms requiring precise timing.
Our decision to use randomized, uncued presentation of stimuli in either the LVF or
RVF was designed to encourage participants to maintain central fixation at the beginning of
each trial given that we were unable to monitor fixation position. Future research could use a
cued bilateral presentation paradigm, which has been shown to yield stronger effects of visual
field asymmetry (see Hunter & Brysbaert, 2008), to determine whether the effects of task
demands observed in the current experiments generalize to other presentation methods.
Similarly, future research could assess whether backward masking of the stimuli interacts
with stimulus presentation duration or task demands on lexical-processing performance
outside the fovea.
Finally, we will briefly discuss our efforts to provide a computational account of the
effect of eccentricity on word identification. This effort entailed modifying the E-Z Reader
model, replacing its previous assumption that eccentricity simply slows lexical processing
with a more detailed account of how visual acuity and crowding slow the rate of letter and
word processing (Veldre et al., 2022). These modifications did not adversely affect the
model’s capacity to simulate eye movements in reading. But with a few additional
assumptions about how participants make lexical decisions and pronounce words, the
modifications allowed the model to simulate the response latencies and accuracies in tasks
like those reported in this article. The accuracy of these predictions was further enhanced in
versions of the model that allow for delay in the transmission of information between
cerebral hemispheres; with this addition, the model simulated the RVF advantage for word
identification. The main limitation of this new modelling work, however, is shared by
previous versions of E-Z Reader: It only provides a cursory account of lexical and post-
lexical processing. Future work will therefore be directed towards extending the Über-Reader
model (Reichle, 2021) along the lines of what has already been done with E-Z Reader. The
challenge will be to determine if the latter model’s account of eccentricity can be paired with
the former model’s detailed account of word and sentence processing to simulate and explain
the full range of findings reported in this article.
Conclusions
Although models of reading have largely acknowledged the role of eccentricity as
demonstrated by the simple fact that many include some type of assumption that eccentricity
modulates the rate of lexical processing, it is equally clear that these models have also
minimized the importance of eccentricity. This is perhaps best evidenced by the fact that the
models say little about the relative importance of visual acuity versus crowding, or how the
application of lexical or semantic knowledge might modulate the influence of eccentricity, or
how such interactions might differ across the two visual hemifields. We hope that the
experiments reported in this article provide an impetus to redress this oversight by providing
results that are worthy of consideration and simulating. As discussed, our previous efforts to
simulate the effects of eccentricity necessitated significant modifications to the E-Z Reader
model. We suspect that similar efforts using other models will also necessitate modifications
of the models.