Ideological Mind-Shaping or Brain-Shaping:
Fusing Empirical Biopolitics and Political Philosophy of Mind
Leor Zmigrod1
1Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge
This is a preprint of a paper in press at the Journal of Philosophy of Emotion, due to be
published in 2022. For any questions or queries, please contact Dr Leor Zmigrod at
lz343@cam.ac.uk. The paper can be cited as:
Zmigrod, L. (2022). Ideological Mind-Shaping or Brain-Shaping: Fusing Empirical
Biopolitics and Political Philosophy of Mind. Journal of Philosophy of Emotion.
***
“Every relationship of forces constitutes a body – whether it is chemical, biological, social or
political” (Deleuze, 1962/2006, p.37)
***
Introduction
There are two primary philosophical approaches to examining the relationship between human
bodies and political bodies. The first, reflected in traditional political theory on the ‘body
politic’, is concerned with the question of how individuals aggregate into functioning or
malfunctioning collectives – how singular citizen bodies come to constitute wider political
entities. The second approach, maturing later in 20th century social and political philosophy,
considers the opposite relation; instead of evaluating how the body politic emerges from the
bottom-up, it focuses on how bodies become politicized from the top-down. This, more
sociological, perspective explores how human bodies are disciplined and learn to self-
discipline into particular physical forms and functions. Dominant ideologies can infiltrate the
bodies of adherents, and the task of the social critic or political philosopher is to delineate how,
why, where, and when political structures shape the minds and bodies of citizens – as well as
whether the effects are coercive, destructive, or liberatory.
I will argue that a political philosophy of mind cannot flourish without attention to the cognitive
science of ideologies. Until recently there has been little serious dialogue between biology and
political philosophy, partly due to disciplinary balkanization and mostly because of the infancy
of empirical biopolitics, the science of how cognitive and neurobiological processes are molded
by political ideologies. I will suggest that attending to the emerging science of ideological
cognition can allow us to build a stronger, more compelling, and provocative thesis on the
mind-shaping consequences of immersion in ideologies than is possible with conceptual tools
alone.
The argument will proceed as follows. Firstly, I will briefly review how political philosophy
has conceptualized the politicization of bodies and embodiment of ideology. Social theorists,
from Michel Foucault to Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Frantz Fanon, Hannah Arendt to Sally
Haslanger and Victoria McGeer, have argued that ideological discipline and oppression change
human beings through explicit control and self-control as well as through implicit
transformations of self-perception, phenomenology, and moral epistemology. In other words,
ideologies influence social beliefs, agency, and experience in everyday social interactions.
Indeed, ideology is often invoked to explain why individuals often accept and justify – and
sometimes advocate for – unjust social arrangements that can lead to their own oppression
(Bianchin, 2021; Celikates, 2017; Haslanger, 2017; Jaeggi, 2008; Jost, 2020; Piketty, 2020;
Sankaran, 2020; Stanley, 2015). Nevertheless, despite a close attention to embodiment and
mind-shaping processes, these theoretical accounts have largely constrained the origins and
consequences of ideological thinking to the social realm of intersubjectivity. When an
individual navigates the social world, the effects of ideological discipline and oppression
become clear in how they steer and respond to interpersonal relationships, exchanges, and the
negotiation of subjective identity. Sociality and subjectivity are at the heart of these
philosophical accounts. Yet it is also possible that we can observe the constitutive effects of
ideologies on minds and bodies in domains that are not directly concerned with social exchange
or subjectivity.
In The Mind-Body Politic, Maise and Hanna (2019) make essential steps forward by
acknowledging that while political socialization is key, the reverberations of ideologies can go
far into the body and mind, including physical movement, sensation, affective orientation, and
attentional habits. In Maise and Hanna’s account, political philosophy and ideology critique
are merged with an understanding of habits of mind. The Mind-Body Politic emphasizes that
ideological institutions, in particular institutions tinged by neoliberalism, determine beliefs,
behaviors, and self-consciousness in real and literal ways. The effects are not metaphorical –
they can be identified, enumerated, and traced to the physicality of the body. The repetitive
practice of neoliberal habits becomes embodied and embedded.
Firstly, I will argue that neoliberalism may not be an ideal candidate upon which to build an
empirically-grounded political philosophy of mind because, in contrast to other ideological
doctrines, neoliberalism is less tractable to define, measure, analyze comparatively, and
critique. Moreover, I will build upon the Neurocognitive Model of Ideological Thinking
(Zmigrod, 2021) and extend Maise and Hanna’s (2019) Mind-Shaping Thesis to argue that we
can form an even “deeper” thesis about the penetration of ideologies into perception, cognition,
and behavior. Drawing on the latest research in political neuroscience and political psychology,
I will evaluate research demonstrating that ideological doctrines may shape cognitive and
perceptual domains which are principally asocial. The effects of ideological immersion can
cascade into non-political and non-social psychological domains of basic human perception
and cognition. We can observe these consequences empirically; dogmatic adherents to
ideological doctrines respond to neutral perceptual stimuli and decision-making tasks in ways
that are systematically different to moderates and non-ideological citizens. This suggests that
we can postulate a deeper and more mechanistic hypothesis about how ideologies shape the
brains of followers and structure their consciousness, phenomenology, and epistemology.
Politicized Bodies: Biopower, Embodiment, and Phenomenology
To understand the depth and reach of both the Neurocognitive Model of Ideological Thinking
(Zmigrod, 2021) and Maise and Hanna’s Mind-Shaping Thesis, it is necessary to distinguish
these from other claims surrounding the politicization of human minds and bodies. Michel
Foucault coined the term ‘biopower’ to denote the ways in which power by the state and
institutions can regulate life by disciplining bodies in prisons, armies, medical institutions,
factories, and schools. In this “anatomo-politics of the human body” (Foucault, 1978, p.139),
bodies are tactically, gradually, and aggregately trained to maximize social utility and docility.
Deviation is minimized by discipline, punishment, and specific reward structures. Biopower
centres “on the body as a machine: its disciplining, the optimization of its capabilities, the
extortion of its forces, the parallel increase of its usefulness and its docility, its integration into
systems of efficient and economic controls” (Foucault, 1978, p.139). Foucault (1993) observes
that governance translates into self-governance. Coercive techniques to control individuals
cascade into how citizens come to construct and control themselves (i.e. ‘subjectivation’). The
effects of ideological discipline on the human body are therefore tangible and self-reinforcing.
Foucault’s emphasis is on the explicit changes to the exterior physical body that take place
through the internalization of social norms surrounding discipline and docility. So although
biopower reflects ideologies about human bodies, it is a theory that does not attend to the
human brain as such or about what disparate ideologies can do to human brains.
Other philosophical accounts have considered the embodiment of ideology and
phenomenological character of being immersed in an ideologically dogmatic or hostile
environment. This is particularly clear in the misogynistic, racist, ableist, capitalist,
xenophobic, fundamentalist, and heteronormative assumptions of what bodies are expected to
do or look like (e.g. Alcoff, 2006; Bartky, 1990; Haslanger, 2019). At the broadest
interpretation, Merleau-Ponty identified that human beings learn to see and feel, and then come
to adopt sedimented physical and psychological habits that shape and are shaped by social
experiences. He noted in the Phenomenology of Perception: “I am a psychological and
historical structure. Along with existence, I received a way of existing, or a style. All of my
actions and thoughts are related to this structure (Merleau-Ponty, 1945/2012, p.482).
Racialization is one potent instance of ideology, embodiment, and phenomenology coming into
contact. As Frantz Fanon observed in Black Sin, White Masks, “In the white world the man of
color encounters difficulties in the development of his bodily schema… Below the corporeal
schema I had sketched a historical-racial schema” (Fanon, 1967/2008, p.83). Linda Martín
Alcoff elaborated on Merleau-Ponty and Fanon’s ideas to argue that racialization partially
determines our vision and representations of bodies:
“Merleau-Ponty is mainly discussing motor habits of perception and movement used in
performing various operations such as driving or typing, but the concept can easily be
applied to postural attitudes and modes of perception taken in interactions with others
whose identities are marked by gender, race, age, and so on. Following Fanon [1967],
Gordon [1995], and Weiss [1998], I will also argue that racialization structures the
visual sphere and the imaginary self, and can block the development of coherent body
images.” (Alcoff, 2006, p.184)
Alia Al-Saji (2014) extends this to demonstrate how these phenomenological features originate
in – and justify – oppressive ideologies:
“A primary way in which racialization takes hold in lived experience, while remaining
unconscious and invisible, is by means of perception… The seeming naturalness of
perceived “race”-categories works to justify the very racist logic that produced them”
(Al-Saji, 2014, p.137).
The embodiment of ideology, such as racism, is thus tightly linked to our bodily and social
subjectivity and can facilitate the perpetuation of ideological oppression and injustice. In the
spirit of a political philosophy of mind, these theoretical analyses focus on the ways in which
bodies are politicized and shaped by social institutions and prevailing ideologies. Yet the focus
is still bound to the domains of sociality, subjectivity, and intersubjectivity. The claim of The
Mind-Body Politic (Maise & Hanna, 2019) and the Neurocognitive Model of Ideological
Thinking (Zmigrod, 2021) is that ideological institutions and doctrines can shape the minds of
adherents beyond the domains of social perception and self-perception. Ideologies can shape
how adherents perceive any stimuli and respond to any decision context – the psychological
effects are not restricted to the social realm. The thesis is thus “deeper” in the sense that the
ideological penetration of perception and cognition reaches further than most contemporary
philosophical accounts. In addition, this thesis is more “mechanistic” and prone to empirical
inquiry; the natural sciences of biology and neuroscience can examine whether these
phenomena are manifest when using objective scientific assessments. But before we turn to the
experimental evidence, it is essential to identify what counts as a “mind-shaping ideology” and
which ideologies are the best candidates for advancing an empirically-grounded political
philosophy of mind.
Mind-Shaping Ideologies
As evident from its title, Maise and Hanna’s (2019) The Mind-Body Politic implicitly knits
together two old philosophical debates: (1) the mind-body problem, the question of whether
and how mental and physical matter interact, and (2) the concept of the body politic, debates
on the form and function of political entities, including the degree to which these are akin to
biological bodies. These debates are brought together in their Mind-Shaping Thesis, which
postulates that
“All social institutions saliently constrain, frame, and partially determine the social-
dynamic patterns of our essentially embodied consciousness, self-consciousness, affect
(including feelings, desires, and emotions), cognition, and agency – that is, they literally
shape our essentially embodied minds, and thereby fundamentally affect our lives, for
worse or better, mostly without our self-conscious awareness.” (Maise & Hanna, 2019,
p.8)
For Maise and Hanna, it is because we are “social minded human animals” that our minds are
“partially determined, and literally shaped, by the social institutions we belong to, participate
in, or fall under the jurisdiction of, in contemporary neoliberal societies” (2019, p.37). Notably,
they argue that “the mind-shaping here is not just notional or metaphorical; it is literal and
happening literally” (emphasis in original, p.9).
How does the mind-shaping process take place? Maise and Hanna rightly and fruitfully turn to
the psychology of learning and habit-formation. Drawing on Bourdieu’s (1977) concept of
habitus and Proveti’s (2009) work on how “a body is patterned by the social system into which
it is acculturated” (2009, p.32), Maise and Hanna consider how norms become habitualized
and hence embodied, such that “many of the habits developed within social institutions can be
understood as bodily skills” (2019, p.46).
“Cultural expectations solicit certain forms of action and experience, particular
sequences of thought and action become routine, and these habitualized patterns are
ratified and reinforced by way of institutional norms and social approval. Thus, various
aspects of the socio-cultural environment play a crucial role in the formation of an
embodied subject’s characteristic patterns of attention, engagement, and response.”
(Maise & Hanna, 2019, p.54)
Furthermore as Maise (2021) later elaborates,
“Via the entrainment of brain and bodily dynamics and the formation of habits, there is
a genuine sense in which we internalize social influences and norms, so that our living
bodies become “socially saturated” and socio-normatively laden… However, precisely
because the way in which we are socially situated molds the way in which behave and
interpret things, our patterns of action and attention can become overdetermined by
social relations and structures.” (Maise, 2021, p.2)
In demarcating that the mind-shaping process is one of habits of attention, affect, and bodily
movement, Maise and Hanna are delving deeper than many mind-shaping accounts, which are
overly general. The original formulation of mind-shaping by Matteo Mameli defined a
“mindshaping effect [as] an effect on the development or structure of a mind” (Mameli, 2001,
p.608). This definition is fairly shallow from a neurocognitive perspective – it makes no deep
or mechanistic claims about what, other than broad belief or behaviour, is shaped in mind-
shaping:
“The mindshaper interacts with the mindshaped subject on the basis of his beliefs about
the subject. These beliefs may or may not be true. Whether they are true or not, they
have important effects on the interaction between the mindshaper and the target and,
thereby, on the target’s mind. Here is an example. Because of the tacit assumptions
generated by their gender stereotypes, people treat males and females very differently
throughout life. This causes males and females to interact with systematically different
kinds of environmental and social conditions. And these systematic differences cause
systematic differences in the average behavior of males and females.” (Mameli, 2001,
p.614)
In these examples, mind-shaping is reducible to (social) learning and socialization, which is
passed down in ways that shape future generations’ environments. The Mind-Body Politic
demonstrates an awareness that we can be more specific about what is shaped by mind-shaping
ideologies and how this occurs. Yet when it comes to arguing that neoliberal ideologies and
institutions are mind-shaping, the mechanisms of action are not very clear, precise, or
empirically grounded. I argue that such processes can be elucidated if we (1) shift away the
focus from neoliberal ideologies to other ideological doctrines, and (2) rely on the new
empirical biopolitics to delineate mechanisms that are tractable, reasonable, and specific
enough to constitute an explanatory theory.
Tractability of Theoretical, Empirical, and Critical Analysis
Several of the most compelling questions that could be addressed by a political philosophy of
mind include: How do political ideologies transform the cognitive and biological constitution
of their adherents? What (political) force would need to be applied to human brains in order
for such a change to occur? And, notably, in what mental domains would the reverberations of
this force be manifest? In other words, how far into human cognition and perception – and
away from the original domain of politics – can we find the residues of ideological thinking?
One of the challenges of The Mind-Body Politic is that, while it is interested in unpacking some
of these questions, its central focus is neoliberal institutions. I believe that this leads to three
kinds of problems: (1) conceptual, (2) empirical, and (3) critical, that is, in the service of the
aims of social critique.
Firstly, neoliberalism is vaguely defined in terms of Hobbesian liberalism, capitalism, and
technocracy, and institutions are granted a “maximally broad conception” (p.5) which
encompasses almost every kind of social grouping from the family to sports groups to
workplaces to nation-states. Maise and Hanna argue that neoliberalism is so deeply ingrained
in our social fabric, we can barely perceive its contours. Yet this means that, from a
psychological perspective, it is unclear what a “neoliberal mind” looks like. It is ill-defined and
with few comparison points. As I argue elsewhere (Zmigrod, 2022), ideological thinking
necessitates an ideological doctrine – with a set of prescriptive and descriptive beliefs – and a
parochial relational orientation that is strongly favorable to ingroup members and antagonistic
and hostile towards non-believers. It is difficult to definitively identify “neoliberal ideological
thinking”; what is the doctrine and who are its adherents and non-adherents? Ideologies such
as nationalism, social conservatism, or religious ideologies have a more well-defined structure
and psychological character. Hence, from a conceptual perspective, neoliberalism is not an
ideal candidate for tracing the cognitive antecedents and consequences of ideological
institutions.
Secondly, because of neoliberalism’s pervasiveness and embeddedness in modern societies, it
is challenging to envision an empirical study of the cognitive and affective habits of
neoliberalism. Scientific inquiry and analysis require comparison points. These comparison
points can be temporal (before and after a certain condition) or cross-sectional (between case
A and case B). Yet with the embodiment of neoliberalism, there are few identifiable
comparisons. Indeed, Maise and Hanna (2019) note that neoliberal attitudes “have gained such
a strong grip and become so thoroughly internalized that in all likelihood they will continue to
exert a significant residual influence even after someone has subjected them to serious critical
scrutiny” (p.27). It is nearly impossible to empirically study the psychological origins or effects
of an ‘inescapable’ ideology. The most interesting political, philosophical, and psychological
questions rest with ideologies where there is, at least to a certain degree, a “genuine option” in
William James’ (1896) terminology. A “genuine option” exists when (1) there are multiple
plausible options for belief and action, (2) choosing belief or non-belief cannot be avoided, and
(3) the option is momentous such that the stakes are significant and the choice is not easily
reversible (James, 1896). The adoption or rejection of neoliberal ideologies is rarely a “genuine
option” in this regard. As a result, one of the principal limitations, in my view, of The Mind-
Body Politic is that it concerns an ‘ideology’ that is so ubiquitous and institutionalized that, for
most individuals, it is not an ideology that is genuinely chosen or one that individuals (feel)
can be left or moved away from. Neoliberalism is therefore difficult to measure, assess, or
capture in a way that would lend itself towards falsifiable theories. This is a serious limitation.
One may argue that a political philosophy of mind – or any social theory for that matter – does
not to be constrained by empirical science. Some may be broadly opposed to philosophical
naturalism, specifically the notion that where the concerns of science and philosophy overlap,
science should guide or at least constrain philosophical inquiry (Price, 2004). However, mind-
shaping accounts are not merely theoretical – they have practical consequences for ideology
critique (Haslinger, 2020; McGeer, 2020). As Victoria McGeer observes: “it’s only by
understanding how our minds are shaped through enculturation that we can make real progress
in understanding the resilience of practices of injustice (even those that are recognized), as well
as developing better strategies for resisting and remedying them” (2020, p.49). Elucidating
mechanisms, and ensuring that these are consistent with the science of the mind and society, is
key for an emancipatory political philosophy of mind. It unearths the cognitive processes that
perpetuate oppression and allows us to envision antidotes. Furthermore, a noted challenge for
ideology critique is the epistemic positionality of the critic – how can they identify and judge
the nature of the ideology’s oppressions if they are viewing it from inside? Maise and Hanna
reflectively point to the notion that “neoliberal ways of thinking, feeling, speaking, and acting
have become so ingrained that they typically are accepted unreflectively and without question,
even for scholars who have devoted their careers to studying the harmful impact of other toxic
ideologies” (p.27). Examining the mind-body-politic dynamics of ideological doctrines which
are more narrowly defined, as well as less insidious and unavoidable, may bolster the epistemic
capabilities of critics.
In sum, neoliberalism is a suboptimal choice for building a sound political philosophy of mind
from conceptual, empirical, and critical perspectives. In order to evaluate how (and which)
ideologies are brain-shaping in meaningful and dangerous ways, we must complement
philosophical inquiry with empirical biopolitics.
Neurocognitive Model of Ideological Thinking: Mechanisms of Mind-Body-
Politic Interactions
The Neurocognitive Model of Ideological Thinking (Zmigrod, 2021) offers a theoretical
framework for understanding how and why individuals are dragged into, or plunge themselves
toward, toxic ideologies. It begins from the premise that we can outline what constitutes
‘ideological thinking’ by studying the degree to which an ideology is adhered to with epistemic
dogmatism and interpersonal intolerance (Zmigrod, 2022). Notably, being immersed in an
ideology is a more specific phenomenon than mere enculturation. Knowledge of the mental
antecedents and consequences of ideological thinking can be best developed when we can
compare ‘strong’ and ‘weak’ adherents of an ideology or compare the functioning of multiple
ideologies. Individuals are more ideological extreme if they exhibit the characteristics of
epistemic dogmatism and interpersonal intolerance to a greater degree than others, whereas
ideological moderates exhibit receptivity to evidence and a humanism that negates an ‘us’
versus ‘them’ mentality. In other words, regardless of the ideology at hand, ideological thinking
possesses a certain structure than can be identified across different ideologies. Unpacking the
contribution of the substance of an ideology – i.e. its aims and claims – must come after the
structure of the ideology has been mapped. When hegemony eliminates nuance and variation,
it is difficult to conceptually or empirically compare gradients of ideological thinking.
The Neurocognitive Model of Ideological Thinking postulates that there are bidirectional links
between the brain and the ideology it is immersed in. Firstly, there are neurocognitive
antecedents in individuals’ brains that shape their tendencies towards ideological thinking.
Secondly, there can also be neurocognitive consequences to strong immersion in ideological
environments.
This is exemplified and supported by empirical findings that individuals with certain
ideological proclivities are characterized by particular neurocognitive traits. For instance,
individuals who are more ideologically extreme or dogmatic or prone to violent solutions tend
to exhibit cognitive rigidity on neutral neuropsychological tests (Zmigrod, 2020; Zmigrod et
al., 2018, 2019, 2019, 2020). In these tests, participants are responding to changing response
rules, such as sorting a deck of cards according to the colour of the cards, and then the rule
changes; cognitively flexible participants will adapt to the new rule whereas rigid participants
will maladaptively persevere with the previous learned rule. It is striking that cognitive rigidity
on these types of neuropsychological tasks are associated with the degree to which an
individual is ideologically rigid and dogmatic. Two non-exclusive processes may be at play
(Zmigrod, 2021): cognitively rigid individuals may gravitate towards more rigid interpretations
of an ideology (i.e. the mind is antecedent to politics) and/or strong immersion in an ideology
leads to more cognitively rigid minds across psychological domains (i.e. politics precedes the
mind).
Similar patterns of ideology-cognition couplings are evident in other psychological traits. For
instance, Zmigrod and colleagues (2021) gave over 350 participants a large battery of
psychological tests, including behaviourally-assessed cognitive tasks and self-reported
personality surveys, as well as ideological attitudes questionnaires. Through data-driven
approaches, Zmigrod and colleagues (2021) found that resonances between visual perception
and ideology emerged. As part of this study, participants were given perceptual decision-
making tasks, such as tasks that asked them to indicate whether dots on the screen were moving
to the left or to the right. The instructions asked participants to respond as quickly and as
accurately as possible, thus prioritizing both speed and accuracy. Individuals who were most
perceptually cautious on these tasks, meaning that they preferred to respond slowly-but-
accurately rather than quickly-but-erroneously, tended to be more politically conservative
(Zmigrod et al., 2021). Hence, individuals with more conservative and cautious ideologies
displayed more caution even at the level of visual perception (Zmigrod, 2021, 2022, under
review). Phenomenologically, this raises many fascinating questions: do perceptual
preferences for caution yield political preferences for conservatism? Or does the experience of
social conservatism, with its emphasis on tradition in social life, lead to preferences for
conservative strategies even in non-political and non-social domains?
Although disentangling the causal directionality is an important next step (Zmigrod, 2020,
2021, 2022, under review; Zmigrod & Tsakiris, 2021), these empirical results signify that the
depth of ideological mind-shaping may extend beyond purely the social – it may penetrate the
asocial, including cognitive and perceptual architecture. Political philosophy of mind can thus
benefit enormously from these types of empirical elucidations, which help to both constrain
and expand the scope of what the field can hypothesize and which political issues it can speak
to.
Conclusions: Habits of Mind, Ideological Brain-Shaping, and Social Critique
At the core of political philosophy as well as philosophy of mind are questions on what and
who governs us, and what part of ‘us’ is being governed. In The Mind-Body Politic, Maise and
Hanna (2019) build on core work in social theory centring on the role of embodied habits of
mind; because we are habitual creatures, we absorb social norms and ritualize them, and hence
politics becomes patterned into our social habits. Yet the focus of mind-shaping accounts on
broad social norms, culture, and neoliberalism are too vague and neurocognitively shallow to
be empirically tractable or meaningful. Advances in political psychology and neuroscience
illustrate that in fact ideological doctrines may have consequences that extend beyond the social
domain and bleed into the general perceptual and cognitive functioning of adherents (Zmigrod,
2021, 2022, under review). To get at the mechanisms that govern these processes, we may need
to emphasize ideological brain-shaping, as opposed to the fuzzier mind-shaping. It will be
imperative to consult the psychological and neurobiological literature to delineate the processes
and interactions that govern minds and bodies entrenched in (or resisting!) ideological
environments. Hence, it is necessary to fuse empirical biopolitics with the emergent discipline
of political philosophy of mind.
Updating philosophical theories in response to scientific elucidations is not merely
conceptually advantageous – it is necessary for a genuinely emancipatory political theory that
can help instigate change and identify routes to justice and liberation from toxic authoritarian
ideologies. As Jan Slaby (2016) observes, “The question of the constitution of individual
mental capacities is here inseparable from the question of a normatively adequate organization
of socio-political reality at large—where “normatively adequate” here means, at the very least:
worthy of reflective endorsement by those concerned” (p.7). Ideology critique necessitates that
we dissect exactly how ideological doctrines coerce the mind and how cognition mutates under
the seductions of ideological dogmas and groups. Delineating the nature of these
neuropsychological changes, including their longevity, depth, and reversibility, is a task of
urgency both to the psychologist and the philosopher. Resisting ideological oppressions
requires that we grasp how our minds change in response to these coercions, and what feasible,
effective, and ethical antidotes may look like.