SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 1
Supporting Fathers to Prevent Child Maltreatment: How Paid Family Leave and Child
Care Subsidies are Part of a Public Health Approach
Garrett T. Pace1, Joyce Y. Lee2, William Schneider3, and J. Bart Klika4
1School of Social Work, University of Nevada, Las Vegas
2College of Social Work, The Ohio State University
3School of Social Work, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
4Prevent Child Abuse, America
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review but is not the
Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections. The
this Accepted Version is subject to the publisher’s Accepted Manuscript terms of use
Citation: Pace, G. T., Lee, J. Y., Schneider, W., & Klika, J. B. (2022). Supporting Fathers to
Prevent Child Maltreatment: How Paid Family Leave and Child Care Subsidies Are Part of a
Public Health Approach. International Journal on Child Maltreatment, 5(4), 519-539.
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 2
Author Note
On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of
interest.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Garrett T. Pace,
University of Nevada, Las Vegas. Email: garrett.pace@unlv.edu
Acknowledgments
This paper was supported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (#5
R01CE003178-01-02) of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) as part of a
financial assistance award totaling $277,747 with 100 percent funded by CDC/HHS. The
contents are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official views of, nor an
endorsement, by CDC/HHS, or the U.S. Government.
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 3
Abstract
There are multiple components of a public health approach for preventing child
maltreatment. One of these components is the question of who to intervene with. Fathers are an
under-targeted and under-studied group for child maltreatment prevention. In this conceptual
article, we describe a public health approach for intervening with fathers. Acknowledging
financial stress as a key risk factor for child maltreatment among fathers, we explore two policy
interventions that aim to increase economic support for families during the early years of a
child’s life: paid family leave and child care subsidies. During the weeks following the child’s
birth, paid family leave can promote child-father bonding and enable fathers to engage in more
caregiving during a critical family transition. After paid family leave ends, child care subsidies
can make child care affordable for families with low income, thereby promoting parents’
employment and earnings. We conclude by highlighting ways in which fathers can take an active
role in preventing child maltreatment.
Keywords: Child Maltreatment, Child Care Subsidies, Fathers, Paid Family Leave,
Prevention
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 4
Supporting Fathers to Prevent Child Maltreatment: How Paid Family Leave and Child
Care Subsidies are Part of a Public Health Approach
Child maltreatment is a common and complex problem which consists of neglect,
emotional abuse, physical abuse, and sexual abuse. Approximately 12% of children in the United
States have a confirmed report of child maltreatment before the age of 18 (Yi et al., 2020). The
harms of child maltreatment are substantial and include a range of physical and mental health
problems (Leeb et al., 2011). The estimated lifetime economic burden of substantiated child
maltreatment in a single year, based on substantiated cases in 2015, is approximately $428
billion (Peterson et al., 2018). This economic burden is incurred across the health care, child
welfare, criminal legal, and education systems. In order to promote children’s safety and healthy
development, there is urgent need to prevent child maltreatment.
A prominent framework that holds great potential for guiding child maltreatment
prevention is a public health approach (Higgins et al., 2022). This framework acknowledges that
early and widely implemented interventions–especially policy interventions–can prevent child
maltreatment at a population level. One policy intervention is the earned income tax credit,
which has been shown to reduce some forms of child maltreatment (Klevens et al., 2017; Kovski
et al., 2021). Other policies such as paid family leave (Klevens et al., 2016) and child care
subsidies (Maguire-Jack et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Yang & Maguire-Jack, 2016) also have
potential to prevent child maltreatment.
According to Higgins and colleagues (2022), there are six components that must be
considered when implementing a public health approach to prevent child maltreatment. These
components include: (1) what to focus on, (2) who to intervene with, (3) when to intervene, (4)
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 5
the use of evidence-based approaches, (5) where to base the delivery of supports and
interventions, and (6) scaling prevention activities at varying levels of intensity across the entire
population (Higgins et al., 2022). Of these components, the second, who to intervene with, will
be the focus of this paper. We argue that fathers are an important, yet understudied, target
population for the prevention of child abuse and neglect.
Approximately three-fourths of U.S. children live with a biological, adoptive, or step
father. Specifically, in 2021, 70% of children lived with two parents (approximately 0.6% of
children with two parents had same-sex parents), 22% lived with a mother only, 5% lived with a
father only, and 4% lived with other relatives or non-relatives (U.S. Census Bureau, 2020, 2021).
Of those who do not live with a father, most of their fathers are involved in their lives
(Livingston & Parker, 2011). Fathers’ presence and involvement comes with risk of maltreating
their children. In 2020, fathers were documented as being involved in the perpetration of
approximately 44% of confirmed cases of maltreatment. Specifically, 23.6% of maltreatment
cases only involved a father and 20.6% involved both parents (U.S. Department of Health &
Human Services, 2022).
Many decades of research have shown that parent-child attachment and bonding
contribute to positive social and emotional outcomes for children (Ranson & Urichuk, 2008).
While most of this work is focused on mothers, more recent research shows that father-child
attachment and bonding also contribute to positive outcomes for children (Ranson & Urichuk,
2008). Indeed, fathers contribute to children’s physical, cognitive, behavioral, socioemotional
development (Diniz, et al., 2021; Lamb, 2010; Sarkadi et al., 2008). Fathers can also help lower
mothers’ risk for child maltreatment in the form of higher paternal educational attainment,
parental self-efficacy, financial support, and positive involvement with their children (Dubowitz
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 6
et al., 2000; Guterman et al., 2009; Schneider, 2016, 2017). Yet, research suggests there are
longstanding discourses in North America and the United Kingdom about fathers being
irrelevant, irresponsible, or even dangerous (Brown et al., 2009). These discourses contribute to
systemic bias and discrimination against fathers to the detriment of the entire family system—
including children and mothers—because fathers do matter and engaging fathers has the
potential to prevent father-perpetrated violence (Brown et al., 2009; Featherstone & Fraser,
2012). Given the involved (be it positive or adverse) role of fathers in contemporary families,
policy interventions that support fathers hold great potential for preventing child maltreatment.
The purpose of this conceptual article is to explore how fathers are a critical population
within a public health framework for child maltreatment prevention. First, we review key themes
from the literature about the importance of intervening with fathers. Second, we outline a public
health approach to intervening with fathers. Third, we describe two policy interventions—paid
family leave and child care subsidies—which aim to increase economic support for families
during the early years of a child’s life. These two policy interventions have the potential to
prevent father-perpetrated child maltreatment. Finally, drawing upon a strengths-based
perspective, we emphasize the active role fathers can play in child maltreatment prevention.
Why Intervene with Fathers?
Fathers are at risk of child maltreatment perpetration
Fathers are implicated in child maltreatment perpetration (Craig & Mullan, 2011). As
noted above, fathers are responsible for a substantial proportion of confirmed child maltreatment
cases, and they tend to perpetrate more severe types of child maltreatment, such as physical
injuries and homicides (Kajese et al., 2011). However, only a limited literature has focused on
fathers in the perpetration of child maltreatment (Guterman & Lee, 2005; Stith et al., 2009).
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 7
Guterman and Lee (2005) argued that paternal child maltreatment is primarily linked to two
domains: (1) sociodemographic factors, and (2) psychosocial factors. Using Guterman and Lee’s
domains, we briefly review literature regarding fathers’ risk for child maltreatment perpetration,
prioritizing literature that informs our subsequent discussion of paid family leave and child care
subsidies. We consider literature on child maltreatment directly attributable to fathers, as well as
fathers’ role in mothers’ risk for child maltreatment perpetration.
Sociodemographic Factors
Sociodemographics, such as father-child coresidence and fathers’ economic wellbeing,
matter for fathers’ risk of child maltreatment perpetration (Guterman & Lee, 2005). Regarding
coresidence, children often enjoy socioemotional benefits from living with their fathers
(McLanahan et al., 2013). Yet, coresidence is also associated with risk factors for paternal child
maltreatment, particularly physical abuse (Starling, et al., 1995). At the same time, when the
father does not live with the child due to barriers such as incarceration, there is greater risk for
maternal neglect and physical aggression (Dubowitz et al., 2000; S. J. Lee, 2013; Schneider,
2016, 2017; Turney, 2014). Nevertheless, through their financial and non-financial support, non-
resident fathers can buffer single mothers’ risk of maltreating their children (Schneider, 2016,
2017).
Research on economic wellbeing suggests, at the individual level, unemployed fathers are
more likely to physically abuse their children than employed fathers (Jones, 1990; Wolfner &
Gelles, 1993). At the macro level, states with high proportions of unemployed fathers tend to
have higher rates of child maltreatment (Paxson & Waldfogel, 1999). Fathers may also be
vulnerable to macroeconomic shifts, given the strong connection between employment and
fulfilling traditional breadwinning roles (Christiansen & Palkovitz, 2001). For example, in
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 8
California, rising unemployment rates are associated with increased child maltreatment
perpetration among fathers, but not mothers (Lindo et al., 2018).
Fathers’ economic wellbeing may be linked to the likelihood of child maltreatment
through both the ability to provide instrumental support and through psychological pathways.
That is to say, economic precarity may make it difficult for fathers to provide needed resources
for their children and to provide safe and consistent care. In Quebec, fathers report that they are
more likely to engage in neglectful parenting behaviors with their 6-month to 4-year-old children
when they feel stress related to reconciling work and family and when they perceive themselves
as being economically poor (Clément et al., 2016). While economic hardship is a maltreatment
risk factor for mothers as well, research with mothers and fathers from socioeconomically
disadvantaged backgrounds documents that pressures around economic provision may more
negatively affect fathers’ mental health than that of mothers (J. Y. Lee, et al., 2022). Economic
challenges may weigh upon fathers more strongly than mothers. Indeed, loss of work and income
may elicit stress (Pearlin, 1999), perceived loss of status (Madge, 1983), and increased irritability
amongst men (McLoyd, 1990). Thus, unemployment and financial challenges may increase the
likelihood of paternal child abuse and neglect.
Psychosocial Factors
Psychosocial factors such as fathers’ preparedness to be a father, mental health and
substance abuse, and father-mother relationship dynamics are also risk factors for paternal child
maltreatment (Guterman & Lee, 2005). Lack of preparedness for being a father can be both
cognitive and emotional (Cabrera at al., 2000) and manifest as limited patience and knowledge of
children’s development (S. J. Lee et al., 2021; Vally & Hichami, 2020). Fathers’ lack of
preparedness may reflect societal norms regarding gender roles in the family, in which boys may
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 9
not be taught to be caregivers to the extent girls are (Witt, 1997). As a result, fathers may have
limited parenting information and have more rigid and demanding expectations of children,
which may also be linked to increased likelihood of child maltreatment (S. J. Lee et al., 2021;
Pittman & Buckley, 2006). Though the evidence is both limited and mixed, fathers who were
themselves maltreated as children may be less prepared to be parents due to an increased risk of
emotional challenges that make parenting more difficult (Greene, et al., 2020).
Fathers’ mental health and substance abuse are also linked to child maltreatment. While
depressive symptoms are more commonly reported among mothers than fathers, estimates
suggest 2-8% of fathers have significant depressive symptoms in the weeks following the birth of
their child (Glasser & Lerner-Geva, 2019). A systematic review of the literature on parental
mental health during the first year of the child’s life and parental risk behaviors for child
maltreatment (e.g., violent discipline) identified six studies that examined fathers (Ayers et al.,
2019). All six studies found that paternal mental health problems were associated with greater
paternal risk for child maltreatment (Ayers et al., 2019). Indeed, paternal depression negatively
shapes how fathers interact with their children, including less use of parental warmth and greater
use of harsh parenting (Shafer et al., 2019). Substance abuse also undermines fathers’ parenting
abilities (Walsh et al., 2003). To sustain substance abuse behaviors, fathers draw upon—and
sometimes deplete—limited family income and resources. Indeed, men are more likely than
women to use and abuse drugs and alcohol, including illicit drugs (McHugh et al., 2018). Yet,
many fathers face personal, cultural, and institutional barriers to help-seeking, which prevents
them from addressing their mental health and substance abuse challenges (Shafer & Wendt,
2015). In particular, men are often socialized to value independence and self-reliance, as well as
to believe that help-seeking is at odds with these values—a sign of personal weakness (Addis &
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 10
Mahalik, 2003). As a result, most men prefer informal help-seeking (e.g., family, friends,
religious leaders) rather than formal help-seeking (e.g., medical doctors, mental health
professionals) (Wendt & Shafer, 2016). Yet, perhaps half of men with diagnosable mental health
problems receive neither informal nor formal support (Addis & Mahalik, 2003). This leaves
many fathers at risk of untreated mental health problems which can increase the risk of child
abuse and neglect.
The quality of a father’s relationship with the mother of his child also has implications
for the risk for child maltreatment. In particular, research has focused on relationship quality
between unmarried parents (Berger, 2004; J. Y. Lee et al., 2021). This work generally finds that
higher stress and lower coparenting and trust are linked to higher levels of child maltreatment by
both mothers and fathers (Schneider, 2016). For example, lower cooperative parenting between
mothers and fathers, regardless of the fathers’ biological or residential status, increases the risk
of unintentional child injuries which are often due to supervisory neglect (Nepomnyaschy &
Donnelly, 2015). Moreover, some men perpetrate violence against their partners which can
undermine mothers’ caregiving capacity, thereby increasing the risk of child maltreatment
(Eckenrode et al., 2000).
In summary, fathers’ risk of maltreating their children can be explained, in part, by
factors such as father-child coresidence, economic wellbeing, knowledge about parenting and
child development, preparedness to be a father, mental health and substance abuse, and father-
mother relationship dynamics. However, since few interventions designed for fathers exist (J. Y.
Lee et al., 2018), little is known about how best to reduce the influence of these risk factors. Paid
family leave and child care subsidies aim to address a select number of risk factors. While these
policies primarily aim to address risks associated with poor economic wellbeing, these policies
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 11
also have potential to promote positive father-mother relationships and increase fathers’
knowledge about parenting and child development. Importantly, other policies and targeted
practices (e.g., paternal depression screening, domestic violence identification through home
visiting) are needed to more fully address fathers’ risk factors. Indeed, multiple policies and
practices need to be part of a prevention framework (Fortson et al., 2016).
A Public Health Approach to Intervene with Fathers
There is similar yet distinct nomenclature used to describe the activities of public health
prevention. The first is the primary, secondary, and tertiary nomenclature from the field of
public health. These levels help us consider when we intervene—before a problem occurs
(primary), when there is higher risk for a problem (secondary), and after a problem occurs
(tertiary). The Institute of Medicine (1994) promotes a similar prevention conceptualization,
which also includes three levels: universal, selective, and indicated. These levels help us
consider who is targeted—everyone in a population regardless of whether the problem has
occurred (universal), populations at risk of a problem (selected), and populations who either are
at high-risk or are already navigating the problem (indicated). Importantly, primary and universal
prevention strategies, such as policy interventions that reach large segments of the population,
are key to a public health approach for child maltreatment (Higgins, et al., 2022). Child
maltreatment prevention interventions usually focus on one level of prevention but can span
multiple levels. Below, we describe each level (focusing on the shared characteristics of each
level across conceptualizations) and provide examples of interventions targeting fathers. We start
with tertiary prevention because this has historically been the central focus of child maltreatment
prevention efforts, then we describe secondary, and primary levels. After the levels of
prevention, we discuss the six components of a public health approach in relation to paid family
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 12
leave and child care subsidies, and situate paid family leave and child care subsidies as being
part of a set of policies and programs that can help support families during the early years of a
child’s life, thereby reducing the risk of child maltreatment.
Tertiary (or Indicated) interventions aim to prevent child maltreatment in high-risk
situations—especially to prevent further child maltreatment after it has already occurred and to
minimize its consequences. These interventions rely on detection, are intensive, and have a high
cost per person. Child welfare system interventions are generally focused on tertiary
interventions. Child welfare interventions often have more difficulty engaging fathers than
mothers (Maxwell et al., 2012). Some reasons for this include reluctance or difficulty among
fathers to participate in services, the child welfare workforce being largely comprised of women
who may feel more comfortable working with mothers or have a gender bias that women are
solely responsible for their children’s wellbeing rather than fathers also being responsible,
mothers not wanting a father involved, lack of child welfare agency protocols and policies
around engaging fathers (Scourfield, 2014; Swift, 1995; Zanoni et al., 2013). A few interventions
have been developed to address challenges of engaging fathers. One of these is the Caring Dads
program, a group intervention that targets fathers who have perpetrated child maltreatment (Scott
& Crooks, 2007). A recent quasi-experimental study showed that Caring Dads reduced
subsequent referrals of father-perpetrated child maltreatment to child protective services from
36% to 21% during a two-year follow-up period (Scott et al., 2021).
Secondary (or Selected) interventions target larger populations at risk of maltreatment,
have a moderate cost per person, and are moderately intensive. Target populations might include
new parents or parents facing economic hardship. Perinatal home visiting for new parents, when
administered based on risk categorization, is a secondary intervention for new parents. Early
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 13
findings from a randomized control trial of DadsMatter, a home visiting intervention inclusive of
fathers, found that the intervention reduced fathers’ and mothers’ risks for child maltreatment
more strongly than home visiting that did not include a focus on fathers (Guterman, et al., 2018).
Specifically, compared to parents in the control group, parents in the treatment group had lower
partner abuse, parenting stress, and harsh discipline, while their perceived quality of the mother-
father relationship improved—effect sizes were generally moderate to large (Guterman et al.,
2018).
Primary (or Universal) interventions are not risk-based, target an entire population, and
generally have a low cost per person. A primary intervention that targets everyone, including
fathers, is No Hit Zones which involves establishing a policy that no one is allowed to hit each
other within a setting, such as a medical center or a school. A key aim of the intervention is to
change social norms regarding corporal punishment—a risk factor for physical abuse (Gershoff
& Grogan-Kaylor, 2016). Posters and pamphlets explain the policy, and staff in the setting are
trained as bystanders to intervene if hitting occurs. A pre-post study of a hospital-wide No Hit
Zone found that the policy likely established a culture of not tolerating corporal punishment
against children (Gershoff et al., 2018). Primary interventions hold great potential for preventing
child maltreatment, but are underutilized (Higgins et al., 2022).
Primary interventions may be especially important for fathers because there are fewer
barriers to access these interventions. A father does not generally need to attend an intervention
session in order to benefit from a primary intervention. Instead of adjusting a work schedule or
traveling across town on public transit to participate in an intervention, primary interventions can
be integrated into daily life. For example, earned income tax credits, livable minimum wage, and
less punitive child support laws can help provide fathers with a sense of financial security and an
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 14
increased ability to contribute to their children’s material needs. With reduced financial stress,
fathers may have more time to spend with their children and contribute to their positive
development (Christiansen & Palkovitz, 2001).
As previously mentioned, the core components of a public health framework for child
maltreatment prevention include: (1) what to focus on, (2) who to intervene with, (3) when to
intervene, (4) the use of evidence-based approaches, (5) where to base the delivery of supports
and interventions, and (6) scaling prevention activities at varying levels of intensity across the
entire population (Higgins et al., 2022). The main component this paper focuses on is who to
intervene with. Nevertheless, the other components also apply as we consider two policy
interventions—paid family leave and child care subsidies. What these policy interventions focus
on is addressing a financial need for families while also relieving stress and pressure on a father,
freeing up time and emotional energy for attending to the needs of a child during a critical and
sensitive period of development (Maguire-Jack et al., In Press). These policies intervene when
children are young and at greatest risk of maltreatment (U.S. Department of Health & Human
Services, 2022). The evidence-base for these interventions as a means of child maltreatment
prevention is growing. Further, the scaling of the interventions ranges from company policies, to
means-tested government programs, to universal state policies.
child’s life, before they reach school age. The younger a child is, the more vulnerable they are to
maltreatment (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 2022), underscoring the
importance of prevention during these early years. When a child is born, paid family leave, a
universal policy available in some U.S. states, enables mothers and fathers to get paid whilst they
take time off from work during the initial weeks of a child’s life. Then, for families with low
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 15
income and young children, child care subsidies promote parents’ employment and economic
benefits of these two policies in relation to fathers’ risk for child maltreatment. In addition,
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program) that may reduce child maltreatment in similar ways.
The prevention of child maltreatment requires strategies across the prevention continuum
(primary, secondary, tertiary) and across stages of child development. No one single policy will
prevent maltreatment. Instead, we need to create a policy environment that supports caregivers in
their roles by reducing stress. We highlight two policies that, in combination, can prevent
maltreatment and also support child and family wellbeing during a critical and sensitive period of
child development.
Paid Family Leave
What is Paid Family Leave?
Paid family leave is a policy in which a worker is paid some or all of their income while
they take time off work for family-related purposes—most commonly after the birth or adoption
of a child, or to care for an ill family member. The United States does not have a national paid
family leave policy. Thus, paid family leave benefits vary by state and employer. As of January
2022, Washington DC and nine states (California, New Jersey, Rhode Island, New York,
Washington, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Oregon, and Colorado) have enacted paid family leave
laws, which provide between five and twelve weeks of paid leave (Bipartisan Policy Center,
2022). The first state to implement a paid family leave policy was California in 2004, followed
by New Jersey in 2009. To date, there has been a 1-3 year lag between policy enactment and
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 16
implementation. State paid family leave policies are funded through a payroll tax paid by
employees, employers, or both (Bipartisan Policy Center, 2022). The federal government began
providing paid family leave benefits to federal employees as a result of the Federal Employee
Paid Leave Act (FEPLA) in 2019. Federal employees have up to twelve weeks of paid family
leave after the birth or adoption of a child, or foster care placement. Across all states and
employers, in 2021, 23% of U.S. workers had access to paid family leave; however, only 12% of
workers in the bottom fourth of the wage distribution had such access (Bureau of Labor
Statistics, 2021b). Thus, in states without a paid family leave policy, low-income workers are
less likely to have paid family leave benefits.
How Paid Family Leave Matters for Fathers
The birth of a child is a critical transition period for families. While the Family and
Medical Leave Act of 1993 enables parents to take up to twelve weeks of unpaid leave to care
for a newborn, in the absence of paid family leave or other employee benefits (e.g., paid sick
leave or paid vacation), families are at risk of having much lower income in the wake of the
child’s birth. This may be because an employed mother and/or father has no earnings or lower
earnings during this time. Having little-to-no income can contribute to material hardship and
parenting stress. This may partly explain why infants are at greatest risk of maltreatment
compared to children age 1 or older (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 2022). Paid
family leave is a potential policy by which families with an infant can be supported and thus
prevent child maltreatment early on. This not only applies to mothers, but to fathers as well. The
vast majority of fathers are employed (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2021a) and stand to directly
benefit from paid family leave.
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 17
Nearly 90% of employed fathers take time off work after the birth of a child
(Nepomnyaschy & Waldfogel, 2007); yet, their time off is generally short. Among coresident
fathers of children born in 2001—which was before states began enacting paid family leave
policies—24% took less than one week of leave, 43% took one week, and 33% took more than
two weeks (Huerta et al., 2014). Research on the effects of leave on fathers in California
indicates that the state’s paid family leave policy increased the number of fathers who take leave
(Bartel et al., 2018) and increased the duration of leave, though only by an average of two to
three days (Baum II & Ruhm, 2016). Fathers who take only a portion of the paid leave time
available to them may do so because most states’ paid leave policies do not fully replace regular
wages.
For example, in 2022 in New Jersey, workers who take paid family leave receive 85% of
their average weekly pay. So, a father who averages $500 per week in wages will receive $425
per week in paid family leave benefits. The maximum benefit is $993 per week. Thus, a father
whose average weekly wage is $1,142 or higher ($59,381 or more per year) will receive a paid
parental leave benefit less than 85% of their average wage (New Jersey Division of Temporary
Disability and Family Leave Insurance, 2022). Some fathers who are eligible for paid family
leave may forgo the benefit because any reduction in income may not be feasible—especially
since the new child will likely increase household expenses. This concern is reflected in results
from a large non-representative online survey of fathers; 45% of fathers said they would only use
paternity leave if it covered 100% of their income (Harrington et al., 2014). While this
percentage is not generalizable, it is likely that many fathers do not take paid family leave
because of the income reduction. In order to increase uptake, states may need to increase the
wage replacement rate of paid family leave.
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 18
Although a robust literature has demonstrated the importance of paid family leave for
mothers, a limited but growing body of work investigates how leave may influence fathers.
Fathers’ leave taking is associated with increased engagement in parenting (Petts & Knoester,
2018; Pragg & Knoester, 2017; Seward et al., 2002). Thus, leave taking after the birth of a child
may have important links for child-father relationship quality and child development and
wellbeing. Leave taking is associated with children’s positive perceptions of father involvement,
father-child closeness, and father-child communication (Petts et al., 2020). Qualitative interviews
with fathers in Canada and the United States suggest paid family leave not only helps fathers
develop parenting skills but also helps fathers take on parenting responsibilities more equal to
that of mothers (Rehel, 2014). In the United States, leave taking is associated with mothers’
reports of higher coparenting, trust, and paternal responsibility among non-resident fathers
(Pilkauskas & Schneider, 2020). In Norway, paid family leave reduces partner conflicts
regarding the household division of labor, increases fathers’ engagement in household tasks, and
increases fathers’ support for publicly funded child care policy (Kotsadam & Finseraas, 2011).
There are a variety of theories about why paternal leave taking might be associated with
better parental relationship quality, coparenting, and father-child relationship quality. It may be,
for example, that leave taking for fathers reinforces their new identity as a father (Stryker &
Burke, 2000). Father identity may increase the saliency of the fatherhood role, increasing father
involvement in parenting (Pilkauskas & Schneider, 2020; Pragg & Knoester, 2017). Leave taking
may also strengthen father-child attachment, allowing fathers the necessary time to bond with a
new child and potentially improving father-mother relationship quality as fathers share the
responsibility of caring for the child. Indeed, some research indicates that longer leave is
associated with improved parenting and relationship outcomes (Petts et al., 2020).
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 19
While a growing literature examines the influence of family leave on fathers in addition
to mothers, this work has largely focused on investigating associations with paternal relationship
quality, coparenting, and father-child relationship quality. No work to date that we are aware of
has examined associations between family leave policies and child maltreatment specific to
fathers. However, since research indicates paternity leave is associated with improvements in a
range of father-mother and father-child relationship measures that have been linked to the risk
for child maltreatment, it may be that leave-taking policies are also linked to decreased child
maltreatment through similar pathways. It may be, for example, that paid family leave decreases
fathers’ economic precarity, helps improve mother-father relationship quality, and secures
fathers’ role as a father through both father-child bonding and through father’s identity salience.
It is important to note as well that leave policies that increase fathers’ access to mothers
and children may also increase the possibility of paternal maltreatment under certain
circumstances. For example, having a father home more frequently due to paid family leave may
put the infant and/or older children at risk of father-perpetrated maltreatment if the father also
struggles with depression or substance use (Shafer et al., 2019; Walsh et al., 2003). Similarly,
having a father home may increase the risk of father-perpetrated intimate partner violence
against the mother—especially if the father has a substance abuse disorder. Evidence-based
interventions such as individually-tailored home visiting are necessary to assess risk and help
address these circumstances (Eckenrode et al., 2000; Jack et al., 2017). As more states and
localities adopt paid family leave policies, a robust investigation of the policies’ effects on
fathers is needed— especially whether there is an increased risk of child maltreatment and
intimate partner violence under certain circumstances.
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 20
Currently, the duration of paid family leave is 12 weeks or less. When paid family leave
ends, fathers face new challenges returning to the workplace. A key challenge is arranging and
paying for the care and supervision of the child until the child is school-aged. Child care
programs provide this care and supervision. Yet, child care is expensive—especially for families
with low income. Child care subsidies are a policy that can bring child care in reach for
employed parents with low income and provide a continuum of support for families beyond what
paid family leave can provide.
Child Care Subsidies
What are Child Care Subsidies?
Child care subsidies are one of several large programs which help families make child
care arrangements. For example, Head Start and Early Head Start provide free care and early
education from infancy to age 5. Similarly, state-funded pre-kindergarten provides free or low-
cost services for children aged 3 to 5. What differentiates child care subsidies from these
programs is that child care subsidies pay some or all of the cost of child care to child care
providers more broadly, including privately-owned providers. Child care subsidies are funded
through the Child Care Development Fund (CCDF), a federally-sponsored program established
in 1990 (Administration for Children and Families, 2021). The federal government provides
block grants to states, territories, and tribal governments to run their own child care subsidy
programs for families with low income. All states administer child care subsidy programs. In
2018, 1.32 million children received CCDF benefits (Dwyer et al., 2020).
There is great need for child care subsidies given the high cost of child care. In 2020, the
average annual cost of child care for infants was $12,377, ranging from $5,933 in Mississippi to
$24,378 in Washington DC (Child Care Aware of America, 2022). For a 4-year-old, the average
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 21
was $9,715 (Child Care Aware of America, 2022). The high cost of child care is a financial
challenge for families with low-income. For families in households with incomes less than the
federal poverty level who pay for child care, families contribute an average of 30 percent of their
income to child care (Laughlin, 2013). Child care subsidies promote child care affordability
among families who otherwise might not be able to afford it.
Since CCDF is a block grant, states are allowed flexibility in how they administer their
child care subsidy programs. As a result, there is considerable variation across states in the
percentage of eligible children whose families receive child care subsidies. Based on state
eligibility guidelines, in 2016, access ranged from 4% of children in Washington DC to 24% in
Iowa, Nebraska, and Vermont (Ullrich et al., 2019). Much of this variation in eligibility is due to
household income limits. States may use federal block grant funds to provide child care subsidies
for families with household incomes as high as 85% of state median income, regardless of the
number of household members. Yet, only four states (Alaska, Arkansas, California, and Maine)
provide child care subsidies to families with the highest federally allowed income (Prenatal-to-3
Policy Impact Center, 2021). Many states’ median income threshold is much lower. In particular,
18 states have income eligibility limits at 50% or less of state median household income. The
four states with the lowest household median income thresholds are Indiana (41%), Ohio (39%),
Nebraska (38%), and Michigan (37%) (Prenatal-to-3 Policy Impact Center, 2021). Another
source of variation is in regards to copayments. Parents are often required to pay a copayment
while benefiting from child care subsidies, but states have exemption criteria which can reduce
or eliminate the copayment. Some exemptions include being very low income, receiving
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), or being involved in child protective
services (Dwyer et al., 2020).
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 22
How Child Care Subsidies Matter for Fathers and their Risk for Child Maltreatment
Public elementary school is the earliest universal program available in every U.S. state
that provides consistent supervision, care, and education for all eligible-aged children. Before a
child is old enough to enroll in elementary school, parents face a complex landscape of options
to financially provide for their families while also ensuring the safety and care of their children.
In general, mothers face greater barriers to employment than fathers. Compared to mothers
whose youngest child is school-aged, mothers with a child not yet school-aged are less likely to
be employed, while fathers’ employment does not differ as strongly by the age of their youngest
child (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2021a). To ensure children are safe while they work, some
mothers rely on fathers, including non-resident fathers, for the care of children. Around one-
fourth of employed mothers in the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study relied on fathers
as their primary child care arrangement when their child was around age one (Radey & Brewster,
2007). Similarly, close to half of mothers with low income in Wisconsin receive child care from
either non-resident fathers or non-resident fathers’ relatives (Kim & Meyer, 2014).
There are multiple pathways by which access to child care might reduce the risk of
maltreatment for fathers. One of these pathways is that it enables parents to be employed. Work
stress and lack of income are factors linked with fathers' risk of neglectful parenting behaviors
(Clément et al., 2016). Inasmuch as child care promotes employment and earnings, this may be
especially protective for fathers’ maltreatment risk. Child care also provides parents with
consistent breaks from caregiving, which may reduce parenting stress and be especially helpful
when a child has complex caregiving needs (Rosenzweig et al., 2008). Child care can also
promote positive behavioral development among children which can make parenting easier.
These benefits are evident at an early age. Quality child care can promote positive behavioral
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 23
development—albeit small gains—among infants who have difficult temperaments (Pluess &
Belsky, 2009) which may reduce mothers’ risk of maltreatment given mothers’ risk of neglectful
parenting behaviors is higher when their young children have difficult temperaments (Clément et
al., 2016). Similarly, experimental evidence suggests Early Head Start reduces family conflict
and parenting stress and promotes positive parent-child interaction, which, in turn, reduces the
likelihood that mothers and fathers will be investigated for child maltreatment during the first 15
years of a child’s life (Green et al., 2020).
Child care subsidies can bring child care, and its potential child maltreatment prevention
benefits, within reach for many families with low income. For example, in Minnesota, survey
data linked with administrative data on child care subsidy receipt suggests child care subsidies
increase the probability of employment among mothers and fathers with low income, especially
full-time employment (Davis et al., 2018). Thus, child care subsidies have been shown to
promote families’ economic wellbeing. But do child care subsidies help reduce the risk of child
maltreatment, especially among fathers?
To our knowledge, no research has examined the relationship between child care
subsidies and father-perpetrated child maltreatment. In fact, a recent scoping review of several
economic support policies for working parents found only two studies that examined the
relationship between child care subsidies and child maltreatment (Maguire-Jack et al., In Press).
Both studies identified in the scoping review focused solely on mothers. The first study (Yang et
al., 2019) used survey and administrative data for a sample of mothers with low income in
Illinois. The researchers found that receipt of child care subsidies was associated with a lower
likelihood of mothers being investigated by child protective services. In the second study
(Maguire-Jack et al., 2019), the researchers used Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 24
data to examine the cross-sectional relationship between mothers’ receipt of government-funded
child care assistance and the extent to which the mother reported engaging in various measures
of neglect with her 3-year-old child. The sample was limited to mothers who were likely eligible
for child care subsidies in their state of residence. The researchers found that child care
assistance was associated with less supervisory neglect (i.e., leaving the child home alone while
thinking adult supervision was needed).
While child care subsidies may reduce supervisory neglect and child protective services
involvement among mothers, child care subsidies will not be entirely protective for child
maltreatment. Reimbursement rates for child care centers are generally low and are unlikely to
appeal to the highest quality child care providers (Johnson & Ryan, 2015). Thus, child care
subsidies have the potential to result in children receiving low-quality child care, which can
hinder child development and preparedness for kindergarten (Herbst & Tekin, 2010). States with
lower reimbursement rates may need to increase reimbursement rates to ensure child care
subsidies function as a protective factor for child maltreatment.
Despite the current lack of evidence on the effect of child care subsidies on fathers’
maltreatment, the conceptual and theoretical links are well-established. Child care subsidies are a
means by which to support the economic wellbeing of families, thereby reducing the risk of
fathers’ maltreatment.
Fathers Can Take an Active Role in Child Maltreatment Prevention
Early on, we highlighted that fathers are at risk of child maltreatment perpetration and
noted paternal sociodemographic and psychosocial risk factors linked with paternal child
maltreatment. Importantly though, fathers can also take on an active role in preventing child
maltreatment through their financial, educational, psychological, and social resources—many of
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 25
which, as argued throughout this article, would be enhanced and supported via key policies such
as, but not limited to, paid family leave and child care subsidies. While empirical evidence
related to the effect of these policies for fathers’ child maltreatment risk is currently lacking, it is
still worth considering the potential impact these policies could have in encouraging fathers to
proactively prevent child maltreatment across early childhood. For example, with the support of
paid family leave, fathers could spend the early days and weeks of welcoming a new baby by
engaging in caregiving, bonding with their new baby, developing their paternal identity,
attending well-baby visits, and supporting mothers (e.g., recovery from labor, breastfeeding,
emotional and mental support) without worrying about a full loss of income and feeling
pressured to economically provide during an extraordinarily intensive time. That is, by
temporarily replacing fathers’ incomes and reducing the economic burden fathers feel, paid
family leave may allow fathers to focus on being engaged in activities (e.g., caregiving, bonding,
warmth) that are linked with positive outcomes for children (Diniz et al., 2021; Lamb, 2010; S. J.
Lee et al., 2018).
Furthermore, because fathers are afforded the time to invest in their new babies through
direct engagement (without the pressure of financial contributions), they may be more available
and open to parent education, for example in the form of home visitations, that allow them to
proactively prevent child maltreatment risk behaviors (e.g., learning about safe sleep practices,
how to effectively respond to a baby with colic or excessive crying, preventing shaken baby
syndrome, directly communicating with pediatricians around anticipatory guidance) (J. Y. Lee et
al., 2018; S. J. Lee et al., 2021). They may also be more available to engage in interventions to
prevent intimate partner violence and address child maltreatment risk factors such as substance
abuse behaviors. Similarly, by supplementing income by helping pay for child care, child care
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 26
subsidies may help alleviate economic stress fathers (and mothers) feel with the high financial
cost of sending their young children to daycare or preschool. Furthermore, by allowing fathers
(and mothers) to continue to work as they raise their children, child care subsidies likely support
fathers’ abilities to economically provide (and thus fulfill breadwinner roles for many fathers)
and meet their children’s material needs (Christiansen & Palkovitz, 2001). Because economic
precarity is directly linked with paternal mental health problems (e.g., depressive symptoms) (J.
Y. Lee et al., 2022), child care subsidies would also contribute to alleviating fathers’
psychological distress stemming from financial difficulties. Subsequently, this would contribute
to fathers’ improved interparental relationship quality with the mothers (e.g., less destructive
conflict, more supportive coparenting) and ultimately positive parenting toward their children
(e.g., less harsh and more responsive parenting) (Conger et al., 1994; J. Y. Lee et al., 2021;
McLoyd, 1990). That is, child care subsidies would have downstream effects on fathers’
parenting via their mental health and partner relationship quality, supporting fathers to engage in
parenting practices that benefit their children’s wellbeing and prevent child maltreatment.
More frequent contact with child care providers may also enable fathers to acquire
knowledge around how to best support their children’s early development and learning as a way
of preventing child abuse and neglect. For example, in New York City, efforts to provide father-
inclusive behavioral parent education within Head Start—teaching fathers of preschoolers about
alternatives to spanking (e.g., redirecting, explaining, ignoring misbehaviors) among other
positive parenting practices—has led to significantly less harsh discipline and negative parenting
and more positive parenting among fathers (Chacko et al., 2018). This example demonstrates
another way in which child care subsidies could help fathers play an active role in preventing
child abuse and neglect.
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 27
In summary, fathers contribute to their children’s development and wellbeing, including
prevention of maltreatment of their young children. Early childhood is the ideal context to aid in
fathers’ efforts to prevent child abuse and neglect, before it ever happens. Both paid family leave
and child care subsidies have potential to protect young children from abuse and neglect by
supporting fathers’ economic wellbeing, mental health, and relationship quality with mothers and
their children. No single policy will prevent all cases of child maltreatment. Instead, we must
build a robust family supportive policy portfolio to address the concrete and economic
challenges that present barriers for all too many caregivers.
SUPPORTING FATHERS TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT 28