Rhythmic priming of syntactic processing in Jabberwocky: a short-lived effect
1 2 3 1
Dávid György , Douglas Saddy , Sonja A. Kotz , Julie Franck
1 Department of Psychology, University of Geneva, 28 Bd du Pont d’Arve, 1205 Geneva,
Switzerland
2 Centre for Integrative Neuroscience and Neurodynamics, University of Reading, Earley Gate,
Reading RG6 6AL, United Kingdom
3 Maastricht University, Neuropsychology & Psychopharmacology, Universiteitssingel 40,
UNS40 2.748, 6200 MD Maastricht
Manuscript submitted to Language, Cognition and Neuroscience.
Abstract
Converging evidence points towards a link between musical rhythm and linguistic syntax
processing. Several potentially shared cognitive mechanisms and overlapping brain regions
have been proposed to account for these findings. The present study explores the hypothesis
that a domain-general cognitive system responsible for hierarchical structure building
constitutes one such component. In two experiments, French-speaking adults listened to
rhythmically regular, irregular or silent primes before completing a grammaticality judgement
task on Jabberwocky sentences. Both experiments showed a priming effect only in the first
three sentences after priming. Experiment 1 (block design) showed a disadvantage of the
irregular condition compared to both other conditions. Experiment 2 (mixed design) showed an
advantage in the regular condition compared to the irregular condition. Across the two
experiments, grammaticality judgement performance correlated with rhythm discrimination.
These findings provide evidence for a domain-general cognitive network responsible for
hierarchical structure building in rhythm and language processing.
keywords: rhythmic priming, syntax processing, entrainment, hierarchical structure building,
music
Introduction
It has recently been suggested that there are several brain networks and neural mechanisms
common to musical rhythm and speech and language processing. Some of these overlapping
brain regions include networks of cortical regions such as the left inferior frontal gyrus, the left
supplementary motor area, the bilateral insula and subcortical brain regions such as the basal
ganglia and the cerebellum (Fujii & Wan, 2014; Heard & Lee, 2019; Kotz et al., 2014; Kotz &
Schwartze, 2010; Patel & Iversen, 2014; Schwartze & Kotz, 2016; Tierney & Kraus, 2014).
Shared mechanisms include the precise encoding of low-level information in the acoustic
signal, neural oscillations that are able to entrain (become synchronised in frequency, phase, or
both) to external and other internal oscillations, and hierarchical cognitive control (Asano et al.,
2021; Fiveash et al., 2021.; Ladányi et al., 2020).
One important line of research has proposed that musical rhythm and language processing both
involve the internal construction of hierarchical sequences. They can be considered sequences
as they are both ordered collections of elements that unfold over time. They can be considered
hierarchical as both can be represented in a tree-like structure in which lower-level units are
combined into higher-level constituents (Fitch & Martins, 2014). One clear illustration of the
spontaneous tendency to find hierarchical structure in sequential events is the report that, when
hearing a metronome of completely identical tones that contain no acoustic markings of groups
of constituents, typical adults tend to perceive groups of 2 to 8 beats (Poudrier, 2020). Further
evidence supporting this proposal comes from several neuroimaging studies showing neural
tracking of acoustically absent structural (syntactic or prosodic) constituents in language, and
similar entrainment mechanisms to an acoustically missing beat in music (Ding et al., 2016;
Glushko et al., 2020; Kaufeld et al., 2020; Large et al., 2015; Tal et al., 2017). Indeed,
converging evidence points to the existence of a domain-general cognitive system responsible
for coding hierarchical structure (Martins et al., 2017; Martins et al., 2020). The capacity to
create hierarchical representations has been proposed to be especially developed in the human
species. Humans are able to generate hierarchies in a wide range of domains including metrical
(as music and speech both have a metrical structure, we will use the term musical rhythmic
structure to refer to metrical structure specifically in music), linguistic, visual, action, and social
hierarchies (Altmann et al., 2003; Fitch & Friederici, 2012; Fitch & Martins, 2014; Hauser et
al., 2010; Jackendoff, 2009; Martins et al., 2017; Zink et al., 2008).
Recent evidence confirms numerous interactions between language and musical rhythm
processing in typical and atypical populations (see Fiveash et al., 2021; Ladányi et al., 2020 for
recent reviews). Typical preschool children’s ability to synchronise motor production to an
external rhythm seems to be linked to precise neural encoding of the speech syllable envelope
and to predict reading readiness measured by phonological awareness, auditory short-term
memory, as well as rapid object and colour naming (Woodruff Carr et al., 2014). Rhythm
discrimination performance reliably explains morphosyntactic production in 6-year-old
children (Gordon et al., 2015), and correlates with syntactic comprehension in children between
the ages of 7 and 17 (Lee et al., 2020). Children with developmental language disorders often
underperform in rhythm discrimination, rhythm reproduction, tapping to a metronome or
extracting and anticipating the beat of a metronome (Corriveau & Goswami, 2009; Flaugnacco
et al., 2014).
In typical adults, rhythmic proficiency has also been shown to have an effect on speech and
language processing: percussionists, who excel at rhythmic skills even compared to vocalists,
outperform both vocalists and non-musicians in sentence-in-noise perception, but not in words-
in-noise perception. The authors proposed that rhythmic patterns may not only help identify
word boundaries, but also provide cues implying certain grammatical structures (Slater &
Kraus, 2016; Yates et al., 2019). At the brain level, a recent activation likelihood estimate
(ALE) meta-analysis has reported several overlapping brain regions involved in rhythm and
syntax processing, including the left inferior frontal gyrus (pars opercularis), the left
supplementary motor area, as well as the bilateral insula (Heard & Lee, 2019). Furthermore,
patients with lesions or neurodegenerative diseases to the basal ganglia show impaired speech
rhythm production, musical rhythm discrimination and a missing P600, an ERP-response
traditionally associated with syntactic integration (Grahn & Brett, 2009; Osterhout & Holcomb,
1993).
Different types of rhythmic stimulation have been shown to influence language processing in
almost all of these populations. First, superimposing a highly regular (trochaic) speech rhythm
on natural German sentences can facilitate semantic and syntactic integration in typical adults,
as well as restoring the missing P600 in adults with lesions to the basal ganglia (Kotz &
Schmidt-Kassow, 2015; Roncaglia-denissen et al., 2013; Roncaglia-Denissen et al., 2015;
Rothermich et al., 2012; Rothermich & Kotz, 2013). Similarly, priming German-speaking
Parkinson’s patients with a march (but not a waltz) rhythm has also restored a missing P600 in
syntactic integration (Kotz & Gunter, 2015). Second, cueing phrases or sentences with a
rhythmic pattern whose structure matches the stress pattern of the language stimulus has been
shown to lead to enhanced phonological processing in typical adults and more accurate
reproduction of the target sentence in prelingually deaf children with hearing aids compared to
a mismatching cue (Cason, Astésano, et al., 2015; Cason, Hidalgo, et al., 2015; Cason & Schön,
2012). Lastly, exposure to a prime whose underlying musical rhythmic structure is easy to
extract improves syntactic processing compared to an irregular musical prime, environmental
noise, or silence in children with developmental language disorder (DLD), developmental
dyslexia (DD), as well as typically developing children and typical adults in French, English,
and Hungarian (Bedoin et al., 2016; Canette, Bedoin et al., 2020;Canette, Fiveash et al., 2020;
Canette, Lalitte et al., 2020; Chern et al., 2018; Ladányi et al., 2021; Przybylski et al., 2013).
In their original research with children with DLD, DD and typical development, Przybylski and
colleagues (2013) found that all groups performed better in an auditory grammaticality
judgement task in French when presented with rhythmically regular than irregular musical
primes. These results were replicated, albeit with a smaller effect size, when regular primes
were contrasted to rhythmically neutral environmental sound scenes in French children with
DLD and typical controls, suggesting a beneficial effect of regular rhythms (Bedoin et al.,
2016). These findings were later refined in Hungarian-speaking children with DLD and TD
controls, who showed better grammatical judgement performance for rhythmically regular than
irregular primes or a silent baseline (with no difference between the latter conditions, Ladányi
et al., 2021). Interestingly, the rhythmic priming effect seems to be specific to syntactic (or at
least language) processing. No RPE has been found in Math and visuo-spatial control tasks in
TD English children, semantic fluency in TD French children, and a picture naming and a
Stroop task in TD Hungarian children (Canette, Lalitte, et al., 2020; Chern et al., 2018; Ladányi
et al., 2021). In typical adults, rhythmic priming led to an enhanced P600 in response to gender,
number and person agreement violations after a rhythmically regular prime compared to an
irregular prime, and higher grammaticality judgement accuracy (specifically in the second half
of the experiment) in materials containing more subtle morphosyntactic errors such as tense,
mode or preposition errors (Canette, Bedoin et al., 2020; Canette, Fiveash, et al., 2020). To our
knowledge, no experiments on typical adults have included a regular prime, an irregular prime
as well as a baseline condition.
The Present Study
The present study sought to explore the hypothesis that a domain-general cognitive system
responsible for internal abstract hierarchical structure building is recruited by both linguistic
and non-linguistic (musical rhythmic) hierarchical structure processing. We studied two types
of effects in typical adult participants: a short-term rhythmic stimulation effect and longer-term
correlations between rhythm and language processing. Short-term effects of rhythmic
stimulation on syntactic processing were tested using a rhythmic priming paradigm. Under the
hypothesis that a shared cognitive system underlies hierarchical structure building in both the
linguistic and non-linguistic domains, and that this system is activated by the overly explicit
musical rhythmic structure of the regular prime, we expected a regular rhythmic prime with an
easy-to-extract underlying structure to facilitate grammaticality judgements in the subsequent
syntactic task compared to an irregular or a control condition (Prediction 1). Alternatively, it is
also possible that exposure to a rhythmically irregular prime would penalise this system, by
providing inconsistent cues to an underlying musical rhythmic structure or by using up more
shared resources in an attempt to build the musical rhythmic structure of the prime, thus
resulting in lower syntactic performance. To evaluate the direction of the RPE, a silent baseline
condition was also used besides rhythmically regular and irregular musical primes.
To focus on the structural (syntactic) processing of language and reduce lexico-semantic effects
as much as possible, semi-artificial Jabberwocky stimuli were used in which nouns were
replaced by pseudowords, but verbs and grammatical morphemes of natural French were
preserved (Franck & Wagers, 2020). Ungrammatical sentences involved agreement errors,
since the presence of an attractor noun phrase was found to trigger a substantial number of
errors in sentence production, as in ‘The label on the bottles are rusty’ (Bock & Miller, 1991
and much following work). Sensitivity to attraction was also found in sentence comprehension,
where it manifests in terms of a ‘grammatical illusion’, i.e., the illusion that a sentence with an
agreement violation is actually correct in the presence of an attractor matching the verb in terms
of its agreement features (Villata et al., 2018, 2019; Wagers et al., 2009). Importantly,
sensitivity to attraction in agreement processing was found to be modulated by a number of fine
syntactic constraints (Franck et al., 2006, 2010), including in sentence comprehension (Franck
et al., 2015). Moreover, similar factors were found to affect agreement processing in the
comprehension of natural and jabberwocky sentences (Franck & Wagers, 2020). These findings
make attraction in jabberwocky an ideal test case to tap into syntactic processing, while
maximally reducing lexico-semantic effects.
Long-term relationships between rhythm and language were explored through correlations
between grammaticality judgement’s accuracy and behavioural tests of participants’ rhythmic
abilities. Specifically, we measured rhythm and beat discrimination using the rhythm and accent
subtests of the short version of the standardized Profile of Music Perception Skills (PROMS,
Law & Zentner, 2012; Zentner & Strauss, 2017). If a shared cognitive system underlies
hierarchical structure building in both the linguistic and non-linguistic domains, we expect to
find correlations between grammaticality judgements and rhythm and beat discrimination skills.
Moreover, we expect a correlation between participants’ sensitivity to the regularity of the
rhythmic prime in the grammaticality judgement task and their ability to process rhythmic
structures (Prediction 2). Furthermore, selective auditory attention was measured using an
auditory oddball paradigm (Schwartze et al., 2013) in order to evaluate to what extent auditory
attention is involved in the rhythmic priming effect. If rhythmic priming is linked to attention,
we expect to observe a correlation between sensitivity to the regularity of the prime and oddball
performance (Prediction 3).
Prediction 1 was tested in two experiments. In Experiment 1, a block design was used in the
rhythmic priming procedure such that participants would be exposed to one of the prime
rhythms for a prolonged period of time, then to silence, and finally to the other prime rhythm.
This design was chosen under the prediction that prolonged exposure to the same rhythmic
prime would maximise the differences between the prime conditions. Experiment 2 adopted a
mixed design as classically used in the rhythmic priming literature, in which the three prime
conditions continuously alternated (Bedoin et al., 2016; L. Canette, Bedoin et al., 2020; Canette,
Fiveash, et al., 2020; L. H. Canette, Lalitte, et al., 2020; Chern et al., 2018; Ladányi et al., 2021;
Przybylski et al., 2013). As the two experiments are identical apart from this design choice,
Predictions 2 and 3 will be reported using the combined datasets of Experiments 1 and 2.
Experiment 1: Block design
Participants
41 native French-speaking typical adults participated in the experiment. Participants were
between 18 and 33 years old (M = 21.923, SD = 2.938) and reported no history of psychiatric
issues, neurological disorders, specific language impairment, or amusia.
Participants gave informed consent prior to the start of the experiment, were not made aware of
the purpose of the study, and were compensated with either course credits or 20 CHF for their
time. The experiment was approved by the University of Geneva Research Ethics Committee
(PSE.20191004.04).
Materials
Grammaticality judgement (GJ) task
Musical Stimuli: Two 32-second rhythmic primes (1 regular and 1 irregular) from Przybylski
and colleagues (2013)’s study were used. The primes contained the same number of tones and
featured the same percussion instruments (a tam-tam at 175 Hz and a maracas at 466 Hz), but
differed in the extent to which their underlying musical rhythmic structure was easy (regular
prime) or difficult (irregular prime) to extract. In the regular prime, this structure relied on
different temporal constituents of 125ms, 250ms, 500ms and 1000ms, and was reinforced by
the two instruments playing simultaneously on six of the eight beats of the regular pattern. The
irregular prime also contained regular intervals of 125ms, but the occurrence of the percussion
beats and the lack of simultaneously played events made it more difficult to construct a
hierarchical structure. Additionally, a 32-second-long period of silence was generated using
version 3.0.0 of Audacity(R) recording and editing software (Audacity Team, 2021) to serve as
the silence condition.
Linguistic stimuli: A total of 144 Jabberwocky sentences were constructed that were either
grammatically correct (N = 72) or incorrect (N = 72). Sentences of various syntactic structures
were used, including simple subject-verb-object sentences (24), subject relatives (12),
complement clauses (12), common (object-subject-verb) object relatives (72) and object
relatives with stylistic inversion (object-verb-subject) (24). Every sentence contained a verb
and 2 noun phrases (NP), one of which was the grammatical subject of the verb while the other
was an attractor. The two NPs always mismatched in grammatical number such that if the
subject was in the singular, the attractor was in the plural, and vice-versa. Ungrammatical
sentences (50%) always contained a subject-verb number agreement violation where the verb
and ungrammatical sentences of all 5 structures. For a full list of sentences, please refer to
Appendix 1.
In every sentence, pseudo-words were used instead of nouns, but the verbs and grammatical
morphemes of natural French were preserved. All of the pseudowords used were disyllabic,
some were borrowed from Franck & Wagers (2020)’s recent study on agreement attraction,
while others were constructed such that they subscribe to the phonotactic rules of French. To
ensure that the determiner preceding the pseudoword is always pronounced in its full form,
none of the pseudowords were vowel-initial. Masculine (N = 152) and feminine (N = 136)
pseudowords feature final syllables typical of masculine or feminine nouns in French.
Due to the structure of the experimental sentences, 132 out of 144 verbs were transitive. As the
task was presented in the auditory modality, only verbs in which the difference between the
third person plural and third person singular forms is phonologically realised were selected. The
vast majority of our verbs were disyllabic (N = 82) or trisyllabic (N = 37), while the remaining
were monosyllabic (N = 25). Monosyllabic words were not used in object relatives so as to
avoid any comprehension difficulties stemming from a monosyllabic verb following a
pseudoword.
Sentences were recorded with natural prosody by a female native French speaker. Noise
reduction and normalisation were carried out in version 3.0.0 of Audacity(R) recording and
editing software (Audacity Team, 2021).
sentences were presented auditorily after each prime. One miniblock contained a musical prime
(or a 32-second period of silence) followed by 3 grammatical and 3 ungrammatical sentences
in a randomised order. Mini blocks were constructed such that the relative ratio of different
syntactic structures remained the same throughout the experiment. Eight mini blocks with the
same musical prime were grouped into one block. Based on the order of presentation of the
regular and irregular primes, two experimental lists were constructed and administered to two
groups of participants (N = 21 and N = 20), respectively (8 x Regular – 8 x Silence – 8 x
Irregular or 8 x Irregular – 8 x Silence – 8 x Regular, Silence always appearing in the second
block). Participants were instructed to press a response key to indicate, as quickly and
accurately as possible, whether the sentence they heard was grammatical (S) or ungrammatical
(K). This task was built and administered using E-Prime 3.0 software (E-Prime Inc, 2016).
Discrimination sensitivity (d’) was computed as the dependent variable. This measure is based
on the proportion of hits (correct responses for ungrammatical sentences), false alarms
(incorrect responses for grammatical sentences), correct rejections (correct responses for
grammatical sentences) and misses (incorrect responses for ungrammatical sentences). D’ was
calculated as z(p[hits]) – z(p[FAs]), where p[hits] is the proportion of hits and p[FAs] is the
proportion of false alarms. Additionally, a participant-level index of sensitivity to the regularity
of the prime (d’ -d’ ) was calculated for the correlation analyses.
Regular Irregular
Profile of Music Perception Skills (PROMS)
The rhythm and beat (accent) subtests of the short version of the Profile of Music Perception
Skills (PROMS, Law & Zentner, 2012; Zentner & Strauss, 2017) were used to evaluate
participants’ ability to discriminate rhythmic and accent structures. In this task, participants
heard the same rhythmic or accent sequence twice and had to decide whether the third sequence
was identical or different on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from ‘Definitely Same’ to ‘Definitely
different’. A total of 8 rhythm and 10 beat trials were presented as per the standardised short
PROMS test. This task was built and administered using LimeSurvey (LimeSurvey Project
Team / Schmitz, 2015).
Composite scores of the PROMS rhythm subtest and the PROMS beat subtest were calculated
based on the PROMS user guide. A PROMS combined score was obtained by adding up the
two composite scores in accordance with the official PROMS guide.
Auditory Oddball
Auditory attention was measured in an oddball paradigm in which participants heard 512
standard (600Hz) and 128 deviant (660Hz) tones, and were asked to report the number of
deviant tones they heard (67). This task was built and administered using Presentation®
software (Neurobehavioral Systems, 2021).
The dependent variable was precision calculated as the absolute value of the difference between
the participant’s response and 128.
General Procedure
Participants were seated in a sound-isolated booth where they performed the experiment on a
computer and heard the auditory stimuli through headphones. All participants completed the
experimental tasks in the following order: Grammaticality judgement, Auditory Oddball, and
PROMS. Experimental sessions, which included additional tasks which are not under analyses
in this paper, took approximately 60 minutes.
Data analyses
Grammaticality judgement data (d’) was analysed using Linear Mixed Effects Regression
Models in R (R. C. Team, 2018), using the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015). Main effects and
interactions are reported from the anova(model) function, while pairwise comparisons were
realised using the emmeans package.
All models contained Participantas a random effect. As all previous rhythmic studies have
reported a main effect of Prime over all 6 sentences presented after priming, an initial model
with Prime (Regular vs. Silence vs. Irregular) as the only fixed effect and Participant was run
on d’. Given the lack of a priming effect on 6 sentences and following visual inspection of the
data, a more complex model that proved to be a significantly better fit to the data was
constructed in an attempt to more precisely characterise our findings. In Experiment 1, this
model contained Prime (Regular vs. Silence vs. Irregular), Miniblockhalf coding sentences 1-3
and 4-6 after each prime (First vs. Second), and Order referring to the Order in which
participants were exposed to the blocks of 8 identical primes (Regular-Silence-Irregular vs.
Irregular-Silence-Regular).
Mixed models for grammaticality judgement d’ and descriptive statistics for additional tasks
will be reported for Experiments 1 and 2, respectively. As Experiments 1 and 2 are identical
with the exception of the priming paradigm (block design in Experiment 1 and mixed design in
Experiment 2), correlation analyses will be reported for the 2 datasets put together in order to
increase power.
Results
Grammaticality judgement task
All items below chance performance (0.5 accuracy) were removed from analysis. Additionally,
due to low and inconsistent performance as well as feedback from participants that these
sentence structures were very unnatural in spoken French, all object relative sentences with
stylistic inversion were also removed from analysis. Consequently, a total of 118 out of 144
sentences per participant were preserved. Grammaticality judgement performance was
generally high (M = 0.923, SD = 0.267) and its distribution right-skewed. A total of 4 subjects
below 0.7 accuracy were removed. This cut-off point was chosen as it affected very few data
points that were very isolated from the overall distribution after visual inspection of the data.
For d’, the initial model with Prime as the only fixed effect yielded no significant main effect
of the fixed effects of the model.
The model with Prime, Miniblockhalf, Order, and their interactions yielded no significant effect
of Prime (F (2, 175) = 1.467, p = 0.234), a main effect of Miniblockhalf showing higher
performance in sentences 1-3 after a prime than in sentences 4-6 (F (1, 175) = 4.181, p = 0.042),
a significant Prime x Miniblockhalf interaction (F (2, 175) = 6.604, p = 0.002), and a significant
Prime x Order interaction (F (2, 175) = 7.072, p = 0.001). Resolving the Prime x Miniblock
interaction with the Tukey correction showed that in the first Miniblockhalf, d’ in the Irregular
condition was significantly lower than in the Regular (t = 2.521, p = 0.034) and Silence (t =
3.687, p < 0.001) conditions, with no significant differences between the Regular and Silence
conditions (t = -1.166, p = 0.475). In the Second Miniblockhalf, no significant differences were
found between the Prime conditions.
Resolving the Prime x Order interaction with the Tukey correction applied showed significantly
lower d’ after an Irregular prime than after a Regular prime (t = 3.397, p = 0.002) or Silence (t
= 2.757, p = 0.018) in the Irregular-Silence-Regular Order, but no significant differences
between Prime conditions in the Regular-Silence-Irregular Order. Furthermore, participants
that completed the experiment in the Irregular-Silence-Regular Order underperformed those
that completed the Regular-Silence-Irregular Order in the Irregular condition (t = 2.716, p =
0.008), but not after a Regular prime condition (t = -0.851, p = 0.398) or Silence (t = 0.679, p
main effects and interactions obtained using the anova(model) function in R.
(INSERT FIGURES 3 & 4 AND TABLES 4 & 5 HERE)
Profile of Music Perception Skills
PROMS composite scores were normally distributed with no outliers (beat: W = 0.961, p =
0.170, rhythm: W = 0.967, p = 0.266, combined: W = 0.947, p = 0.056). Additionally,
significant positive correlations were observed between PROMS rhythm and PROMS beat
(r(41) = 0.60, p < 0.001), as well as between the combined PROMS score and both sub-tests
(beat: r(41) = 0.881, p < 0.001 , rhythm: r(41) = 0.888, p < 0.001).
Auditory Oddball
In the Auditory Oddball task, two participants with a precision score of over 30 (an extremely
high difference between the participant’s response and the correct number of deviant tones)
were removed from analysis. Additionally, 3 further participants whose precision scores were
over 2 standard deviations above the grand mean were also excluded from the final dataset (M
= 5.630, SD = 5.758).
Discussion
Experiment 1 showed no significant priming effect when looking at all 6 sentences presented
after each prime. Results showed that rhythmic priming can influence subsequent syntactic
processing in Jabberwocky, specifically in the first 3 sentences that follow the rhythmic prime.
This short-lived nature of the rhythmic priming effect contrasts with previous studies on
children (Bedoin et al., 2016; Canette, Lalitte et al., 2020; Chern et al., 2018; Ladányi et al.,
2021; Przybylski et al., 2013) and adults (Canette, Bedoin et al., 2020), which have thus far
reported priming effects spanning across entire miniblocks of 4 or 6 sentences (and have
therefore not reported how the priming effect evolved over the sentences that followed each
prime). Interestingly, unlike previous studies that have used a baseline, the effect did not appear
to be a facilitatory effect of rhythmic regularity: we observed lower performance in the Irregular
condition compared to both the Regular and the Silence conditions rather than an advantage of
the Regular condition over the Irregular prime and the Silent baseline. At least two crucial
differences in population and stimuli can be identified between these studies and the present
study. Experiments showing a beneficial effect of regular rhythmic priming over baseline tested
children processing natural language, while we tested typical adults processing Jabberwocky.
Typical adults could be closer to ceiling in their first language, thus leaving more room for a
penalising effect of the irregular prime and less room for improvement due to regular rhythmic
priming. Reducing lexical semantics by using Jabberwocky may have also changed the
underlying mechanisms of rhythmic priming (see General discussion).
A third potential explanation lies in a confound introduced by the use of a block design. As
reported above, when looking at all 6 sentences, the data showed a difference between the
regular and irregular (and silence) conditions in the Irregular-Silence-Regular order, but not in
the Regular-Silence-Irregular order. Due to the nature of the design, experimental blocks
corresponded to Prime conditions. As such, we could reinterpret this observation by saying that
in the Irregular-Silence-Regular order, performance in Block 1 of the experiment was lower
than that in Blocks 2 and 3. Therefore, lower condition in this first block could be explained by
a penalising effect of the irregular prime, a simple task-learning effect, or a combination of
both. As Silence always appeared in the second block (i.e., never in the first), its position within
our design may have introduced a confound, resulting in inflated performance in the Silence
condition and thus preventing us from reliably comparing all 3 Prime conditions. To explore
this hypothesis, and to rule out the possibility that the block design also played a role in the
short-lived priming effect, Experiment 2 was built in a mixed design, similarly to what is
typically used in that literature. In this design, mini blocks of the 3 different prime conditions
alternated in one of the six possible order combinations, counterbalanced across participants,
such that it would allow us to compare all 3 Prime conditions regardless of the order of
presentation (8 x (Regular-Silence-Irregular), 8 x (Regular-Irregular-Silence), etc.). Experiment
2 was otherwise identical to Experiment 1.
Experiment 2: Mixed design
Participants
Fifty-one native French-speaking typical adults participated in the experiment. Participants
were between 18-42 (M = 25.496, SD = 6.151) years of age and reported no history of
psychiatric issues, neurological disorders, specific language impairment, or amusia.
Participants gave informed consent prior to the start of the experiment, were not made aware of
the purpose of the study, and compensated either course credits or 20 CHF for their time. The
experiment was approved by the University of Geneva Research Ethics Committee
(PSE.20191004.04).
Materials, Procedure and Data analyses
Grammaticality judgement task
Experiment 1, one mini block contained a musical prime (or a 32-second period of silence)
followed by 3 grammatical and 3 ungrammatical sentences in a randomised order. Mini Blocks
were constructed such that the relative ratio of different syntactic structures remained the same
throughout the experiment. Unlike in Experiment 1, 3 mini blocks of the three different prime
conditions were presented in an alternating order, which remained the same throughout the
experiment in a given experimental list. Based on the order of presentation of the prime
conditions (8 x (Regular-Silence-Irregular), 8 x (Regular-Irregular-Silence), 8 x (Irregular-
Regular-Silence), 8 x (Irregular-Silence-Regular), 8 x (Silence-Irregular-Regular), 8 x (Silence-
Regular-Irregular)), six experimental lists were constructed and distributed evenly across
participants.
Experiment 2 was otherwise identical to Experiment 1, using on the tasks (rhythmically primed
grammaticality judgement, auditory oddball, and PROMS the same order.
Data analyses
Like in Experiment 1, all mixed models used to analyse grammaticality judgement d’ contained
Participantas a random effect. As all previous rhythmic studies have reported a main effect of
Prime over all 6 sentences presented after priming, an initial model with Prime (Regular vs.
Silence vs. Irregular) as the only fixed effect and Participantwas run on d’. Given the lack of a
priming effect on 6 sentences and following visual inspection of the data, a more complex
model that proved to be a significantly better fit to the data was constructed in an attempt to
more precisely characterise our findings. In Experiment 2, this model contained Prime (Regular
vs. Silence vs. Irregular) and Miniblockhalf coding sentences 1-3 and 4-6 after each prime (First
vs. Second).
Results
Grammaticality judgement task
All items below chance performance (0.5 accuracy) were removed from analysis. Additionally,
due to low and inconsistent performance as well as feedback from participants that these
sentence structures were very unnatural in spoken French, all object relative sentences with
stylistic inversion were also removed from analysis. A total of 25 out of 144 sentences per
participant were removed. Grammaticality judgement performance was generally high (M =
0.905, SD = 0.292) and its distribution right-skewed. A total of 8 participants below 0.7
accuracy were removed.
The initial model on d’ with Prime as the only fixed effect showed no significant effect of Prime
The model with Prime, Miniblockhalf and their interaction yielded no significant effect of
Prime (F (2, 210) = 1.072, p = 0.344), a significant main effect of Miniblockhalf showing higher
performance in the First than in the second Miniblockhalf (F (1, 706) = 6.593, p = 0.011), and
a significant Prime x Miniblockhalf interaction (F (3, 562) = 6.882, p = 0.001). Post-hoc tests
with the Tukey correction showed that in the first Miniblockhalf, d’ after a Regular prime was
significantly higher than after an Irregular prime (t = 2.806, p = 0.015), with no other significant
differences between the other conditions. In the Second Miniblockhalf, d’ after a Regular prime
was lower than after Silence (t = -2.773, p = 0.001), with no significant differences between the
other conditions. Furthermore, d’ after a Regular prime was significantly higher in the First
Miniblockhalf than in the Second (t = 4.512, p < 0.001), while there were no significant
differences between the First and Second miniblocks in the Irregular (t = -0.031, p = 0.98) and
function in R.
Profile of Music Perception Skills: PROMS composite scores were normally distributed with
no outliers (beat: W = 0.966, p = 0.145, rhythm: W = 0.976, p = 0.392, combined: W = 0.981,
p = 0.578). Additionally, significant positive correlations were observed between PROMS
rhythm and PROMS beat (r(51) = 0.505, p < 0.001), as well as between the combined PROMS
score and both sub-tests (beat: r(51) = 0.876, p < 0.001, rhythm: r(51) = 0.842, p < 0.001).
Auditory oddball: In the Auditory Oddball task, two participants with a precision score of over
30 (an extremely high difference between the participant’s response and the correct number of
deviant tones) were removed from analysis. Additionally, 3 further participants whose precision
scores were over 2 standard deviations above the grand mean were also excluded. This resulted
in a total of 46 participants in the final dataset (M = 6.638, SD = 6.631).
Discussion
Experiment 2 was run to address a potential confound stemming from the block design of
Experiment 1. Results showed 1) that rhythmic priming influenced grammaticality judgement
d’ only in the first 3 sentences after the prime and 2) that in the first 3 sentences, grammaticality
judgement performance higher after a regular prime than after an irregular prime, with the silent
baseline condition not significantly different from either.
Replicating Experiment 1, Experiment 2 showed a significant rhythmic priming effect only in
the first 3 sentences following the prime, but not across all 6. These results are in contrast with
studies reporting a rhythmic priming effect over 6 sentences in children (Bedoin et al., 2016; L.
H. Canette, Lalitte, et al., 2020; Chern et al., 2018; Ladányi et al., 2021; Przybylski et al., 2013)
and adults (L.-H. Canette et al., 2020). At least two key differences can be identified between
the present study and those reporting a rhythmic priming effect over 6 sentences. As discussed
before, one key difference between our study and those reporting a longer-lasting effect is the
use of Jabberwocky. It is possible that reducing lexical semantics may have influenced the
underlying mechanisms of rhythmic priming, thus reducing the duration of the effect. Another
potential explanation may lie in the combination of the population and the material. Canette,
Bedoin and colleagues (2020) reported a behavioural rhythmic priming effect on adults
processing sentences with more subtle morphosyntactic errors, while Canette, Fiveash and
colleagues (2020) found that in simpler sentences featuring subject-verb number agreement
errors, rhythmic priming affects ERP-responses to ungrammatical sentences but not
behavioural data. Both of these points are discussed in greater detail in the General Discussion.
As for the direction of the effect, Experiment 2 showed higher grammaticality judgement d’
after a Regular prime than after an Irregular prime, with Silence not significantly different from
either. On the one hand, this result suggests that the primarily penalising effect observed in
Experiment 1 was indeed due to a confound caused by the block design. On the other hand,
unlike rhythmic priming experiments on children processing natural language sentences that
report an advantage of Regular priming compared to Irregular priming and baseline, the present
study on adults processing Jabberwocky shows that Silence is between the two rhythm
conditions. In other words, it is possible that in adults processing Jabberwocky sentences, the
rhythmic priming effect has two components: a beneficial effect of the Regular prime and a
penalising effect of the Irregular prime. This point is discussed further in the General
Discussion.
Experiments 1 and 2: Correlations between linguistic and non-linguistic measures
Profile of Music Perception Skills: In the complete dataset with no outliers removed, PROMS
composite scores were normally distributed with no outliers (beat: W = 0.977, p = 0.152,
rhythm: W = 0.978, p = 0.192, combined: W = 0.983, p = 0.351).
Auditory oddball: In a total of 72 participants after cleaning, Oddball scores showed a non-
normal distribution (M = 4.528, SD = 3.688, W = 0.735, p < 0.001).
Relationships between our tasks were evaluated through simple Spearman correlation analyses
using the Hmisc package in R (69).
Grammaticality judgement d’ showed a significant positive correlation with PROMS beat (r(80)
= 0.376, p < 0.001), PROMS rhythm (r(80) = 0.268, p = 0.016) and the combined measure
(r(80) = 0.352, p = 0.001). These correlations remained significant when controlling for
auditory selective attention (beat: r(72) = 0.378, p = 0.001, rhythm: r(72) = 0.334, p = 0.004,
combined: r(72) = 0.394, p < 0.001). Looking separately at correlations between rhythmic skills
and GJ performance after a regular and an irregular primes, the correlations between GJ d’ in
the irregular condition and PROMS beat (r(80) = 0.394, p < 0.001), PROMS rhythm (r(80) =
0.374, p < 0.001) and PROMS combined (r(80) = 0.421, p < 0.001) were stronger than those
between GJ d’ after a regular prime (beat: r(80) = 0.305, p = 0.006; rhythm: r(80) = 0.182, p =
0.106; combined: r(80) = 0.273, p = 0.014)). The pattern remained similar after controlling for
auditory attention: rhythmic skills correlated with grammaticality judgement d’ after an
irregular prime (beat: r(72) = 0.413, p < 0.001, rhythm: r(72) = 0.40, p < 0.001, combined: r(72)
= 0.456, p < 0.001), but not after a regular prime (beat: r(72) = 0.165, p = 0.168, rhythm: r(72)
= 0.134, p = 0.265, combined: r(72) = 0.177, p = 0.141). The PROMS rhythm and PROMS
combined scores also showed a trend for a negative correlation with sensitivity to the regularity
of the rhythmic prime: the better participants performed in PROMS rhythm (r(80) = -0.211, p
= 0.060) and combined (r(80) = -0.185, p = 0.1), the weaker the overall priming effect observed.
Similar marginal correlations were observed when controlling for auditory selective attention
(beat: r(72) = -0.204, p = 0.088, rhythm: r(72) = -0.222, p = 0.063, combined: r(72) = -0.229, p
= 0.055).
Oddball scores showed no significant correlations with overall grammaticality judgement d’
(r(72) = -0.045, p = 0.707) or sensitivity to regularity (r(72) = -0.117, p = 0.330). However,
when looking at only the first three sentences after the prime, where both experiments showed
a significant priming effect, results showed that the more attentive participants were in the
Oddball task, the stronger the overall rhythming priming effect was observed (r(72) = -0.256,
p = 0.030). Interestingly, this effect specifically lies in the link between the attentional task and
the regular condition, as indicated by the positive correlation between the Oddball task and d’
after a Regular prime (r(72) = -0.280, p = 0.017), but the lack of correlation after an Irregular
prime (r(72) = 0.097, p = 0.936).
General Discussion
The present study explored the hypothesis that there is a cognitive system responsible for coding
abstract hierarchical structure, which is recruited by both language and musical rhythm
processing (Asano et al., 2021; Fitch & Martins, 2014; Heard & Lee, 2019; Martins et al., 2017).
We conducted two experiments that allowed us to specifically explore three predictions.
According to Prediction 1, exposure to a rhythmically regular musical prime (whose underlying
hierarchical structure is easier to extract) should activate this system, thus facilitating
subsequent syntactic (hierarchical) processing. Alternatively, it is also possible that exposure
to a rhythmically irregular prime would penalise this system, reducing syntactic performance
in the irregular condition. Following Prediction 2, rhythm and beat discrimination skills are
expected to correlate with overall grammaticality judgement performance and sensitivity to the
regularity of the rhythmic prime were expected to correlate. Finally, Prediction 3 was that if the
priming effect is at least partly an attentional effect, there would be a correlation between
participants’ auditory selective attention and their sensitivity to the regularity of the prime. Our
main interpretations of the observations made in the present study are as follows: (1) exposure
to a rhythmically regular musical prime facilitates syntax processing in the three sentences
immediately following the prime (but this effect diminishes in sentences 4-6) and (2) this
facilitation effect correlates with participants’ auditory selective attention. (3) influence from a
rhythmically irregular musical prime hinders subsequent syntactic processing, and (4) this
inhibitory effect of an irregular prime is possibly compensated for by participants’ ability to
extract musical rhythmic structures We will now move on to summarising data points relevant
to these interpretations and discussing them in greater detail.
Duration and direction of the priming effect
Data from both experiments of the present study showed that rhythmic priming can influence
syntactic processing in Jabberwocky sentences, replicating results from natural language
studies (Bedoin et al., 2016; Canette, Bedoin et al., 2020; Przybylski et al., 2013). However, in
both experiments, the observed priming effect was more short-lived than that reported in the
rhythmic priming literature. While priming studies usually report effects throughout all of the
4, 6, or even 10 sentences presented after each prime, our results showed that the effect was
restricted to the first 3 sentences presented after the prime. To our knowledge, the present study
is the first to report on the evolution of the rhythmic priming effect over the 6 sentences
presented after priming.
The results of the block and mixed design experiments differed in the direction of the observed
priming effect. Experiment 1 showed a disadvantage of the irregular condition compared to
both the regular and silence conditions. Experiment 2 showed higher grammaticality judgement
accuracy in the regular than in the irregular condition, with no significant difference between
the baseline and either prime condition. Given that GJ d’ in the baseline condition of
Experiment 2 was right in between the two prime conditions, it suggests that in typical adults
processing Jabberwocky sentences, the rhythmic priming effect is a combination of a
facilitatory effect from the regular prime and a penalising effect of the irregular prime.
These results provide further evidence for a rhythmic priming effect in typical adults, though it
seems that 1) the effect is shorter than the effects reported in earlier studies and 2) the precise
direction of the effect is susceptible to the experimental design. Both of these points are
discussed in greater detail in the sections below.
One key finding of the current study is that rhythmic priming can influence syntactic processing
in Jabberwocky sentences in typical adults, but the duration of the effect appears to be shorter
than the blocks of 6 sentences usually reported in the literature. Importantly, this finding was
replicated in both the block and mixed design experiments, so the choice of design is unlikely
to have influenced this result. In both experiments, this effect boiled down to higher
performance in the Regular condition than in the irregular condition in sentences 1-3, which
was reduced in sentences 4-6. One key difference between the current study and other rhythmic
priming studies is the use of Jabberwocky sentences. Therefore, our finding suggests that it is
possible that by attempting to focus on syntactic processing and reducing lexical semantic
information, it was harder to construct the underlying hierarchical representation of the
sentences. As mentioned before, converging evidence suggests that neural oscillations in
different frequency bands track different levels of hierarchical (covert prosodic or syntactic)
structure even if the speech signal contains no overt acoustic cues to these levels (Ding et al.,
2016; Glushko et al., 2020). Interestingly, one recent Dutch study has shown that neural
entrainment to these constituents is weaker in Jabberwocky than in natural Dutch sentences
(Kaufeld et al., 2020). The shorter rhythmic priming effect reported in the present study may
be another manifestation of the role of semantic information in hierarchical structure building,
under the assumption that a weaker semantic structure provides a weaker ground on which a
regular rhythm can imprint its hierarchical structure.
Alternatively, it may also be argued that the combination of testing a typical adult population
and using highly repetitive subject-verb number agreement errors (as opposed to a combination
of gender assignment, subject-verb number agreement and subject-verb person agreement used
by several studies) has led to higher grammaticality judgement performance. Given the close-
to-ceiling performance, there may have been less room for a priming effect. Indeed, recent
priming studies on adults report no behavioural priming effect when using simple agreement
errors, but they observe a behavioural effect when using more varied morphosyntactic errors
(Canette, Bedoin et al., 2020; Canette, Fiveash, et al., 2020). Nevertheless, grammaticality
judgement performance in both experiments of the current study was generally higher in the
first three sentences than in the last three sentences after each prime. As the observed rhythmic
priming effect in the sentences 1-3 where performance was generally higher, a potential ceiling
effect is unlikely to account for the shortness of the priming effect reported here: if a ceiling
effect was indeed to blame, that would probably manifest in the lack of a priming effect where
overall performance is higher, not where it is lower.
Additionally, while the primes developed by Przybylski and colleagues (2013) have repeatedly
been used to generate a priming effect in typical and atypical children, it is also possible that
the structural difference between the regular and the irregular prime is simply not enough to
influence a fully developed structure processing system. Using primes whose musical rhythmic
structures differ in clear and precise points may help bring further insight to this issue. Recent
studies on children and adults have chosen to use more musical, more varied and multi-layered
primes, creating irregular primes by randomising the order of acoustic events in each layer
(Canette, Bedoin et al., 2020; Canette, Fiveash et al., 2020; Canette, Lalitte et al., 2020).
Introducing precise stepwise changes between the regular and irregular primes used in these
experiments may help uncover what aspect(s) or musical rhythmic regularity contribute to the
rhythmic priming effect.
Shared resources between rhythm and syntax: attention and structure?
In line with Prediction 2 and with previous findings in children (Gordon et al., 2015; Lee et al.,
2020), the present data showed that grammaticality judgement accuracy correlated with rhythm
and beat discrimination in typical adult participants, even after controlling for auditory selective
attention. Additionally, we predicted that sensitivity to the regularity of the prime in the
grammaticality judgement task would show a relationship with participants’ ability to process
musical rhythmic structure. The results showed trends for a lower priming effect the better our
participants were at rhythm and beat discrimination. Looking more closely at the data revealed
that this effect stemmed from a stronger, positive correlation between rhythm and beat
discrimination and grammaticality judgement performance in the irregular condition compared
to the regular condition. In other words, it seems that participants who excel at building musical
rhythmic structure are less disturbed by the presence of the irregular prime in the extraction of
syntactic structure. Interestingly, this data point seems to suggest that, at least in typical adults
processing Jabberwocky sentences, part of the rhythmic priming effect may lie in the penalising
effect of the irregular prime, in line with our finding of a penalising effect in Experiment 1.
Alternatively, it is also possible that as participants who excel building musical rhythmic
structures also perform better at grammaticality judgement to begin with, there is less room for
regular rhythmic stimulation to improve their already high performance. However, as noted
before, a ceiling effect is unlikely to account for the present data as we observe a priming effect
in sentences where performance is higher, not where it is lower. As noted above, it is possible
that the priming effect observed in Experiment 2 is a combination of a facilitatory effect from
the regular prime and a penalising effect of the irregular prime. Therefore, both of these
explanations might contribute to the differences observed between rhythm discrimination
abilities and grammaticality judgement performance following regular and irregular priming,
respectively.
In line with Prediction 3, data showed that in sentences 1-3 after the prime (which is where the
expected priming effect was observed in our data), participants with better selective attention
showed a greater priming effect. Specifically, these participants benefited more from the regular
prime, suggesting that at least part of the priming effect we observed in typical adults processing
Jabberwocky sentences stemmed from a facilitatory effect of regular priming, modulated by
participants’ attentional resources. Taken together, these two data points paint a complex
picture of the effects of rhythmic priming in typical adults processing Jabberwocky sentences:
on the one hand, a regular rhythmic prime seems to improve subsequent syntactic performance,
and this improvement is related to selective auditory attention. On the other hand, irregular
rhythmic priming seems to penalise syntactic performance, but good musical rhythm structure
processing skills are able to compensate for this effect.
A large number of rhythmic priming studies interpret their results within the framework of
Dynamic Attending Theory (Jones & Boltz, 1989; Large & Jones, 1999). DAT proposes that
attention can be described as a system of self-sustaining internal attentional oscillations which
vary in oscillatory phase and period, and which are able to entrain to each other and external
oscillators in the input. These priming papers suggest that entrainment to the musical rhythmic
structure of a regular prime allows orienting attention in time, generating temporal predictions
as to the occurrence of the next event. These predictions would then facilitate the processing,
segmentation, sequencing, and integration of the speech signal. However, in these rhythmic
priming studies and in the present study, there is no direct correspondence between the musical
rhythmic structure of the prime rhythm and that of the language stimuli. Therefore, it seems
unclear precisely how these entrained oscillators would benefit the processing of syntactic
structures in the language stimuli. It is also possible that the rhythmic priming effect is realised
through a cognitive system responsible for the construction of hierarchical structures. This
shared cognitive system might include neurocognitive mechanisms such as hierarchical
cognitive control and hierarchically organised prediction (Asano et al., 2021).
One recently proposed explanation for the facilitatory effect of a regular rhythm is twofold: on
the one hand, a highly regular rhythm makes it possible for highly automatic processes to
construct its metrical representation, thus relieving resources responsible for hierarchical
control and enabling more of these resources to be used during subsequent syntax processing
(Asano et al., 2021). Conversely, if the system is exposed to an irregular prime, purely
automatic structure building processes fail to construct its metrical representation, and fewer
resources will be available to be dedicated to syntactic processing, thus penalising performance.
On the other hand, the highly predictable structure of the regular rhythmic prime could also
actively support syntactic structure building by providing a predictable metrical grid (though
the precise nature of the interplay between a predictable metrical structure and discrete rule-
based predictions syntactic predictions is yet to be fully understood), thus improving syntactic
performance (Asano et al., 2021; Kotz et al., 2009). Regardless of whether a DAT-based
account, hierarchical cognitive control-based explanation or both can provide an adequate
account for rhythmic priming, data from the present study seems to indicate that the rhythmic
priming effect is related to (non-dynamic) auditory attention.
Conclusion
The present study provides evidence that in typical adults processing Jabberwocky sentences,
the rhythmic priming effect consists of at least two components: we observed that (1) exposure
to a rhythmically regular musical prime facilitates subsequent syntax processing over about
three sentences that follow a regular prime (which then diminishes in sentences 4-6), and (2)
this facilitation effect correlates with participants’ attention. Furthermore, (3) influence from a
rhythmically irregular musical prime hinders subsequent syntactic processing, and (4) this
inhibitory effect of an irregular prime is compensated for by participants’ ability to extract
musical rhythmic structures. Further research is necessary to gain more insights into the precise
nature of the priming effect(s) in an attempt to construct a functional framework that adequately
describes all of its dimensions, including the extent to which it is modulated by individual
differences such as (but also beyond) rhythmic abilities and attention.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Teresa Guasti, Mauricio Martins, Daphné Bavelier, Antonella Sorace,
Barbara Tillmann, and Diego Krivochen for their invaluable insight into rhythm processing,
language processing and hierarchical structure building. We would also like to thank Lna Ali,
Fabrice Guibentif, and Marie de Tellier for their work on the materials, data collection and
analysis, as well as their scientific curiosity. This project has received funding from the
European Union's Horizon2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie
Skłodowska Curie grant agreement No 765556.
Disclosure of interest
The authors report no conflict of interest. This project has received funding from the European
Union's Horizon2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska Curie
grant agreement No 765556.