MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 1
Does mindfulness improve intergroup bias, internalized bias, and anti-bias outcomes?
A meta-analysis of the evidence and agenda for future research
Doris F. Chang James Donald
New York University University of Sydney
Jennifer Whitney Iris Yi Miao
Veteran Affairs, Keene Vet Center Medical College of Wisconsin
Baljinder Sahdra
Australian Catholic University
Author Note
Citation: Chang, D.F., Donald, J., Whitney, J., Miao, I.Y., & Sahdra, B. (2023). Does
mindfulness improve intergroup bias, internalized bias, and anti-bias outcomes? A meta-analysis
of the evidence and agenda for future research. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. doi:
10.1177/01461672231178518. Online ahead of print.
The study was preregistered with PROSPERO International Prospective Register of Systematic
Reviews: Chang, D., Sahdra, B., Donald, J., Whitney, J., & Miao, I. (2018). Mindfulness and
intergroup bias: a meta-analytic review. PROSPERO 2018 CRD42018095514 Available from:
codebook, and script used for analyses are available on the Open Science Framework Online
Corresponding Author: Doris F. Chang, Silver School of Social Work, New York University, 1
Washington Square North, New York, NY 10003. Email: dfc276@nyu.edu.
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 2
Abstract
Whereas mindfulness has been shown to enhance personal well-being, studies suggest it
may also benefit intergroup dynamics. Using an integrative conceptual model, this meta-analysis
examined associations between mindfulness and (a) different manifestations of bias
(implicit/explicit attitudes, affect, behavior) directed towards (b) different bias targets (outgroup
or ingroup, e.g., internalized bias), by (c) intergroup orientation (towards bias or anti-bias). Of
70 samples, 42 (N = 3,229) assessed mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs) and 30 (N = 6,002)
were correlational studies. Results showed a medium-sized negative effect of MBIs on bias
outcomes (g = -0.56, CI 95% [-0.72, -0.40]; I(2;3)2: 0.39; 0.48) and a small-to-medium negative
effect between mindfulness and bias for correlational studies (r = -0.17 [-0.27, -0.03]; I(2;3)2:
0.11; 0.83), per Funder and Ozer (2019) and Hedges and Olkin (1985). Effects were comparable
for intergroup bias and internalized bias. We conclude by identifying gaps in the evidence base
to guide future research.
Keywords: mindfulness, bias, prejudice, social justice
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 3
Intergroup bias refers to the systematic tendency to evaluate members of one’s own
group more favorably than members outside of one’s group (Brewer & Brown, 1998; Fiske,
1998; Turner et al., 2001). For those with societal power, intergroup bias provides the moral
justification for perpetuating injustice and inequality, systemic oppression and violence, ethnic
cleansing and genocide (Hewstone & Cairns, 2001). For example, it has been found to contribute
to racial and ethnic disparities across a range of life outcomes including health care quality (Hall
et al., 2015; Williams & Wyatt, 2015), police use of deadly force (Hehman et al., 2018; Ross,
2015), employment decisions (Bertrand & Mullainathan, 2004; Koch et al., 2015), and
disciplinary responses in school settings (Chin et al., 2020; Okonofua & Eberhardt, 2015).
Beyond race and ethnicity, intergroup biases related to gender, social class, disability, body size,
sexual orientation, etc. have also been associated with significant adverse consequences for
marginalized groups (Chrisler & Barney, 2017; Hackett et al., 2020; Lott, 2012; Meyer, 2003;
Watts & Zimmerman, 2002).
Despite this common tendency to draw boundaries between “us” and “them”, many
individuals are also driven by more humanistic values such as prosociality, allyship, and social
justice (Duncan, 2012). Across history, systematic efforts to ostracize, oppress, or aggress
against another group have been met with organized opposition among those who see through
divisive and dehumanizing rhetoric to recognize our shared humanity. Examples include White
activists who opposed apartheid in South Africa; heterosexual allies who campaign for LGBTQ
rights, and the growing, multicultural activist coalitions that have advanced the Black Lives
Matter movement across the world. Recent scholarship describes individual and group-level
predictors and processes by which individuals with relative privilege are motivated to work
towards ending oppression for marginalized groups (Grzanka et al., 2015; Suyemoto &
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 4
Hochman, 2021; van Zomeren et al., 2008). Yet such prosocial intentions may be undermined by
self-serving motives, emotions of fear and shame, and the pull to retreat to comfort rather than
battle the systems that maintain oppression (Radke et al., 2020; Spanierman & Cabrera, 2015).
How can we strengthen this impulse towards communality over division, justice over oppression,
across diverse groups?
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in mindfulness and other contemplative
practices as a pathway to disrupting intergroup bias and promoting more equitable relationships
between groups. Contemporary psychological definitions of mindfulness refer to moment-by-
moment awareness of our bodily sensations, thoughts, feelings, and surrounding environment,
paired with an attitude of openness, curiosity, and nonjudgment (Kabat-Zinn, 2011). Although a
robust body of research (see Brown & Ryan, 2003; Davidson, 2010) has established the benefits
of mindfulness for the individual-- including improvements in mood, stress, emotional self-
regulation, psychological flexibility, and working memory-- mindfulness as originally developed
within Buddhist traditions was aimed at the cultivation of so-called virtuous mental states,
including compassion for others (Condon, 2017).
Indeed, there is accumulating evidence of the interpersonal benefits of mindfulness
(Berry & Brown, 2017; Berry et al., 2020; Condon, 2017). A recent meta-analysis involving 31
studies (N = 17,241) reported that individual differences in mindfulness were associated with
prosocial behavior, and that mindfulness interventions predicted significant increases in helping
behaviors (Donald et al., 2019). Berry et al.’s (2020) more recent meta-analysis found that even
without the inclusion of ethics-based instruction (e.g., lovingkindness, compassion), mindfulness
training alone can promote overt prosocial behavior.
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 5
The application of mindfulness and related contemplative practices to the problem of
intergroup bias is still in the early stage; however, there is emerging evidence that it may be
effective. Oyler, Price-Blackshear, Patscher, and Bettencourt (2022) conducted a systematic
review of the growing research on mindfulness and intergroup bias. They found that across a
diverse pool of 29 studies–which included mindfulness-based interventions, brief mindfulness
inductions, expert meditators, and correlational studies of dispositional traits– the overall average
effect size was g = .29 (k = 36; 95% CI [0.20, 0.39], suggesting a small but significant effect of
mindfulness in improving intergroup bias. Effect sizes were slightly larger for intervention
studies than for correlational studies. While results indicate that mindfulness is a promising
approach to reducing intergroup bias, the largely descriptive focus of the review highlights the
need for a more comprehensive and inclusive conceptual framework to guide research in this
burgeoning field. For example, this study used a limited number of search terms for mindfulness
and intergroup bias constructs, which may inadvertently exclude some studies on related
constructs such as stereotyping, racism, and other specific forms of bias, due to variability in
indexing practices across databases. They also restrict their theoretical focus to studies that
examine bias directed towards outgroup members, not the experiences and outcomes of outgroup
members themselves. Finally, while the authors provided a useful narrative summary of results
by different outcome categories (implicit, behavioral, explicit), they did not separately examine
the effect of mindfulness for these different expressions of bias. Given the urgent need for
effective approaches to address the increasing polarization and intergroup bias that plagues
societies across the globe, the present study seeks to clarify the association between mindfulness
and bias by conducting a broad and inclusive meta-analysis of the quantitative research.
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 6
We present an integrative conceptual model that synthesizes established bias frameworks
along three dimensions: (a) manifestations of bias, specifically implicit attitudes, explicit
attitudes, affect, and behavior, (b) bias target, whether members of an outgroup (bias) or ingroup
model guides our approach to examining mindfulness as both an individual difference factor and
an intervention directed towards different expressions of bias, while extending the scope of
analysis in two key ways to reflect new directions in the science of intergroup bias. First, in
addition to examining bias directed towards outgroup members, we include studies that examine
the internalization of bias among marginalized populations. These studies are important because
they center the experiences of targeted groups (e.g., racial minorities, the mentally ill, LGBTQ
populations) who experience derogation and animus in the broader culture, and examine whether
mindfulness reduces the internalization of negatively biased attitudes directed towards their
group, e.g., internalized bias.
Second, we conceptualize bias as one end of a continuum, the other end being attitudes,
beliefs, and behaviors that reflect and promote greater inclusion, equity, and belonging for
marginalized populations. For example, mindfulness and related contemplative practices have
been applied recently to the cultivation of cultural awareness and anti-oppressive practice,
especially among helping professionals (Hilert & Tirado, 2019; Wong, 2013). Accordingly, we
also include in our review and meta-analysis studies that examine associations between
mindfulness and anti-bias outcomes such as positive emotions towards marginalized groups,
cultural awareness, motivation to respond without prejudice, and altruistic and inclusive
behaviors towards outgroup members (e.g., Ashar et al., 2016; Ivers et al., 2016; Tourek, 2014).
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 7
Guided by our integrative conceptual model, we examine associations between
mindfulness and the cognitive, affective and behavioral dimensions of bias, internalized bias, and
anti-bias. We also examine substantive moderators, including characteristics of the sample, bias
target, study design, and year of publication. Our goal is to summarize and evaluate the relevant
empirical studies in this burgeoning field to provide guidance in the effort to remedy the problem
of intergroup bias and the division, oppression, and violence that often results.
Intergroup Bias
Dovidio and Gaertner (2010) define intergroup bias as “an unfair evaluative, emotional,
cognitive, or behavioral response toward another group in ways that devalue or disadvantage the
other group and its members either directly or indirectly by valuing or privileging members of
one’s own group” (p. 1084). Thus, embedded in the concept of intergroup bias is an ethical
position, specifically that our evaluations and responses towards in-group and out-group
members should be balanced, equitable, and nonharming.
Bias has typically been examined in terms of stereotypes (overgeneralized beliefs),
prejudice (biased attitudes/affect), and discrimination (unfair treatment) (Dovidio & Gaertner,
2010). Stereotypes refer to those qualities, such as social roles and traits, that are perceived to
distinguish particular categories of individuals. When stereotypes are activated, individual group
members are judged by the cognitive representations of that group, which include trait
associations (e.g., Asians are good at math) as well as affective reactions to the group (i.e., low
warmth) (Cuddy et al., 2008). Prejudice refers to biased attitudes, which contain cognitive and
affective elements, as well as behavioral inclinations to respond in particular ways towards an
outgroup (Dovidio & Gaertner, 2010). As prejudice has shifted in modern times to be more
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 8
subtle and less overtly hostile, it may manifest as aversive or avoidant reactions, policy views
that would adversely affect the outgroup (e.g., “colorblind” policies), and implicit associations.
Whereas stereotypes and prejudice are conceptualized as intrapsychic phenomena,
spanning cognitive and affective dimensions, discrimination refers to unfair treatment of
individuals because of their group membership. Discrimination may include direct and indirect
actions that cause harm, including violence, hostility, negligence, and exclusion, as well as less
positive behavior or consideration than would be directed towards an ingroup member. Examples
include failing to help someone in need, devaluing the qualifications of a job candidate, or
ostracizing someone from one’s social network because of their race or some other characteristic.
In their seminal work, Cuddy, Fiske, and Glick (2007) proposed the Behaviors from
Intergroup Affect and Stereotypes (BIAS) map, which models a set of predictable relationships
between cognitive (stereotypes), affective (emotional prejudice) and behavioral (discrimination)
dimensions of bias. Empirical tests of the BIAS map confirm that while both stereotype content
and emotions predict particular behavioral action tendencies, emotions (Esses et al., 1993; Esses
& Dovidio, 2002) mediate the relationship between stereotypes and action tendencies (Bye &
Herrebrøden, 2018; Cuddy et al., 2007). In other words, stereotype content activates certain
emotions, and those emotions lead to certain behavioral tendencies (to actively or passively
facilitate or harm the target group’s goals). These findings are consistent with other studies
suggesting that affect often predicts discriminatory behavior better than stereotypes (e.g., Esses
& Dovidio, 2002; Stangor et al., 1991). Taken together, research confirms the distinctive but
related influence of cognitive and affective dimensions of bias in predicting discriminatory
behaviors, suggesting distinct targets for intervention. For example, given the more direct
influence of emotions on discriminatory behavior, improving emotional self-regulation in
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 9
response to stereotype activation may serve to weaken the emotion-behavior link. While less
closely associated with behavior, cognitive dimensions of bias (e.g., stereotypes, beliefs,
attitudes) also predict discriminatory intentions, creating what Talaksa et al. (2007) propose as a
“conscious ideological system”. Therefore, strengthening self-awareness and cognitive flexibility
also may contribute to decreases in explicit and implicit attitudes and greater behavioral
intentions to challenge bias and discrimination in self and others (Lillis & Hayes, 2007). To
quantify the relative strength of associations with these different bias components, we draw on
the Cuddy et al (2007) BIAS framework to separately explore the effects of mindfulness on the
Effects of Bias on Targeted Groups
Whereas much of the research on intergroup bias focuses on ways to reduce bias among
higher-status groups, less is known about the experiences and impact of bias from the
perspective of the target group members themselves (Fox et al., 2018; Pyke, 2010). The
sociological concept of stigma describes the status loss that occurs when particular individuals or
groups become designated as marked, tainted, or morally polluted as a result of some socially
salient attribute (Goffman, 1963; Link & Phelan, 2001). Examples of stigmatized statuses in
North America include being a member of a racial, ethnic, sexual, gender, or religious minority;
being elderly, overweight, homeless, or having an illness or disability (e.g. mental illness,
HIV/AIDS). Those with the power to define and reinforce ideas of differentness and
abnormality systematize the process of devaluation into norms, practices, and policies (Crocker
et al., 1998; Link & Phelan, 2001). In this way, bias at the interpersonal level is reinforced by
and contributes to systematic bias in the institutions and structures of society, with harmful
consequences for targeted groups.
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 10
For example, chronic exposure to racist stereotypes, prejudice and discrimination is a
feature of everyday life for Black Americans and is associated with low educational
achievement, poverty, poor health, police shootings, incarceration, and decreased life expectancy
(Mesic et al., 2018; Morris & Perry, 2016; Williams et al., 2019). Over time, they may come to
internalize ideas about themselves as inferior and accept racial inequities as deserved (David et
al., 2018; Pyke, 2010), resulting in feelings of self-hatred and shame, devaluation of one’s
culture of origin and idealization of whiteness (Fanon, 1963; Freire, 1970a).
Like bias itself, internalized bias has been operationalized in terms of its cognitive,
affective, and behavioral components. Examples include endorsement of negative attitudes,
beliefs and judgments about one’s own (stigmatized) group; negative affect related to being a
member of the group; stereotype-consistent behaviors, discriminating against members of their
own group, and supporting institutional policies that maintain inequality (Corrigan et al., 2006;
David et al., 2018; Lillis et al., 2010; Steele & Aronson, 1995). However, most studies focus on
its cognitive and affective dimensions. For example, the widely used Weight Bias Internalization
Scale (Durso & Latner, 2008) assesses respondents endorsement of negative views about persons
with overweight and obesity (e.g., “I am less attractive than most other people because of my
weight”). Studies also typically find that while marginalized groups view their own group more
favorably than do dominant groups, they still evidence more positive implicit associations to the
(dominant) outgroup, with some exceptions (e.g., Black Americans) (Nosek et al., 2007).
Although internalized bias is detrimental to the mental and physical well-being of
marginalized groups (Graham et al., 2016; Hatzenbuehler, 2009; Hwang, 2021; Livingston &
Boyd, 2010; Turan et al., 2017), few interventions have been designed specifically to address it.
As research has predominantly focused on reducing intergroup bias and stigma among dominant
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 11
group members (e.g., White college students), centering the experiences of marginalized groups
emphasizes both the deleterious psychological effects of bias and oppression as well as
intragroup efforts to resist, confront, and heal from it (David, 2013; French et al., 2020; Ma et al.,
2019). For these reasons, in the present review and meta-analysis, we broaden our definition of
bias outcomes to include both intergroup bias (directed towards outgroup members) and
internalized bias (directed towards ingroup members), with a shared focus on their cognitive,
From Bias to Anti-Bias
A second distinctive aspect of our approach is to conceptualize bias on a continuum from
bias to anti-bias. This view is consistent with critical race scholars who argue that the antidote to
racism is not simply race-neutrality or colorblindness, but rather anti-racism (Delgado &
Stefancic, 2001; Kendi, 2019). Racial colorblindness, which provides justification for practices
that maintain racial inequities, such as race-blind admissions, police brutality, and housing
discrimination, has been found to be associated with internalized oppression (Neville et al.,
2005) and less engagement in anti-racist actions (Yi et al., 2022). In contrast, an anti-racist
position may include awareness that White supremacy and other systems of oppression shape
individuals’ life outcomes, and behaviors aimed at disrupting racist ideas and policies to promote
racial equity. We extend this basic premise to other forms of bias and anti-bias– including that
related to gender identity, sexual orientation, social class, nativity, ability, body size, religion,
and illness.
For minoritized groups, becoming aware of and resisting biased and inferiorizing
messages from society has been proposed as a crucial component of well-being (David, 2013;
French et al., 2020). The influential Brazilian educator Paulo Friere advanced the concept of
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 12
critical consciousness (CC) or conscientization, which describes the process whereby
marginalized or oppressed groups learn to identify and analyze the structural forces (such as
racism, classism, and sexism) that produce inequitable social conditions (critical reflection) and
take action to change them (critical action) (Freire, 1970b). Resistance to the dominant messages
that normalize one’s subordination provides a pathway to reclaiming one’s humanity and
changing society. Thus, like bias itself, the concept of critical consciousness encompasses
cognitive (awareness), affective (self-compassion), and behavioral (action) components. Among
diverse minoritized groups, critical consciousness has been associated with positive
psychological, educational, and health outcomes and the reduction of negative consequences
associated with oppression (see Jemal, 2017, for a review). Other intervention frameworks for
internalized bias focus on the development of self-love, self-compassion, positive ethnic identity,
and collective resistance (David et al., 2019; French et al., 2020). Therefore, in addition to
examining outcomes related to implicit and explicit cognitions, affect, and behavior regarding
stigmatized groups, we also include studies that target outcomes related to anti-bias/ anti-
intercultural attentiveness, sensitivity, engagement, and respect for cultural differences (Chen,
2000), multicultural counseling competence (Holcomb-McCoy & Day-Vines, 2004), and
prosocial actions to benefit marginalized groups specifically (e.g., Ashar et al., 2016).
Mindfulness
Given the widespread harm that bias causes to marginalized groups, determining how
best to decrease bias and increase anti-bias efforts is a public health priority. In recent years,
researchers have begun to explore the possible benefit of mindfulness for reducing bias and
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 13
promoting anti-bias outcomes. Mindfulness is a term with different meanings in Buddhist and
contemporary contexts, but in a basic sense refers to “a self-regulated attentional stance oriented
towards present-moment experience that is characterized by curiosity, openness, and acceptance”
(Dahl et al., 2015, p. 515). Mindfulness has been operationalized in numerous ways, including as
a) a naturally-occurring dispositional trait (e.g., Baer, Smith, Hopkins, Krietemeyer & Toney,
2006; Brown & Ryan, 2003; Lau et al., 2006), b) an attentional skill, developed through
meditation, of awareness of what is arising moment-to-moment in sensory experience, and c) a
group of meditative practices used to develop a set of skills or qualities to reduce self-processing
biases, reduce suffering, and cultivate a healthy mind (Vago & Silbersweig, 2012).
Most studies applying mindfulness to the problem of bias are informed by Buddhist
philosophical understandings of mindfulness and its cultivation through different forms of
meditation (see Dahl et al., 2015; Lutz et al., 2007). Focused attention (FA) practices involve
training one’s attention on a sensory target (e.g., breath) or other object (Dahl et al., 2015). As
the task requires noticing when one’s mind has wandered, FA practices cultivate attentional
control and self-monitoring skills (Lutz, Slagter, et al., 2008; Vago & Silbersweig, 2012). For
example, in Lueke and Gibson’s (2015) study examining the effects of mindfulness on implicit
age and race bias, participants listened to a 10-minute mindfulness recording that guided them to
become aware of any physical sensations they were experiencing in the present moment and to
accept those sensations without trying to alter, resist, or judge them. A foundational practice, FA
is frequently employed in empirical studies of mindfulness and bias, alone or in combination
with other techniques. Building on the attentional control cultivated by FA practices, open-
monitoring (OM) practices enhance the person’s ability to monitor dimensions of experience
(thoughts, feelings, etc) with less judgment, discernment, or reactivity (Dahl et al., 2015). OM
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 14
practices often begin with FA but then broaden the focus of attention while emphasizing the
monitoring aspect of awareness. For example, the mindfulness condition in Berry et al.’s (2018)
study of prosociality towards ostracized strangers consisted of listening to an 8 ½ -minute
recording of a guided practice to induce a state of attention to moment-to-moment somatic,
cognitive, and emotional experiences (adapted from Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002).
Finally, others have studied the effects of constructive practices, or what Vago and
Silbersweig (2012) refer to as “ethical enhancements” to mindfulness interventions. These
practices typically begin with foundational training in mindful attention and acceptance of
present-moment experience, before advancing to the active cultivation of prosocial emotions,
such as lovingkindness, empathy, and compassion (Dahl et al., 2015; see Galante, Galante,
Bekkers, & Gallacher, 2014, for a review) that may be specifically directed towards marginalized
groups (e.g., Kang, Gray, & Dovidio, 2014). Finally, clinical researchers also have tested the
effects of multi-component mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs), such as adaptations of
Mindfulness-based Stress Reduction (MBSR) and Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT),
that integrate various aspects of mindfulness training with other contemplative, psychological or
relational methods to specifically address intergroup bias and internalized bias (e.g., Lillis &
Hayes, 2007; ) Skinta et al., 2015) Taylor et al., 2016). As applications of MBIs to the problem
of bias are in its early stage, this review includes both types of studies (e.g., ‘mindfulness-only”
and multi-component, ‘mindfulness-plus’ studies), and compares results in moderator analyses to
identify promising areas for future study.
How Mindfulness may Reduce Bias
In Vago and Silbersweig’s (2012) widely-cited integrative conceptual framework,
mindfulness is proposed to reduce biases and distortions in three main ways: by developing
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 15
meta-awareness of one’s moment-to-moment experience without judgment or reactivity (self-
awareness), increasing one’s ability to manage emotions and responses in adaptive ways (self-
regulation), and cultivating a prosocial orientation towards others that transcends personal needs
and desires (self-transcendence). The self-processing focus of their model is supported through
converging evidence of the benefits of mindfulness and its underlying neurobiological
mechanisms (Hölzel et al., 2011). Experimental, phenomenological, and clinical studies on
mindfulness describe a range of cognitive and psychological benefits including improvements in
self-awareness, cognitive flexibility, attentional functioning, emotional and behavioral regulation
(Hodgins & Adair, 2010; Moore & Malinowski, 2009). These outcomes are mirrored by
mindfulness-induced changes in brain regions involved in attention, learning and memory, self-
referential processing, perspective-taking, and emotion regulation (for a review, see Tang et al.,
2015). Beyond the individual mind, brain, and body, mindfulness also has been shown to have
significant interpersonal benefits (Donald et al., 2019; Berry et al., 2020). We predict that these
cognitive, affective, and behavioral benefits of mindfulness will extend to the bias domain to
reduce biases directed towards marginalized outgroup members as well as biases directed
towards the self (internalized bias). This leads to our first prediction:
H1: Mindfulness will be negatively associated with intergroup bias and internalized bias
outcomes.
Links Between Mindfulness and Four Dimensions of Bias
As the effects of mindfulness span cognitive, affective, and interpersonal outcomes, we
predict that mindfulness will decrease bias/increase anti-bias tendencies in the four key
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 16
explicit attitudes, emotions and behaviors (Cuddy et al., 2007).
Implicit Attitudes. A growing number of studies suggest that mindfulness training may
be associated with less implicit bias, frequently assessed using the Implicit Association Test
(IAT). Relational mindfulness practices in particular, such as lovingkindness and compassion
meditation, activate prosocial values and perspective-taking, and may reduce the accessibility of
negative stereotypes activated by implicit measures (Flook et al., 2015; Schonert-Reichl et al.,
2015); Shih, Wang, Trahan Bucher, & Stotzer, 2009). For example, Stell and Farsides (2016)
found that white college students randomly assigned to a 7-minute lovingkindness meditation
(LKM) condition, part of which involved directing lovingkindness towards an image of a Black
stranger, showed lower levels of implicit bias against Blacks relative to a control group. Further,
work by Kang and colleagues suggests that longer periods of LKM practice may produce global
reductions in implicit bias, even when the practice does not specifically focus on the bias target
(Kang, Gray, & Dovidio, 2014; Kang & Falk, 2020).
Other research suggests that the attentional and self-regulatory benefits of mindfulness
may also weaken implicit negative associations to target groups, even without directly targeting
the content of individuals’ biases. Lueke and Gibson (2015) found that a 10-minute mindfulness
intervention that guided participants to be more aware of their bodily sensations and thoughts
was associated with greater decreases in implicit race and age bias compared to an active control.
Separate analyses examining measures of automatic and controlled processing found that this
reduction was the result, in part, of a reduction in the automatic activation of negative
associations with the target group (e.g., Black/bad, old/bad), and not an increase in cognitive
control. However, other correlational and intervention studies find no association between
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 17
mindfulness and implicit bias (i.e., Mann, 2012; Hunsinger et al., 2019; Verhaeghen & Aikman,
2019), underscoring the value of the present review.
Explicit Attitudes. Mindfulness may affect explicit attitudes in a number of ways, for
example by a) increasing awareness of automatically activated biases and prompting the
initiation of self-regulatory processes (Teper et al., 2013), b) facilitating perspective-taking,
which may reduce the endorsement of stereotypes and increase anti-bias commitments (Dovidio
et al., 2004; Shapiro et al., 2006), and c) among marginalized groups in particular, developing
self-compassion and acceptance, which have been recommended as strategies for reducing
internalized bias (Hwang, 2021).
Correlational studies have found a link between mindfulness and explicit attitudes
relating to intergroup bias, internalized bias, and anti-bias attitudes (Gervais & Hoffman, 2013;
Graham, 2013; Salvati, Chiorri, & Baiocco, 2019). In one study, Salvati et al. (2019) found that
mindfulness was associated with less internalized sexual stigma in gay/bisexual men and less
explicit sexual prejudice in heterosexual men, even after controlling for demographic,
psychological, and cultural characteristics. However, other correlational studies find little
support for the association between trait mindfulness and explicit attitudes (e.g., Hasler, 2017;
Platt & Szoka, 2021).
As another explanation, research suggests that mindfulness may counteract basic
processes of social categorization, the main perceptual mechanism through which bias arises and
is maintained (Dovidio & Gaertner, 2010). Specifically, mindfulness training is thought to
increase awareness of and openness to challenging stereotypic assumptions of marginalized
groups as homogeneous, inferior, and “other” (Shapiro et al., 2006), which may produce shifts in
explicit attitudes. Several multi-component mindfulness-based interventions incorporating
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 18
elements such as compassion training (Ashar et al., 2016; Palmeira et al., 2017), socio-emotional
skills development (Berger, Brenick, & Tarrasch, 2018; Berger, Brenick, Lawrence, et al., 2018),
and cognitive defusion techniques (Hayes et al., 2004; Kenny & Bizumic, 2016) have been found
to decrease explicit prejudicial attitudes. Yet, mindfulness interventions have not consistently
produced changes in explicit attitudes (e.g., Masuda et al., 2007). So although there are
compelling explanations for why mindfulness should inhibit explicit attitudes of intergroup bias,
there is a need to assess the extant evidentiary base.
Affect. Intergroup contexts elicit a range of emotions, including fear and anger
(prejudice), shame and self-hatred (internalized bias), and hope and compassion (anti-bias)
(David et al., 2019; Fiske et al., 2002; Spanierman & Cabrera, 2015). As mindfulness is
associated with improvements in emotional self-regulation, mindfulness training may help
individuals to manage the stresses of intergroup contact and elicit more positive, inclusive
emotions (Richeson & Shelton, 2003; Stephan & Stephan, 1985)
Mindfully attending to emotional states allows the individual to learn that emotions are
dynamic and fleeting, and thus that emotions do not need to be feared or avoided (Shapiro et al.,
2006). This cognitive process of decentering reduces reactivity and likely contributes to the
effectiveness of MBIs such as MBSR in reducing depression and anxiety in clinical and
nonclinical samples (Gotink et al., 2015; Hofmann et al., 2010). Thus, a mindful attitude of
nonjudgment, openness and curiosity may reduce the ambivalence and anxiety that is
characteristic of modern forms of bias (Bishop, 2004; Dovidio & Gaertner, 2004; Lau et al.,
2006), including internalized bias among marginalized group members (Luoma & Platt, 2015;
Luoma et al., 2012).
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 19
In addition to reducing negative affect, mindfulness is also associated with increases in
positive affect (Jha et al., 2010; Luoma et al., 2012; Lutz et al., 2013). Lovingkindness
meditation (LKM) in particular has been found to promote positive emotions and prosociality
(Zeng et al., 2015), via activation of brain regions involved in emotion processing and empathy
(Lutz, Brefczynski-Lewis, et al., 2008). Fredrickson et al. (2008) found that 7-weeks of training
in LKM significantly increased positive emotions (i.e., joy, amusement, pride, love, awe, hope)
and greater self-acceptance, social support received, and positive relations with others.
Behavior. Mindfulness is expected to shape behavioral measures of intergroup and
internalized bias and anti-bias through cognitive (self-awareness, attention, executive
functioning, perspective-taking) and affective processes (emotional regulation), which create the
conditions for self-transcendence (Vago & Silbersweig, 2012; Verhaeghen, 2019; Verhaeghen &
Aikman, 2020). Self-transcendence involves a shift from a normative focus on the self to a more
expansive perspective that includes concern for others or something greater than oneself (Wong
et al., 2021). Thus, as mindfulness broadens awareness of bias, perspective-taking, and one’s
prosocial values (Ryan et al., 2021), it may decrease discriminatory actions and increase more
equity-oriented, anti-bias behaviors. For example, LKM or compassion training has been shown
to promote perspective-taking (Kang & Falk, 2020), which has been shown to improve explicit
attitudes and helping behavior towards outgroup members (Shih et al., 2009).
In addition, mindfulness may help individuals to become aware of and change their
relationship to problematic thoughts and experiences that can interfere with goal-directed
behavior, a process called cognitive fusion (Hayes et al., 2009). In support of this, acceptance
and mindfulness-based interventions such as ACT have been shown to reduce cognitive fusion
and promote goal-directed behaviors (Assaz et al., 2018; Hayes et al., 2009), including those
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 20
relevant to intergroup bias. In a study of racial prejudice, Lillis and Hayes (2007) showed that
undergraduate students who received an ACT intervention demonstrated more positive
behavioral intentions, including seeking contact with students of other races or ethnicities,
joining diversity-related organizations, and attending events where they would be the only
person of their race present.
Further, because emotions are strongly predictive of behavioral tendencies (Bye &
Herrebrøden, 2018; Cuddy et al., 2007), mindfulness practices may promote less discriminatory
behavior and more anti-bias behaviors by reducing interfering emotions, such as anxiety. Parks
et al. (2014) found that a brief LKM intervention was associated with greater intentions for
future contact with the homeless. The effect of LKM on intentions for future contact was
mediated by both explicit attitudes and intergroup anxiety. These effects also may extend to
behavioral outcomes related to internalized bias. In one study, Thai undergraduate women
showed decreased evidence of stereotype threat on a reasoning ability test following a 5-minute
raisin mindfulness practice (Jarunratanakul & Jinchang, 2018).
Taken together, these findings suggest that mindfulness will be negatively linked with
each of the four dimensions of bias discussed above. This leads to our second hypothesis:
H2: Mindfulness will have a negative association with each of the four components of
bias, namely (a) implicit attitudes, (b) explicit attitudes, (c) emotions, and (d) behaviors.
Comparing the Magnitude of Associations between Mindfulness, Automatic and Controlled
Components of Bias, and Bias Target (Self vs. Other)
Of particular interest is the relative magnitude of the relationship between mindfulness
and each of these bias dimensions. While exposure to societal biases is unavoidable, there is a
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 21
difference between implicitly knowing that certain groups are viewed negatively and explicitly
endorsing those views oneself (Devine, 1989). Because implicit biases are automatic and
involuntarily activated in the presence of the target group, they are more resistant to change and
typically require intentional efforts to unlearn biased associations, for example, through active
exposure to counterstereotypical exemplars or evaluative conditioning (Devine et al., 2012; Lai
et al., 2014). In contrast, controlled components of bias refer to those that operate in our
conscious awareness and control, for example our explicit beliefs, feelings, and behaviors
towards other groups (Devine, 1989). Because these controlled processes are intentional, they
may be more flexible and amenable to change through education, increasing opportunities for
intergroup contact, and cognitive strategies such as stereotype replacement, recategorization, and
perspective-taking (Dovidio & Gaertner, 2010; Paluck et al., 2021). As mindfulness has been
shown to improve self-awareness, cognitive control and emotional regulation, it may be
particularly helpful for shifting bias outcomes that are within one’s conscious control.
Accordingly, we predict that the effects of mindfulness will be greater for controlled (explicit)
dimensions of attitudes, affect, and behavior.
H3: Mindfulness will be more negatively associated with controlled components of bias,
specifically explicit attitudes, emotions, and behaviors, relative to automatic (implicit)
attitudes.
Finally, as studies have typically examined the effects of mindfulness on intergroup bias
or internalized bias outcomes but not both, it is unclear whether mindfulness is differentially
associated with bias when directed towards others versus the self. Theory and research point to
some commonalities in the cognitive, affective, and behavioral processes underlying intergroup
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 22
and internalized bias. Examples include cultural socialization about the inferiority of
marginalized groups, a fixed and narrow view of the self, emotional dysregulation in intergroup
contexts, and behavioral alignment with dominant group norms (David et al., 2018; Dovidio &
Gaertner, 2010; Pyke, 2010; Trawalter et al., 2009). Further, given robust support for the
theorized mechanisms of mindfulness across a range of outcomes (Brown & Ryan, 2003;
Shapiro et al., 2006; Dahl et al., 2015; Vago & Silbersweig, 2012), we expect comparable effects
of mindfulness for bias both directed towards outgroups (intergroup bias) as well as the
self/ingroup (internalized bias).
H4: Mindfulness will be associated with similar-sized effects for bias directed towards
outgroups as well as the self (internalized bias).
The Present Study
In this review, we draw on prior theorizing (e.g., Cuddy et al., 2007; David, 2013;
Dovidio & Gaertner, 2004; French et al., 2020; Shapiro et al., 2006; Vago & Silbersweig, 2012)
to present an integrative three-dimensional conceptual framework for exploring the effects of
mindfulness on a) manifestations of bias at the level of implicit attitudes, explicit attitudes,
affect, and behavior, (b) bias target, whether members of an outgroup (bias) or ingroup
(internalized bias), and (c) intergroup orientation towards both bias or anti-bias. We make the
case for broadening the scope of attention beyond bias enacted by dominant groups to include
internalized bias and anti-bias outcomes and their cognitive, affective, and behavioral
expressions. Second, we meta-analyze the associations between mindfulness and cognitive,
affective and behavioral dimensions of bias and anti-bias to identify which outcomes are most
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 23
influenced by mindfulness as a trait and as an intervention. We also examine potential
moderators, including features of the sample, bias target, and study design.
Finally, as this field is still in its early stages of development, we contribute an evidence
and gap map to catalog how mindfulness has been studied in relation to our three-dimensional
framework and identify gaps in need of further investigation. Thus, in addition to testing our
separate hypotheses regarding the pooled and separate associations between mindfulness (as a
trait and as an intervention) on implicit attitudes, explicit attitudes, affect, and behavior, we also
seek to examine two exploratory research questions:
RQ1: What is the quality of evidence for the links between mindfulness, bias and
internalized bias outcomes?
RQ2: What are the research gaps and questions needing further examination?
Methods
Procedures, including definitions of key constructs, search terms and strategy, inclusion
and exclusion criteria, data extraction procedures, risk of bias assessment, and analytic plan,
were preregistered with PROSPERO International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews
after piloting the search criteria (Chang, Sahdra, Donald, Whitney, & Miao, 2018). The datafile,
codebook, and script used for analyses are available on the Open Science Framework Online
Eligibility Criteria
We drew upon the steps outlined in the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement, including the determination of eligibility
criteria (Moher et al., 2009). Quantitative studies were eligible for inclusion if they included i) a
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 24
psychometrically-valid measure of mindfulness, or a mindfulness intervention or manipulation;
and either iia) a measure of intergroup bias, including explicit and implicit measures of
stereotypes, prejudice, or discrimination, with a focus on outgroup derogation, ingroup
favoritism, or ingroup derogation (i.e., self-stigma) or iib) an explicit measure of intergroup anti-
bias orientation, e.g., egalitarian, inclusive, or multicultural beliefs, attitudes and behaviors. We
placed no constraints on participants’ demographic factors. To minimize publication bias and
enhance transparency, we were otherwise maximally inclusive, including published papers and
book chapters, as well as dissertations and other datasets that met our inclusion criteria.
Supplemental Materials contains detailed information on the specific mindfulness interventions,
mindfulness measures, and measures of bias and anti-bias we included in this review.
Search Terms and Information Sources
We conducted a literature search on articles published through January 2020 using four
databases: PsycINFO, PubMed, EBSCO (Academic Search complete), and Web of Science. We
used multiple search terms to identify relevant articles related to mindfulness or mindfulness-
based interventions, specifically mindful*, meditation, lovingkindness, compassion focused
therapy, compassion training, Acceptance and Commitment Therapy. We crossed these terms
with bias-related terms and keywords including prejudice, intergroup bias, stereotype,
discrimination, rac* bias, racism, implicit attitude. We also separately crossed the mindfulness
terms with anti-bias terms such as cultural competenc*, multicultural competenc*, cultural
sensitivity, divers*, social justice, altruism, cultural humility, empathy, and compassion. We
also searched for relevant studies in the reference lists of the studies identified via our initial
database search, contacted all primary authors of articles meeting our inclusion criteria for other
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 25
relevant articles in preparation or in press, and posted requests for studies on listservs including
the Association for Contextual Behavioral Science and the American Psychological Association
Society for the Psychological Study of Culture, Ethnicity, and Race.
Study Selection
Our search yielded 13,212 eligible records. In line with PRISMA guidelines (Moher et
al., 2002), two researchers independently screened titles and abstracts of each identified record.
Next, the same two researchers independently screened the full texts of the 828 included studies
against our eligibility criteria. Any conflicts were resolved with input from a third and in some
cases fourth member of the study team.
Data Collection Process
Two reviewers independently extracted data from the 66 eligible records. Any
disagreements were resolved via discussion among the first, second and final authors. Study
there was insufficient data provided to calculate effect sizes, the authors were contacted with a
request to provide the missing data. Failure to respond or inability to provide additional data,
data screening process, which resulted in the retention of 72 eligible studies from 64 records.
This includes 42 intervention studies (n= 41 records), and 30 correlational studies (n=26
records), with 3 reports including both intervention and correlational studies.
Data Items
Information was extracted on the following variables, where available: (1) publication
author(s) (2) publication year; (3) study language; (4) description of study population (e.g.,
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 26
students, healthcare workers, general community samples, etc.); (5) country(ies) in which the
study was conducted; (6) sample ethnicity; (7) sample mean age; (8) proportion of the sample
that is female; (9) study design (correlational, longitudinal or experimental); (10) number of
participants; (11) cell-sizes (if experimental); (12) instrument used to measure or intervention to
manipulate mindfulness; (13) instrument used to measure intergroup bias or anti-bias orientation;
(14) type of intergroup bias measure (explicit attitudes, implicit attitudes, affect, or behavior);
(15) whether the target of prejudice was an in-group or out-group member; and (16) the
statistical result measuring the effect of a mindfulness intervention on bias/anti-bias (intervention
studies) or the association between mindfulness and bias/anti-bias (longitudinal and correlational
studies). Further, among studies of mindfulness interventions, we classified: (17) the type of
mindfulness intervention; (18) the length of the intervention (in minutes); and (19) the lag (in
weeks) between the end of the intervention and the time prejudice was measured.
Summary Measures
Due to the different inferences that can be drawn from correlational, longitudinal, and
intervention studies, we meta-analyzed effects from these studies separately, and as such
extracted different summary measures from correlational and longitudinal studies as compared
with intervention studies. For intervention studies, an odds ratio, an eta-squared statistic, or a
standardized mean difference between treatment and control groups was extracted and converted
into Hedge’s g using conversion formulas (Hedges & Olkin, 1985). For correlational and
longitudinal studies, all extracted effects were converted to Pearson’s r.
Moderators
We examined a number of potential moderators of the relationship between mindfulness
and different dimensions of bias and anti-bias. Individual difference moderators were examined
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 27
among both intervention and correlational/longitudinal studies, while separate sets of moderators
were relevant for intervention studies and correlational/longitudinal studies respectively.
Substantive Moderators
Bias Target Group. Whereas much intergroup bias research has focused on gender and
racial bias in White samples, researchers are increasingly examining bias and inclusion in a
broader range of marginalized groups including the elderly, homeless individuals, sexual
minorities, obese individuals, and clinically stigmatized groups both from the perspective of the
higher-status ingroup member (bias) and lower-status outgroup member (internalized bias).
Based on the number of effect sizes available per group, we compared whether mindfulness was
differentially associated with improvements in bias outcomes separately for (1) racial/ethnic
minorities, (2) clinically stigmatized groups, and (3) other target groups.
Sample Population. While reducing intergroup bias is important for all individuals,
recent studies have specifically targeted bias and stigma among helping professionals (e.g.,
nurses, counselors, therapists, teachers) as a means of promoting equity in healthcare and
education. While there is some evidence that mindfulness can improve other prosocial outcomes
such as empathy and compassion in both general populations and helping professionals, results
are mixed (Cooper et al., 2020; Fernando et al., 2017). As helping professionals may express
greater commitments to values of care and fairness, mindfulness may further enhance their
capacity to enact those values and result in greater reductions in bias (Epstein, 1999). On the
other hand, the demands of their jobs and regular contact with outgroup members, including
challenging members, may increase the difficulty of reducing bias among helping professionals,
relative to members of the general population. Therefore, we compared whether mindfulness is
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 28
differentially associated with changes in bias outcomes among (1) general populations (students,
community members) and (2) helping professionals (health care providers, teachers).
Gender. With regard to gender effects, men tend to show greater intergroup bias
tendencies than women (Hewstone et al., 2002) and there is some evidence that MBIs may yield
better results for women (Kang et al., 2018; Katz & Toner, 2013). However, there are mixed
results regarding gender differences in trait mindfulness (e.g., Gervais & Hoffman, 2013; Nicol
& De France, 2018). To clarify the role of gender in the relationship between mindfulness and
intergroup bias, we examined whether mindfulness may have a greater effect on intergroup bias
and anti-bias outcomes among self-identified women compared to men. (Note: We excluded
transgender and gender nonconforming individuals in these analyses due to their low
representation in study samples.)
Publication Year. Given the substantial increase in studies on the effects of mindfulness
since 2006 (Baminiwatta & Solangaarachchi, 2021) and the more recent applications of
mindfulness to the problem of bias, we examined whether these effects varied over time.
Moderators Specific to Intervention Studies
Intervention Type. We examined the possibility that mindfulness interventions aimed at
reducing bias and fostering inclusion may be enhanced by, or may require specific engagement
with ethical, prosocial, or anti-bias training elements (Vago & Silbersweig, 2012). Reviews of
bias reduction strategies suggest that the most effective interventions leverage multiple
mechanisms (Bezrukova et al., 2016; Lai et al., 2014), yet Berry et al.’s (2020) meta-analysis
demonstrates that mindfulness training, even without explicit ethical instruction, is positively
associated with prosocial behavior. We therefore compared (1) mindfulness-only interventions to
(2) multi-component interventions that combine mindfulness with other contemplative practices
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 29
such as LKM or compassion, or other therapeutic components such as psychoeducation, social-
emotional skills training, acceptance, and cognitive defusion.
Intervention Intensity/Length. There is substantial variation in the intensity of MBIs
studied, ranging from brief (<10 minute) one-time experimental inductions involving listening to
pre-recorded meditations (e.g., Berry et al., 2018), to one or two-day workshops (e.g., Lillis et
al., 2009), to those involving regular sessions over many weeks or months (e.g., Berger, Brenick,
Lawrence, et al., 2018). Given that intergroup biases are learned habits of mind reinforced by the
dominant culture, they may be particularly resistant to change, requiring consistent effort, time,
and motivation (Devine, 1989). On the other hand, some recent investigations have found
significant reductions in implicit bias even after a brief mindfulness intervention in the lab (e.g.,
Lueke & Gibson, 2016; Stell & Farsides, 2016). We therefore tested whether more time-
intensive interventions had stronger effects on bias outcomes relative to brief interventions, by
coding all interventions in terms of their total duration in minutes, e.g., ½ hour (30), 1 hour (60),
1 day (1,440), 1 week (10,080).
Timing of Assessment. An important consideration is whether positive changes in bias
following mindfulness training are maintained over time. Studies of prejudice reduction
interventions suggest that they do not have an enduring effect on attitudes, although follow-up
data are scarce (Bezrukova et al., 2016; Somerville et al., 2020). Thus, we compare results (1)
obtained immediately after the intervention to (2) that obtained during a follow-up period.
Moderators Specific to Correlational Effects
Mindfulness Measure. As discussed, operational definitions of mindfulness vary across
measures. Therefore, we examined whether the relationship between mindfulness and different
bias outcomes varied for (1) a unidimensional measure of mindful attention/awareness, e.g., the
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 30
MAAS (Brown & Ryan, 2003) compared to (2) multidimensional measures that include
attitudinal dimensions such as acceptance, non-reactivity, and non-judgement, or skills, such as
the CAM (Feldman et al., 2007), FFMQ (Baer et al., 2006), and the KIMS (Baer et al., 2004).
Analyses
Historically, researchers used fixed and random effects models to conduct meta-analyses
(Borenstein et al., 2005). A key limitation of this method, however, is that it assumes
independence in effect sizes, meaning only one effect size can be used per study. Traditional
methods for overcoming the non-independence of multiple effect sizes from a single study (e.g.,
average effect sizes, or randomly selecting one effect from a study) are problematic in that they
lose valuable information and make it difficult to meaningfully test moderators (Cheung, 2014b).
One way to overcome these limitations is the use of multilevel structural equation modelling
approaches to meta-analysis, which are robust to the non-independence of effect sizes from a
single study (Cheung, 2014a, 2014b; Raudenbush & Bryk, 1985; Van Den Noortgate &
Onghena, 2003). We used this method in the present meta-analysis.
We conducted all analyses in R using the packages ‘metaSEM’ (Cheung, 2014a) and
‘metafor’ (Viechtbauer, 2010). We used unconditional mixed-effects models to calculate overall
pooled effect sizes (Hedge’s g for intervention effects and Pearson’s r for correlational effects)
and their respective 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Pearson’s r correlations were transformed to
Fisher’s z for analysis. Fisher’s z was transformed back to correlations in the presentation of
results to enhance interpretability. Record identification number was used as the clustering
variable in all multilevel meta-analytic models, following recommendations by Cheung (2014b).
Effect sizes that are estimated by the same research team tend to be more similar than those
estimated by other researchers (e.g., due to a tendency to use common methods, instruments, and
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 31
participant pools), and meta-analytic clustering by “record” (i.e., article or dissertation) accounts
similar approaches elsewhere (e.g., Berry et al., 2020), we reverse-coded the anti-bias effects, so
that all bias and anti-bias outcomes were assessed with the same valence.
Effect Size Interpretation
To interpret the magnitude of Hedge’s g effect sizes for intervention studies, we referred
to Cohen (1994): 0.20 is considered small; 0.50 is considered a medium-sized effect; 0.80 is
considered a large effect. For correlational and longitudinal studies, we interpreted the magnitude
of our effects according to recent reviews by Gignac and Szodorai (2016) and Funder and Ozer
(2019). Both reviews found that correlations in the range of 0.10 are relatively small, 0.20 are
typical, and those approaching 0.30 are relatively large. Similarly, Funder and Ozer (2019) found
that effects approximating 0.05 are very small, 0.10 are small, 0.20 is a medium-sized effect, and
0.30 is a large effect (in terms of the consequences of each effect size on a single event). We
used these heuristics to interpret the findings of the present meta-analysis.
Moderation Analysis
Heterogeneity indices were used to describe the proportion of variance within (I2 ), and
between studies (I2 ) not attributable to sampling error (Higgins et al., 2003; Cheung, 2014;
2015). An I2 statistic that is greater than 25% is typically considered to be evidence of
heterogeneity within a given pooled effect (Higgins et al., 2003). In such cases, we conducted
moderation analyses to assess whether a-priori moderators accounted for variance within and
between studies. Meta-analytic moderation involves comparing a model without the moderator
as a predictor with one that includes it. The p-value from likelihood-ratio tests was used to assess
whether the baseline model fit was significantly improved by inclusion of moderator variables
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 32
(Cheung, 2015). Further, we reported the proportion of within-study (R2 ) and between-study
(R2 ) variance explained by each moderator. Where evidence of moderation was found, we
conducted subset analyses to estimate the pooled effect for each sub-category of the moderator.
In general, a minimum of four effect sizes is required for each moderator sub-category to draw
inferences regarding pooled estimates (Fu et al., 2011). We therefore only conducted moderation
analyses where all sub-categories contained at least four effect sizes.
Risk of Bias
We drew upon the methods outlined in the PRISMA statement (Moher et al. 2002) to
assess the risk of bias for the experimental and correlational studies included in this review.
Supplemental Materials contain further information regarding the criteria we used to assess risks
of bias as well as tables showing risk of bias ratings for each study in the meta-analysis.
Publication Bias
To assess publication bias, we conducted moderation analyses to test whether pooled
effects varied as a function of publication status. Evidence of this indicates that effects from
published studies may be systematically different (typically larger) than effects from unpublished
studies (Borenstein et al., 2009). As a second test for publication bias, we ran the three-parameter
selection method (3PSM; Vevea & Woods, 2005). The 3PSM approach has been found to be a
robust sensitivity measure relative to more traditional assessments of publication bias (e.g.,
Egger’s regression test, rank correlation test, Trim-and-Fill; McShane et al., 2016; Rodgers &
Pustejovsky, 2020), and is especially advantageous for tests of publication bias among
moderately-sized meta-analytic datasets (Vevea & Woods, 2005). The 3PSM test generates a
meta-analytic model that includes the relative chance of observing a nonsignificant effect size
estimate as well as between-study heterogeneity (Rodgers & Pustejovsky, 2020). Evidence of a
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 33
significant likelihood ratio test statistic from this model indicates selective reporting of results.
Where we found evidence of publication bias, we ran sensitivity analyses using the
precision-effect test and precision-effect estimate with standard errors (PET-PEESE) method
(Stanley & Doucouliagos, 2014). Further information on these tests and PET-PEESE analyses
can be found in Supplementary Materials.
Results
Study Characteristics
Of the 70 eligible studies from 62 reports included in the meta-analysis, we identified 42
studies (178 effect sizes; N = 3,229 participants) that measured the effect of an MBI on indices
of bias and anti-bias; 6 were unpublished studies. We identified another 30 correlational studies
(150 effect sizes; N = 6,002 participants) that examined the relationship between self-reported
mindfulness, bias and anti-bias outcomes. Twelve studies were unpublished as of January 2020
when we completed the search; however, two have since been published, specifically Berry et al.
(2021) (from Berry, 2017) and Kang and Falk (2020). Our search did not identify any
longitudinal studies that met our inclusion criteria. The characteristics of the 70 included studies
are summarized in Supplementary Material and shown in Tables S1 and S2.
addresses RQ 2). For bias directed toward outgroups, the number of effect sizes were respectable
for outcomes focusing on attitudes, affect, and behavior, except there were only two effect sizes
for implicit attitudes. For bias directed toward ingroups, there were no effects for either
internalized bias or anti-bias for either implicit attitudes or behavioral measures. The number of
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 34
effect sizes for internalized bias for explicit attitudes and affect were respectable to proceed with
a meta-analysis.
Risk of Bias
To answer RQ 1, risk of bias assessment was conducted by study (n= 70). Most were
rated as having a moderate risk of bias but 10 were rated as having a high risk of bias (k=7 INT,
k=3 CORR) and 3 were rated as having a low risk of bias (k=2 INT, k=1 CORR).
See Supplemental Materials for results of risk of bias assessments by effect size (S3 and
S4). Due to the methodological and inferential differences between intervention and correlational
studies, we report results from both sets of studies separately in the following sections. As
mentioned, we did not identify any longitudinal studies in this review.
Intervention Studies
Primary Analyses
intervention studies (within 40 separate records) included in this review. As noted, following
recommendations by Cheung (2014), we used “record ID” as the clustering variable in all meta-
negative effect of mindfulness interventions on intergroup bias outcomes (g = -0.56, CI 95% [-
0.72, -0.40]). To test Hypothesis 2, the extent to which mindfulness influences bias along the
four dimensions of attitudes (implicit and explicit), affect, and behavior, we conducted subset
analyses. We calculated the meta-analytic effect of mindfulness interventions separately for each
of these four dimensions of intergroup bias. Consistent with Hypothesis 2, mindfulness
interventions produced a small-to-medium-sized, negative effect on implicit attitudes (H2(a); g =
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 35
-0.35, CI 95% [-0.51, -0.19]), a medium-sized, negative effect on explicit attitudes (H2(b); g = -
0.51, CI 95% [-0.68, -0.34]) and affect (H2(c); g = -0.55, CI 95% [-0.74, -0.36]), and a large
negative effect on behaviors that reflect intergroup bias (H2(d); g = -0.90, CI 95% [-1.53, -
0.26]). These findings, and the effect sizes from the studies underpinning them, are shown in
We next tested Hypothesis 3, that mindfulness interventions would have larger effects on
forms of controlled bias (i.e., explicit attitudes, emotions, and behavior) than implicit attitudes.
We did not find evidence for this, however (R2 = 0.00; R2 = 0.047; p = 0.71). The pooled effect
2 3
for controlled forms of bias was large in magnitude (g = -0.62, CI 95% [-0.82, -0.43]), while the
pooled effect for implicit attitudes was moderate in size (g = -0.35, CI 95% [-0.51, -0.19]),
however the confidence intervals surrounding these effects overlapped.
Finally, we tested Hypothesis 4, that mindfulness interventions would have similar-sized
effects on bias towards outgroups relative to their effect on internalized bias. We found support
for this prediction, with no evidence that effects of mindfulness interventions differed between
these two different forms of bias (R2 = 0.00; R2 = 0.065; p = 0.215). Effects for both sets of
2 3
targets of a similar, large magnitude (for outgroup bias, g = -0.51, CI 95% [-0.71, -0.33]; for
internalized bias, g = -0.70, CI 95% [-0.88, -0.51]). Notably, the confidence intervals of the two
pooled effects overlap substantially, which increases our confidence in H4. As an additional step,
we conducted sensitivity analyses, with one study by Langer et al (1985) excluded from the
analysis. Mindfulness interventions such as the one conducted by Langer et al (1985) have been
argued to be conceptually somewhat different from more Buddhist conceptualisations of
mindfulness (e.g., Brown, Ryan, & Creswell, 2007). Excluding this study did not alter the pattern
of meta-analytic findings (H1, among all bias outcomes, g = -0.55, CI 95% [-0.71, -0.40]; H2,
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 36
among biased behaviors, g = -0.85, CI 95% [-1.47, -0.24]; and for H3 and H4, there was no
evidence of moderation).
[INSERT FIG 3-4 ABOUT HERE]
Moderation Analyses
We identified moderate levels of both within- and between-study heterogeneity for the
overarching meta-analytic effect of mindfulness interventions on bias outcomes (R2 = 0.39; R2
2 3
sources of this heterogeneity. Based on a-priori theorizing, we examined the following
moderators: bias target, sample population, gender, study design, and publication year. We also
examined several methodological moderators (i.e., intervention type, duration, and timing of
assessment) and risk of bias.
Bias Target Group. First, we tested whether the meta-analytic effect varied between
biases directed at three bias target groups: (1) racial/ethnic minorities, (2) clinically stigmatized
groups, and (3) other bias target groups. We did not find evidence that effects varied as a
function of any of these different categories (for racial/ethnic minorities, R2 = 0.00; R2 = 0.030;
2 3
p = 0.373; for clinically stigmatized groups R2 = 0.00; R2 = 0.005; p = 0.700; for other groups
2 3
R2 = 0.00; R2 = 0.061; p = 0.271).
2 3
Sample Population. Next, we tested whether the pooled effect differed between studies
among helping professionals compared with studies of students and the general population. We
found evidence of marginally significant moderation (R2 = 0.00; R2 = 0.16; p = 0.057). The
2 3
pooled effect of mindfulness interventions on intergroup bias among helping professionals was
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 37
medium in magnitude (g = -0.26, CI 95% [-0.40, -0.12]), while the effect among students and the
general population was large (g = -0.63, CI 95% [-0.82, -0.45]). Notably, the confidence
intervals around these estimates were non-overlapping, indicating mindfulness interventions had
a larger impact on intergroup bias among the general population than among helping
professionals.
Gender. We next tested whether the percentage of female study participants would
explain differences in effect sizes across studies, with expectations that studies with majority
female samples may find larger effects than those with majority male samples. However, we did
not find evidence for this (R2 = 0.067; R2 = 0.030; p = 0.554).
2 3
design (R2 = 0.00; R2 = 0.15; p = 0.032). The pooled effect for RCTs was smaller (g = -0.53, CI
2 3
95% [-0.71, -0.34]) than the effect for non-RCTs (g = -0.66, CI 95% [-0.96, -0.37]), though the
confidence intervals around these effects were overlapping. These findings provide further
support for Hypothesis 1, with a medium-to-large pooled effect of randomized controlled
mindfulness interventions on all bias types. For parsimony, we tested Hypotheses 2, 3 and 4
among RCT studies only. In support of Hypothesis 2, we found that among RCT studies,
mindfulness interventions resulted in medium-sized attenuations in implicit attitude biases
(H2(a); g = -0.33, CI 95% [-0.51, -0.16]), medium-to-large reductions in explicit attitude biases
(H2(b); g = -0.41, CI 95% [-0.55, -0.23]), and large reductions in biased affect (H2(c); g = -0.58,
CI 95% [-0.87, -0.29]) and behaviors (H2(d); g = -0.90, CI 95% [-1.53, -0.26]). In relation to
Hypothesis 3, we did not find evidence that mindfulness interventions had larger effects on
controlled forms of bias (i.e., explicit attitudes, affect, and behavior) than on implicit attitudes
(R2 = 0.00; R2 = 0.192; p = 0.901). Regarding Hypothesis 4, and consistent with prior findings,
2 3
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 38
we did not find differences in effects of mindfulness interventions on biases toward outgroups
and internalized biases, among RCTs (R2 = 0.004; R2 = 0.815; p= 0.213).
2 3
Other Potential Moderators. Effects did not vary as a function of publication year or
the methodological moderators intervention type (i.e., interventions with mindful awareness as
their singular focus (“mindfulness-only” interventions) versus multi-component (or
“mindfulness-plus”) interventions), intervention duration (including when this variable was log-
and quadratic-transformed for possible non-linear effects), or timing of assessment. Regarding
intervention type, we used a +1 (mindfulness-only) vs -1 (multi-component) coding scheme and
tested whether this dichotomous variable explained heterogeneity in the pooled effect. We also
conducted sensitivity analysis with multi-component mindfulness interventions removed from
the dataset, and obtained a meta-analytic effect (g = -.57, CI 95% [-0.91, -0.23]) that was almost
evidence that risk of bias was a moderator of the pooled meta-analytic effect.
Tests for Influential Outliers and Corrections. We examined funnel plots for outliers
and tested for influential outliers using the ‘influence’ function in the ‘metafor’ package in R.
Funnel plots are displayed in Supplemental Materials. Our formal test for influential outliers
identified two influential outliers among intervention studies. We conducted subset analyses with
these outliers removed. The exclusion of these outliers did not substantially change the pattern of
meta-analytic findings. Among intervention studies, the outlier-adjusted meta-analytic effect of
mindfulness interventions on all bias outcomes was g = -0.47, CI 95% [-0.57, -0.36]. We also
tested for influential outliers among effects for each of the four bias categories (i.e., implicit
attitudes, explicit attitudes, explicit affect, and biased behavior), but there were none.
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 39
Publication Bias Tests and Corrections. Tests of moderation by publication status
identified evidence of publication bias for affect, but not for any of the remaining three outcome-
types (i.e., implicit attitudes, explicit attitudes, and prejudicial behavior). Meta-analytic effects of
mindfulness interventions on measures of affect were larger for published (g = -0.62, CI 95% [-
0.81, -0.43]) than unpublished studies (g = -0.10, CI 95% [-0.31, -0.11]), indicating potential
publication bias. Second, the 3PSM tests found evidence of potential publication bias for implicit
attitudes (χ2(df = 1) = 7.62, p = 0.006) and explicit attitudes (χ2(df = 1) = 6.19, p = 0.013). Based
on this evidence, we used the PET-PESSE method to generate bias-corrected meta-analytic
estimates for implicit and explicit attitudes, and affect. Bias-corrected estimates for implicit
attitudes became non-different from zero (g = -0.12, 95% CI [-1.40, 1.16]), while those for
explicit attitudes and affect reduced to a medium-sized effect (for explicit attitudes, g = -0.37,
95% CI [-0.56, -0.17]; for affect, g = -0.38, 95% CI [-0.63, -0.12]). There was no evidence of
publication bias among intervention studies of prejudicial behavior, or when all outcome-types
were included in a single meta-analytic model, so no corrections were made to these estimates.
Correlational Studies
Primary Analyses
Meta-analytic findings from the 30 correlational studies (nested within 25 records)
support of Hypothesis 1, there was a negative association between dispositional mindfulness and
indices of intergroup bias (r = -0.17 [-0.27, -0.03]). Per guidelines provided by Funder and Ozer
(2019) and Gignac and Szodorai (2016), this can be interpreted as a small-to-medium sized
correlation: One that is consequential over time, and of potential explanatory and practical value
in the short term (e.g., in relation to specific instances of intergroup bias (Funder & Ozer, 2019).
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 40
We next tested Hypothesis 2, conducting subset analyses on the associations between
mixed support for this prediction among correlational studies: The meta-analytic effect for the
association between mindfulness and implicit attitudes was non-different from zero (H2(a); r = -
0.12 [-0.27, 0.03]). There were small-to-medium sized, negative associations between
mindfulness and both explicit attitudes (H2(b); r = -0.12, CI 95% [-0.18, -0.06]) and affect
(H2(c); r = -0.19, CI 95% [-0.33, -0.04]), but insufficient data (per the Fu et al., 2011 guidelines)
to conduct subset analyses for discriminatory behavior (H2(d); k = 2; ES = 3).
Regarding Hypothesis 3, that mindfulness would have a more negative association with
controlled forms of biases (i.e., explicit attitudes, emotions, and behaviors), than with implicit
attitudes, we did not find evidence for this (R2 = 0.018; R2 = 0.082; p = 0.102). The pooled
2 3
association between mindfulness and controlled forms of bias was medium-sized and negative (r
= -0.18, CI 95% [-0.28, -0.07]), while the pooled effect for implicit attitudes was non-different
from zero (r = -0.12 [-0.27, 0.03]).
Finally, we found evidence in support of Hypothesis 4, that dispositional mindfulness
would be similarly associated with decreases in bias directed towards others as well as the self
(R2 = 0.002; R2 = 0.000; p = 0.940). The association between mindfulness and bias toward
2 3
outgroups was of a small magnitude (r = -0.13, CI 95% [-0.25, -0.01]), while the association
between mindfulness and internalized bias was medium-sized (r = -0.23, CI 95% [-0.37, -0.08]).
Moderation Analyses
indicating that 83% of the variation in effect sizes was unexplained by the baseline meta-analytic
model. Within-study heterogeneity was negligible (I2 = 0.11). To probe this unexplained
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 41
heterogeneity, we conducted moderation analyses testing whether effects varied as a function of
the bias target group, study population, gender, mindfulness measure, publication year and risk
of bias.
marginally significant moderator of the pooled effect (R2 = 0.08; R2 = 0.00; p = 0.054). Subset
2 3
analyses showed that meta-analytic associations for studies with attentional/awareness measures
of mindfulness (i.e., studies using the MAAS; Brown & Ryan, 2003) were non-different from
zero (r = -0.21, CI 95% [-0.54, 0.17]), while associations based on multi-dimensional
mindfulness measures were negative, and small-to-medium in size (r = -0.17, CI 95% [-0.24, -
0.10]). However, we note the limited number of studies and effects based on the MAAS (k = 6;
effects = 14), limiting the inferences that can be drawn from these moderation findings.
Other Potential Moderators. We found no evidence that the meta-analytic effect varied
as a function of the bias target group, study population, gender, publication year or risk of bias
Tests for Influential Outliers and Corrections. We examined funnel plots for outliers
and tested for influential outliers using the ‘influence’ function in the ‘metafor’ package in R.
Funnel plots are displayed in Supplemental Materials. Our formal test for influential outliers
identified five influential outliers among correlational studies. We conducted subset analyses
with these outliers removed. Among correlational studies, the outlier-adjusted meta-analytic
association between mindfulness and all bias outcomes was z = -0.14, CI 95% [-0.20, -0.07],
which is very similar to the un-adjusted effect. We then separately tested for influential outliers
among effects for each of the four bias categories (i.e., implicit attitudes, explicit attitudes,
explicit affect, and biased behavior). For effects on explicit attitudes and explicit affect, these
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 42
were almost identical to effects that were not adjusted for outliers (effects, respectively, were z =
-0.11, CI 95% [-0.17, -0.05] and z = -0.15, CI 95% [-0.27, -0.03]). Effects for implicit attitudes
were smaller in magnitude than the original result (z = -0.06, CI 95% [-0.11, -0.01]), while for
biased behavior, there were insufficient effect sizes to generate a meaningful estimate.
Publication Bias Tests and Corrections. As our first test of publication bias, we ran
moderation analyses to assess whether meta-analytic effects varied as a function of publication
status. We did not find evidence for this. As a second step, we ran the 3PSM analyses, and found
evidence of publication bias for the meta-analytic association between mindfulness and all
prejudice outcomes (χ2 (df = 1) = 4.71, p = 0.030), as well as the association between
mindfulness and implicit attitudes (χ2 (df = 1) = 4.00, p = 0.045). We next calculated bias-
corrected effect sizes for these meta-analytic effects, using the PET-PESSE approach. The bias-
corrected effect for the association between mindfulness and all prejudice outcomes was negative
and medium-sized (r = -0.20, 95% CI [-0.33, -0.07]). For the association between mindfulness
and implicit attitudes, the PET-PESSE model failed to converge, likely due to the small number
of studies (k = 5) included in this subcategory (Stanley, 2017).
[INSERT FIGS 5-6 ABOUT HERE]
Discussion
Whereas prosocial values such as being kind to your neighbor and caring for those in
need are promoted in societies all over the world, empirical studies suggest a universal tendency
to discriminate against outgroup members, especially those with less social power (Brewer &
Brown, 1998; Fiske, 1998; Turner et al., 2001). In this meta-analysis, we explored whether
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 43
mindfulness, as both a meditative practice and a dispositional factor, may reduce intergroup bias
and promote anti-bias tendencies. Guided by our three-dimensional conceptual model, we
examined associations between mindfulness and (a) different manifestations of bias, specifically
implicit attitudes, explicit attitudes, affect, and behavior, directed towards (b) different bias
targets, whether members of an outgroup (bias) or ingroup (internalized bias). We examined
these relationships in a bidirectional way, examining individuals’ (c) intergroup orientation
towards bias or anti-bias as assessed by measures of intergroup bias as well as measures of anti-
oppressive and inclusive attitudes, affect, and behaviors. Study samples were multinational
(including the U.S., Canada, the U.K., Italy, Portugal, Spain, Israel Palestine, India, Thailand
Hong Kong, Australia, New Zealand) and spanned diverse settings and contexts (including
university students, clinical populations, community members, research panels, trainees and
professionals in health and mental health care, teachers, and law enforcement officers).
We found broad support for our hypothesis that mindfulness would be associated with
improvements in intergroup bias/anti-bias outcomes (H1). Effects were medium-sized for
intervention studies (g= -0.56) and small-to-medium sized for correlational studies (r = -0.17); all
effects were in the direction of reduced bias. Compared to Oyler et al. (2021), which included
fewer study samples (k = 29 compared to 70 in the present study), this meta-analysis yielded a
larger-sized effect of mindfulness interventions but a similar-sized effect for correlational studies
on bias outcomes compared to their results (g = +.33 for intervention studies; g = +.24 for
dispositional mindfulness, scaled in the direction of reduced bias).
Our hypothesis that effects would be significant across all bias outcomes (H2) was also
confirmed, with MBIs having a very large effect on behaviors, a large effect on affect and
explicit attitudes, and a medium-sized effect on implicit attitudes. A conservative test, including
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 44
only the RCT studies, found comparable results and confirmed that effect sizes tended to be
larger for biased behavior and affect, followed by explicit attitudes and implicit attitudes. Results
from correlational studies also mirrored this pattern although overall effect sizes were smaller.
Associations to explicit attitudes and affect were in the small-to- medium sized range, whereas
there was no significant association with implicit attitudes. According to Funder and Ozer
(2019), a small-to-medium-sized correlation can be interpreted as one that is consequential over
time, and of potential explanatory and practical value in the short term (e.g., in relation to
specific instances of intergroup bias). Notably, there were not enough correlational effects to
examine associations separately for biased behavior.
Together, these results provide robust support that the benefits of mindfulness extend to
the bias domain, with stronger effects on explicit responses and weaker effects on responses
operating outside of our conscious awareness and control (e.g., implicit attitudes). These results
are consistent with findings that while implicit biases can be changed, such changes are likely to
be modest and rely on mechanisms that are distinct from those most effective for changing
explicit biases (Forscher et al., 2019). According to dual-process theories, explicit biases stem
from cognitive processes that are slower, deliberate and controllable (Devine, 1989), such that
mindfulness-induced improvements in attention, self-awareness and cognitive control may
attenuate the conscious, explicit expression of bias in its cognitive, affective, and behavioral
forms. Furthermore, as mindfulness has been found to strengthen the link between intention and
behavior (Chatzisarantis & Hagger, 2007), the larger effect size for behavior may be driven in
part by mindfulness-induced changes in cognitive resources and motivation to control the effects
of bias on behavior (Devine, 1989; Fazio & Olson, 2014).
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 45
In contrast, implicit biases reflect automatic mental processes that are fast, efficient,
habitual, and uncontrolled (Devine, 1989). In a recent meta-analysis of strategies to change
implicit measures, procedures that induced goal-directed motivation (e.g., making antiracist
norms salient) or directly or indirectly targeted biased associations (e.g., Black=bad) reduced
implicit bias relative to a neutral control (Forscher et al., 2019). Along these lines, mindfulness-
based interventions, such as lovingkindness practice, may affect implicit attitudes by
emphasizing prosocial norms (Berry et al., 2020), increasing perspective-taking (Kang & Falk,
2020), and reflective awareness, which Verhaegen and Aikman (2020) found was associated
with both implicit racial bias and motivation to control prejudiced reactions.
Our third hypothesis, that mindfulness would have a substantially greater effect on
controlled aspects of bias (explicit attitudes, affect, and behavior) than on automatic (implicit)
bias (H3), was not supported, although results trended in the expected direction. For intervention
studies for example, the pooled effect for controlled forms of bias was large in magnitude, while
the pooled effect for implicit attitudes was moderate in comparison. Further research is needed to
clarify the different mechanisms through which mindfulness may affect automatic versus
controlled types of bias and implications for behavior (Cuddy et al., 2007; Fazio & Olson, 2014;
van Zomeren et al., 2008).
Given the psychological and health outcomes associated with internalized bias (Gale et
al., 2020), our final hypothesis examined whether mindfulness would be associated with
comparable effects on bias directed towards the (marginalized) self and outgroup members (H4).
Results showed that MBIs were associated with large negative effects for both internalized bias
and intergroup bias outcomes. Among correlational studies, associations between mindfulness
and bias were also significant, though in the small (intergroup bias) to medium-sized
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 46
(internalized bias) range. To our knowledge, this is the first meta-analysis to demonstrate that in
addition to improving intergroup outcomes for dominant group members, mindfulness may
enhance the well-being of marginalized individuals by increasing resilience to negative societal
messages about their group. As internalized bias has both direct and indirect associations with
outcomes such as distress, quality of life, self-esteem, and health risk behaviors among
stigmatized groups (Lee et al., 2019), decreasing internalized bias through mindfulness may be
an important part of a multi-tiered strategy for promoting health equity. At the same time,
systems-level interventions are needed to dismantle the structural inequities that perpetuate and
maintain population health disparities (Bailey et al., 2017).
Moderation analyses found that the effects of MBIs and dispositional mindfulness were
comparable for biases directed towards racial/ethnic minorities, clinically stigmatized groups,
and other bias targets, whether an outgroup or ingroup member. Effects also did not vary by
gender of the respondent, year of publication, or study quality (i.e., risk of bias). For intervention
studies specifically, effects also did not vary by length of the intervention or timing of
assessment. Importantly, we examined the possibility, raised by Berry et al.’s (2020) critique,
that the inclusion of ethical enhancements in many MBIs may introduce demand characteristics
and social desirability concerns, which may promote reductions in bias beyond the direct effects
of mindfulness itself. To explore this possibility, we compared the effects of mindfulness-only
interventions to multi-component interventions that include other enhancements, such as
compassion, values-enhancement, or other psychological skills. We also conducted “subset”
analysis, to examine meta-analytic effects of mindfulness interventions with the so-called
“mindfulness-plus” interventions excluded from the analysis. Together, these tests provide
evidence that there was not systematic variation in effects between so-called “pure” mindfulness
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 47
intervention types were medium-sized and comparable (for ‘mindfulness only’ interventions,
k=16, g= -0.57, 95% CI [-0.91, -0.23], and for ‘mindfulness-plus’ interventions, k= 25, g= -0.54,
95% CI [-0.69, -0.39]. Results for the mindfulness only interventions are largely consistent with
Berry et al. (2020)’s findings, taking into account their more restrictive selection criteria. For the
studies focusing on prejudice outcomes (20.6% of the sample), they found a small to medium
effect of mindfulness training only when compared with active and inactive controls, k= 6, g =
.464, 95% CI [.302, .626].
Altogether, the results of moderation analyses for the intervention studies highlight that
even small doses of mindfulness training, alone or packaged with other components, were
sufficient to significantly improve bias outcomes for both ingroup and outgroup members.
However, moderation analyses by type of mindfulness measure suggest that multiple processes
are involved in bias reduction. Results from correlational studies indicated that the effect of
nonjudgmental awareness (as assessed by the MAAS; Brown & Ryan, 2003) was not different
from zero, whereas associations between multidimensional measures of mindfulness and bias
outcomes were negative and small-to- medium sized. It seems that actively altering biased
associations requires more than nonjudgmental awareness, for example the additional skills of
description, acceptance and nonreactivity assessed by multifactor measures such as the FFMQ
(Baer et al., 2006) and the KIMS (Baer et al., 2004).
A positive trend within the field of mindfulness studies is a growing focus on applications
to real world contexts. Notably, moderation analyses comparing members of the general
population (predominantly university student samples) to helping professionals (e.g., teachers,
counselors, and medical staff) found that MBIs had a stronger effect on bias in the general
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 48
population. This finding is consistent with claims that university students represent a unique
population, with less crystallized attitudes, less formulated senses of self, more tendencies
towards compliance, and therefore particularly vulnerable to experimental manipulations (Sears,
1986), although empirical studies suggest they are more heterogeneous than previously assumed
(Peterson & Merunka, 2014). Another possibility is that helping professionals interact more
directly with individuals who are the targets of bias within institutional contexts that have a
history of pathologizing and marginalizing groups with low social power. For example, systemic
inequities in educational achievement and school discipline rates reflect racial, gendered, and
class-based stereotypes that are often normalized and reinforced in school settings (Chin et al.,
2020; Okonofua & Eberhardt, 2015). Applying MBIs within such institutional contexts likely
increases the difficulty of shifting biases among helping professionals and others in positions of
power, although MBIs were still associated with improved outcomes overall. More
contextualized MBIs may be needed to address the complex and situated power dynamics that
may reinforce bias towards stigmatized members of society (see for example, Kanter et al.,
2020). However, for correlational studies, moderation analyses found no differences in effects
among the general population and helping professionals.
We found some evidence of publication bias for affect, explicit and implicit attitudes for
the intervention studies. Our bias-corrected estimates indicated a medium-sized effect of
mindfulness interventions in reducing explicit biased attitudes and affect, but not in reducing
implicit biases or biased behaviors. While there is arguably value in adjusting estimates for
potential bias, we also note that bias-adjusted estimates need to be interpreted with caution, and
not in isolation from the original estimates (Carter et al., 2019; Stanley et al., 2017).
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 49
The State of the Evidence and an Agenda for Future Research
Our model-based evidence and gap map identified a number of notable gaps in the
evidence base. First, most of the identified effect sizes pertained to bias/anti-bias responses to
outgroup members, with only 12% focusing on bias experiences of minority groups. This
disparity reflects the relatively recent shift in the field of psychology to center the lived
experiences of marginalized populations, including studying internalized bias and other
psychological effects of structural violence and oppression. As most of the studies examining
internalized bias sampled clinically stigmatized groups (i.e., individuals with psychiatric
disorders, substance use problems, overweight, or HIV) as well as sexual minority populations,
more research is needed to clarify how mindfulness may reduce internalized bias among other
groups with less societal power such as racial/ethnic minorities, immigrants, the poor, disabled,
and elderly, as well as those with multiple marginalized identities (e.g., women of color).
As a relatively new area of research, the terms being used to describe the phenomenon of
internalizing negative attitudes related to one’s oppressed minority identity vary depending on
the theoretical frameworks and disciplinary perspective adopted by the researcher. Reflecting our
focus on mindfulness and social-psychological perspectives on intergroup dynamics, we adopted
a social cognition/bias framework to guide our search. Future studies on internalized bias would
benefit from developing a construct map to chart the boundaries of the construct from different
disciplinary perspectives. For example, related constructs may include self-stigma, internalized
oppression, collective self-esteem, and self-acceptance as well as those referring to specific
group experiences, e.g., racial trauma, colonial mentality, internalized sexism or internalized
homophobia, etc. Recent efforts to operationalize constructs related to internalized bias have
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 50
yielded a number of new measures (e.g., Campón & Carter, 2015; Choi et al., 2017; Hübner et
al., 2016) that may facilitate future research on mindfulness as a potential mitigating factor.
Second, among studies of outgroup bias, the weight of the evidence was skewed toward
attitudes and affective measures of bias, with the majority of effect sizes examining associations
between mindfulness and explicit attitudes (see also Paluk, Porat, Clark, & Green, 2021).
Notably, the largest effects were found for behavior/behavioral intentions and affect, despite
there being fewer effect sizes available for these outcomes. While promising, more research is
needed to confirm these results, in addition to studies that examine the real-world effects of
mindfulness training on behaviors that uphold or challenge structural oppression and inequity
(i.e., voting behavior and other forms of collective action or resistance).
Third, the largest gaps in the literature pertained to bias directed towards the ingroup.
There were a few effect sizes for explicit attitudes and affect for internalized bias, but fewer still
for anti-bias. There were no effect sizes for implicit attitudes or behavioral measures of bias
directed toward the ingroup for either internalized bias or anti-bias. Research is needed to fill
these gaps in the literature. For marginalized groups, developing an awareness of how one’s
internalization of negative self-views has been shaped by structural oppression and cultural
socialization processes (critical reflection) is a crucial first step; however, that awareness does
not always translate into changes in behavior (critical action) (Friere, 1970b). Research is needed
to clarify how mindfulness may facilitate resilience to denigrating societal messages about one’s
group at cognitive, affective, and behavioral levels.
Fourth, future research should focus on increasing sample diversity. Although many
studies included some cultural diversity in their samples, they were too underpowered to conduct
separate analyses by race or ethnicity, gender identity (including transgender and nonbinary
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 51
individuals), as well as other demographic characteristics such as social class. This is consistent
with the general problem of underrepresentation of people of color (aka people of the global
majority), sexual and gender minorities, and low-income individuals in mindfulness research
(DeLuca et al., 2018; Waldron et al., 2018). Further, as most standardized MBIs have been
developed by White Euro-American or European practitioners and researchers and in most cases,
decontextualized from their Buddhist spiritual origins, it cannot be assumed that results may
generalize across different cultural and social identity groups. A meta-analysis of MBIs among
people of color found smaller effect sizes relative to findings in other populations (Sun et al.,
2021), highlighting the need for future studies to confirm that such interventions are effective for
culturally diverse populations and if and how they may need to be culturally adapted to increase
relevance and acceptability with specific populations (DeLuca et al., 2018).
Finally, more research is needed to test theorized mechanisms of mindfulness as they
relate to bias outcomes. Whereas most studies in our review did not examine mechanisms
(thereby preventing meta-analytic mediation analyses), a handful did. Drawing on the studies in
this review, three potential mechanisms are self-compassion, psychological flexibility, and stress
reduction, and we now briefly discuss each. Self-compassion, which encompasses attitudinal and
affective responses to the self, may result in less defensive responding and greater motivation to
respond without bias among privileged groups, and facilitate greater resistance to biased
messages among marginalized groups (Burgess et al., 2017; Palmeira et al., 2019; Yang & Mak,
2017). Chan et al. (2018) examined pathways to stigma resistance among 311 individuals with
psychiatric disorders in Hong Kong, China. Using structural equation modeling, they found that
mindfulness was positively associated with stigma resistance and that the association was
mediated by both self-compassion and psychological flexibility.
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 52
Psychological flexibility refers to the ability to remain fully in contact with the present
moment, even when facing difficult thoughts and feelings, while acting in ways that reflect one’s
goals and values (Hayes et al. 2006). Psychological flexibility is a target process of ACT, a
mindfulness-based therapy that has been increasingly applied to reducing internalized bias
among a range of marginalized groups and increasing anti-bias attitudes and behaviors among
dominant groups. Thus, in these contexts, psychological flexibility encompasses the self-
awareness, self-regulation, and self-transcendence components of mindfulness (Vago &
Silbersweig, 2012). Results from several ACT studies (e.g., Luoma et al. 2008; Skinta et al.,
2015; Lillis et al., 2009) confirm that psychological flexibility is a key pathway through which
mindfulness may soften stereotypic beliefs about self and other and increase the potential for
more intentional responding in more compassionate and inclusive ways.
Finally, given that intergroup interactions are experienced as stressful and anxiety-
provoking (Richeson & Shelton, 2003; Stephan & Stephan, 1985), reducing stress (perceived
threat) and anxiety may be another key pathway for reducing bias. Several studies support this
premise. In Kang et al. (2014), the reduction in bias towards the homeless following LKM was
mediated by reductions in psychological stress (“stress experienced in the past week”). Similarly,
Parks et al. (2014) found that the effect of LKM on intentions for future contact with homeless
individuals was mediated by intergroup anxiety. Other promising relational mechanisms that
future studies should examine include empathy (Cooper et al., 2020) and perspective-taking
(Kang & Falk, 2020). Lastly, as we did not find relevant longitudinal studies, research is needed
to test whether the effects of mindfulness on bias endure over time.
Limitations and Constraints on Generality
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 53
Results of this study should be interpreted with consideration of several limitations. First,
the present meta-analysis does not address the issue of how mindfulness compares with other
potential factors in influencing intergroup bias, nor do we rule out additional independent
influences on these outcomes. Second, although we did not find evidence that bias target, gender,
intervention type or duration, timing of assessment, mindfulness measure, or risk of bias
moderated the pooled effects, we cannot rule out that unmeasured variables account for the
variation in effect-sizes in this meta-analysis. For both the intervention and correlational effects
tested in this review, there was substantial between-study unexplained heterogeneity in effects.
Future studies should explore other possible sources of variation in effects, such as
race/ethnicity, socio-economic status, education level, and other characteristics of the sample.
We acknowledge that characteristics of the study samples constrain the generalizability
of the results of this research. While the intervention studies included more culturally and
ethnically diverse samples in the U.S. and other countries, the correlational studies tended to
focus more on dominant group members (e.g. White participants in the U.S. and the U.K or
Indians in India). Except for studies that focused on reducing internalized bias among
stigmatized groups, there was limited demographic information provided in most studies
regarding sexual orientation, ability/disability status, and age, for example. As a result, the
general finding that mindfulness may be helpful in reducing bias directed towards others should
not be assumed to generalize to minoritized group members’ views about dominant group
members. Further, in the absence of an intersectional analysis on bias in the field, it remains
unclear how mindfulness may impact multiply minoritized individuals’ views about different
dimensions of internalized bias. For example, among sexual minority men of color, whether
mindfulness helps to reduce internalized racism and homophobia equally remains unknown.
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 54
Conclusion
This review concludes that mindfulness is a promising pathway to reducing intergroup
bias and internalized bias in the direction of greater equity and inclusion of marginalized groups.
We found multi-method evidence, across RCTs, other intervention designs, and correlational
studies that mindfulness inhibits intergroup bias and promotes anti-bias attitudes, affect, and
behavior in diverse country contexts and samples. Analysis of evidence and gaps in the literature
highlights the need for future studies to adopt rigorous RCT designs, examine mechanisms of
mindfulness, and target the under-researched areas of internalized bias and anti-bias attitudes,
affect, and behaviors among marginalized groups specifically. Creative approaches are needed to
operationalize minority experiences more thoroughly and recognize the complex intersectional
ways that dynamics of power and oppression manifest in intergroup contexts. At the same time,
we acknowledge that the problem of intergroup bias is complex and reinforced by systems of
oppression such as racism, sexism, and classism. Structural solutions are needed to address the
systemic nature of bias across life domains.
MINDFULNESS AND BIAS 55