The applicability of Big Five facets and Dark Tetrad traits on
Yukio Mishima’s novel protagonists
East Asian Journal of Popular Culture EAJPC 7.1. (1 April 2021), pp. 95-113 (preprint)
Bjorn Boman, Stockholm University
ABSTRACT
Psychological accounts of literature research are chiefly associated with a
psychoanalytical nomenclature, while research on personality psychology like the Five
Factor Model and the Dark Tetrad has mostly been investigated using questionnaires
and quantitative statistics. However, building upon a lexical understanding of the 30
Big Five personality facets, in tandem with the application of Dark Tetrad traits on
popular culture analysis initiated by Jonason et al., this article analyses the personality
profiles of five fictional protagonists, specifically five well-known novels of the
renowned Japanese author Yukio Mishima.
KEYWORDS:
Yukio Mishima, Big Five, Dark Tetrad, Japan, psychoanalysis,
personality
INTRODUCTION
From a historical vantage point, literary fiction and psychology have been closely
intertwined in several, often multidirectional ways. On the one hand there are the
pioneers in psychology, Sigmund Freud and C. G. Jung, who used mythological figures
to interpret a set of human psychological phenomena. On the other hand, there are
individuals within literary theory who have been inspired by Freud (e.g. Jacques Lacan,
Harold Bloom, Julia Kristeva, Camille Paglia) or his successor, Lacan (e.g. see,
Kristeva 1984; Bhabha 1994). Furthermore, several fictional writers such as Hermann
Hesse (2002) and Ursula Le Guin (2012) have drawn upon Jungian analytical
psychology, or Freudian psychoanalysis (e.g. Murakami 2005). Many academics have
been keen to apply psychoanalytical concepts to such disparate authors like Fyodor
Dostoyevsky (Breger 1989), Joseph Conrad (Meyer 1967), Chinua Achebe
(Esonwanne 2007) and John Fowles (Kochhar-Lindgren 1993). However, from a
scholarly perspective it is mainly psychoanalysis or related psychological theories used
in literary research which have been of major significance.
Psychological interpretations of fiction writers outside the West, like some of
the works on the Japanese author Yukio Mishima (born Kimitake Hiraoka, 1925–70),
have been accessible since the late 1970s. Ueda stresses,
The artist in language had to be a psychologist, too. Indeed, The Blue Period, The
Temple of the Golden Pavilion, and After the Banquet can be called psychological
novels in the sense that in each work the author vigorously pursues the internal, psychic
events in the protagonist’s life that culminate in the catastrophic external event.
(1976: 232)
Further, the life, authorship and quasi-political endeavours of this author have
been critically examined by Jerry Piven, who underscores the anal sadism, phallic
narcissism and misogyny within the frames of Mishima’s life and writings from a
psychoanalytical perspective. He goes on to demonstrate that Mishima’s childhood
shaped his disgust for females and resulted in a perverse, narcissistic and sadistic world-
view that in turn shaped his fictional protagonists to a substantial degree (Piven 2001,
2004; see also Cornyetz 2007). The narcissism of Mishima posing as ‘the last samurai’
– perhaps as a way of advertising his persona and books – has been underlined by Starrs
(1994), who also explores the palpable ultra-nationalism present in fictional works like
Runaway Horses, as well as Rankin (2018).
While scholars who have taken a serious interest in the persona and literature of
Mishima agree that he was a great literary talent, most depictions are negative – Ueda
(1976) and Rankin (2018), however, seem to be the most congenial – and stress the
deranged qualities of both Mishima himself and the protagonists and other characters
of the fictional works. Such critical representations are both relevant and insightful.
Nonetheless, a disadvantage is that the analyses become somewhat analytically
unnuanced and lexically limited. For instance, it might be the case that many scholars
tend to avoid the relatively conscientious and agreeable characters, like the middle-aged
female Kazu in After the Banquet (1960) and adolescent male Shinji in The Sound of
Waves (1954), in order to emphasize a particular narrative pattern. Further, the lexico-
psychological concepts that are used to describe Mishima and the novel characters are
mainly ‘dark’ (narcissism, sadism, misogyny) or signify negative ideological
connotations (ultra-nationalism, fascism). More positive (warmth, altruism, compliance,
dutifulness) or neutral traits (activity, fantasy, order), however, may be equally present
within several novels’ main characters.
Therefore, the 30 facets of the Big Five personality theory (openness to
experience, conscientiousness, agreeableness, extraversion and neuroticism), combined
with the Dark Tetrad (narcissism, psychopathy, Machiavellianism, sadism), may
provide a more kaleidoscopic portrait of Mishima’s body of work and offer a
complementary perspective to earlier scholarly effort in this respect. It will also
constitute a more thorough analysis of dark personality traits in popular culture in the
West and Japan initiated by Jonason et al. (2012). This perspective may be of
significance to both literature studies and popular culture studies. It is as much a
contribution to these fields as it is to the specific study of Mishima’s body of work.
I will limit the analysis to five works of Mishima, which however span over
almost the entire range of his career as a fictional writer: Forbidden Colours (1951),
The Sound of Waves (1954), The Temple of the Golden Pavilion (1956), The Sailor Who
Fell from Grace with the Sea (1963) and The Temple of Dawn (1970). While arbitrarily
selected, they may be appropriate for the application of a broader spectrum of
personality psychology concepts on literary analysis. For instance, The Temple of Dawn
is the third book in a tetralogy but includes pervasive themes of significance such as
personal development among the main character. As the biographical, cultural and
philosophical aspects of Mishima’s work have already been extensively dealt with (e.g.
see Nathan 2000; Starrs 1994; Inose 2012; Flanagan 2014; Rankin 2018; Piven 2004),
this article focuses more on personality psychology among main characters.
The article proceeds with a conceptual framework section, a methodological
section, a brief description of the cultural, biographical and philosophical dimensions
of Mishima’s authorship, an analysis of the five novels’ main characters, and ends with
a conclusive discussion.
THE BIG FIVE FACETS AND DARK TETRAD AS LITERARY
PERSONALITY TRAITS
The Big Five theory or Five Factor Model (FFM) consists of five personality domains,
sometimes referred to as OCEAN (openness to experience, conscientiousness,
agreeableness, extraversion, neuroticism). Although a complete scholarly consensus
has not been reached in this regard, each domain trait is typically understood to be
comprised of six facets, which represent narrower and more specific dimensions of
personality and corresponding behaviour. Thus, in total 30 facets exist within the range
of the Big Five taxonomy. As several personality psychologists have emphasized, the
Big Five are generally cross-culturally valid concepts to impose as etic or emic-etic
theoretical and methodological instruments, inclusive of Japan. This means that
Japanese lexical equivalents are found for the English Big Five concepts (John and
Srivastava 1999; Benet-Martinez and Oishi 2010; Oshio et al. 2013).
There is an overlap between psychoanalysis and personality psychology in that
psychoanalysis accounts for neurosis and psychosis (Rosenfeld 2003). Moreover,
personality psychology deviates from psychoanalysis while partially building on
similar concepts. For instance, Freud’s idea of the superego has influenced
conscientiousness (Roberts et al. 2013: 369).
Whereas personality is influenced by culture and culture influenced by
personality (Benet-Martinez and Oishi 2010), literary characters have not yet been
thoroughly analysed using the Big Five and/or the Dark Tetrad. Is it then too far-fetched
or methodologically unsound to use the Big Five, whether the five domains or 30 facets,
in literary studies, and even outside the West? A large body of evidence suggests the
appropriateness of applying the Big Five and Dark Tetrad in such regards. First, the Big
Five domains and facets reflect lexical categories in both western and non-western
countries, including Japan (John and Srivastava 1999; Benet-Martinez and Oishi 2010).
Personality traits, such as narcissism and sadism, are often used to describe fictional
characters in literary research (e.g. Paglia 1991; Orgad 2017). Moreover, Jonason et al.
(2012) have used dark personality traits to describe characters in popular culture in the
West and Japan, which signifies the appropriateness of to use the etic Big Five
taxonomy and Dark Tetrad – which are more or less interrelated – on fictional
characters. Further, although fragmented rather than systematic, the Mishima expert
Starrs (1994) has used lexical terms associated with the Big Five (e.g. neurotic, introvert,
extrovert, conscientious, fantasy) and Dark Tetrad (narcissism, sadism,
psychopathology) in his analysis of the psychology of Mishima’s body of work. Having
been influenced by Nietzsche as well as psychoanalysis, Mishima was inclined to draw
on images and categories of nihilism and pathology (Starrs 1994; Rankin 2018).
The four ‘dark’ subclinical traits narcissism, psychopathy, Machiavellianism
and everyday sadism are moderately intercorrelated and characterized by
disagreeableness, dishonesty and aggressiveness. Narcissists love to brag about
themselves and may often, but not necessarily, be exhibitionistic, whereas psychopaths
are callous and indifferent in relation to other people’s needs and interests. Moreover,
psychopaths tend to be very narcissistic. Machiavellians, after Niccolò Machiavelli’s
ideal prince, may exploit others using cunning and manipulation. Everyday sadists
enjoy hurting others or watch them being hurt (Paulhus 2014; Book et al. 2016).
Machiavellianism is to a large part a learned personality style rather than constituting a
fundamental biological propensity (Jonason and Webster 2010). Statistical research
shows that narcissism is the trait which seems to belong the least to the Dark Tetrad
constellation (Book et al. 2016), perhaps because it contains characteristics which are
looked upon as relatively normal or ‘bright’ under present cultural conditions, at least
in the West (Rauthman and Kolar 2012; Lasch 1979).
In literary research, many of these traits have been examined, often with a
psychoanalytical terminology and epistemological position (e.g. Paglia 1991; Orgad
2017). In popular fiction, 50 Shades of Grey (James 2011) has popularized sadism,
while film and TV characters, for instance James Bond and Batman, tend to possess a
broader constellation of dark traits. Similar characteristics are found among at least
some Japanese anime characters (Jonason et al. 2012) and one may identify more
instances in the East Asian region. The vile elementary school teacher Makoto Savada
in the Japanese TV drama Erased (Shimoyama 2017) possesses typical Dark Tetrad
traits, psychopathy in particular. Similarly, while Korean films such as Oldboy (Park
2003) and Burning (Lee 2018) contain neurotic, psychopathic and sadistic antagonists
(Boman 2020). Their opponents are typically more conscientious and agreeable
although the benevolent main characters may occasionally constitute more nuance and
complexity.
METHODOLOGY
The study is primarily based on a thematic reading (e.g. see Braun and Clarke 2006;
Krippendorff 2018) of the above-mentioned five works of Yukio Mishima in relation
to personality dimensions. The thematic aspects are related to the emphasis on the
personality of protagonists from the theoretical framework of the Big Five and Dark
Tetrad. Such themes are latent and requires a specific interpretation, rather than explicit
at the surface level (see Braun and Clarke 2006 for a discussion). It bridges the
humanities and social sciences into a broader integrative framework of popular culture
studies, similar to Jonason et al. (2012).
Specifically, the analysis does chiefly focus on the protagonist in each story and
how this literary character possesses, reflects or demonstrates the Big Five facets and
Dark Tetrad traits by means of behaviours, thoughts, emotions and descriptions.
Whereas the related literature includes some Japanese works, English translations of
Mishima have been used to avoid back-and-forth translations.
Not every facet or trait is discussed since it would require a too extensive and
repetitious description. Other novel characters, as well as the plot of each story, are only
relevant insofar as they are related to the protagonist’s actions or thoughts (for instance
the Chief of the friend group in The Sailor Who Fell from Grace with the Sea). Apart
from the traits and facets presented by Ziegler et al. (2014), the ‘correlated skill
adjective’ and ‘Analogous Childhood Temperament Skills’ emphasized by Heckman
and Kautz (2014: 348–49) have been useful when highlighting the nexus between
lexical categories and the expressed personality facets of the protagonists. Secondarily,
the analysis is based on the inclusion of related literature as authors who confirm similar
interpretations will be referred to where appropriate.
I will also pay less attention to the cultural context. To the extent that the
specific cultural milieu (and plot) of each novel is pertinent, it is briefly described in
the preamble of the analysis of each novel.
MISHIMA’S AUTHORSHIP
More generally, Mishima took interest in western (e.g. Greek mythology, British
literature, nihilism, decadence, bodybuilding), Japanese (e.g. Shinto, bushido, kendo,
seppuku) and broader East Asian cultural elements (e.g. Buddhism, Confucianism),
both in his personal life and writing. Mishima had an interest in writers like Friedrich
Nietzsche, Oscar Wilde, Georges Bataille and Joris-Karl Huysmans (Rankin 2018; see
also Inose 2012).
Mishima was also fluent in English and aware of the large impact of western
culture on Japan, often critically discussed in many of the essays and novels (Seikai
1992; Kiyoshi 2010: Rankin 2018). Elements of Japanese Mahayana Buddhism are
present in The Temple of the Golden Pavilion and to lesser degree The Sound of Waves,
whereas components of Thai Theravada Buddhism are explicit in The Temple of Dawn.
Thematically, many novels centre on beauty, death and eroticism, whether bisexual,
heterosexual or homosexual (Starrs 1994; Piven 2004; Nathan 2000; Inose 2012:
Rankin 2018).
A question that has concerned scholars on Mishima (e.g., see Seikai 1992;
Kiyoshi 2010) is why Mishima took interest in these rather disparate ideas and ideals,
because although Mishima’s proclivities might not have been as idiosyncratic as some
think these were not passively imposed on him. Thus, the interest reflects the general
tendencies in Japan at the time when Mishima was active as a cultural commentator
(Rankin 2018). Regardless of Mishima’s personal inclinations, he was active and made
decisions as someone who has overcome nihilism of the passive variety (Rankin 2018;
Starrs 1994).
FORBIDDEN COLOURS
The novel’s plot focuses on Shunsuké, an ageing yet well-respected author, who meets
the young and attractive Yuichi, an individual dissatisfied with a current heterosexual
relationship, and takes place in Toyo. Shunsuké uses Yuichi to avenge the supposed
hardships that the female sex has caused him throughout the stretches of his 65-year
existence. For instance, three of his earlier wives have betrayed him, in one case by
letting another man perform cunnilingus on her, almost in the presence of Shunsuké
(Piven 2004: 136, 153). That pursuit is linked to Shunsuké’s insistence of that Yuichi
ought to go through with an instrumental marriage with Yasuko, a well-off woman,
while concomitantly leading a promiscuous life with both male and female paramours.
These objectives are revealed at a relatively early stage of the plot, when Yuichi is
introduced to a woman, the Countess Mrs Kaburagi, whom Shunsuké wants his
apprentice to become intimate with:
Yuichi, on the other hand, felt embarrassed by the rashness which he had brought out
of the handkerchief. He felt he had been insincere. It was as if he were becoming sober
after a period of drunkenness and was not struck by the thought that his words and
actions might be taken as flirtatious. The habit of reflection had at last reconciled him
with his unhappy self. His eyes darkened, as usual. Shunsuké noticed it and felt
relieved at the joy of seeing something to which he had been accustomed. Not only
that, it was as if the luminous youthfulness Yuchi had exhibited earlier was all artifice
designed to help Shunsuké achieve his objectives. (Mishima 1968: 63)
As Piven (2004) argues, this novel is largely but far from entirely characterized by
palpable misogyny, which stems from Shunsuké personal past (and ultimately, perhaps,
Mishima’s own childhood) and contagiously spreads to his young adept. When asked
by Yuichi why one marries without the presence of love, Shunsuké elaborates his notion:
I’m not joking. Men marry logs; they can even marry ice boxes. Marriage is man’s
own invention. It is something he can do; desire isn’t necessary. At least in the past
one hundred years, mankind has forgotten how to act with passion. Just make believe
she’s a bundle of sticks, a cushion, a side of beef hanging from a beam in the butcher
shop. You’ll surely be able to conjure up a counterfeit passion to excite her and make
her happy. Nevertheless, as I told you before, to teach a woman pleasure is to incur a
hundred liabilities and not one asset. The only thing to be careful about is never to
acknowledge at any time that she has a soul. Even the dregs of a soul are out of the
question here. (Mishima 1968: 29)
Later, the misogyny that grows within Yuchi becomes apparent:
He looked at this woman who, having just ordered a new suit of clothes for him, was
now drunk in her small and conventional joy of giving, and thought how like a monkey
she was. Truthfully, this young man found it impossible to see any beautiful person,
so long as she was a woman, as more than a monkey. (Mishima 1968: 120)
Whereas Yuichi largely follows a similar route as Shunsuké, in the sense that he is
equally misogynic as the older mentor, he partly deviates at the end of the novel and
downplays this inclination, in favour of a more balanced outlook on the opposite sex.
Again, he is able to appreciate sexual and social relationships with women. This is
exemplified by the continuing family life in the last chapters. Shunsuké, on the other
hand, fails to reach a similar equilibrium. While talented and intelligent, he is cunning
and neurotic, and does not bear to handle the inevitable process of ageing and
decreasing beauty over the course of the lifespan (Piven 2004: 150–55). As indicated
by his shrewd attempts to convince Yuichi about the soullessness and perpetual flaws
of women, Shunsuké comes off as highly Machiavellian and narcissistic, and
moderately psychopathic and sadistic. Correspondingly, he appears low in all
agreeableness facets except for altruism (e.g. he gives Yuichi a monetary gift upon
committing suicide in the ending pages of the novel and is not bothered about a previous
loan that Yuichi has not yet repaid). In regard to neuroticism facets, he is highly self-
conscious and demonstrates moderate angry hostility (mainly directed towards women),
and similarly highly depressed and vulnerable.
Furthermore, one may ask if Shunsuké’s personality is associated with openness
to experience (action, idea, fantasy, aesthetics, feeling), and as such related to his
literary intellect and related expositions. For instance, he goes on to explain fragments
of Japanese history to Yuichi:
‘Do you know of anything in the Japanese Middle Ages like the worship of the Virgin
Mary in European medievalism?’ Shunsuké asked. Taking it for granted that the
answer would be negative he continued: ‘It was a worship of the catamite. It was a
time when the catamite was given the seat of honor at the banquet and was the first to
receive the Lord’s saké cup. I have a reproduction of an interesting and esoteric book
of that period’. (Mishima 1968: 65)
However, this passage does also indicate the Machiavellian cunning – the inclusion of
the catamite (a boy in a pederast relationship) serves as a clue for Shunsuké’s
encouragement of Yuichi’s homosexual acts and infidelity. Moreover, Shunsuké might
have a dogmatic set of beliefs that are in fact opposite to openness.
As a successful author, Shunsuké is nevertheless high in the conscientiousness
facet competence and moderate in the others. While not particularly agreeable (but
perhaps rather extrovert, which is demonstrated by throwing multiple parties) he is not
reckless and manifests moderate trust in relation to Yuichi, although it might be hard to
separate from manipulation (Machiavellianism). Further, he dies contended at the end,
as if he has reconciled with his own evaporating existence, rather than in an act of
desperation.
Indeed, if Yuichi would have been deemed the protagonist – he could as well
be regarded as such, but for the sake of coherence only Shunsuké’s personality is
examined – the Dark Tetrad, openness to experience, and neuroticism constitution
would have looked different. Yuichi is not as intellectually oriented to say the least, but
also less neurotic and Machiavellian compared to Shunsuké if one accounts for the
entirety of this long story.
THE SOUND OF WAVES
The plot of the novel is predominantly centred on the lives of some individuals and
families on a fictional island, Uta-Jima (Song island), located south of Tokyo and Mt.
Fuji in Japan. Shinji is a simple fisherman’s son, whose mother is a pearl diver (and
widow), and falls in love with the pretty Katsue, the daughter of an aristocratic local
family who has been adopted out to pearl divers but then brought back by the father
after the only son’s sudden death. While the love appears mutual, Shinji is not an
appropriate future husband in the eyes of the father, especially after false sexual
rumours are spread around the local village. Things are further complicated due to a
failed rape attempt of Shinji’s rival, Yasuo, on Hatsue but the end is unequivocally
joyful.
This novel is sometimes described as a coming-of-age story which focuses on
Shinji’s maturation, from a sympathetic but unexperienced adolescent to a grown man
who impresses the surroundings by physical capability and moral character (while the
rival Yasuo is described as lazy, hence unconscientious). Moreover, it is indeed
Mishima’s most bright and perhaps unrealistic depiction of Japan (Napier 1995: 20–
26). At the end of the story, Shinji demonstrates character and suitability as a future
husband to Hatsue when he manages to swim against a strong current by sea and tie a
lifeline to a buoy. That is further elaborated in one of the ending paragraphs by Hatsue’s
father, Terukichi Miyata, who quite explicitly underlines Shinji’s personality facets
such as dutifulness, trust, compliance, altruism, warmth and activity. ‘The only things
that really counts in a man is his get-up-and-go. If he’s get-up-and-go he’s a real man,
and those are the kind of men we need here on Uta-jima. Family and money are all
secondary’ (Mishima 1994a: 175). The responsibility demonstrated by Shinji’s bravery
is from a personality trait-facet viewpoint understood by John and Srivastava (1999) as
the presence of agreeableness and conscientiousness at the trait domain level.
All facets linked with Shinji are associated with pro-social personality traits
such as conscientiousness, extraversion and agreeableness. If there is anything
moderately related to the Dark Tetrad in this story it is situated in the indolent and
attempt-rapist Yasuo, who ends up as the loser of the interpersonal battle with Shinji.
The confidence (assertiveness), self-control and other positive traits and facets of Shinji
(and Hatsue) are underscored by Ueda (1976: 244–45). Thus, the protagonist is
presented as a true everyday hero, quite different from the Machiavellian antiheroes
often found in contemporary popular culture (Jonason et al. 2012). To the extent that
Shinji is associated with the passive/active nihilism repeatedly underscored by Starrs
(1994) it seems to be an agreeable and conscientious type, almost the opposite of the
neuroticism, narcissism and sadism associated with several other Mishima novels.
An interesting dimension to consider is to which extent Shinji shares the
openness to experience facets. This sensational ambiguity is underlined in the following
passage, where at first he appears not as excitement-seeking and open to experience as
his urban contemporaries: ‘Surrounded though he was by the vast ocean, Shinji did not
especially burn with impossible dreams of great adventure across the seas’ (Mishima
1994a: 19), but demonstrates his feelings and fantasies,
Even so, when the day’s fishing was almost done, the sight of a white freighter sailing
against the evening clouds on the horizon filled the boy’s heart with strange emotions.
From far away the world came pressing in upon him with a hugeness he had never
before apprehended. The realization of this unknown world came to him like a distant
thunder, now pealing from afar, now dying away from nothingness. (Mishimia 1994a)
The intrepid swim at the end of the novel, which indirectly makes him fortify
his position on the island since it granted him the respect of Hatsue’s father, is Shinji’s
most adventurous moment. However, his achievement striving is in fact laid out earlier
in the novel when he utters his future plans in the company of Hatsue:
As for me, some day I want to buy a costal frighter with the money I’ve worked for
and saved, and then go into the shipping business with my brother, carrying lumber
from Kishu and coal from Kyushu. […] Then I’ll have my mother take it easy, and
when I’ll get old I’ll come back to the island and take it easy too. (Mishima 1994a: 53)
Hence, the conscientious facets, as well as agreeable conscientiousness (i.e.
responsibility) appear unimpeachably situated in the novel’s protagonist.
THE TEMPLE OF THE GOLDEN PAVILION
Mizoguchi is the protagonist of this story, whose plot is predominantly unfolded at the
Golden pavilion, Kinkaku-ji, in the city of Kyoto, just prior to the end of Second World
War and the consecutive years after Japan’s defeat. In part, Mishima has built the story
on the historical events of a young monk, Hayashi Yoken, who burned down the Golden
Pavilion in 1950 (Starrs 1994).
The fictional adolescent individual has been reminded of his stutter and physical
unattractiveness throughout his entire childhood, which have led him to contradictorily
obsess about beauty while simultaneously resenting it. According to Mizoguchi, the
Golden Pavilion manifests the highest form of beauty, why he eventually ponders about
its destruction.
Other events and regular occurrences that have shaped Mizoguchi’s personality
is bullying because of the stutter (‘Some of the more ill-behaved children used to make
fun of me by imitating a stuttering priest as he tried to stammer his way through the
sutras’ Mishima 2001: 4) and when he, as a 13-year-old, gazed at his mother when she
fornicated with a relative, while the father acted passively (Mishima 2001: 50–52).
Using psychoanalytical terminology, the latter may be categorized as a form of primal
scene (Piven 2004). The mother’s disparaging of Mizoguchi is also spelled out, ‘you
fool!’, she said. ‘If they start taking stutterers like you into the Army, Japan is really
defeated!’ (Piven 2004: 57). These events, in tandem with the bullying, have shaped
the personality of Mizoguchi who has become traumatized by the mother’s betrayal and
the father’s passiveness. As Piven (2004: 194–99) stresses, Mizoguchi’s encounter with
the beautiful yet deprecatory girl Uiko has afflicted him. She is later punished for a
crime, which Piven (2004) interprets as a form of symbolic revenge (according to
Mizoguchi’s internal logic), and somewhat accidentally shot dead. Yet, her ghostly
presence manifests itself under a set of sexual circumstances.
Further, Mizoguchi is involved in several disconcerting situations, such as an
inability to couple with a girl (later in the story, however, he manages to have
intercourse with a prostitute, why he actively transcends his impotence) and the
unintended fault of a terminated pregnancy of another young woman (whom he,
however, is pleased with). These events appear to have magnified the protagonist’s
resentment against mankind, perhaps women in particular, although he regains some
degree of inner strength and novel perspectives from the friendship with the candidly
sadistic Kashiwagi. Perhaps a moderate degree of warmth (friendliness) is also
connected to his mourning of a deceased friend, the decent student Tsurukawa.
Indeed, there is little if anything associated with agreeableness and extraversion
at the trait domain level but since Mizoguchi spends considerable time with the
clubfooted, yet assertive and socially shrewd Kashiwagi while attending university for
a certain period, he might be considered ambivert rather than introvert as Starrs (1994:
116) has suggested. These passages provide a clear insight into Mizoguchi’s individual
philosophy and personality profile:
My sudden flight from the temple in November of that year came as an accumulation
of all these things. When I thought about it later, I realized that this flight of mine,
which seemed so sudden, had in fact been by considerable reflection and hesitation. I
preferred, however, to believe that I had been driven by some abrupt impulse. Since I
was essentially lacking in anything impulsive, I was addicted to a form of spurious
impulsiveness. In the case of a man who, for example, had been planning to visit his
father’s grave on the following day, but who when the day comes and he finds himself
in front of the station, suddenly changes his mind and decides to go and visit a drinking-
companion of his, one can say that this shows any genuine impulsiveness? Is not his
sudden change of mind a sort of revenge that he takes on his own will? Is it not, in fact,
something more conscious than his long-standing preparations to visit his grave?
(Mishima 2001: 161–62)
Moreover, about the gradual depletion of conscientious facets:
After I had made sure of the Superior’s anger by means of my trick with the photograph,
I started to neglect my studies at the university. This was quite obvious. In my
preparatory year’s course, I had the best results in Chinese and History, scored eighty-
four marks in those two courses and a total of seven hundred and forty-eight marks,
thus ranking twenty-fourth in a class of eighty-four students. […] It was in my third
year, however, that I really began to neglect my studies – not because I had any money
to waste my time with, but simply from the joy of being idle. (Mishima 2001: 162)
Mizoguchi, as he evolves throughout the story, appears highly neurotic, psychopathic
and sadistic. For instance, he feels aroused rather than repulsed after having trampled
on the belly of the pregnant girl (Piven 2004). Specifically, the thoughts and actions
demonstrate self-consciousness, angry hostility and anxiety, especially at the dramatic
end of the story. While the idea of to incinerate the temple may have been deliberate
rather than an act of impulse, it nevertheless indicates callousness; he does not even
reflect on any human collateral damage in relation to the act of obliteration. Mizoguchi
is not the prototypical Dark Tetrad character but does rather display traits and facets
typical of a neurotic psychopath, traumatized by his childhood, peculiar ideals and
incapacity to deal with the individual circumstances and shortcomings.
One may notice, though, that Mizoguchi’s fantasies and ideas are characteristic
of a creative, intellectual mind partly associated with openness. Furthermore, since he
attends a university, with the aim to one day follow in the father’s footsteps and become
a Superior of the Golden pavilion, and is initially capable in that pursuit, he is at first to
be regarded as moderately competent, self-disciplined and achievement striving, which
may reflect Mishima’s own conscientious facets (Starrs 1994). On the other hand, he is
not reluctant to occasionally skip classes at university and instead follow Kashiwagi,
which indicates a depletion of self-discipline which is further manifested as he neglects
his studies. Kashiwagi does gradually become less conscientious as the story evolves.
Overall, although one may associate the main character with the Dark Tetrad
and neurotic tendencies, there is much nuance, ambiguity and complexity manifested
in its fictional persona. Starrs notes:
The active/passive psychological dialectic, indeed, is more clearly and dramatically
presented in Mizoguchi than in the Confessions’s protagonist. The polar oppositions
in his psyche are more extreme: he is more neurotically introverted but, at the same
time, more capable of exploding into real destructive action. In this sense, indeed, he
is the most ‘well-rounded’, multi-dimensional creation, neither completely passive like
the Confession’s protagonist or Honda. (1994: 116)
That may partly be because this is as much a philosophical as a psychological novel
and Mizoguchi’s ideas develop as the story unfolds – from passive to active nihilism
(Starrs 1994).
THE SAILOR WHO FELL FROM GRACE WITH THE SEA
The core of the plot highlights Noboru, a 13-year-old boy who lives with his mother in
Yokohama, a large coastal city in the greater Tokyo Metropolitan area. Early in the
story the reader becomes accustomed to the sexual fantasies of the voyeuristic boy who
conveys that he often gazes at the rather young and physically attractive mother through
a peephole. As Piven (2004) asserts, voyeurism is a recurrent theme in many of
Mishima’s novels and, indeed, this is another instantiation.
However, while being important for the foundation of the personality of Noburu,
this somewhat deviant behaviour is not a recurrent theme throughout the plot of the
novel. Noburu’s behaviour is revealed by an outrageous mother, while the agreeable
sailor, Ryuji, immediately forgives his new ‘son’, a nascent killer, in an ironic fashion.
In that moment of shameful silence, Noburu’s self-conscious side is manifested. Instead
the focus shifts when Noboru’s mother has intercourse with the chummy seaman who,
in the first instance, becomes an archetypical role model of the grandiose ideals of the
young boy and the accompanying elitist friends, largely led by the Chief (Piven 2004).
Their ideals reflect a precocious intellectual constitution – perhaps a reflection of
Mishima’s precocious literary talent (Starrs 1994: 25) – while they are simultaneously
callous like a juvenile school bully or delinquent and are associated with openness to
experience facets such as ideas, fantasy, action, aesthetics and values, which do not per
se require any positive associations. Piven underscores ‘these boys do not prefer reality
to fantasy, and Mishima’s characters are perpetually insisting on the pleasures of the
imagined and the disappointments of reality’ (2004: 219). In this work, as in other
novels, Mishima juxtaposes fantasy, aesthetics, feeling, ideas and values, but not
necessarily action, and contextualizes them to fit the particular circumstances of each
main character. Mishima as a boy and adolescent had a vast intellect (Starrs 1994) and
this reflects on Noburu.
On the other hand, as an extension of their explicit hatred against the adult world,
their maleficent plans to murder the sailor when he, according to the young boys’
viewpoint, betrays their lofty ideals and a greater personal calling in favour of the
pursuit of becoming an unctuous parent, as well as the callous treatment of a defenceless
kitten (understood a sort of in-group rite of passage), are associated with the Dark
Tetrad traits narcissism, Machiavellianism, psychopathy and sadism. The stylistically
remarkable, graphic descriptions of the intestines of the dead cat (which are displayed
after the Chief has dissected the kitten’s corpse with a scissor) are perhaps more of a
reflection of Mishima’s inner constitution, and/or stylistic excesses, than a sign of
psychopathy and sadism. They reflect ‘a deep psychological need to isolate tender
feelings’ (Piven 2004: 223). Be that as it may, the protagonist (and the Chief)
unquestionably falls into the category of high Dark Tetrad traits, which is evident in
several sections of Chapter 5 and later:
Noburu seized the kitten by the neck and stood up. It dangled dumbly from his fingers.
He checked himself for pity; like a lighted window seen from an express train, it
flickered for an instant in the distance and disappeared. He was relieved.
(Mishima 1994b: 57)
The Chief always insisted it would take acts such as this to fill the world’s great hollows.
Though nothing else could do it, he said, murder would still fill those gaping caves in
much the same way that a crack along its face will fill a mirror. Then they would achieve
real power over existence (Mishima 1994b: 47).
The extrovert and neurotic facets are less palpable, although angry hostility is
related to the fury Noboru senses in relation to the sailor. For example, he summarizes
a set of counts, reminiscent of a lawyer, both precocious and infantile. Noburu lists the
sailor’s ‘crimes’ as follow:
CHARGES AGAINST RYUJI TSUKAZAKI:
ONE: smiling at me in a cowardly, ingratiating way when I met him this morning.
TWO: wearing a dripping-wet shirt and explaining that he had taken a shower in the
fountain at the park – just like an old bum.
THREE: deciding arbitrarily to spend the night out with Mother, thereby placing me
in a dreadfully isolated position.
But after thinking it over, Noburu erased the third count. It was obviously a
contradiction of the first two, which were aesthetic, idealistic, and therefore objective
value judgments. The subjective problem in the third charge was only proof of his own
immaturity, not to be construed as a crime on Ryuji’s part. (Mishima 1994b: 65)
Piven (2004: 210–15) offers a psychoanalytical reading of Noboru’s voyeurism. What
is fairly obvious is that besides the anger, directed towards the sailor rather than the
austere mother, is that Noboru suffers from separation anxiety and vulnerability. He
signs of weakness (agreeableness signifies weakness in this context), the young and
vulnerable, Dark Tetrad males quickly punish him.
In regard to extraversion, one may notice that Noboru is relatively gregarious
since he spends significant amount of time with friends, but warmth is lacking and there
are no signs of agreeableness. Neither is there any unambiguous evidence of the
conscientiousness facet achievement striving, but moderate dutifulness, deliberation
and self-discipline are present since he is set to fulfil the promises made and carry
through both the dreadful rite of passage (kill the defenceless kitten) and the
consecutive act of murder. While somewhat hesitant at first, he is convinced by the
Chief that there are no other options, according to their misanthropic world-view, why
the sailor must die. The murder of the sailor is a symbolic gesture of the betrayal of the
sailor’s ideals, since it explicitly relates to his falling for Noboru’s mother, which is a
fall from masculine power into emasculated domesticity (Piven 2004).
Indeed, Noboru does fit a typical pattern of an unconscientious young
psychopath, as the personality profile is predominantly dark and deranged. Like many
other of Mishima’s novel protagonists, regardless of age, however, he also manifests
facets associated with openness to experience (fantasy, aesthetic, action, ideas and
values). Thus, the personality profile is not unitarily ‘dark’.
THE TEMPLE OF DAWN
The Temple of Dawn is the third book of the tetralogy Sea of Fertility, seen as the
culmination of Mishima’s literary career (Flanagan 2014: 238). It focuses less on
economic and political aspects in comparison to the two earlier books in the series,
Spring Snow and Runaway Horses. Instead more emphasis is set on the new protagonist
Shigekuni Honda (referred to as Honda throughout the novel), in the second part of the
book 57 years old, and his cognizance about inevitable death and extinction. To
reconcile with death, or at least gain a deeper understanding of samsara (the idea of
death and rebirths), Honda studies Buddhism in Thailand and Hindu beliefs in India
throughout the first part of the book. Despite these deeper philosophical aspirations and
spies on a couple who have intercourse, among other ways of displaying a depraved,
lustful personality.
For instance, the protagonist fantasises about a young Thai princess whom he
had met in Bangkok early in the story when she was a child. Ying Chan, now a young
woman, has a symbolic, quasi-religious meaning for Honda (he thinks of this person as
an avatara, ‘incarnation’, of a childhood friend presented in the first novel of the
with lively details. Starrs stresses,
The moral and physical decline of Japan over the course of the tetralogy is paralleled
by Honda’s own decline, which also occurs on both the physical and moral levels. […]
By old age he has become a caricature of himself, no longer a detached, philosophic
observer but now a prurient voyeur, spying on proletarian lovers in city parks. (1970:
58–59)
The voyeurism associated with this quote was preceded by the spying of Ying
Chan and Honda’s female friend Keiko couple, a pursuit which he does not even hide
from his wife, Rié, when she unexpectedly interrupts his morally dubious affairs.
body like that she ought to have a lot of children’ [Mishima 1970: 313]).
Honda is not a pure sadist, narcissist, Machiavellian or psychopath, but shares
some features – such as lack of self-control – with a psychopathic personality style.
Moreover, according to Starrs he appears narcissistic, ‘[t]he words the tetralogy’s
Honda applies to himself, in fact, could also be applied to the narrator/protagonist of
the Confession’s he uses his philosophy “merely to serve his self-love”’ (1994: 39).
Further, the main character seems moderately depressed and anxious, two facets
linked to neuroticism, but that is based as much of the philosophy as the psychology of
the protagonist; Starrs even suggests that the last novels of Mishima are ‘anti-
psychological’. Nevertheless, Honda seeks excitement, a facet associated with
extraversion but remains ‘passive’ (Starrs 1994: 116). Adding to this plethora of
personality characteristics, his openness to experience inclination leads him to indulge
in everything from unconventional sexual activities to traditional religio-philosophical
beliefs. Starr’s passive/active nihilism reading of Mishima indicates that this interest
lacks substance since it is void of any real meaning (Starrs 1994: 54–55). However,
applying the analogous openness to experience skills suggested by Heckman and Kautz
(2014: 348), Honda’s preference reflects ‘pleasure in low-intensity activities’ and,
indeed, ‘curiosity’. In that respect, he appears puerile, despite the broad intellect.
In regard to conscientiousness, it is pertinent to add that Honda is a former
lawyer and at least moderately competent and achievement striving. As Starrs (1994:
36) notes, Mishima himself was a conscientious lawyer by profession and, indeed, a
very industrious writer. However, as Honda develops throughout the second part of the
novel, facets such as order, dutifulness and self-discipline appear low based on his
actions. On the other hand, a passage indicates that he is relatively agreeable and
gregarious, ‘Honda was likable, unobjectionable to the women. How freely they talked
in front of him, whereas they at once hid behind innocuous social chatter when Rié
approached’ (Mishima 1970: 166). Such sections, and the whole of the story, implicates
that the pro-social or ‘bright’ personality features appear salient. On the other hand, it
is not unthinkable that these behaviours reflect Machiavellian cunning, or tatemae (a
public façade in Japanese culture) as suggested by one reviewer.
Perhaps, the protagonist of The Temple of Dawn is the most kaleidoscopic of
the five characters dissected in this analysis, in that he transcends the Dark Tetrad
teenager Noburu in The Sailor Who Fell from Grace with the Sea, as well as the
conscientious and agreeable Shinji in The Sound of Waves. Some features are shared
with Shunsuké in Forbidden Colours, who likewise combines neurotic tendencies with
hedonic pursuits and a vast intellect, although the latter protagonist appears less
agreeable, and more Machiavellian compared to Honda.
As Starrs asserts in regard to Mishima’s relationship to passive vs. active
nihilism in the debut novel Confessions of a Mask, ‘[w]ith his overdeveloped intellect
and underdeveloped feelings, he was ideally suited to play the writer’s role of passive
observer, man of words rather than man of action’ (1994: 40). The first dependent
clause of the sentence may be extended to the protagonists of Forbidden Colours, The
Temple of the Golden Pavilion and The Temple of Dawn, while Noboru is at most a
premature intellect influenced by vile companions and Shinji constitutes somewhat of
a literary outlier.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
As noted in the previous section, the overall findings indicate that four out of five
literary characters are associated with ‘dark’ and neurotic traits and facets, although in
different ways and perhaps to different extents. Moreover, Honda appears quite
variegated and his personality is associated with ‘high levels’ of most facets. As one
reviewer underscored, no character besides Shinji is ‘open’ (to experience) but some
facets like fantasy, aesthetics, ideas and values are applicable to all characters and
perhaps Mishima himself (Ueda 1976; Starrs 1994; Rankin 2018). Much of the earlier
literature has, indeed, emphasized the dark and neurotic traits of characters but the
inclusion of Big Five demands the interpreter to transcend the dark and neurotic traits
and also consider openness to experience, agreeableness, conscientiousness and
extraversion/introversion. For instance, it is interesting to consider Honda to be
extrovert and agreeable or not and underline the conscientious/unconscientious
dynamics in regard to Mizoguchi. Similarly, the trait openness to experience and related
facets require the analyst and reader to reflect on how these should be linked to literary
characters.
This study has a number of limitations and the analysis should therefore mainly
be seen as exploratory. One limitation concerns that only five works have been analysed,
why it is difficult to say something general about Mishima’s authorship in that regard.
However, such demarcations are, indeed, necessary in this format. Even the scrutiny of
one single main character might lack some depth. Nevertheless, the thematic analysis
offered in this article is a development compared to the almost superficial analysis of
film/TV characters conducted by Jonason et al. (2012).
Moreover, only English translations of Mishima’s work have been used. Hence,
aligning Japanese personality psychology concepts (often adjectives) with the
characters in the original works of Mishima (or other authors) might be fruitful. Perhaps
it is difficult to combine the quantitative design of current personality psychology with
literary analysis, although a solution could be to use multiple coders (in relation to co-
authorship) to quantify traits and facets (e.g. see Armstrong et al. 1997). However, as
John and Srivastava (1999) and Benet-Martinez and Oishi (2010) have underlined,
these personality concepts are ultimately rooted in lexical categories in each culture and
language, why a qualitative alignment is feasible. As such, future analyses may focus
less on broader thematic readings of characters and more on the specific language used
to describe characters’ personality, actions, inclinations, thoughts and behaviour.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author acknowledges two reviewers for their important comments on earlier
versions of this manuscript.