STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 1
Does Students’ Awareness of School-Track-Related Stereotypes Exacerbate Inequalities
in Education?
Lisa Bardach1*, Claudia Neuendorf1, Kou Murayama1, Thorsten Fahrbach1, Michel Knigge2,
Benjamin Nagengast1,3, and Ulrich Trautwein1
1 University of Tübingen, Hector Research Institute of Education Sciences and Psychology,
Tübingen, Germany
2 Humboldt University Berlin, Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, Berlin, Germany
3 Department of Education and the Brain & Motivation Research Institute (bMRI), Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
* Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Lisa Bardach, University of
Tübingen, Hector Research Institute of Education Sciences and Psychology, Walter-Simon-
Straße 12, 72072 Tübingen, Germany; Phone: +49/07071 29-76577; E-mail:
lisa.bardach@uni-tuebingen.de
Acknowledgments: This study’s research questions, hypotheses, and main analyses were
preregistered on the Open Science Framework prior to the main analyses (on December 7,
2022, see the anonymized link:
and supporting information can also be found on the OSF.
Funding statement: The TRAIN study was funded by the Ministry of Education and Cultural
Affairs Baden Württemberg, the Robert-Bosch foundation and the Hertie-foundation. Lisa
Bardach and Kou Murayama are supported by Jacobs Foundation Research Fellowships, and
Kou Murayama is supported by an Alexander von Humboldt Professorship endowed by the
German Federal Ministry of Education and Research.
This manuscript is currently under review and may be subject to change.
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 2
Abstract
Early ability tracking increases inequalities in education. It has been proposed that the
awareness of negative school-track-related stereotypes contributes to educational inequalities
as they particularly hinder the thriving of students in lower, stigmatized tracks. The present
study tested this assumption in a sample of 3,880 German secondary school students from
three tracks, who were assessed four times on stereotype awareness regarding their own
school track and academic outcomes (achievement, engagement, self-concept) between
Grades 5 and 8. Students in the lowest track reported higher levels of stereotype awareness
than higher track students or students attending a combined track. Stereotype awareness
increased across time in all tracks. Contrary to our preregistered hypotheses, however,
(changes in) stereotype awareness were not more strongly related to (changes in) most
outcomes in the lowest track in comparison with the other two tracks.
Keywords: stereotypes, tracking, inequalities in education, educational outcomes,
academic achievement
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 3
Does Students’ Awareness of School-Track-Related Stereotypes Exacerbate Inequalities
in Education?
Many education systems all around the globe group students by ability. Often, the
sorting of students into different educational tracks is viewed as a way to help educators target
students’ learning needs more effectively. At the same time, tracking has lasting
consequences for students’ learning and later careers. For instance, educational tracks
represent differential developmental contexts, with higher average levels of teaching quality
and learning rates in higher tracks (Becker et al., 2012; Maaz et al., 2008). Further, the
assignment to different school tracks has been criticized for reproducing existing social class
differences (Chu et al., 2018; Maaz et al., 2008), as children from less socioeconomically
advantaged families have a higher chance of being enrolled in a lower track secondary school.
These tracking decisions cannot be explained by lower abilities of disadvantaged groups
alone, as it has been shown that teachers provide higher tracking recommendation for students
coming from higher socioeconomic status backgrounds than for equally performing students
with lower socioeconomic status (Batruch et al., 2022).
Additionally, students’ awareness of stereotypes relating to their school track could
further exacerbate inequalities. Stereotypes capture oversimplified beliefs about
characteristics of members of certain groups (Durante & Fiske, 2018), and educational tracks
generate different stereotypes about the students attending these tracks. Stereotypes regarding
students in higher ability tracks (higher status) involve the characterizations that they are
“smart” and “perform well,” whereas the opposite is expected from students attending lower
ability tracks (lower status) for whom negative stereotypes prevail (e.g., being “stupid or
“unmotivated”; Chu et al., 2018; Domina et al., 2017; Durante & Fiske, 2017; Knigge &
Hannover, 2011). Being aware of negative stereotypes can lead to disengagement from the
stigmatized domain and lower domain-specific performance (Knigge & Hannover, 2011;
Steele, 1997). Hence, awareness of negative school-track-related stereotypes may become a
psychological barrier that particularly hinders the thriving of lower track students.
However, prior quantitative research on students’ awareness of school-track-related
stereotypes has been surprisingly scarce (Chu et al., 2018; Knigge & Hannover, 2011; Spruyt,
2015), leaving serious gaps in the current understanding. The present longitudinal study
therefore set out to investigate (a) mean-level differences in students’ awareness of negative
school-track-related stereotypes (comprising negative cognitive, motivational, and social
stereotypes) between tracks, (b) developmental trajectories of stereotype awareness, and (c)
relationships between (changes in) stereotype awareness and (changes in) academic outcomes
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 4
in terms of academic achievement, self-concept of academic aptitude, and school engagement.
We relied on a sample of German secondary school students from three different
nonacademic tracks who were assessed four times on their awareness of stereotypes and all
outcomes between the ages of 11 and 14 years (Grades 5, 6, 7, and 8). Specifically, our
sample included students from the German federal state of Baden-Württemberg attending
Hauptschule, the lowest track in Germany, and Realschule, a higher track. Our sample also
included students from Mittelschule, a combined track (students in this track could get a
diploma equivalent to Hauptschule or a diploma equivalent to Realschule) from the German
federal state of Saxony. Multigroup models were used to examine potentially differentiated
patterns of effects in different school tracks. Throughout the manuscript, students’ awareness
of school-track-related stereotypes refers to stereotypes pertaining to a student’s own school
track (i.e., students from a particular track report how aware they are of stereotypes that
pertain only to their track) and not stereotypes that pertain to other tracks.
Awareness of School-Track-Related Stereotypes: Mean Differences Between Tracks
The placement in a relatively lower track (compared with a relatively higher track) can
be perceived as a devalued social position reflective of a student’s ability and includes
information about the student’s standing in society (Hargreaves, 1967; Legette, 2020; van
Houtte, 2017). Tracking thus provides students with institutionalized status labels that are
highly visible and impactful (e.g., with respect to later career chances and life paths; Negru-
Subtirica et al. 2015; Spruyt, 2015). Moreover, students know about the image of their track
in society. Consequently, lower track students are aware of the negative stereotypes that
“others” or “people in general” hold about their school track (Knigge & Hannover, 2011;
Spruyt, 2015), even though they do not necessarily endorse these negative stereotypes
themselves (see also research on social stigma; e.g., Major & O’Brien, 2005).
In accordance with this awareness, it has been found that about 20% of students from
the lower vocational track in Belgium agreed with the statement “Some people look down on
me because of the studies I’m enrolled in,” in comparison with less than 12% in the higher
general education track (Spruyt, 2015). In another study relying on the same stereotype
awareness measure as the current study, German students from the lowest track (Hauptschule)
reported significantly higher levels of awareness of negative school-track-related stereotypes
than students from the highest track (Gymnasium). That is, students from the lowest track
more strongly believed that people in general think that the typical student from their track
possesses negative attributes in the cognitive (e.g., “stupid”), motivational (e.g.,
“uninterested”), and social domains (e.g., “not well-behaving”; Knigge & Hannover, 2011).
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 5
These differences in stereotype awareness between tracks as well as the content of stereotypes
can also be linked to differentiation-polarization theory (e.g., Abraham, 1989; Hargreaves,
1967; Van Houtte, 2006). The theory states that the differentiation of students into different
tracks leads to a polarization of the students’ school attitudes. For higher track students,
school is a positive experience, given that belonging to a higher track reflects a higher status.
By contrast, lower track students lose status due to their assignment to a lower and less valued
track. Lower track students therefore react against this system and the values it upholds,
namely, ability and hard work. Consequently, an “antischool culture” emerges in the lower
tracks (Hargreaves, 1967; Van Houtte, 2006, 2015). Here, we argue that polarization might be
reflected not only in school cultures and the corresponding school attitudes (as in the initial
formulation of the theory) but also in students’ awareness of how the public perceives their
track and the characteristics of students from their track, with negative characteristics that are
detrimental to academic success (akin to antischool cultures and attitudes) being attributed to
lower track students.
Hence, regarding the pre-registered Research Question 1 (RQ1, differences between
tracks), we hypothesized that we would find mean differences between tracks in all four
waves, with higher average levels of negative school-track-related stereotypes for students
from the lowest track in comparison with students from the combined track and the higher
track.
Developmental Trajectories of Students’ Awareness of School-Track-Related
Stereotypes
Conceptually, stereotypes have often been considered to be fixed, persisting even in
the face of conflicting evidence (e.g., Garcia-Marques et al., 2010). Thus, students’ awareness
of school-track-related stereotypes could remain stable over time, reflecting stable status
differences between tracks within a society that are visible to students. On the other hand, it
has been highlighted that stereotypes can undergo developmental changes during the school
years (e.g., Cromley et al., 2013; Totonchi et al., 2021). For students’ awareness of school-
track-related stereotypes, both increasing and decreasing trajectories seem theoretically
plausible.
Students’ awareness of negative school-track-related stereotypes may increase over
time, at least in the lower tracks. During (early) adolescence, students gain a more nuanced
understanding of their own social position and become more sensitive to cues reflecting the
devalued position of their group (here: lower track students) in society (e.g., Durante & Fiske,
2017; Goodman et al., 2015; Rivenbark et al., 2019). These developmental processes likely
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 6
provide a fertile foundation for lower track students’ stereotype awareness. In addition,
differentiation-polarization theory also holds for school staff, as different tracks
institutionalize specific expectations among teachers and principals. Thus, staff members in
lower track schools tend to expect less from their students, create less academically oriented
environments, and hold negative school-track-related stereotypes themselves (Nolkemper et
al., 2019; Spruyt, 2015; Van Houtte, 2006), which could nourish their students’ awareness of
school-track-related stereotypes. Further, the awareness of negative school-track-related
stereotypes is likely intertwined with other tracking-relevant aspects, such as students’ sense
of futility (Van Houtte, 2006). Sense of futility captures a fatalistic image of the future,
combined with an, albeit vague, group identification (e.g., “People like me will not have much
of a chance to do what we want in life”; Spruyt, 2015; Van Houtte, 2015). Sense of futility is
more prevalent in lower tracks and increases over time, especially in the lower tracks (Van
Houtte, 2006, 2015). Hence, similar trajectories may be found for students’ awareness of
school-track-related stereotypes.
Alternatively, borrowing from theory and prior research on effects of tracking on
academic self-concept (e.g., Chmielewski et al., 2013), stereotype awareness could weaken
over the secondary school years, even in the lower tracks. As soon as students are placed in a
track at the beginning of secondary school, they spend most of their time with students from
their track. In educational systems relying on between-school tracking, lower track students
have been found to report higher academic self-concepts than higher track students. The
opposite pattern was obtained for course-by-course tracking (Chmielewski et al., 2013). The
authors concluded that these findings could be explained by the different reference groups:
Whereas course-by-course tracking constantly reminds students of the relative status of their
track, for between-school tracking, the salient reference group shifts over time from the entire
age cohort to only those students in one’s own track (Chmielewski et al., 2013). Although the
awareness of school-track-related stereotypes clearly differs from students’ academic self-
concepts, reference group mechanisms may also come into play here. In a similar vein,
research has shown that individuals frequently perceive their ingroups as more heterogeneous
than groups they do not belong to (Boldry et al., 2007; Konovalova et al., 2019) because they
obtain larger samples of information about their ingroup (i.e., interact with them on a more
regular basis). Importantly, people are less likely to hold stereotypes about a group if they
perceive the group to be more variable (Konovalova et al., 2019). Accordingly, whereas high
levels of awareness of negative school-track-related stereotypes likely prevail when students
enter a lower secondary school track, the reality of students’ daily lives and interactions with
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 7
diverse others in their track could alleviate initial negative beliefs about the image of their
track, manifesting in decreasing trajectories for stereotype awareness.
However, considering the current lack of longitudinal research that has explored how
students’ awareness of school-track-related stereotypes in different school tracks develops
across several years and the contrasting theoretical assumptions about such trajectories, it is
difficult to derive clear predictions. Therefore, for the pre-registered Research Question 2
(RQ2, changes in students’ awareness of school-track-related stereotypes over time in the
three different tracks), we did not specify concrete hypotheses and conducted exploratory
analyses instead.
Relationships Between Students’ Awareness of School-Track-Related Stereotypes and
Academic Outcomes
In the current study, we investigated three types of academic outcomes. First, we
considered academic achievement in terms of standardized achievement test scores as crucial
indicators of students’ learning with pervasive implications for students’ school careers (e.g.,
students with poor performance may need to repeat a grade) and beyond school (e.g., access
to further educational opportunities and better paying jobs; e.g., Spinath et al., 2012). Second,
we included students’ self-concept of academic aptitude. Not only are academic self-concepts
(reciprocally) related to achievement, but they have also been prized as desirable for other
relevant outcomes, such as psychological well-being, academic persistence, and educational
choices (e.g., Craven & Marsh, 2008). Third, to complement the focus on academic potential
(achievement) and self-beliefs about one’s academic potential (self-concept), we assessed
school engagement, which, in our study, tapped into affective engagement dimensions (e.g.,
how much students enjoy working on tasks at school). Engagement feeds into academic
achievement, facilitates long-term commitment to learning, and has also been found to be
related to mental health (e.g., Wang & Degol, 2014). Below, we outline theoretical
considerations and prior research findings on relationships between the awareness of school-
track-related stereotypes and academic outcomes, with an emphasis on potential differences
between tracks.
The awareness of school-track-related stereotypes may amplify inequalities, as
stereotype awareness could be particularly harmful to members of stigmatized groups
(Swencionis & Fiske, 2020). Due to the social stigma associated with their track, it is
plausible that lower track students’ awareness of negative school-track-related stereotypes
negatively affects their school-related development (academic achievement, engagement, self-
concept). Potential mechanisms underlying these negative effects among lower track students
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 8
are, for example, stereotype threat and self-fulfilling prophecies (Madon et al., 2014; Steele,
1997; but see, e.g., Chu et al., 2018; Cullen et al., 2014; for research that questioned the
relevance of stereotype threat in “real life” settings). On the other hand, given that higher
track students belong to a nonstigmatized (higher status) track, they might not be affected by
negative stereotypes that refer to the “typical” higher track student. To conclude, according to
what we call the “stereotype awareness as an amplifier of inequality” hypothesis, the
awareness of school-track-related stereotypes hampers the thriving of students from the
lowest track. Hence, stereotype awareness should be most strongly and negatively related to
the academic outcomes of students in the lowest track, thereby increasing the inequalities that
are associated with the different school tracks.
Whereas the “stereotype awareness as an amplifier of inequality” hypothesis primarily
builds on social psychological and sociological theories, an individual differences perspective
supports a competing hypothesis. Such a competing hypothesis could state that group
categories and objective status differences associated with different tracks may be less
important, and instead, individuals’ subjective perceptions of negative school-track-related
stereotypes matter most (see also, e.g., research on effects of subjective socioeconomic status;
Rivenbark et al., 2020; Tan et al., 2020). This implies that school-track-related stereotype
awareness might not be exclusively maladaptive for students from the lowest track. Rather,
stereotype awareness may be negatively related to academic outcomes of individuals from
other tracks, too, as long as they believe that such stereotypes exist; an assumption we call the
“stereotype awareness as harmful for all” hypothesis.
Regarding links to academic achievement, a third assumption seems plausible. As
students are sorted into different tracks on the basis of achievement, two scenarios can be
outlined for achievement. Even though stereotype awareness may be negatively related to
achievement, it is also reasonable to assume that relatively higher achieving students in a
track are particularly likely to devalue their track and generalize this devaluing to how others
perceive their track because, for them, the next higher track may also have been an option
(from herein labeled the “stereotype awareness as an indication of missed opportunities”
hypothesis). In line with Big Fish Little Pond reasoning (e.g., Marsh & Parker, 1984), such a
student could be the “big fish” (a relatively high-achieving student) in a “little pond” (their
current track); however, as they did not make it to the “big pond” (next higher track), and they
use students who did so as a reference group, they devalue their current track and believe that
other people in general do so as well.
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 9
Prior research on school-track-related stereotype awareness and academic outcomes
able to test different theoretical assumptions has been limited. In a sample containing
predominantly lower track students (Hauptschule, 72%) but not as many students attending
the highest ability track in Germany (Gymnasium, 28%), awareness of school-track-related
stereotypes was significantly and negatively correlated with students’ self-concept of
academic aptitude, motivation, and academic achievement (Knigge & Hannover, 2011).
However, the cross-sectional design prevented conclusions from being drawn about
developmental relationships between stereotype awareness and critical outcomes. In addition,
school track was included as a predictor, but relationships between students’ awareness of
school-track-related stereotypes and outcome variables were not explored separately for
different school tracks (Knigge & Hannover, 2011). Therefore, this research could not
determine whether stereotype awareness produced different effects in different tracks. In
another study, students who perceived that others felt contempt toward them because of their
school track showed more feelings of futility (Spruyt, 2015). Links between perceived
contempt and academic outcomes were not assessed in Spruyt (2015), although it can be
argued that feelings of futility, which were related to perceived contempt, have been found to
predict academic outcomes in previous research (e.g., Agirdag et al., 2012).
In light of the scarce amount of research on relationships between school-track-related
stereotype awareness and academic outcomes, it seemed most appropriate to rely on
theoretical considerations (in terms of the above outlined three hypotheses) to guide the
current study’s pre-registered research questions. Hence, for Research Question 3 (RQ3,
relationships between initial levels of stereotype awareness assessed in Grade 5 right after
students transitioned to secondary school and initial levels of academic outcomes), Research
Question 4 (RQ4, relationships between initial levels of stereotype awareness and
developmental trajectories in outcomes variables), and Research Question 5 (RQ5,
relationships between changes in stereotype awareness and changes in outcome variables), we
combined the “stereotype awareness as an amplifier of inequality” hypothesis and the
“stereotype awareness as harmful for all” hypothesis. Thus, we hypothesized that (initial
levels of and changes in) stereotype awareness should be negatively related to (initial levels of
and changes in) all academic outcomes; however, while we assumed that the effects would be
present in all investigated tracks (“stereotype awareness as harmful for all” hypothesis), we
proposed that effect sizes should be largest for students from the lowest track in line with the
“stereotype awareness as an amplifier of inequality” hypothesis. We hypothesized that there
would be negative relationships between school-track-related stereotypes and the outcomes,
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 10
with the potential exception of achievement scores. Whereas we expected to find significant
relationships with achievement, we left it open whether these would be negative or, reflecting
the “stereotype awareness as an indicator of missed opportunities” hypothesis, positive.
addressed with tests of mean differences in stereotypes between tracks, all research questions
were addressed with multigroup growth curve analysis, controlling for potentially
confounding variables (socioeconomic status, gender, migration background).
Overview of the Five Research Questions Addressed in This Study
Method
Sample
We used previously collected data from a large-scale longitudinal German study
(TRAIN) with four measurement points, which is hosted by the Hector Research Institute of
tuebingen.de/en/43704). The TRAIN study was based on a multistage sampling design, in
which school-type-specific subpopulations of interest (from the three tracks Hauptschule,
Realschule, and Mittelschule) were drawn disproportionately to the actual population shares.
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 11
The TRAIN study relied on stratified cluster samples, which were drawn separately for both
participating federal states (Baden-Württemberg, Saxony). First, a random sample of schools
(cluster) was determined for both federal states. From each school, fifth-grade classes were
then randomly selected, and all students in these classes were asked to participate in the
TRAIN study. This sampling strategy was employed due to the TRAIN study’s focus on the
three school tracks of Hauptschule, Realschule, and Mittelschule and allowed for detailed
analyses of students and schools from these three tracks. However, the sample is therefore not
representative of the population (Rose et al., 2013). The sampling procedure used by the
TRAIN study resulted in a target sample of 22 schools for Mittelschule, 25 schools for
Realschule, and 60 schools for Hauptschule, all of which were contacted and invited to
participate. Out of the schools that were invited, one school from the Realschule track and one
school from the Hauptschule track did not participate. The student response rates for the
survey assessments were 83–89%, 90–93%, and 74–80% in the Hauptschule, Realschule, and
Mittelschule tracks, respectively (Rose et al., 2013).
The sample analyzed in this study contained data from 3,880 secondary school
students enrolled in 136 classes from two German federal states (Baden-Württemberg, 66%,
and Saxony, 34%), for whom data from at least one measurement point was available. Across
all measurement points, 45.2% of the students identified as female, and they were, on average,
14.20 years old at the fourth measurement point (SD = 0.65). A total of 43% of the students
attended the academically least demanding track (lowest track, Hauptschule), 23% attended
the higher track (Realschule), and 34% attended the combined track (Mittelschule). The
students from Hauptschule and Realschule in our sample were from the German federal state
of Baden-Württemberg. Most German states, including Baden-Württemberg, track students in
the threefold school system consisting of Gymnasium (the highest track), Realschule (the next
higher track), and Hauptschule (the lowest track). Hauptschule, the school track with the
lowest academic demands, is mainly vocationally oriented. The Realschule curriculum is
focused on general education but also lays the foundation for future vocational careers. In
comparison with Hauptschule, Realschule provides students with much better opportunities
for acquiring higher educational qualifications. Lastly, Gymnasium represents the
academically most demanding track, and successfully completing Gymnasium entitles
students to study at university (Maaz et al., 2008; Frenzel et al., 2010). In addition, the sample
included students from the German federal state of Saxony attending a combined track,
Mittelschule. Students from Mittelschule could acquire a Hauptschule diploma or a
Realschule diploma. It should further be noted that, like Baden-Württemberg, the secondary
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 12
school system in Saxony also includes Gymnasium. However, there are no Realschule or
Hauptschule tracks in Saxony. Hence, for our study, comparisons between students from
Hauptschule (referred to as the lowest track) and Realschule (referred to as the higher track)
from Baden-Württemberg are straightforward; however, any comparisons between these two
tracks and Mittelschule (referred to as the combined track) should take into consideration the
fact that the students from Mittelschule came from another German federal state (Saxony)
with a slightly different secondary school system. All variables used in this study were
assessed four times, when students were on average 11 (Grade 5), 12 (Grade 6), 13 (Grade 7),
and 14 (Grade 8) years of age. All assessments took place some weeks after the start of the
respective school year. The study was approved by the state authorities of Baden-
Württemberg and Saxony, who, at this time, were responsible for approving studies like this
one. Parental consent was required for study participation.
Measures
Achievement was measured with standardized tests. Stereotypes, self-concept of
academic aptitude, and school engagement were assessed via student reports on a 4-point
scale ranging from 1 (completely disagree) to 4 (completely agree). Students’ migration
background was measured with student reports, whereas family socioeconomic status was
captured with parent reports. Gender was assessed with student and teacher ratings combined
into one variable (e.g., in cases in which students did not report their gender, information from
teacher reports was used).
Awareness of School-Track-Related Stereotypes
We used a measure of negative school-track-related stereotypes referring to a student’s
own secondary school track (Knigge & Hannover, 2011; Hannover, 2009). The items were
introduced with the following phrase: “What do you think? How do other people in general
think about students attending [your school track]? Other people think that typical students
from [your school track] are ….” Students were asked to rate the “typical student” from their
school track on nine adjectives referring to negative stereotypes with cognitive (“stupid,”
“unimaginative,” “dumb”), motivational (“unmotivated in class,” “not interested in school,”
“lazy”), and social content (“rude,” “cheeky,” “brazen”). Reliability coefficients (Cronbach’s
alpha) for the awareness of school-track-related stereotypes measure for the four waves were
.926, .931, .922, and .944 for students from the lowest track; .918, .900, .916, and .939 for
students from the higher track; and .933, .925, .930, and .937 for students from the combined
track, respectively.
Academic Achievement
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 13
Two indicators of academic achievement were used, namely, standardized
achievement test scores in mathematics and German. The tests included standard content from
the federal states’ mathematics curricula (e.g., arithmetic rules, linear equations, and angels)
and German language curricula (i.e., reading comprehension). Open ended, closed ended, and
multiple-choice response formats were used (for more detailed descriptions, see Aldrup et al.,
2018; Dumont et al., 2014). Item and person parameters for students’ mathematics and
German achievement have previously been estimated with longitudinal, multidimensional,
two-parameter item response theory models (Rose et al., 2013), and we relied on weighted
likelihood estimators (WLEs) of students’ mathematics and German achievement test scores
(Warm, 1989), that is, one indicator for each subject and wave. To capture school
achievement more broadly, we built an average of students’ mathematics and German test
scores for the analyses of this study.
Self-Concept of Academic Aptitude
Students’ self-concept of academic aptitude was measured with four reverse-coded
items (Schwanzer et al., 2005; items: “Frequently, I’m convinced that I won’t be able to solve
a task even before I get started”; “I frequently think that I’m not as smart as others are”; “I’d
like to be as intelligent as others are”; “Compared with others, I’m not as talented”).
Reliability coefficients (Cronbach’s alpha) for the four waves were .678, .713, .727, and .751
for students from the lowest track; .719, .712, .774, and .776 for students from the higher
track; and .736, .779, .773, and .779 for students from the combined track, respectively.
School Engagement
We used three items to map school engagement. The items were based on the BIJU
study (Baumert et al., 1997; items: “I enjoy working on my tasks at school”; “In the morning,
I look forward to a day at school to learn something new”; “School is a place I enjoy being
at”). Reliability coefficients (Cronbach’s alpha) for the four waves were .754, .730, .729, and
.737 for students from the lowest track; .774, .826, .771, and .764 for students from the higher
track; and .782, .756, .772, and .769 for students from the combined track, respectively.
Covariates
The control variables gender (0 = female, 1 = male), migration background (0 = no
migration background, 1 = migration background), and socioeconomic background (SES;
highest socio-economic index of occupational status of the parents, HISEI; Ganzeboom et al.,
1992) were considered.
Measurement Models and Measurement Invariance Testing
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 14
We tested the factor structure of all multiple-item scales with confirmatory factor
analyses (CFAs) conducted in Mplus Version 8.6 (Muthén & Muthén, 1998-2017), including
longitudinal measurement invariance testing and testing for invariance between school tracks.
For growth curve models (main analyses), at least scalar invariance (equal item intercepts and
factor loadings) is needed (Little et al., 2007). For stereotypes, we furthermore compared
models with different numbers of stereotype awareness factors. Originally, scholars
distinguished between students’ awareness of cognitive, social, and motivational school-track-
related stereotypes (Knigge & Hannover, 2011), and for our study, we tested for whether these
stereotypes represent (a) three distinct facets, (b) one overarching construct, or (c) two
constructs by comparing three-factor, two-factor, and one-factor CFA models. We assessed
the goodness of fit of all models using the comparative fit index (CFI), the Tucker-Lewis
Index (TLI), and the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA). Typical cut-off
scores that are considered to reflect excellent and adequate fit to the data, respectively, were
considered: (a) CFI and TLI > .95 and > .90, (b) RMSEA < .05 and < .08 (Hu & Bentler,
1999).
The evaluation of longitudinal and intergroup invariance assumptions was based on
respective recommendations from the methodological literature (Chen, 2007; Cheung &
Rensvold, 2002; Little et al., 2007). Hence, we considered drops in the CFI or TLI > .01 and
increases in the RMSEA > .015 as indicative of meaningful changes in model fit, which make
assumptions of measurement invariance untenable. When relying on latent factors, several
problems can occur, and it is not possible to anticipate all of them. For instance, there may be
single items that show a substantially low(er) loading on the latent factors than others, and
model fits might not be in line with traditional recommendations (Hu & Bentler, 1999). When
this was the case, we carefully checked both statistical indicators (e.g., lower loading, worse
model fit) and content-related indicators (e.g., a specific item might not “represent” the
respective construct as well as other items do) and adapted our models to achieve adequate fit.
Accordingly, for school engagement, we decided to use the three (positively worded) items
from the original seven-item scale that best captured students’ broader affective school
engagement based on the respective CFA (and additionally conducted exploratory factor
analysis) results and conceptual considerations. Moreover, for the school engagement scale,
residuals from the same items were allowed to correlate across time.
For stereotype awareness, the CFA findings showed that a two-factor model with a
factor for cognitive stereotype awareness and a factor combining social and motivation
stereotype awareness fit the data slightly better than the next best one-factor solution (two-
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 15
factor model: CFI = .954, TLI = .949, RMSEA = .031; one-factor model: CFI = .942, TLI =
.938, RMSEA = .034). The three-factor model did not converge. In addition, it should be
noted that we only included the negatively worded items because including both positively
worded (reverse-coded) and negatively worded items resulted in a very poor model fit and
convergence problems (introducing a method factor did not solve the problem). Conceptually,
as our aim was to measure the awareness of negative stereotypes, focusing on the negatively
worded items seems appropriate, and we therefore excluded the three positively worded
statements for cognitive, social, and motivational stereotype awareness, respectively (e.g.,
“smart,” “polite”). There was a deviation from our preregistered analysis plan for the main
analyses (see the Statistical Analyses section for the main analyses). On the basis of the CFA
results, we had preregistered that we would model cognitive and social/motivational
stereotype awareness separately. However, despite the slightly superior fit of the respective
two-factor solution in comparison with a one-factor solution, a closer inspection revealed that
the two stereotype awareness factors were strongly correlated. Whereas the manifest
correlations ranged from .78 to .83 (which was slightly lower than those previously reported;
Knigge & Hannover, 2011), the latent correlations ranged from .92 to .97. We therefore
decided to rely on one overall stereotype awareness factor in our (latent) main analyses.
Tables reporting detailed CFA and measurement invariance testing results for all constructs
can be found in the Online Supplement (Tables S2–S4). To summarize, both longitudinal
invariance and invariance between tracks could generally be established, and the main
analyses (see Statistical Analyses) were based on the respective models.
Statistical Analyses
All analyses were performed with Mplus Version 8.6 (Muthén & Muthén, 1998-2017)
using the robust maximum likelihood estimator (MLR), which is robust to non-normal data.
To deal with missing data, we employed full information maximum likelihood estimation
(FIML, Enders, 2010). All multiple-item scales were modeled as latent variables.
Achievement was modeled as a manifest indicator for which mathematics and German test
scores were combined.
For RQ 1, we tested for mean level differences in stereotype awareness between the
three tracks separately for each wave. Specifically, we tested for mean differences in latent
stereotype awareness factors by constraining them to equality between groups and then
comparing the constrained model with a model with unconstrained stereotypes. This
comparison was done jointly, and then we compared individual groups as a follow-up test
(including the adjustment of p-values with the Benjamini-Hochberg correction).
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 16
Next, we set up multigroup latent growth curve models. To investigate developmental
trajectories in school-track-related stereotype awareness (RQ 2), we estimated univariate
growth models. To allow greater flexibility for the shape of the curve, we estimated latent
basis growth models in which only the first and the last growth parameters were fixed,
whereas all other parameters were freely estimated. Thereby, no linearity was imposed on the
models. However, the growth parameters were set to be equal between the groups (tracks) so
that we could meaningfully compare the slopes between them.
For RQ 3–5, we estimated multigroup growth curve models to examine relationships
between initial levels (intercepts) of stereotype awareness and initial levels (intercepts) of all
outcomes (RQ 3), relationships between initial levels (intercepts) of stereotype awareness and
changes (slopes) in all outcomes (RQ 4), as well as relationships between changes (slopes) in
school-track-related stereotype awareness and changes (slopes) in all outcome variables (RQ
5). We created separate models for each outcome due to model complexity. All models
included time-invariant covariates (SES, gender, migration background). We evaluated
differences in parameters between the groups by using a nested-models χ2 approach with
follow-up comparisons to isolate the source of the overall differences. To account for the
hierarchical data structure, with students nested in classes, the analyses were conducted with
cluster-robust standard errors. All significance testing was performed at the .05 level, and we
relied on two-tailed tests. Benjamini-Hochberg corrections (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995)
were used to adjust for multiple tests. We applied the adjustment for each research question
separately (but across the three different outcomes) and adjusted all p-values that were
relevant for our research questions (e.g., Lakens, 2022; Matsunaga, 2007).
Results
Bivariate correlations are reported separately for the three tracks in Figures S1–S3 in
the Online Supplement. The student composition in the three tracks showed that students from
the lowest track had lower SES backgrounds (M = 43.21, SD = 11.86, measured as the
SES
highest socio-economic index of occupational status of the parents, HISEI; Ganzeboom et al.,
1992, which integrates information on income and education and can range from 16 [cleaner]
to 90 [judge]) and were more likely to come from a migration background (46.8%) than
students in the other two tracks (higher track: M = 49.46, SD = 13.44, 16.9% migration
SES
background; combined track: M = 45.54, SD = 12.11, 4.6% migration background). The
SES
gender composition was very similar, with 56%, 55%, and 53% male students in the lowest,
combined, and higher tracks, respectively. Descriptive statistics (M and SD of all variables)
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 17
calculated intraclass correlation coefficients for the stereotype awareness measure separately
for each track for the four waves to provide additional information. ICC(1) values ranged
from .000 to .081. Overall, little variance could be attributed to the classroom level, indicating
that school-track-related stereotypes are best viewed as an individual-student-level construct
and not as a group-level (i.e., classroom-level) phenomenon. Measurement invariance over
time and across tracks was tested and generally supported (for details, see the Method
section).
We deviated from the preregistered main analyses in two significant ways: First, we
had preregistered that we could use school belonging as an outcome; however, due to
persistent model convergence problems, we decided not to include the results for school
belonging in this paper. Second, the analyses were based on a one-factor model for stereotype
awareness comprising cognitive, social, and motivational stereotypes and not on separate
factors (see the Method section for more details on the CFAs for stereotype awareness).
Mean Differences in Stereotype Awareness Between Tracks (RQ 1)
Tests based on model comparisons revealed significant mean differences in latent
stereotype awareness factors between tracks for all waves (models with constrained means
between tracks had a significantly worse fit than models with unconstrained means, χ2(2)
ranging from 66.59 to 215.37, all ps < .001). Follow-up tests with a Benjamini-Hochberg
correction to adjust for multiple testing indicated that students from the lowest track reported
significantly higher levels of stereotype awareness in all waves than students from the higher
and combined tracks (all ps < .001, except for the comparisons between the lowest and
combined tracks in Grade 6: p = .003, and between the lowest and combined tracks in Grade
8: p = .011). Students from the combined track further reported significantly higher levels of
presents the mean-level differences.
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 18
Violin Plots Displaying Mean-Level Differences (Including Standard Deviations) in School-
Track-Related Stereotype Awareness Between the Three Secondary School Tracks for All
Four Waves
Developmental Trajectories of Stereotype Awareness (RQ 2)
Multigroup univariate growth curve models were set up to investigate developmental
Supplement for details about growth curve model parameters). Stereotype awareness
significantly increased in all tracks across the 4-year period (lowest track: b = 0.281; higher
magnitude of the change, we additionally calculated Glass’s ∆ as an effect size indicator
(Miyamoto et al., 2020; Morris et al., 2002). Glass’s ∆ amounted to 0.306, .0.358, and .0325,
for the lowest track, the higher track, and the combined track, respectively (all ps < .001).
These findings indicate that the mean levels of stereotype awareness in all three tracks
increased by roughly one quarter of a standard deviation across the 4 years. Moreover,
comparing a model constrained to be equal across tracks with an unconstrained model
revealed that the developmental trajectories did not differ significantly between tracks, χ2(2) =
0.912, p = .634.
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 19
Developmental Trajectories (Including 95% CIs) in School-Track-Related Stereotype
Awareness from Grade 5 (First Year of Secondary School) to Grade 8 in the Three Tracks
Relationships Between Initial Levels of and Changes in Stereotype Awareness and
Academic Development (RQ 3–5)
We estimated multigroup growth curve models to investigate the relationships
between the initial levels of stereotype awareness and academic outcomes (RQ3),
relationships between initial levels of stereotype awareness and changes in outcomes (RQ 4),
and relationships between changes in stereotype awareness and outcomes (RQ 5), controlling
each outcome, and all three research questions were addressed in one model. The results are
(self-concept of academic aptitude).
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 20
Multigroup Latent Growth Curve Model for Investigating Research Questions 3–5
Note. Int = Intercept Stereotype Awareness, Sl = Slope Stereotype Awareness, Int = Intercept Outcome,
ST ST OC
Sl = Slope Outcome; RQ3 = Relationships between Initial Levels (Intercept) of Stereotypes and Initial Levels
OC
(Intercept) of Outcome Variables in Grade 5; RQ4 = Relationships between Initial Levels (Intercept) of
Stereotype Awareness in Grade 5 and Changes (Slope) in Outcome Variables; RQ5 = Relationships Between
Changes (Slope) in Stereotype Awareness and Changes (Slope) in Outcome Variables. Control Variables:
Gender, Migration Background, and Socioeconomic Status (SES). Correlations between exogenous variables are
not displayed.
Engagement
Initial levels of school-track-related stereotype awareness in Grade 5 were
significantly and negatively related to initial levels of engagement in the lowest track
(standardized β = -0.276, p = .001), the higher track (β = -0.394, p < .001), and the combined
track (β = -0.382, p = .001; RQ 3). However, initial levels of stereotypes were not
significantly related to students’ development in engagement across the 4 years (RQ 4), and
the developmental trajectories of stereotype awareness and engagement were not significantly
related in any of the three tracks (RQ 5). Model comparisons revealed that a more
parsimonious model in which parameters were constrained to be equal across tracks did not
show a significantly worse fit than an unconstrained model, meaning that none of the effects
differed significantly between tracks, χ2(8) = 6.259, p = .618.
Achievement
Initial levels of school-track-related stereotype awareness in Grade 5 were
significantly and positively related to initial levels of achievement in the lowest track
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 21
(β = 0.465, p < .001), whereas the relationships were not statistically significant in the two
negatively related to developmental trajectories in achievement, when initial levels of
achievement were controlled for, in the combined track (β = -0.252, p = .023; RQ 4).
Developmental trajectories in stereotype awareness were not significantly related to
developmental trajectories in achievement in any of the tracks (RQ 5). Results from model
comparisons indicated that the constrained model had a significantly worse fit than the
unconstrained one, χ2(8) = 50.983, p < .001, revealing significant differences between tracks.
Follow-up tests with the Benjamini-Hochberg correction indicated that for RQ 3, the effect in
the lowest track differed significantly from effects in the higher track and the combined track
(both ps < .001). The combined and higher tracks did not differ significantly (p = .128). For
RQ4, no differences between tracks were found (lowest track vs. higher track: p = .738;
lowest track vs. combined track: p = .738; combined track vs. higher track: p = .884). For
Research Question 5, follow-up tests showed significant differences between the higher track
and the combined track (p = .038). The effect in the lowest track did not differ significantly
from the effects in the higher track (p = .673) or the combined track (p = .244).
Academic of Academic Aptitude
Initial levels of school-track-related stereotype awareness in Grade 5 were
significantly and negatively related to initial self-concept levels in the higher track (β = -
0.277, p = .003; RQ 3). None of the relationships between initial stereotype awareness and
changes in self-concept were statistically significant. Changes in stereotype awareness were
not significantly related to changes in self-concept. There were no statistically significant
differences in the effects between tracks, χ2(8) = 12.427, p = .133.
Discussion
Secondary school tracking generates inequalities in opportunities and has pervasive
consequences for individuals’ educational trajectories and life paths (Knigge et al., 2020).
Despite the widespread use of tracking in Germany and other countries and efforts to identify
psychological barriers that further widen school-track-related inequalities in education (e.g.,
Legette, 2020), stereotypes have received surprisingly little attention to date (e.g., Chu et al.,
2018; Knigge & Hannover, 2011; Legette, 2018; Spruyt, 2015). The present 4-year
longitudinal study on students’ awareness of negative school-track-related stereotypes
therefore advances current knowledge in important ways.
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 22
We found significant mean-level differences in school-track-related stereotype
awareness between all three tracks for all waves in the expected direction, with students from
the lowest track consistently reporting higher levels of stereotype awareness than those from
the higher and combined tracks. These findings present an important replication and extension
of prior work (Knigge & Hannover, 2011), documenting significant differences between
students from the lowest track (Hauptschule, also included in our data) and students from
Gymnasium, the highest ability track in Germany. Our finding also add to differentiation-
polarization theory (Hargreaves, 1967; Spruyt, 2015; Van Houtte, 2006, 2015) by suggesting
that the polarization component can be applied to students’ awareness of negative school-
track-related stereotypes, with the most negative perceptions in the lowest track.
Next, negative school-track-related stereotypes increased in all tracks. From a
developmental perspective, secondary school tracking coincides with the onset of
adolescence, a period in which students’ cognitive capacities to understand the social
implications of their academic placement grow (Legette, 2020). Moreover, particularly
students from lower tracks are exposed to teachers’ negative expectations (Van Houtte, 2006),
and teachers may communicate their own negative school-track-related stereotypes to lower
track students (e.g., Noelkemper et al., 2019). Such cues from the social environment in
secondary school may increase students’ awareness of negative school-track-related
stereotypes. A potential explanation for these ascending trajectories that could apply to
students from all three of the tracks we investigated stresses the fact that school-track-related
stereotype awareness referring to one’s own school track likely develops in reference to other
tracks. Over time and as the end of compulsory schooling nears, restricted opportunities (e.g.,
for students’ further education and career) linked to their current track as compared with the
next higher track(s) may become more apparent to students. Importantly, this phenomenon
should also apply to many students from the relatively highest track in our study, who still
tend to have fewer opportunities than students from Gymnasium, the highest academic track
in Germany, which was not represented in our data.
Further, we examined relationships between stereotype awareness and academic
outcomes by combining different theoretical assumptions to guide our research. Sociological
and social psychological theories stress the importance of group categories and mechanisms
relating to membership in a stigmatized group (e.g., stereotype threat; e.g., Durante & Fiske,
2017; Steele, 1997). Hence, stereotype awareness should be particularly detrimental for lower
track students and should be most strongly and negatively related to their academic outcomes
(“stereotype awareness as an amplifier of educational inequalities” hypothesis). By contrast,
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 23
approaching this issue from the perspective of individual differences in psychology, what
matters most should not be the group categories but the stigma one subjectively perceives. As
such, stereotype awareness could be harmful for students from different tracks instead of
being restricted to the lowest tracks (“stereotype awareness as harmful for all” hypothesis).
Here, we bridged these seemingly contrasting hypotheses by assuming that we would find
negative relationships between stereotype awareness and engagement, self-concept, and,
possibly achievement for students from all tracks that, nevertheless, should be strongest for
students from the lowest track. For achievement, we outlined two scenarios: As hypothesized
for engagement and self-concept, subjective perceptions of stereotype awareness may be
negatively linked to students’ achievement in all tracks, with the largest effect sizes in the
lowest track. Alternatively, the awareness of negative school-track-related stereotypes may
serve as an indicator of missed opportunities in that higher achieving students for whom the
next higher track could also have been an option report higher levels of awareness of
stereotypes that refer to their current track.
To summarize the main findings, we did not obtain any empirical support for the
“stereotype awareness as an amplifier of educational inequalities” part of our assumptions.
Some limited support was derived for the “stereotype awareness as harmful for all” part;
however, this support was exclusively based on cross-sectional findings for engagement.
Specifically, stereotype awareness in Grade 5 was related to lower engagement in all tracks,
with no significant differences in effects sizes between tracks. This finding indicates that
students who started secondary school with higher levels of negative stereotype awareness
were less engaged and reported enjoying school less. It may be the case that, albeit negative
stereotypes regarding their track are more prevalent in students from the lowest track (see
results for RQ 1 on mean-level differences), for many students in the lowest track, the
academic domain was devalued irrespective of school-track-related stereotype awareness
(e.g., Boone & Demanet, 2020). This would explain why stereotypes were not more strongly
related to engagement than in other tracks.
Initial levels of stereotype awareness showed significant and negative relationships
with initial levels of self-concept of academic aptitude in the higher track, whereas no
significant relationships emerged for the other tracks. Hence, for higher track students, the
awareness of negative stereotypes about their track was ingrained into their self-perceptions to
a higher degree at the beginning of secondary school, which is not in alignment with
the “stereotype awareness as an amplifier of educational inequalities” hypothesis or the
“stereotype awareness as harmful for all” hypothesis. Keeping in mind the cross-sectional
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 24
nature of this relationship, we propose a potential explanation. Tracking decisions are already
made in primary school, and it may be the case that students assigned to the higher track
(Realschule) in our data initially calibrated their self-perceptions about their academic
aptitude in reference to their elementary school classmates assigned to the highest ability track
(i.e., Gymnasium). This unfavorable comparison could have been accompanied by a greater
susceptibility to negative information about their own secondary school track, manifesting in
higher levels of stereotype awareness. The fact that no significant longitudinal relationships
were obtained for self-concept may signal that over time, higher track students’ reference
group shifted to other students from their own track (Chmielewski et al., 2013). Further, the
“integration paradox” describes the phenomenon that more highly educated immigrants turn
away from the host society instead of becoming more oriented toward it. This phenomenon
can be explained by their higher educational levels, which enhance their awareness of their
vulnerable and marginalized position (e.g., Verkuyten, 2016). A similar mechanism may
apply to students from the relatively highest track in our study. Higher track students are more
likely to better understand their position and the implications of their track placement, which
could strengthen the link between stereotype awareness and self-concept found in Grade 5.
However, it also needs to be mentioned that the effects for self-concept were not significantly
different across the three tracks.
In addition, our results cast new light on relationships between school-track-related
stereotype awareness and academic achievement (Knigge & Hannover, 2011; Spruyt, 2015).
A significant positive relationship between initial levels of stereotype awareness in Grade 5
and achievement emerged in the lowest track, and this effect was found to be significantly
different from the effect in the higher track (a nonsignificant small negative relationship) and
combined track (a nonsignificant small positive relationship). Hence, for students from the
lowest track, our study provides support for the “stereotype awareness as an indicator of
missed opportunities” hypothesis. A reason for why significant effects were restricted to the
lowest track students could be that for relatively high-achieving students from the lowest
track, positive and self-worth-protecting comparison processes that students from other tracks
could use (“I might not have made it to the next higher track, but at least I am not in the next
lower one!”) do not work. Therefore, missed educational opportunities may be perceived as
particularly drastic (Forster, 2021) and could go along with negative school-track-related
stereotypes. Nonetheless, the “stereotype awareness as an indicator of missed opportunities”
hypothesis for lower track students was not confirmed with respect to longitudinal
relationships with achievement. It seems likely that, over time, the psychological reality of
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 25
students’ daily lives in their new school, and interactions with other students and their
teachers, hold significance for students’ achievement trajectories, thus overwriting the link
between the meaning that society attaches to the tracks (and students’ awareness thereof) and
academic achievement found at the beginning of secondary school (see also Chmielewski et
al., 2013).
Finally, stereotype awareness in Grade 5 significantly predicted a more maladaptive
development of achievement over the course of 4 years in the combined track, a finding that
may indicate that initial stereotype awareness signals resignation and disappointment with
one’s track placement that could feed into poorer performance over time. Nonetheless, the
sizes of the effects in the three tracks were very similar, and, despite the differentiated pattern
of significant and nonsignificant results, the effects did not differ significantly between tracks.
We did not obtain any significant relationships between developmental trajectories in
stereotype awareness and developmental trajectories in achievement or any of the other
academic outcomes, even though it is worth mentioning that the negative effect for
achievement in the higher track just failed to reach statistical significance and differed
significantly from the effect in the combined track.
Implications for Theory, Policy, and Practice
Our study has implications for theory and the understanding of how school-track-
related stereotype awareness operates in real life. In short, it is complex and differs from what
would be expected on the basis of related research in the laboratory (e.g., on stereotype threat;
see also, e.g., Chu et al., 2018). These differences are likely due to the multifaceted
experiences that students have in complex social environments, dynamic shifts in
environments and reference groups, students’ subjective interpretations thereof, along with
(variations in) developmental processes during adolescence. Hence, we propose that research
and future theory development regarding school-track-related stereotype awareness cannot
afford to be blind to “the context,” adolescents’ respective meaning making, and dynamic
shifts in their perceptions. Further, a developmental (longitudinal) perspective is crucial for
disentangling concurrent and longitudinal associations. Relatedly, a more extensive
formulation of a theory of school-track-related stereotype awareness in real-life contexts is
also informed by what we did not find. Specifically, clarity on potential implications of
stereotype awareness in terms of consistent longitudinal relationships with the investigated
outcomes could not be achieved. Nonetheless, given the, to the best of our knowledge, lack of
longitudinal research on stereotype awareness spanning several years of adolescents’ school
careers, the present study’s findings significantly contribute to the existing body of research.
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 26
What we now need are context-sensitive developmental studies that can capture stereotype
awareness on different time scales. For example, longer term longitudinal assessments could
be combined with intensive longitudinal assessments at critical time points (e.g., the transition
to secondary school) to shed light on dynamic changes in stereotype awareness, implications
for academic outcomes, and interactions with changes in comparison processes and reference
group effects.
Our work has implications for practice and policy too. In the present study, students in
the lowest track reported the highest levels of stereotype awareness in all waves. Hence, we
see a need to counteract school-track-related stereotypes in daily interactions with students
and in the media. Still, efforts to curb stereotypes should not be constrained to the lowest
track, as relatively higher tracks may also be negatively affected (e.g., Realschule in our data).
Moreover, we caution that it is not only about improving the image of tracks but also about
improving the actual life realities and chances for students in these tracks. In Germany,
secondary school tracking occurs early, track-related upward mobility is still very limited, and
the permeability of the education system likely interacts with family background
characteristics. For instance, it was found that low-SES parents adjusted their educational
expectations more strongly downward when their child received a lower track placement than
expected, whereas high-SES parents maintained their high expectations when confronted with
negative achievement information (Forster, 2021). In addition to streaming students at a later
point in their educational careers, coaching and other types of interventions (e.g., Eastbrook &
Hadden, 2021)—especially prior to and at the transition to secondary school and with a focus
on socioeconomically disadvantaged students and their parents—could provide a remedy.
Students who missed the next higher track could be another relevant target group for
interventions, as in our study relatively higher achieving students in the lowest track reported
higher levels of negative school-track-related stereotype awareness right after starting
secondary school.
Limitations and Directions for Future Research
Several limitations and directions for future research should be noted. First, in our
study, stereotype awareness was assessed solely in reference to a student’s own track. Future
research could gain insights into social comparison processes by investigating how these
stereotype awareness ratings differ from students’ awareness of stereotypes about other school
tracks. Relatedly, it would be interesting to explore the extent to which the perception that a
much stronger stigma is associated with one’s track than with other tracks (i.e., larger
stereotype awareness gaps) drives relationships between stereotypes and outcome variables.
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 27
Second, the awareness of negative stereotypes was assessed and analyzed as a single, general
construct, which ensured comparability of the stereotype construct across tracks. At the same
time, however, this measurement approach falls short of capturing the existence of potentially
different types of stereotypes for students in different tracks. For example, stereotypes about
students in higher tracks may be that they are nerdy, boring, socially awkward, elitist, “know-
it-alls” or teacher’s pets (see also Knigge & Hannover, 2011). Future research should thus
include a larger number of more diverse school-track-related stereotypes. Nonetheless, we
believe that the content of the stereotype measure we employed was still suitable for our
study. Although in our study, the mean levels of stereotype awareness were highest in the
lowest track (Hauptschule), significant relationships between stereotype awareness and the
outcome variables were in several instances obtained for (or even restricted to) students from
Realschule, the higher track. This latter finding indicates that the negative stereotypes we
assessed are relevant to higher track students. Third, substantially distinct stereotypes likely
exist for the highest ability track (Gymnasium), but this track was not represented in our data.
Fourth, the present study focused on outcomes that reflect academically relevant
features in three different domains (academic achievement: actual performance; self-concept
of academic aptitude: motivational self-beliefs; engagement: affective school involvement)
and that are arguably proximal to academically relevant stereotypes (e.g., “stupid,” “not
interested in school”). On the other hand, this focus necessarily excluded other critical
outcomes. Future studies on school-track-related stereotype awareness should expand the
scope of the present investigation to explore relationships between school-track-related
stereotype awareness and a range of outcomes in the socioemotional (e.g., well-being), social
(e.g., social networks), emotional (e.g., academic emotions), and behavioral (e.g., disruptive
behavior, school drop-out) domains.
Fifth, several items from the academic self-concept scale measure asked students to
evaluate their abilities in comparison with others. However, the measure did not specify who
these “others” were. Future studies should enhance clarity by indicating and systematically
contrasting different reference groups (e.g., elementary school classmates, new secondary
school classmates, friends).
Sixth, lastly, limitations that refer to the composition of the sample can be identified
and used to inform future studies. Even though we were able to take advantage of a large and
rich data set with four measurement points that spanned students’ lower secondary school
careers, it remains a drawback that students from the highest track in Germany (Gymnasium)
were not included due to the focus of the TRAIN study on specific school types. In addition,
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 28
differences in secondary school systems across the German federal states need to be kept in
mind when interpreting the findings. Specifically, the comparison between Hauptschule
(lowest track) and Realschule (higher track) from the federal state of Baden-Württemberg is
unequivocal, whereas caution is warranted when comparing these two tracks with
Mittelschule in Saxony.
Conclusions
To conclude, stratified school systems likely create stereotypes about students
attending different tracks (Knigge & Hannover, 2011). Our study showed that students from
the lowest track consistently reported higher levels of negative school-track-related stereotype
awareness than students attending the higher and combined tracks. However, the findings on
links between the awareness of school-track-related stereotypes and academic outcomes
revealed no indications that school-track-related stereotype awareness amplifies educational
inequalities. As an initial longer term longitudinal investigation of school-track-related
stereotype awareness exploring patterns of effects in different school tracks, our study notably
adds to the literature and contributes to a more differentiated understanding of students’
awareness of the stigma associated with their school track.
STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF SCHOOL-TRACK-RELATED STEREOTYPES 29