The mind and the political
Ali Teymoori
Faculty of Philosophy, Berlin School of Mind and Brain
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany
****
This is preprint of a commentary for the book symposium on The Mind-Body Politic by Michelle Maiese
and Robert Hanna: Palgrave MacMillan 2019. The commentary was discussed at a roundtable discussion at
the Society for Philosophy and Emotion, APA Central Conference. Feb 25, 2022. The commentary will be
published in Journal of Philosophy of Emotion.
****
Introduction
The philosophy of mind has traditionally engaged with issues related to individual minds
in isolation by focusing on issues such as mental function, representations, the problem of
consciousness, and the mind-body relation. The recent interdisciplinary research of 4E cognition
has stretched the boundaries of philosophical works on the mind, exploring the dynamics of the
interactions between mind, body, and physical and social environment. Maiese and Hanna’s
(2019) work The Mind-Body Politic sets a new ambition for philosophy of mind, namely to
develop what they consider to be a new critical and political philosophy of mind. They do engage
with the classical problems of philosophy of mind such as Cartesian mind-body dualism and they
use their own account of essentially embodied minds in response to mind-body dualism. Most
remarkably though, they extend the essentially embodied minds thesis to develop “a critique of
contemporary social institutions”, and as a result to change them for the better (p. 2). Extending
the essentially embodied minds thesis, they investigate a wide range of topics such as habit
formation, mental health, and education. In the process, they analyze the influence of neoliberal
institutions on the mind and how it is possible to develop new and constructive social institutions.
This is indeed a very timely and highly needed work to extend the literature of embodied
cognition to social and political life.
I am very sympathetic to Maiese and Hanna’s project to develop a political philosophy of
mind, showing how the current neoliberalism’s ever-increasing assault on normative social
institutions would affect individuals’ minds. It is also extremely informative that they show how
the insight from embodied cognition, affective processes and political philosophy can help us
envisage and organize new social institutions that are productive and serve to improve human
conditions. Having said that, I have some reservations and open questions about the way Maiese
and Hanna lay out their project. In this review, I present a very brief account of Maiese and
Hanna’s political philosophy of mind and present my own questions and critique regarding the
general outline of their project. I focus on three main shortcomings: their dualistic view of the way
society is organized and works, the confusion in some of their conceptual frameworks and their
account of politics, and finally their analysis of the social institutions, especially the way they see
new institutional structure can be formed.
The problem of duality
Maiese and Hanna criticize the Cartesian mind-body duality and present their account of
the essentially embodied mind with three main theses. The first thesis is the mind-shaping thesis
according to which social institutions such as family and the education system constantly and
saliently determine, restrain and reframe our embodied mind. Second, they argue that most
neoliberal social institutions shape our minds in a detrimental way that would alienate us and
enslave our minds, hence their collective sociopathy thesis. The third and final thesis is the
collective wisdom thesis in which they argue that through a few institutions, or by creation of new
constructive institutions, people can strive for self-realization, liberate themselves from dystopian
neoliberal social institutions and achieve a deeply happy life.
Maiese and Hanna present a persuasive account of embodied mind to overcome Descartes’
dualistic thinking, but they retain an essentially dualistic thinking during their overall project. As
we proceed through the book, it appears that Maiese and Hanna have a problem with the Cartesian
mind-body duality but are quite content with all other dualistic ways of thinking, from destructive
vs. constructive institutions, false vs. true needs, bad vs. good habits, false vs. true freedom,
coercion vs. autonomy, false vs. true consciousness, and so on. In general, their vision of society
is quite dualistic, opposing the current dystopian world with their own vision of a utopian society.
That is not to say that I do not agree with their characterization of the destructive effects of
the neoliberal assault on the global population and normative institutions, and in particular its
destructive effect on people’s lives and minds. Things are even worse than neoliberalism in many
parts of the world such that there is a radical neoliberalism for the poor but a radical protectionism
or a radical socialism for the rich (also known as the bailout economy). Nor do I deny the need for
new and constructive institutions to organize things differently. However, I would argue that there
is not a clear-cut dualism of good and evil.
In addition, I found it problematic to try to impose a vision of utopia on society as a whole.
The authors have a universalistic idea of what a good society would look like, claiming that it is
normatively a better world to live in for everyone. They assume that they have a universal vision
of a utopian society in which everyone gets a satisfaction of their true needs and exercises their
true freedom. They derive the legitimacy of their vision of society from normative principles
which are beyond the potential reservations of those who might find themselves subject to it.
Instead of imposing externally justified standards to analyze the present, a more
constructive approach to deal with our current predicament is to expose how the existing
institutional frameworks and social reality fail to live up to their own normative claims, that is, by
using an immanent critique. In doing so, one can expose the limits of the current political
conditions and leave open possibilities that are available to society to organize itself differently.
One of the pioneers of immanent critique was indeed Karl Marx (1976), when he moved away
from his earlier humanist and utopian vision to study capital from a scientific vantage point. He
showed the irrationality of the rational discourse of political economy and the capitalist mode of
production. He did so by focusing on classical political economy’s contradictions as well as the
th th
lived experiences of the working class of the industrial capitalism in the 18 and 19 centuries. In
contrast, Maiese and Hanna express their explicit intention to rely on earlier Marx for their design
of new humanistic and utopian society which led to their dualistic vision of society. It seems to
me that it was the limits of that dualistic way of viewing society that led Marx to his later use of
immanent critique.
The inherently dualistic thinking in Maiese and Hanna’s work brings up the second shortcoming
of the book: their problematic account of politics.
The political structure
According to Maiese and Hanna, neoliberalism creeps into our everyday life and breeds
false needs and false freedom of choices. They claim that the neoliberal ideology coalesces with a
scientific worldview, aiming at controlling society, and such a neoliberal ideology can lead to
coercive authoritarianism, causing collective sociopathy.
There are several problematic issues in the conceptual framework of political structure in
The Mind-Body Politic. First, there is a confusion in the definition of neoliberalism. They laid
down their account of neoliberalism at the beginning of the book as a political doctrine
encompassing classical Hobbesian liberalism with a conception of individuals as egoist seeking
their own self-interested goals, big capitalism with its multinational and global corporate
structure, and scientifically minded technocracy (p. 3-4, reprinted at p. 103). Later, they rely on a
different definition of neoliberalism as a policy framework, an ideology, and a form of
governmentality (see p. 125). Do these three parts form a definition of neoliberalism as a political
doctrine? That seems to be the case since they sporadically refer to David Harvey’s account as
well, who treats neoliberalism as purely a hegemonic political project. How is neoliberalism as a
form of governmentality related to neoliberalism as an ideology? It seems that they consider
centrism, conservatism, and other narratives as loosely formulated dominant ideological narrative
that justify neoliberal form of governmentality. That is at least my understanding of their political
analysis and clarification is required to see if that is a correct reading. In my view, some caution is
warranted in integrating such different approaches. For instance, combing ideology and
governmentality needs a proper justification and clarification. Ideology assumes that there is an
underlying truth that the dominant narrative attempts to hide it. In contrast, in the governmentality
account there is no distinction between what goes on in the surface and what is the underlying
truth. Instead, in Foucault’s account of governmentality, everything is in the surface and in the
way in which particular practices or modes of subjectivity are related to relations of power and
rationalities of government.
My impression is that Foucault’s (2008) governmentality can shed light on the main
problems associated with neoliberal capitalist system, such that a body of knowledge is produced
(e.g., human capital, effective demand, freedom, competition, behavioral economics) in particular
relations of power (e.g., political interests, a reform of administrative and legal system, reformed
labor market) with major truth effects for the formation of individuals’ subjectivity (e.g., their
needs, desires, ideals, hard and soft skills, and expectations). It is precisely this neoliberal form of
subjectivity that seems problematic for Maiese and Hanna, though their explanations get a bit
more confusing when they also try to explain neoliberalism from a variety of other perspectives.
Maiese and Hanna showed the destructive effect of neoliberalism on individual minds
through two case studies including the mental health and education system. These examples are
very illuminating and instructive, though still some of the confusion in conceptual frameworks
persist. For instance, the authors use Foucault’s concept of governmentality to explain
individuals’ understanding of themselves through mental health practices. At the same time they
use the concept of ideology to explain widespread mental health practices. More precisely, in
explaining their account of mental health, they oppose the “value-free” and naturalistic account of
psychiatry, claiming that “the ideology of mental health is a socially constructed myth” (p. 176).
Then they consider how the medical model of psychiatry is part of “the larger ideological
framework of ….[what they call] socio-scientism” (p. 180). How governmentality is related to
ideological practices is not at all clear, nor is the relation between ideology and socio-scientism.
Does that mean that when someone is seeking a professional mental health service, they are
buying into the ideology of hegemonic neoliberal ideals? I doubt that Maiese and Hanna would
agree with this and it seems to me what they mean is that the knowledge from scientific mental
health practices and psychiatry serve different human interests and might not be in line with social
emancipatory ideals, as one might derive from Habermas’ (1987) Knowledge and Human
Interests. At least, that is my impression.
Finally, Maiese and Hanna list eight criteria of collective sociopathy including
commodification, mechanization, coercion, divided mind, reversal of affect, loss of autonomy,
incentivization of desires, and false consciousness. They do not provide sufficient reason why one
has to consider these eight criteria to examine social phenomena and institutions and to see
whether they are normal or they fulfill criteria for sociopathy. It seems to me that they rely on
later Marx to elucidate the way in which a particular technological infrastructure and mode of
production, consumption, and circulation reproduce a particular mode of daily life, mental
conceptions of the world, social relations, and a relation to the nature (Marx 1976, p. 493, for a
clear elucidation of Marx’s methodology on this point, see Harvey 2010, p. 195). I see a potential
for the integration of Marx’s later works with Foucault’s account of governmentality to provide
insight into our predicaments and to present a scientifically rigorous account of a detrimental
effect of the hegemonic neoliberal mode of subjectivity and models of social institutions in our
time. Although there are traces of such a successful integration in Maiese and Hanna’s work, it
remains quite vague and fragmentary.
Social institutions
Finally, regarding the formation of new institutions, Maiese and Hanna remain general and
ambiguous. For instance, they characterize the new enabling constructive institutions to be those
that afford the flexible mental habits of curiosity, imagination, empathy and humility (p. 236-7).
This sounds interesting indeed and such a social institution would be constructive. They intend to
achieve the formation of new enabling social institutions through what they call “reverse social
engineering” and through enactive-transformative learning (p. 246). Later they clarify that this
transformative learning involves changing “problematic frames of reference, which include habits
of mind, meaning perspectives, assumptions, and expectations” (p. 247, italic in original). It is
surprising that the solution and resistance to dystopian social institutions ends up being able to
learn changing one’s perspectives, assumptions and expectations through new institutions.
Although I found their approach to bring about new social institutions very interesting, it
might need to address a few issues for its realization. First, it seems to me that their solution might
turn into another individualistic account of social change. The authors focus on changing
individuals’ frames of reference and flexible habits of mind to bring about change and to construct
new constructive social institutions. The solution seems to be basically the same for our neoliberal
planners that seek to address unemployment problems through self-assertion technics and job
interview skills. Many social changes take place through collective actions and social movements
as well as political organizations that heed the cry of the grass-root movements. Changing one’s
perspectives and assumptions would make individuals more sympathetic toward progressive
social movements, but it is not sufficient for a social change. To create new social institutions, it is
also necessary to form or have an organizational and political structure to make the necessary
social change. Otherwise, all of these individualistic solutions are likely to be coopted in the
cultural logic of late capitalism (Jameson, 1991; Sennett, 2007).
This brings me to the second issue with regards to Maiese and Hanna’s account of social
change: that the intermediary process between the political and the mental remains obscure. That
is, the process of change from individuals’ minds to social institutions is not clear. As argued,
some of the solutions regarding individuals’ changes in their frames of reference are
individualistic and might fall into the logic of late capitalism. How can one be sure that the change
in frames of references and flexible habits of mind would be in the service of the emancipatory
ideals? Are these solutions not already widespread through self-help books? Maiese and Hanna do
emphasize that the change in frame of references should occur through constructive enabling
social institutions and through transformative learning. This means that the popular self-help
books do not quality for bringing about the transformative learning. Moreover, there are also
sometimes references indicating that an institutional change is necessary for flexible habit of mind
and creative thinking, i.e., a top-down process of change though transformative learning. Though
still the process of change from individuals’ frames of reference to social institution and vice
versa can be perhaps better illuminated.
It is a bit surprising that the solution Maiese and Hanna offer based on emancipatory social
and political theories is just a learning process. Quite ironically, the neoliberals would love this
solution. It is in line with their own solutions as well: empowerment, self-help, and more
therapeutic and counseling services. Maiese and Hanna set themselves against the neoliberal
models of society but the solution they provide for creation of new institutions is in line with the
therapeutic culture of our neoliberal era (see Madsen, 2020 for more on therapeutic culture).
Perhaps a durable and transformative change in mental habits and frames of references requires a
more fundamental change in society such as a change in technical infrastructure, labor market,
and its mode of production and reproduction as later Marx would have it, but that topic is beyond
the purpose of the current discussion.
Concluding remarks
The Mind–Body Politic starts with a thesis for a political philosophy of mind. Maiese and
Hanna’s main aim is to demonstrate the destructive and deformative effect of neoliberal political
economy on people’s essentially embodied minds and advocate building new social institutions
that would improve people’s essentially embodied minds according to certain normative and
emancipatory principles.
There are several main shortcomings that significantly undermine Maiese and Hanna’s
account of mind-body politics. These include their dualistic and Manichean view of society, their
unclear account of politics, and their individualistic and therapeutic solutions to our current
predicaments. Their social and political account did not consider the nuances and complexities
across different social and political theories and sometimes various concepts were used in a
convoluted way. It would have been helpful to keep distinct concepts apart or at least clarify the
nuances that exists between various theories and concepts. For instance, neoliberalism is not the
same as neoconservatism and centrism, although their interests might coalesce at times.
Governmentality is not the same as ideology, though they might sometimes study the same object.
On a minor but no less important point, the authors’ writing seems more like a manifesto
than a philosophical argument. I take that to be a wake-up call for a critical and political
philosophy of mind. In addition, the authors provide a long list of books and perspectives that
have inspired their approach which I found impressive (see e.g., p. 7, and throughout the book)
and their references to others read more like an alliance formation than a critical engagement
(agreement / disagreement with). I take that to be part of the goal of their work and a task for us to
consider the broader political implications of our scientific and philosophical works (Habermas’
Knowledge and Human Interest is quite illuminating for this point). Finally, Maiese and Hanna’s
version of resisting the destructive social intuitions fits somehow ironically with the culture of late
capitalism, being individualistic and consistent with the widespread dominant therapeutic culture
and empowerment literature. Perhaps that is a sign of the difficulty of the task for bringing social
change that lies ahead of us.
The aim of The Mind-Body Politic to develop a political philosophy of mind is quite
ambition and several questions still remain open. We must still ask how one can apply the insight
from embodied minds to analyze our current socio-political conditions and what are the ways in
which such insights from embodied minds can help us develop more constructive social
institutions. I do think the project that Maiese and Hanna set up is worth pursuing and they
already provide many hints and directions for its productive and constructive pursuit.