A cognitive computational approach to social and collective
decision-making
1,2,∗† 1,2,∗† 3
Alan Novaes Tump , Dominik Deffner , Timothy J. Pleskac ,
2,4,5 1,2
Pawel Romanczuk , Ralf H. J. M. Kurvers
Center for Adaptive Rationality, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany
Science of Intelligence, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Department of Psychology, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, United States of America
Institute for Theoretical Biology, Department of Biology, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Corresponding authors: tump@mpib-berlin.mpg.de, deffner@mpib-berlin.mpg.de
Equal contributions
June 19, 2023
Abstract
Collective dynamics play a key role in everyday decision-making. Whether so-
cial influence promotes the spread of accurate information and ultimately results
in adaptive behavior or leads to false information cascades and maladaptive social
contagion strongly depends on the cognitive mechanisms underlying social inter-
actions. Here we argue that cognitive modeling, in tandem with experiments that
allow collective dynamics to emerge, can mechanistically link cognitive processes
at the individual and collective levels. We illustrate the strength of this cogni-
tive computational approach with two highly successful cognitive models that have
been applied to interactive group experiments: evidence accumulation and rein-
forcement learning models. We show how these approaches make it possible to
simultaneously study (i) how individual cognition drives social systems, (ii) how
social systems drive individual cognition, and (iii) the dynamic feedback processes
between the two layers.
Keywords: cognitive modeling; drift-diffusion model; reinforcement learning; groups; col-
lective dynamics
Many decisions are embedded in social contexts, being it sharing news on social media, choosing
an investment fund, or deciding whether or not to cross a red light in the presence of others are just
a few examples (Cialdini and Goldstein, 2004). Individuals are embedded within groups, platforms,
and other social entities, which they both influence and are influenced by; and these processes of
reciprocal social influence shape the dynamics of social systems. Indeed, the collective intelligence
phenomena that emerge from these interactions underpin the immense ecological success—but also
destructiveness—of the human species (Henrich and McElreath, 2003; Tomasello et al., 1993). In
today’s interactive world, these dynamically-evolving social processes seem more important than
ever, both on- and offline. We argue that to understand collective systems, research needs to adopt
approaches that allow complex social dynamics to evolve—that is, to study simultaneously (i) how
individual cognition drives social systems, (ii) how social systems drive individual cognition, and (iii)
the interaction between both layers. We argue that to test competing hypotheses in such complex
systems, computational approaches are needed that explicitly account for this dynamic feedback
across levels.
Though it is widely agreed that the behavior of individuals is the basis of all collective dynam-
ics, many influential models of collective behavior, such as the Vicsek model (Liggett, 1997) or the
Voter model (Castellano et al., 2009b), make highly idealized, simplifying assumptions about the
underlying individual decision processes. For example, borrowing concepts from statistical physics
or epidemiology, these models assume that individuals interact like Brownian particles (Romanczuk
et al., 2012) or that information and opinions spread like virulent diseases (Cavalli-Sforza and Feld-
man, 1981). Such assumptions facilitate mathematical tractability and allow modeling of behavior
of collectives at large scales. These approaches typically focus on emergent patterns in collectives
with very large numbers of individuals. These simulation-driven analyses have provided valuable
insights into collective phenomena such as swarms or large herds (Castellano et al., 2009a). However,
they typically neglect individual cognition, assuming that large collectives show general properties
irrespective of the details of the individual-level decision process. Currently, empirical studies on
social cognition have made great progress in understanding the cognitive mechanisms of decision
processes in social settings—for example, showing when individuals seek social information (Kendal
et al., 2018) and how social influence can alter evaluation processes (Germar et al., 2016) and risk
attitudes (Ciranka and Van den Bos, 2019). Although such studies provide detailed insights into how
cognition acts in social settings, very few studies take a dynamic approach to study how cognitive
processes shape—and are shaped by—collective dynamics over time. Instead, social cognition studies
typically look at static—often simulated—sources of social information and are unable to accom-
modate the complexity of multiple individuals interacting dynamically and repeatedly in real-time.
We argue that (i) designing more “dynamic” cognitive behavioral experiments where participants
repeatedly interact in real-time (embracing natural variation in the timing of decisions) and respond
to the unfolding social environment created by the decisions of others (as opposed to more “static”
experiments which constrain decision timing and prevent recurrent feedbacks between the choices
of group members); and (ii) modeling the cognitive processes of such dynamically interacting indi-
viduals is a fruitful path forward, making it possible to describe, understand, and predict collective
outcomes (Krause et al., 2021).
Computational cognitive modeling has become firmly established as an invaluable tool for the
study of human decision-making (see Lee and Wagenmakers (2014), Farrell and Lewandowsky (2018)
and Wilson and Collins (2019) for introductions to cognitive modeling). We argue that taking such
models to the level of social interactions will prove instrumental for integrating theories across dis-
ciplines such as psychology, biology, and economics within a single framework. Recent advances in
cognitive modeling and the increasing availability of software such as Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017),
PyMC3 (Salvatier et al., 2016), and Turing (Ge et al., 2018) allows formalizing and testing models to
capture these complex interactions (Lee and Wagenmakers, 2014; Farrell and Lewandowsky, 2018),
and thus to investigate the relationship between individual cognition and collectives bottom-up:
The models take cognitive processes at the individual level as the start point while simultaneously
accounting for the collective dynamics that these processes create. This approach can thus bridge
the gap between individual and collective dynamics in social groups. Starting from formal models
of individual cognition and mechanistically linking the individual and collective level, this approach
makes it possible to analyze dynamic behavior in social experiments and to test quantitative pre-
dictions derived from different theories against each other.
We illustrate the strength of this approach with two classes of models that have been highly
successful in explaining individual decision-making: (i) evidence accumulation models, predicting
trial-level choices and response times, and (ii) reinforcement learning models, predicting dynamic
learning process over repeated choices. Throughout, we highlight novel research directions.
Modeling Evidence Accumulation in Collectives
From individual to social cognitive modeling
Timing plays a central role in a wide range of decision-making tasks, e.g., animals deciding whether
to escape or continue foraging under predation risk or pedestrians deciding whether to wait or cross a
busy street. The dominant theoretical framework to account for the underlying individual decision
processes is that of evidence accumulation models. These models describe the decision-making
process as a continuous process of accumulating noisy evidence until a decision threshold is reached
and a decision is made. The most prominent representative of evidence accumulation models is the
drift-diffusion model (DDM), which captures the choice process between two alternatives (Ratcliff
and McKoon, 2008; Ratcliff et al., 2016). It assumes that individuals start with an initial evidence
state, which can favor one of the decision alternatives (described by the start point). Over time,
they gather further information, which changes the evidence state (described by the drift rate) until
the evidence for one alternative reaches a level that triggers a decision (by hitting the upper or
lower decision threshold; see Fig. 1A). This continuous evidence accumulation process is typically
approximated by assuming small discrete time steps (∆t) with the change in the evidence state L
being described by:
L(t + ∆t) = L(t) + δ × ∆t + ∆t × (cid:15), (1)
with δ being the drift rate describing the rate of evidence accumulation per unit time with positive
(negative) values describing a drift towards the upper (lower) decision threshold. If one option is
correct, the drift rate typically describes the rate of evidence accumulation for the correct choice.
The parameter (cid:15) adds Gaussian noise and makes the choice process stochastic (i.e., the diffusion
process).
By providing an account for response time distributions and choice probabilities, the DDM is
widely used to study individual cognitive processes across many domains (Ratcliff et al., 2016;
Krajbich and Rangel, 2011). To date, the large majority of DDM applications have studied single
decision makers. Yet, many choices are made under social influence, with individuals able to observe
the choices of others to inform their own decisions. Animals often observe the flight responses or food
choices of conspecifics and pedestrians observe others dashing across the road. In such situations,
early choices can cascade through the group via social contagion (Bikhchandani et al., 1998; Mann,
2018; Poel et al., 2022; Tump et al., 2020). The collective outcome of these dynamics is strongly
influenced by how individuals integrate information over time, and how they time their decisions. As
DDMs can account for both these processes, extending such models to the domain of social dynamics
is extremely promising.
The integration of personal and social information over time can be described as a dynamic
process whereby multiple individuals simultaneously collect noisy evidence (see equation 1). Once
an individual makes a decision, this decision becomes observable for undecided individuals and can
be incorporated as further evidence (Fig. 1A). Formally, the incorporation of this additional evidence
can be described by a change in the drift rate δ(t) as a function of the majority size M (t) of the
individuals who already decided at time point t:
δ(t) = δ + δ (M (t)). (2)
p s
Thus, the drift rate δ consists of a personal drift rate δ and a social drift rate δ describing the
p s
uptake of non-social and social information, respectively. The former describes personal information
intake from the task-specific stimuli, while the latter describes the social influence which changes
(left) by accounting for the integration of personal and social information during the choice process
(right). (A) Five individuals gather noisy evidence for options “A” (here the correct decision)
and “B” (the incorrect decision). When an individual hits a decision threshold (i.e., red dashed
lines), their choice becomes observable (indicated by dots) for the undecided individuals. These
undecided individuals can use this information as additional information by drifting to the decision
threshold favored by the majority. (B) If group members vary in their ability to extract personal
information (i.e., their personal drift rate), those with a higher ability are expected to make faster
and more accurate choices. This allows groups to self-organize, whereby accurate individuals provide
high-quality information to less skilled individuals. (C) If group members differ in the amount of
information needed to make a decision (i.e., different thresholds), individuals with lower thresholds
are expected to make faster but less accurate choices, undermining the accuracy of later-deciding
with the majority size M (t):
M (t) = N (t) − N (t). (3)
A B
where N (t) and N (t) are the number of individuals who have already decided for the options “A”
A B
or “B”, respectively. For the simulations in Fig. 1A-C we assumed a linear relationship between
the majority size and social information uptake (i.e., δ = s × M (t)), with s scaling the strength of
social information use. In reality, individuals may use more complex social information integration
strategies, as discussed later.
The social DDM links evidence accumulation at the individual level to the collective level, ex-
plicitly modeling the timing of choices and the arrival of new social information, thereby shedding
light on the information flow in sequentially-deciding collectives (Bidari et al., 2022; Caginalp and
Doiron, 2017; Karamched et al., 2020a,b; Tump et al., 2020). This framework goes beyond previous
models on information cascades, which usually assume a random decision order (Bikhchandani et al.,
1998; Deneubourg et al., 1990; Sumpter and Pratt, 2009, but see Vicente-Page et al., 2018). Such
models neglect the influence of individual cognitive processes on strategic decision timing. Whether
individuals decide early or late can be the result of distinct cognitive processes, such as individual dif-
ferences in response biases (e.g., starting evidence accumulation closer to one option), personal drift
rate, thresholds (a.k.a., speed–accuracy trade-offs), or the integration of social information (Bogacz
et al., 2010). Importantly, these cognitive processes are predicted to have different ramifications at
the collective level. For example, individual differences in how quickly group members can extract
information for the correct option (i.e., variation in expertise) is described by individual differences
in the personal drift rate δ . Such individual differences in expertise are expected to promote collec-
tive intelligence, as they will allow “expert” individuals to make early, accurate choices, which can
then be adopted by later-deciding, less skilled individuals (Fig. 1B). But the social DDM can also
predict when social interactions might undermine accuracy. For example, individuals’ preferences
for speed or accuracy are reflected in their decision thresholds with higher thresholds resulting in
more accurate, but slower, decisions. If group members vary in these preferences, those individuals
with low thresholds are predicted to make early, error-prone choices, thereby jeopardizing the accu-
racy of individuals with higher thresholds (Fig. 1C). The social DDM allows testing these different
predictions by fitting the model to empirical data. Thereby it can tease apart distinct decision
processes, paving the way for more in-depth modeling and understanding of information cascades
or other social processes.
Strategies underlying social information integration
How individuals integrate social information crucially determines the outcome of social interactions.
Applying a DDM perspective can facilitate a detailed mechanistic understanding and provide novel
insights into decision processes in sequentially-deciding groups, including (i) social learning rules,
(ii) the information present in response order and speed, and (iii) information flow.
Social psychology has a long tradition of investigating how the number of individuals displaying
a certain behavior influences the likelihood of another individual adopting that behavior (Asch,
1951; Milgram et al., 1969; Morgan and Laland, 2012). This relationship has been speculated to
follow different forms, such as a saturating power function (Latané, 1981) or an S-shaped function
(Bond, 2005). Yet few studies allowed social information to arise from the interactions between
group members. In more realistic settings, how social information arises will crucially depend on the
cognitive strategies of the group members. For example, individuals using quorum thresholds will
down-weight small majorities but ramp up copying once the majority reaches a critical size. The
choices of these groups will initially be relatively independent, allowing individual errors to cancel
out and later-deciding individuals to benefit from often accurate majorities. In contrast, the choices
of groups relying on strong copying of small majorities will be highly dependent, increasing decision
speed, but at the cost of accuracy (Sumpter, 2006; Sumpter and Pratt, 2009). Thus, how much
weight individuals give to an observed choice depends on when it was observed and the implemented
strategy. In some contexts, choices might be observed before the process of personal evidence
accumulation starts. In this case, the social evidence can enter the choice process by biasing the
start point instead of the drift which can push people towards confirming the social source without
thoroughly evaluating their personal information (Germar and Mojzisch, 2019). By operationalizing
these strategies with the social DDM, future research can measure and test the use of such strategies.
For example, the diminishing effect of each additionally observed choice described by Latané (1981)
via a saturating power function—but also other relationships—can be implemented via the social
drift rate (see also Tump et al., 2020):
δ = s × M (t) , (4)
with s scaling the strength of social influence and q influencing the shape of the power function.
Freely timed decisions allow individuals to make inferences from response times. For example,
the speed of an observed decision is used to infer the decision quality (Frydman and Krajbich, 2022).
Similarly, the order in which people make decisions can convey information. For example, a choice
that diverges from the current majority is predicted to be based on strong personal information
(Mann, 2018). Even the absence of decisions can convey information. When group members start
with a bias toward one option, a long period without a choice may indicate that individuals have
gathered good evidence for the initially less-preferred option (Karamched et al., 2020b). Allowing
participants to freely time their decision can thus provide a richer and more realistic understanding
of social systems.
Taking such a dynamic approach can cast light on the mechanisms driving information flow.
Previous work has shown that relying on social information in sequentially-deciding groups can
increase accuracy (Goeree et al., 2007; Mann, 2021; Tump et al., 2020; Vicente-Page et al., 2018),
but that it can also promote false information cascades or maladaptive herding (Anderson and Holt,
1997; Baddeley, 2010; Bikhchandani et al., 1998; Toyokawa et al., 2019; Weizsäcker, 2010). The
DDM has the potential to bring together such results under one framework. One driving factor
here is the order in which individuals decide, whereby benefits of social interactions emerge when
individuals coordinate their response time according to information quality (i.e., deciding early/late
when possessing strong/weak evidence), but fail to emerge when they do not (Gul and Lundholm,
1995; Kurvers et al., 2015; Tump et al., 2020; Vicente-Page et al., 2018; Zhang, 1997).
The emergence of biases in social systems
The DDM framework has been used extensively to understand the emergence of biases at the indi-
vidual level (Gold and Shadlen, 2007; Leite and Ratcliff, 2011; Mulder et al., 2012), but few studies
have looked at biases in social systems. To illustrate, consider a police officer approaching a poten-
tially dangerous situation, and needing to decide whether or not to shoot. Previous research has
studied which aspects of the cognitive process can explain biases in single police officers, showing
that the start point and evaluation of incoming information depend on the suspect’s race (Pleskac
et al., 2018; Johnson et al., 2018). In reality, however, the decision to shoot is rarely made in iso-
lation. Most police precincts in the United States dispatch at least four officers when a suspect is
expected to be armed. Despite the importance of the social context, it remains unknown how biases
play out when two or more police officers approach a potentially dangerous scene. Creating realistic
social scenarios (e.g., interactive shooting simulations) that acknowledge the role of timing are key
for understanding these issues.
The DDM framework can also be used to generate predictions for social contexts, based on
modeling the behavior of single individuals. For example, experimental research on individual police
officers in shooting simulators has shown that the decision to shoot is typically made faster than the
decision not to shoot, explained by a bias in the start point (Pleskac et al., 2018). Such asymmetries
in decision timing—which appear in various social contexts (Tump et al., 2022a)—are predicted to
have consequences on which decisions (and potential biases) are amplified in a social context, because
early-arriving social information typically exerts a stronger influence on the collective (Tump et al.,
2022a,b). The prediction at the collective level is thus that having multiple police officers in a
shooting simulator will increase the likelihood to shoot.
Individual heterogeneity, social networks and norms
It is well known that individuals differ systematically in many key aspects of cognition (Kanai and
Rees, 2011), including how they react to standardized social information (Molleman et al., 2019,
2020). However, few studies have quantified such individual differences in dynamic social systems,
let alone studied their importance at the collective level. Cognitive models accounting for social
interactions—such as the social DDM— allow to systematically quantify individual differences and
their importance for social systems.
Another key dimension on which individuals may vary is the number and structure of social
contacts. The topology of social networks is known to strongly influence the dynamics of information
flow (Galesic et al., 2023). By allowing freely timed decisions, future research could address questions
such as how the speed of a decision interacts with a network structure and which structures promote
(or prevent) the influence of early-deciding individuals (Gross and Blasius, 2008).
Lastly, the behavior of others can also convey normative expectations. How such expectations
are incorporated into the choice process, influences early choices and, thereby, the social dynamics
are largely open questions. For example, individual tendencies to behave selfishly or cooperate have
been described to influence the start point (Chen and Krajbich, 2018), while social expectations
can bias the drift rate (Germar and Mojzisch, 2019; Toelch et al., 2018), with different expected
consequences for emerging dynamics. As normative influence plays a central role in many everyday
social interactions, research is needed to investigate how the cognitive underpinnings promote or
discourage undesired social dynamics such as jaywalking, collective violence, and hate speech (Krause
et al., 2021).
Whereas the DDM models two-alternative forced choice tasks, the approach could be extended
to other tasks. For example, models accounting for go/no-go tasks provide an interesting extension
(Ratcliff et al., 2018) as only the “go” action is observable by others which causes an asymmetry in
information flow in collectives. Evidence accumulation models have also been extended to tasks with
more than two alternatives (Krajbich and Rangel, 2011; Kvam, 2019). Other extensions can account
for different types of social information exchange—for example, directly communicating evidence
states (Bidari et al., 2022). Jointly, these models offer the potential to develop tools that shed new
light on temporal coordination and information flow in a much broader range of social systems by
explicitly modeling the process of personal and social information accumulation.
Modeling Reinforcement Learning in Collectives
Individual and social learning
Collective dynamics are not limited to single choices (astypically assumed in evidence accumulation
models), they often unfold throughout many successive choices. To succeed in complex and hetero-
A)
Option A or Option B
B)
C)
Payoff
Trial
a social reinforcement learning (RL) model. Five individuals repeatedly choose between options
¯ ¯
“A” and “B” which differ in their average payoffs (A = 15 and B = 20 points, with SD = 3;
AB
see illustration on the left). Following their choices (colored dots), individuals receive payoffs and
update their latent values (i.e., beliefs about the value of both options; colored lines; see equation
5). After half of the trials, the relative payoffs change and option “A” produces, on average, a
higher payoff. In addition to this personal information, individuals can observe the choices of other
group members and integrate these social cues depending on their learning strategy (see equations
7 and 8). (A) Without social learning (social learning weight σ = 0), only some individuals learn
which option produces the highest payoff (indicated by shaded areas). (B) With low conformist
social learning (σ = 0.3, conformity exponent θ = 1.5), all individuals initially learn that option B
produces a higher payoff and are able to successfully track the change in payoffs. (C) With high
conformist social learning (σ = 0.7, θ = 5), individuals quickly converge on the initially better
option, but continue to choose this option after the change in payoffs, illustrating the danger of
maladaptive herding in social systems. Individual RL parameters were fixed with updating-rate
parameter α = 0.3 and exploration/exploitation-rate parameter β = 0.18 (see equations 5 and 6).
geneous environments, organisms must continually learn from the consequences of their actions and
adjust their behaviors accordingly. Social organisms can learn not only from direct interaction with
the environment but also from the observed choices and behaviors of others. Such social learning
allows groups to pool information and to adapt to changing conditions more quickly and reliably
than individual learners (compare Figs. 2A and 2B; Boyd et al., 2011; Kendal et al., 2018). How-
ever, similar to information cascades in the social DDM, excessive social learning can also result in
maladaptive herding, where collectives continuously copy each other and fail to track the state of
the environment (see Fig. 2C; Aoki and Feldman, 2014; Kendal et al., 2018; Rogers, 1988).
To standardize the social information available to participants, many experimental studies in-
vestigate social learning in relatively simplistic settings, where social information either comes from
earlier participants or is not truly “social” but created by the experimenter (Hoppitt and Laland,
2013; Mesoudi, 2021). This approach has provided important insights into the mechanisms and
strategies individuals use to learn from others (see Kendal et al., 2018, for review). However, it
does not allow the dynamic collective consequences of individual learning strategies to be studied.
To uncover how individuals use social information and how different social learning strategies shape
collective performance, researchers need to study the use of social information in social environments
created by individuals, that is, in scenarios where social information arises endogenously from the
behavior of others in interacting groups.
Dynamic inference for dynamic collectives
Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a powerful computational framework that links observed
choices to latent individual-level value updating and translates the influence of such latent val-
ues (i.e., estimated payoffs for each choice option) into individual choice probabilities (see Sutton
and Barto, 2018, for a general introduction). Standard individual-level RL models consist of two
basic components: (1) an updating equation describes how latent values (“Q-values”) of different
behavioral options i change over time as a function of reward prediction errors (i.e., differences
between received rewards π and reward predictions):
i,t−1
Q = Q + α(π − Q ). (5)
i,t i,t−1 i,t−1 i,t−1
The updating-rate parameter α determines the relative weight of recent experiences and thus influ-
ences how quickly individuals update their values based on recent experiences (colored lines in Fig. 2
illustrate latent value updating).
(2) A softmax choice rule translates the latent values of different options (here shown for two
options) into probabilities that those options are chosen:
exp(βQ )
i,t
P = . (6)
i,t
(cid:80)
exp(βQ )
m,t
m=1
The exploration/exploitation-rate parameter β describes how strongly differences in latent values
determine choices and thus influences an individual’s tendency to select new options over relying on
previously rewarding behaviors.
Linking individual-level learning to group-level adaptation
Extending RL models to dynamic social situations makes it possible to identify mechanistic links
between individual-level (non-social and social) learning, the social information that such learning
creates, and the resulting group-level consequences (e.g., Deffner et al., 2020; McElreath et al., 2005,
2008; Toyokawa et al., 2019; Toyokawa and Gaissmaier, 2022). Social RL models allow different
observable social cues to also influence the probability that a certain option is chosen:
exp(βQ )
i,t
P = (1 − σ) + σP . (7)
i,t S,i,t
(cid:80)
exp(βQ )
m,t
m=1
An additional parameter σ represents the relative weight individuals place on social information as
opposed to their own experience and the social choice probability P can include the influence of
S,i,t
several option- or model-specific social cues such as frequency-dependent (or “conformist”) copying
(Hoppitt and Laland, 2013; McElreath et al., 2005):
i,t−1
P = , (8)
S,i,t
(cid:80)
m,t−1
m=1
where n is the number of group members previously choosing option i and θ is the conformity
i,t−i
for simulation and plotting code).
Explicitly modeling the learning and decision processes of individuals in collectives can provide
mechanistic insights into collective adaptation and decision-making. For example, it has long been
unclear why groups sometimes exhibit collective intelligence and other times maladaptive herding.
Toyokawa et al. (2019) studied interactive group experiments in which individuals needed to learn
which of three slot machines produced the highest payoff. Fitting social RL models, they showed
that the individual-level social learning strategies explained when groups succeeded (or failed) in
adapting to a changing environment (see also Fig. 2). Specifically, a weak conformist bias allowed
groups to perform well in stable environments, while retaining flexibility when environmental con-
ditions changed. In harder tasks, where the payoff distributions showed more overlap, individuals
showed a stronger conformist bias, and, thus, tended to stick with an outdated maladaptive solution
when conditions changed. Further increasing the realism (and complexity) of such experiments,
Deffner et al. (2020) allowed for dynamically-changing group compositions through movement be-
tween groups. Using time-varying social RL models, they showed that individuals relied heavily on
conformist social learning after entering a new group with experienced group members, but more on
personal information when group members did not provide useful social information. In simplifying
group dynamics, previous studies may, therefore, have underestimated the amount of social learning
occurring in more realistic, dynamic groups with different experience levels.
Computational models can also help to better understand seemingly paradoxical effects of indi-
vidual strategies. For example, many RL studies have found that single individuals’ value-updating
tends to focus on recent experiences, which can bias them to choose safe options that are sub-optimal
in the long run. Because conformity tends to amplify individual biases, one might expect collectives
to display even stronger biases toward safe, sub-optimal, behavior. If conformist social influence was
strong, Toyokawa and Gaissmaier (2022) indeed found that individual risk aversion was amplified in
interactive groups. However, if conformist influence was weaker than personal risk aversion, social
learning, surprisingly, increased exploration and promoted favorable risk taking. Only by study-
ing how the learning and choice biases of multiple individuals unfold in dynamically-interacting
collectives can we understand when collectives mitigate, rather than amplify, individually-biased
decision-making.
There is a rich diversity of social learning strategies beyond conformity, such as prestige-based,
success-based, similarity-based, and novelty-based learning (Kendal et al., 2018) that can equally be
integrated into social RL models via equation 7. The collective consequences of such strategies are
still largely unexplored. For instance, preferentially learning from high-prestige individuals might
prove adaptive for the collective when prestige accurately reflects past performance and generalizes
to novel tasks, but maladaptive in hierarchical groups where this is not the case. Also, social learning
strategies do not operate in isolation but jointly influence individuals’ choices. Future research could
investigate how different social learning strategies in concert allow collectives to adapt to changing
environments (or prevent them from doing so). Lastly, group dynamics and social network structures
have proven to be important drivers of social learning and collective adaptation (Chimento et al.,
2021; Deffner and McElreath, 2022; Derex and Mesoudi, 2020; Galesic et al., 2023). Experiments on
social RL have recently started to move beyond closed groups, but future studies could allow even
more complex turnover and network dynamics to emerge, making it possible to investigate how such
effects might interact with individual cognition.
Cognitive details matter: decision biasing, value shaping, and meta-learning
Recent work in cognitive neuroscience has generated novel insights into the mechanisms underpinning
people’s abilities to learn from others (see Olsson et al., 2020, for a review). This line of research
has suggested how cognitive details might matter for collective outcomes. For example, in all social
RL models that have been applied to interactive group experiments (see also equation 7), social
information directly influences the probability that a certain option is chosen without changing the
latent values (e.g., Deffner et al., 2020; McElreath et al., 2005; Toyokawa et al., 2019; Toyokawa
and Gaissmaier, 2022). As an alternative to such “decision-biasing” social learning, Najar et al.
(2020) have proposed a “value-shaping” process, where social information directly enters the latent
value estimation of different options such that observed choice options become inherently more
“valuable” to participants (implemented through extension of equation 5) rather than only affecting
their behavior. The authors present experiments that suggest that value shaping might explain
human choice behavior in their task better than decision biasing or other social learning models.
More empirical research is needed on the relative importance of decision biasing and value shaping
and on their collective-level consequences, which can be tested through evolutionary simulations
and dynamic group experiments. Value shaping might lead to faster learning in stable environments
by aligning the internal expectations of individuals. In stochastic environments, however, decision
biasing might be more adaptive, as individuals influence each others’ choices but still update their
beliefs about the world based on their personal experience.
Lastly, going beyond social RL, Wu et al. (2022) argue that the power of human social learning
is not underpinned by a single cognitive capacity, but by the ability to flexibly switch between
different computational modes. Specifically, social learners can directly copy other individuals’
actions without any causal understanding (“policy imitation”), infer the values guiding those actions
(“value inference”), or infer their model of the environment and intrinsic rewards (“belief inference
and reward inference”). Similarly, human individual learning extends beyond pure Rescorla-Wagner-
style updating (Sutton and Barto, 2018), and future work could implement more realistic learning
models from computational neuroscience—for instance, models based on variational inference (Blei
et al., 2017; Doya et al., 2006). No research (as far as we know) has yet addressed such complex
forms of individual and social learning in dynamic interactive experiments. How do collectives adapt
to environmental changes if individuals use social information to infer others’ mental states instead
of blindly copying their behavior? How do collective outcomes change if people have access to other
people’s goals instead of only their actions? And how do social learners decide and switch between
different strategies when faced with multiple sources of social information? These and many related
questions await more detailed investigation—there is thus vast unexplored territory concerning the
collective consequences of the various cognitive (social) learning mechanisms that facilitate collective
adaptation and cultural evolution (Galesic et al., 2023).
Combining evidence accumulation and reinforcement learning models
Social evidence accumulation and social RL models have thus far only been used independently
within largely distinct research traditions, although they are in fact highly complementary: RL
models describe the dynamics of latent value updating, while assuming a simplified decision process
(usually a softmax choice rule) that leaves out the complexities of noisy evidence accumulation. In
contrast, evidence accumulation models account for choice probabilities and response times, but do
not model information transfer about option quality across trials. Combining both models would
constitute a major advance for the computational modeling of social systems. Similar RL diffusion
models have already been developed for the non-social domain, explaining choice behavior better
than previous models (Fontanesi et al., 2019; Konovalov and Krajbich, 2016; Pedersen et al., 2017).
For example, Pedersen et al. (2017) let the drift rate change depending on (learned) expected rewards
through a RL process. They also tested which other features of the DDM process (e.g., the start point
or decision threshold) change with experience by comparing different model versions using cross-
validation (see Fontanesi et al. (2019) for further variations). Extending such models to dynamic
social systems might provide fresh insights into collective decision-making across different time scales.
How does the timing of individual decisions influence the exploration of different options and how do
experienced payoffs and observed choices in turn influence the subsequent evidence accumulation and
temporal self-organization of collectives? Integrating these approaches provides exciting prospects
for theory development and empirical breakthroughs but also requires researchers to develop and
test additional assumptions about the exact intersection of both models and how social environments
might influence learning dynamics and choice processes in different ways.
Conclusion
Human collectives are complex, dynamic systems that emerge from and shape individual cognition.
Due to this inherent complexity, most previous studies have either abstracted away from individ-
ual cognition and focused on macro-level dynamics or used constrained, simplified experiments to
investigate specific aspects of social interactions. Both approaches have been (and will continue
to be) fruitful, but focusing exclusively on one side of the dynamic interplay between individual
and collective will necessarily miss crucial aspects of social dynamics. We have argued that more
naturalistic experiments which allow complex social dynamics to unfold over time can close the gap
between simulation-based studies on large-scale collective phenomena and experimental studies on
individual-level social cognition. More dynamic group experiments will only be useful if appropriate
statistical tools are available for their analysis, and complexity of experimental setups should not be
an end in itself. Therefore, we advocate for a close integration between experimental designs and
computational models.
There are different ways to link computational models to empirical evidence: Most commonly,
researchers fit models to data from experiments that closely mirror the structure of the theoretical
model in order to empirically identify plausible parameter values. This approach allows to measure
features of latent cognitive processes such as how fast participants update their beliefs or how
sensitive they are to social information; it can also be used to test specific hypotheses if they can
be expressed in terms of certain parameter values (e.g., conformity vs. anti-conformity depending
on the value of θ in equation 8). A complementary aim is to test and compare competing model
assumptions to assess which assumed process(es) are compatible with empirical evidence using, for
example, model comparison or model selection (Farrell and Lewandowsky, 2018; McElreath, 2020).
The application of computational models to social systems is greatly facilitated when researchers
can build on well-grounded models of how (non-social) environmental features and individual char-
acteristics influence the decision process, which can then be extended to social contexts to allow for
dynamic feedback between individuals’ choices. Most of these established formal models—including
all examples discussed in this article—describe decision problems with a well-defined set of potential
actions that can be described by probability distributions and, therefore, fitted to experimental data
using routine statistical methods. If behavior is even more unconstrained (e.g., free movement across
space, naturalistic social interactions or unstructured discussions), single actions can be difficult to
pin down and the direct application of established decision-making models becomes more difficult,
and potentially intractable. Even if such experiments may not be used to directly test or falsify
hypotheses generated by computational models, social-cognitive models can serve as starting guides
for exploration and help to identify essential features of complex real-world interactions, limit the
problem space, and inspire new experimental paradigms and computational methods.
Lastly, applying a cognitive computational approach to collective decision-making will not only
generate novel advances in basic research but might also help researchers and policy makers to
better generalize insights from cognitive science to other social systems and to predict and guide
how different collective phenomena unfold in the real world (Glymour et al., 2016; Deffner et al.,
2022). From the emergence of economic bubbles to the spread of false news and polarization of be-
liefs, collective dynamics can go very wrong, leading to herding and false information cascades with
devastating societal consequences. Whether interventions successfully reduce the risk of undesired
dynamics ultimately depends on features of the decision-making process. On a more positive note,
culture and other social dynamics can facilitate flexible adaptation to vastly different environments
and (at least partly) underlie our success as a species (Henrich, 2017). Better understanding the
circumstances under which collectively intelligent behavior emerges from individual-level cognition
will thus be crucial in helping people to adapt and thrive in a changing world.
Acknowledgments. A.N.T., D.D., P.R., and R.H.J.M.K. acknowledge funding from Germany’s
Excellence Strategy – EXC 2002/1 “Science of Intelligence” – project number 390523135. We thank
Susannah Goss for editing the manuscript.
Data and Code Availability. This manuscript does not contain any new empirical data. Simu-
lation and plotting code necessary to reproduce all figures in the manuscript can be found on OSF: