Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
Curious about threats: Morbid curiosity
and interest in conspiracy theories
1, 2* 3*
Coltan Scrivner & Joseph M. Stubbersfield
Recreational Fear Lab, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark
Institute for Mind and Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Psychology Department, University of Winchester, UK
* Contact: Scrivner, cscrivner1@gmail.com; Stubbersfield joe.stubbersfield@winchester.ac.uk
Abstract
Conspiracy theories provide explanations of important events or circumstances which allege a
secret plot between two or more powerful actors as the salient cause, and commonly highlight
the threat presented by the plot and its conspirators. Given the importance of threat in conspiracy
theories, an interest in obtaining threat-related information might predispose one to be interested
in conspiracy theory. Morbid curiosity describes the tendency to seek out information about
threatening or dangerous situations and is associated with an interest in threat-related
entertainment. Across three studies we investigated the relationship between morbid curiosity
and conspiracy theories. We found that higher trait morbid curiosity was associated with higher
general conspiracist beliefs (Study 1) and the perceived threat of conspiratorial explanations of
events (Study 2). Using a behavioral choice paradigm, we found that participants who chose to
investigate morbidly curious stimuli were more likely to choose to learn about conspiratorial
explanations for events (Study 3). Greater curiosity about the minds of dangerous people was
consistently the strongest predictor of conspiratorial ideation and interest. These results suggest
that morbid curiosity is an important but hitherto unstudied predictor of conspiratorial interest
and belief.
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
Introduction
Morbid Curiosity
Humans often do their best to avoid threatening or dangerous situations since these bring about
risks to health and safety. However, complete avoidance can lead to ignorance about how to
identify and appropriately respond to dangerous situations if they do occur. One solution to this
problem is to seek out threat-related information in situations where the perceived costs are low
and the perceived benefits remain high. The tendency to seek out information about threats in
this manner has been called morbid curiosity (Scrivner, 2021a; Scrivner, 2021b; Scrivner &
Clasen, 2021). The propensity for morbid curiosity can help explain the allure of frightening and
violent entertainment, including horror films, true crime, and violent sports. Recently, Scrivner
(2021b) created the Morbid Curiosity Scale as a way to assess overall trait levels of morbid
curiosity as well as trait morbid curiosity in four domains: Minds of dangerous people, violence,
paranormal danger, and body violation. Though the subject matter varies across the domains, the
unifying thread between them is the potential to learn threat-related information. General morbid
curiosity appears to be a common behavior (Oosterwijk, 2017) and the trait has been found to be
normally distributed in samples (Scrivner 2021b). People with more morbid curiosity tend to be
younger, more rebellious, more socially curious, and less disgusted by or afraid of death
(Scrivner, 2021b).
Despite their interest in the macabre, morbidly curious people may be more anxious or neurotic
than non-morbidly curious people. For example, fans of horror movies and books with dark and
dangerous themes score higher in neuroticism (Nave et al., 2020; Annalyn et al., 2018) and
people who feel nervous are more likely to rent horror movies than movies of other genres
(Strizhakova & Krcmar, 2007). This seemingly paradoxical finding could be explained by the
heightened vigilance in morbidly curious people, which motivates them to seek out and attend to
threat-related information. When deployed in fictional contexts, engagement with threat-related
information is generally safe and even potentially helpful in alleviating anxiety and building
psychological resilience (Scrivner & Christensen, 2021; Scrivner et al., 2021). However,
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
increased vigilance and attention to threat-related information that stems from morbid curiosity
can also lead to an interest in threat-related information about real events.
Conspiracy Theories
Conspiracy theories typically provide an explanation for an important event or circumstance
involving an alleged secret plot by two or more powerful actors as the salient cause (Douglas et
al., 2019; Goertzel, 1994; Keeley, 1999). Belief in these theories is not inherently irrational (as
conspiracies do occur, see Dentith, 2014; Pidgen, 1995), but conspiracy theories persist as
explanations despite a lack of reliable evidence (Douglas et al., 2019; Keeley, 1999). Increased
conspiracy theory belief is associated with reduced engagement with mainstream politics (Imhoff
et al., 2020; Jolley & Douglas, 2014), increased support for political violence and extremism
(Imhoff et al., 2020; Uscinski & Parent, 2014), and increased prejudice towards minority groups
(Jolley et al., 2020; Kofta et al., 2020). As such it is vital to understand what motivates
individuals to seek out and believe these conspiratorial explanations.
A common feature of successful conspiracy theories is perceived threat, commonly represented
by a malign outgroup working in secret to harm the ingroup of the believer (Cichocka et al,
2016; van Prooijen, 2020; van Prooijen & Lange, 2014; van Prooijen & Song, 2021). Prior
research suggests humans are predisposed towards being vigilant of threats in our environment
(Baumeister et al., 2001; Fessler et al., 2014; Rozin & Royzman, 2001) and a bias for threat-
related content has been found in attention (Scrivner et al., 2019; Yiend, 2010), memory (Kang
et al., 2008; Nairne, 2010; Nairne et al., 2019; Otgaar et al., 2010), and social transmission
(Blaine & Boyer, 2018; Moussaïd et al., 2015; Stubbersfield et al., 2015). Because of this,
perceived threat is likely crucial to the appeal of conspiracy theories.
While the nature of the threat presented in a conspiracy theory can be a direct threat to well-
being or survival, such as in the many long-lasting health-related conspiracy theories (Oliver &
Wood, 2014; Stubbersfield et al, 2021), it can also be a threat to abstract concepts we hold to be
important, such as liberty or democracy (Bangerter et al, 2020; Franks et al, 2013). This can be
seen in longstanding and widespread claims that water fluoridation in the USA was a plot to
pacify people and make them susceptible to communism (Armfield, 2007), or recent electoral
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
fraud conspiracy theories (Enders et al., 2021). In this sense, conspiracy theories can include
realistic threats — towards one’s life or livelihood — and/or symbolic threats — towards one’s
way of living, or values (Stephan et al., 2002). However, it is unclear whether the appeal of
symbolic threats represents an extension of the psychological mechanisms involved in
responding to direct threat-related information, or if it relies on different psychological systems.
A better understanding of this could provide insights into the relative cultural success of
conspiracy theories featuring different types of threat.
The Current Research
Across three studies, we investigated the relationship between morbid curiosity and conspiracy
theories. In Study 1, we tested whether trait morbid curiosity was associated with a general belief
in conspiracy theories. Given the common core of learning about threats that is present in both
morbid curiosity and conspiratorial belief, we expected trait morbid curiosity to be positively
correlated with general conspiratorial beliefs (H1).
In Study 2, we looked at how morbid curiosity is associated with perceptions of threat in both
conspiratorial and mainstream explanations of events. We predicted that people who scored
higher in morbid curiosity would perceive more threat in conspiratorial explanations (H2). We
also explored whether there was a difference in perceived threat in events that are more
threatening to the self vs. events that are more threatening to society. Finally, we explored
whether morbidly curious people were more familiar with conspiratorial explanations.
In Study 3, we used a behavioral choice paradigm to test whether people who exhibited more
morbid curiosity would also be more interested in learning about conspiratorial explanations of
historical events compared to mainstream explanations. We predicted that participants who
displayed more morbidly curious behavior would choose to learn about conspiratorial
explanations more often (H3). We further explored if morbidly curious behavior was associated
with different types of threat (e.g., threats to health/well-being, threats to life/liberty, or
indirect/low threats) present in conspiratorial explanations. Finally, we explored whether
different domains of morbid curiosity were more or less associated with decisions to learn about
conspiratorial explanations.
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
Experimental procedures for all studies were approved by the Social Sciences Institutional
Review Board at The University of Chicago (Reference: IRB19-0972-AM012). All data,
Study 1: Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracist Beliefs
Study 1 Method
Participants
Participants (n = 150) were recruited from Prolific for a study on curiosity and beliefs. Six
participants failed a data quality check and were removed from further analysis, leaving 144
participants (72 female; M = 32) for analysis.
age
Measures
Morbid Curiosity
The 24-item Morbid Curiosity Scale (MCS) was used to assess trait levels of morbid curiosity
(Scrivner, 2021a). The MCS has four subscales that measure curiosity about the minds of
dangerous people, violence, paranormal danger, and body violations. Participants indicated the
extent to which they agreed with each statement from 1 (strongly disagree) to 6 (strongly agree).
Scores for each subscale and the total score were averaged with higher scores indicating higher
levels of that trait. Because enjoying horror movies is a behavioral manifestation of morbid
curiosity, we also asked participants how much they agreed or disagreed with a single item
question about how much they enjoyed horror movies and tv shows from 1 (strongly disagree) to
7 (strongly agree).
Generic Conspiracist Beliefs Scale
Trait levels of conspiracist ideation were assessed using the 15-item Generic Conspiracist Beliefs
Scale (GCBS; Brotherton et al., 2013). Participants indicated the extent to which they believed
each statement was likely to be true from 1 (Definitely not true) to 5 (Definitely true). Scores
were averaged with higher scores indicating higher levels of conspiracist ideation.
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
Procedure
Participants were presented with the MCS and GCBS in a randomized order. After completing
the questionnaires, participants reported their age and sex.
Study 1 Results
Correlation Between Morbid Curiosity and General Conspiracist Beliefs
Pearson correlations were conducted between scores on the GCBS and the subscales and total
score on the MCS. Morbid curiosity and general conspiracist beliefs were significantly positively
correlated (r = .32, p < .001) as were enjoyment of horror movies and general conspiracist beliefs
(r = .34, p < .001). General conspiracist beliefs were positively correlated with curiosity about
the minds of dangerous people (r = .36, p <.001), paranormal danger (r = .33, p < .001), and
body violations (r = .18, p = .028), but not with violence (r = .13, p = .114).
A linear model with morbid curiosity predicting general conspiracist beliefs was conducted to
see if the results would be robust to controlling for age and sex. Morbid curiosity significantly
predicting general conspiracist belief in the model (b = 0.28, SE = 0.07, t = 5.29, p < .001). No
sex differences emerged in the model, but younger participants were more likely to hold higher
conspiracist beliefs (b = -0.02, SE = 0.01, t = -2.52, p = .013). When each dimension of morbid
curiosity was entered as a predictors controlling for age and sex, only minds of dangerous people
(b = .18, SE = .08, t = 2.41, p = .017) and age (b = -.01, SE = .01, t = -2.19, p = .030)
significantly predicted general conspiracist beliefs.
Study 1 Discussion
Study 1 was a simple initial test of the association between trait morbid curiosity and general
conspiracist beliefs. We found that more morbidly curious participants had higher general beliefs
in conspiracy theories (H1). The minds of dangerous people domain of morbid curiosity emerged
as the strongest predictor of conspiracist beliefs. At the core of this domain of morbid curiosity is
the tendency to be interested in the behaviors and motivations of potentially dangerous people.
Potentially hostile conspecifics have long been a threat for humans, especially when those
conspecifics employ deception. Vigilance for this type of threat may not only increase morbid
curiosity, but may also lead to conspiratorial explanations for events, consistent with our findings
in Study 1.
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
Study 2: Morbid Curiosity and Perception of Threat in
Conspiratorial Explanations of Events
Study 1 was conducted under the assumption that morbidly curious people would be more prone
to believing in conspiracy theories due to increased vigilance toward learning about potential
threats. In Study 2, we tested this assumption by assessing whether or not those who score high
in morbid curiosity found conspiratorial explanations of events to be more threatening than
people who score low in morbid curiosity (H2). We explored whether threats to the self or
society were perceived as more threatening and how this varied by scores on the four different
domains of morbid curiosity.
Study 2 Method
Participants
New participants (n = 101; 48 female; M = 31) were recruited from Prolific for a study on
age
curiosity and beliefs.
Measures
Threat Assessments of Conspiracy and Mainstream Explanations of Events
Conspiratorial and mainstream explanations for 23 events were collected from the Belief in
Conspiracy Theory Inventory (Swami et al., 2011), Components of Conspiracy ideation
questionnaire (Greenburgh et al., 2022), Health Conspiracy Theory Index (Stubbersfield et al.,
2021) and supplemented with items and information from Wikipedia . Events were chosen to
represent a wide range of consequences that might be considered more relevant to either
themselves or society and that might be more relevant to life/liberty or health/well-being. All
items were re-written to be of similar length and to have closely-matched wording between
conspitorial and mainstream versions. See the Supplementary Material for the full list of events
and explanations.
After reading an explanation of an event, participants were asked three questions. 1) “Assuming
this statement is true, how threatening would this situation be to you personally? Please use the
slider below to indicate the level of threat from 0 (not at all threatening) to 100 (extremely
threatening)”; 2) “Assuming this statement is true, how threatening would this situation be to
society? Please use the slider below to indicate the level of threat from 0 (not at all threatening)
to 100 (extremely threatening)”; and 3) Have you ever heard this statement before? (yes, no, or
no, but I’ve heard something similar).
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
Morbid Curiosity
The 24-item Morbid Curiosity Scale (MCS) was used to assess trait levels of morbid curiosity
(Scrivner, 2021b). Participants indicated the extent to which they agreed with each statement
from 1 (strongly disagree) to 6 (strongly agree). Scores for each subscale and the total score were
averaged with higher scores indicating higher levels of that trait.
Procedure
Participants first completed the Morbid Curiosity Scale. They were then given the instructions
for the threat assessment task, which read,
We will now show you several different statements that some people believe and others do not.
Some statements will be more threatening while others will be more neutral. You will be asked
three questions for each statement: Assuming the statement was true...
1) How threatening is the situation described to you personally?
2) How threatening is the situation described to society?
3) Have you ever heard of this situation before?
Participants were then randomly presented with either the mainstream or conspiracy explanation
of each of the 23 events. Presentation order was randomized. Finally, participants reported their
age and sex.
Study 2 Results
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiratorial Threat Assessment
We first tested the hypothesis that participants with higher trait morbid curiosity would rate
conspiratorial explanations as more threatening (H2). Those who scored high in morbid curiosity
perceived the conspiratorial explanation to be more threatening to themselves (r = .25, p = .010)
and to society (r = .29, p = .003). These findings held when controlling for participant age and
sex in linear models (b = 5.12, SE = 1.77, t = 2.89, p = .005; b = 4.73, SE = 1.79, t = 2.65,
self society
p = .009).
Morbid Curiosity and Mainstream Threat Assessment
We also explored whether or not morbid curiosity was related to threat perception of mainstream
explanations. Participants with higher trait morbid curiosity also perceived the mainstream
explanations of events to be more threatening to themselves (r = .25, p = .010) and to society (r =
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
.25, p = .012). These findings held when controlling for participant age and sex in linear models
(b = 3.04, SE = 1.14, t = 2.67, p = .009; b = 4.73, SE = 1.79, t = 2.65, p = .009).
self society
Domains of Morbid Curiosity and Threat Assessment
To further explore the relationship between morbid curiosity and threat assessment, we examined
the correlations between domains of morbid curiosity and how threatening the explanations were
Higher scores in the minds of dangerous people subscale was a consistent predictor of higher
threat assessment in all event explanations while higher scores in the body violation subscale
correlated with greater perceived threat of conspiratorial explanations of events. Higher scores in
the paranormal danger subscale was positively associated with perceiving greater threat to
society in mainstream explanations of events.
Familiarity with Conspiratorial and Mainstream Explanations
Familiarity with conspiratorial explanations may indicate that the individual has (or had at one
time) a greater curiosity for conspiratorial explanations. Familiarity responses were coded from 1
to 3 (never heard, heard something similar, heard this before) and compared to scores on the
morbid curiosity scale. We found that more morbidly curious people had greater familiarity with
conspiratorial explanations (r = .23, p = .021) but not mainstream explanations (r = .06, p =
.558). Older participants were more familiar with the mainstream explanations of events (r = .35,
p < .001), but not the conspiratorial explanations (r = .02, p = .877).
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
Threat Assessment of Event Explanations by Morbid Curiosity Domain
Conspiratorial Explanation Mainstream Explanation
Self Society Self Society
Domain r p r p r p r p
Minds .25 .010 .30 .002 .24 .017 .26 .008
Violence .16 .111 .12 .237 .17 .087 .10 .304
Body .28 .005 .31 .002 .19 .059 .18 .072
Paranormal .08 .405 .17 .089 .20 .051 .23 .022
Total MC .25 .010 .29 .003 .25 .010 .25 .012
Note. Bold indicates significant correlation.
Study 2 Discussion
Consistent with our assumptions in Study 1, we found that morbidly curious people perceived
greater threat in conspiratorial explanations of events than non-morbidly curious people.
Morbidly curious people were also more familiar with conspiratorial explanations of events,
despite being younger on average than non-morbidly curious people. Higher scores on the body
violation domain of morbid curiosity were positively correlated with perceived threat of
conspiratorial explanations. This may be explained in part by the fact that many conspiratorial
explanations involve harm to the body. We also found that higher scores on the minds of
dangerous people domain of morbid curiosity was more strongly and more broadly associated
with higher perceptions of threat in explanations of events. This finding is consistent with our
finding in Study 1 that minds of dangerous people was the strongest predictor of general
conspiracist beliefs.
The minds of dangerous people domain of morbid curiosity taps into one’s propensity to seek out
information about potentially dangerous individuals. Threatening individuals are also a key
aspect of conspiracy theories, which center around groups of threatening actors acting in secrecy
(van Prooijen & van Vught 2018). As such, those who are curious about the minds (i.e.,
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
intentions, beliefs, desires) of dangerous individuals are also likely to be interested in secret
coalitions of dangerous people that are at the core of conspiracy theories. A curious or slightly
paranoid outlook on the intention of others may also lead to perceiving threat in non-
conspiratorial explanations that still involve groups of powerful individuals. This could explain
why higher scores in the minds of dangerous people domain of morbid curiosity were positively
correlated with perceived threat in both conspiratorial and mainstream explanations.
Study 3: Choosing to Learn Morbid and Conspiratorial
Information
In the previous two studies, we found that trait morbid curiosity was associated with both greater
general belief in conspiracy theories and in perceived threat from conspiratorial explanations.
We extend these findings in Study 3 by investigating the relationship between behavioral
measures of morbid curiosity and behavioral measures of conspiracy theory interest. We
predicted that participants who displayed more morbidly curious behaviors would also choose to
learn about conspiratorial explanations of events more frequently (H3).
Study 3 Method
Participants
New participants (n = 255; 128 female; M = 36) were recruited from Prolific for a study on
age
curiosity and beliefs.
Measures
Conspiracy and Mainstream Explanations of Events
Nine events from Study 2 were used in Study 3. In order to examine how morbid curiosity
related to different types of threats present in conspiracy theories, three of the events contained a
health-related threat, three contained a threat to way of life/liberty, and three contained minimal
or indirect threat. Selection of events was informed by the results of Study 2. Items were selected
for having relatively low familiarity, and greater differences in perceived threat between
conspiratorial and mainstream explanation, with the exception of the minimal/indirect threat
items where similar levels of threat between versions was preferred. The three items selected for
low/indirect threat were chosen for receiving lower threat ratings than those selected for the
health- and life/liberty-related conspiracy theories. Presentation order was randomized. See
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
would find more information about their choices at the end of the study and were provided
Wikipedia links to the explanations that they chose.
Paired conspiracy and mainstream explanations participants were presented with in Study 2.
Type Conspiracy Explanation Mainstream Explanation
Low or Paul McCartney did not appear on the Beatles’ Paul McCartney did appear on the Beatles’ ‘Sgt.
indirect ‘Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band’ album Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band’ album and
threat or later work because he secretly died in 1966 later work and is alive to the present day.
and his death was covered up by the other
Beatles and people close to the band.
Low or The Titanic did not sink, the ship that sank was The Titanic did sink, it struck an iceberg,
indirect an older, damaged ship, the Olympic, which was damaging the hull and causing it to flood below
threat disguised as the Titanic as part of an insurance the waterline. The ship sank two hours and forty
scam by the ships’ owners. minutes later.
Low or Holy Roman Emperor Otto III conspired with Holy Roman Emperor Otto III ruled from AD
indirect the Pope and the Byzantine Emperor to 996 until his early death in 1002. Evidence from
threat retroactively alter the dating system and added ancient astronomy, archaeological remains, and
297 years to the date, making the year AD 1000, historical records from other cultures refute any
to legitimize Otto’s claim to the Holy Roman claims that 297 years were added to the dating
Empire. system.
Threat to The Food and Drug Administration is The Food and Drug Administration has
health / deliberately preventing the public from getting approved multiple successful treatments for
well-being natural cures for cancer and other diseases cancer and other diseases that have been
because of pressure from drug companies. developed by drug companies.
Threat to The global dissemination of genetically Monsanto produced genetically modified food
health / modified foods by Monsanto Inc is part of a crops. They were also part of the World
well-being secret program, called Agenda 21, launched by Business Council for Sustainable Development,
the Rockefeller and Ford foundations to shrink a group associated with Agenda 21, an action
the world’s population. plan launched by the UN with the goal of
achieving global sustainable development.
Threat to Public water fluoridation is really just a secret Public water fluoridation is really just a way to
health / way for chemical companies to dump the prevent tooth decay by adjusting the
well-being dangerous by-products of phosphate mines into concentration of fluoride in public water
the environment. supplies.
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
Threat to The goal of the US Federal Emergency The goal of the US Federal Emergency
way of life / Management Agency (FEMA) is to use a major Management Agency (FEMA) is to respond to
liberty disaster as a pretext to impose martial law in the any major disaster which occurs in the US and
US and to imprison citizens in concentration overwhelms the resources of local and state
camps. authorities.
Threat to The High-frequency Active Auroral Research The High-frequency Active Auroral Research
way of life / Program (HAARP) is a research program funded Program (HAARP) is a research program funded
liberty by the US government to develop a system to by the US government to analyze the
bombard people with mind-controlling radio ionosphere, which is intended to develop
waves. enhanced technology for radio communications.
Threat to The trails seen behind high-flying aircraft are The trails seen behind high-flying aircraft are
way of life / ‘chemtrails’ consisting of harmful chemical ‘contrails’ consisting of harmless water vapor
liberty agents designed for psychological manipulation. produced by aircraft engine exhausts at high
altitude.
Morbid and Non-Morbid Information
Morbidly curious behavior was assessed using a behavioral task adapted from Scrivner (2021b).
Participants were shown nine different sets of descriptions one at a time and asked to select the
description that they were most interested in seeing. Each pair of descriptions included a morbid
option and a closely matched non-morbid option. For example, one pair of descriptions asked
participants if they would be more interested in seeing a photo of a man who killed his girlfriend
and ate her or a man who saved his friend from drowning. Participants would make a selection
and could view the image of the description that they chose on the next page. Since there are four
domains of morbid curiosity (See Study 1), two sets of descriptions from each domain were
included in the study.
To keep the number of choices the same as in the conspiracy theory task, a third set of
descriptions for the Minds of Dangerous People category was included. When analyzing morbid
curiosity domains, participants who chose all 3 minds of dangerous people morbid options were
coded as choosing 2, to keep the number of options for analysis consistent with other domains.
Presentation order was randomized. Participants either saw a randomized set of conspiracy vs
for information about the nine sets of descriptions used in the study and the Supplemental
Material for the stimuli.
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
Paired descriptions participants chose between in Study 2.
Type Morbid Choice Non-Morbid Choice
Minds An excerpt from a serial killer's manifesto. An excerpt from a movie critic's review.
Minds How serial killers select victims according to the How the Nobel Prize Committee selects Peace
FBI. Prize winners.
Minds A picture of a man who killed his girlfriend and A picture of a man who saved his friend from
ate her. drowning.
Paranormal A page from an old book on witchcraft. A page from an old novel.
Paranormal A photo of a supposedly haunted building. A photo of a famous building
Violence A photo of a firing squad executing a criminal. A photo of a theatrical play.
Violence A reenactment of a medieval sword fight. A reenactment of cooking in the Middle Ages.
Body A diagram showing how to perform a leg A diagram showing the muscles in the leg.
amputation.
Body A photo of a burnt body. A photo of a burnt phone.
Study 3 Results
Demographics
Younger participants were more likely to choose morbid descriptions to view (r = -.14, p = .029)
and more likely to choose conspiratorial explanations to learn about (r = -.23, p < .001). There
were no sex differences in morbid choices, but females were more likely to choose the
conspiratorial explanations to learn about (t = -2.17, p = .031, d = -0.27).
Association between Choosing Morbid Descriptions and Conspiratorial Explanations
The number of morbid descriptions a participant chose was positively correlated with the number
of conspiratorial explanations they chose (r = .26, p < .001). Those who chose to view more
morbid descriptions chose to learn about the conspiratorial explanation more often in every
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
The number of morbid choices predicted the number of conspiratorial explanations even when
controlling for age and sex (b = .31, SE = .08, t = 3.83, p < .001). Age was also a significant
predictor in the model, with younger participants choosing more conspiratorial explanations (b =
-.04, SE = .01, t = -3.25, p = .001).
The number of conspiratorial explanations chosen was most strongly correlated with the number
of morbid descriptions chosen in the minds of dangerous people category (r = .29, p < .001),
followed by violence (r = .19, p = .002), and body violations (r = .17, p = .008). The correlation
with paranormal danger was not significant (r = .08, p = .201).
The number of morbid descriptions a participant chose was most strongly correlated with
decisions to learn about health threats (r = .24, p < .001), followed by threats to life/liberty (r =
.23, p < .001), and low/indirect threats (r = .20, p = .001).
version of an event. Significance testing was conducted using unpaired t-tests. *** indicates p < .001, **
indicates = p < .01, and * indicates = p < .05.
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
Study 3 Discussion
Consistent with Studies 1 and 2, we found that morbid curiosity was associated with increased
interest in conspiracy theories. While Study 1 examined correlations between trait morbid
curiosity and trait conspiracist beliefs, Study 3 demonstrated this relationship using a behavioral
choice task. We found that participants who chose to investigate more morbid stimuli were more
likely to also choose to learn about conspiratorial explanations for events than mainstream
explanations of events. As in Studies 1 and 2, the minds of dangerous people domain of morbid
curiosity exhibited the strongest association with conspiratorial interest.
Interest in learning more about conspiratorial explanations representing all types of threat were
correlated with morbidly curious behavioral choices, with similar effect sizes, indicating that the
nature of the threat is not central to the appeal of conspiracy theories as it relates to morbid
curiosity. As found in Study 2, morbidly curious people perceive greater threat in explanations in
general, so the salience of different types of conspiratorial threats may not differ much. The most
important aspect of conspiracy theories for morbidly curious people seems to be a plot
representing a threat from dangerous others. This is consistent with findings across all three
studies that the minds of dangerous people domain of morbid curiosity exhibits the strongest
association with conspiratorial belief and interest.
That females were more likely to choose the conspiratorial explanations is aligned with some
previous research finding females being more likely to believe conspiracy theories (e.g.,
Cookson et al., 2021; Popoli & Longus, 2021). However, several other studies find no effect of
sex or gender (e.g., Douglas et al., 2016; Farhart, et al., 2020; Goertzel, 1994; Green & Douglas,
2018; Jolley & Douglas, 2014; Miller et al., 2016; van Prooijen & Acker, 2015), and others find
men as being more likely to believe conspiracy theories (e.g., Cassesse et al., 2020; Freeman &
Bentall, 2017; Galliford & Furnham, 2017; Reese & Lamberty, 2019).
General Discussion
Across three studies and multiple different measures, we found evidence that higher levels of
morbid curiosity are associated with increased interest in conspiracy theories and conspiratorial
explanations of events. We argue that this association is due to the increased propensity for
learning threat-related information in both morbid curiosity and interest in conspiracy theories.
In Study 1, we found that participants with higher trait morbid curiosity also had higher general
conspiracist beliefs. We argued that this correlation existed because of the increased interest in
threat learning that underlies both morbid curiosity and conspiracist beliefs. We tested this
assumption in Study 2. Consistent with our explanation, participants who were more morbidly
curious were more familiar with conspiratorial explanations of events and perceived
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
conspiratorial events to be more threatening. Finally, in Study 3 we used a behavioral task to
assess the relationship between morbidly curious behaviors and interest in conspiracy theories.
We found that participants who chose to investigate morbidly curious stimuli were more likely to
choose to learn about conspiratorial explanations for events.
Of the domains of morbid curiosity, the minds of dangerous people domain was the most
consistently associated with conspiratorial ideation and interest. This result is consistent with
prior research which has found correlation between agency detection and belief in a range of
conspiracy theories (Douglas et al., 2016; Imhoff & Bruder, 2014). Hyperactive agency detection
(HAD) is a disposition towards perceiving agents where there are none (Barrett, 2004; 2007) and
is argued to explain a range of beliefs which posit intentional agents, such as spirits and gods, as
the causes of events (Barrett, 2007). Unlike some of these other beliefs, conspiracy theories
always posit a coalition of hostile agents as the cause of events (Douglas et al., 2019; Uscinski et
al., 2016; van Prooijen & van Vugt, 2018). Explanations of events which propose such a
coalition are likely to provoke substantial interest in individuals who are sensitive to threats in
their environment created by dangerous others, explaining the consistently strong association
between curiosity about the minds of dangerous people and conspiracy belief and interest.
Work in cultural evolution has suggested a content bias for general threat-related information in
social transmission. This bias increases the likelihood that information about threats will be
attended to, encoded in memory, and passed on to others, increasing their prevalence in culture
(Stubbersfield, in press). This has been demonstrated experimentally using micro-society designs
(Blaine & Boyer, 2018; Moussaïd et al., 2015; Stubbersfield et al., 2015), and has been found to
be relevant to the propagation of rumors (Knapp, 1944), front page news (Davis & McLeod,
2003), ‘fake news’ (Acerbi, 2019), and urban legends (Stubbersfield et al., 2017). As conspiracy
theories commonly feature threat-related information, this threat bias has been suggested as a
reason for their successful propagation (Stubbersfield, 2021). However, it appears that the threat
having its origins in dangerous others is more central to the appeal of conspiracy theories to
those high in morbid curiosity than the mere presence of a threat or the nature of what is being
threatened (e.g., health or liberty).
Here, we demonstrate that individual variation in perceived threat salience influences belief in
and interest in learning more about conspiracy theories. Individuals with higher trait morbid
curiosity had higher belief in conspiracy theories (Study 1), generally perceived explanations of
events to be more threatening (Study 2), and were more interested in learning about conspiracist
explanations of events (Study 3). Considering the cultural transmission and evolution of
conspiracy theories, future research should examine if higher trait morbid curiosity also increases
the likelihood that individuals will transmit conspiracy theories to others and play important
roles as nodes in conspiracy theorist social networks.
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022
On demographic effects, sex was only predictive in Study 3, with females showing more interest
in conspiratorial explanations of events. Age, however, was predictive of both belief and interest
in conspiracy theories explanations, with younger people showing more belief and interest than
older people. Research on age and conspiracy theory belief has been mixed, with some studies
reporting that young people are more prone to conspiracy theory belief (Douglas et al., 2016;
Galliford & Furnham, 2017; Goertzel, 1994; Green & Douglas et al., 2018) and others
suggesting no age effect (Buturoiu et al., 2021; Cookson et al., 2021; Douglas et al., 2016; Ross
et al., 2006). Younger age is also associated with higher morbid curiosity (Scrivner, 2021b). One
possibility is that younger people are still exploring and uncovering many aspects of the complex
social environment. When people are faced with new information about events that are impactful
and difficult to explain, they are prone to blaming malicious and covert coalitions (Singh, 2021;
Tennen & Affleck, 1990).
Conclusion
Work on the psychological nature of morbid curiosity and its consequences for behavior is a
budding area of research. Recent research suggests that morbid curiosity is not as detrimental to
psychological well-being as is sometimes suggested by popular media (e.g., Scrivner &
Christensen, 2021; Scrivner, 2022). However, one area that has not been addressed by popular
media or the scientific community is how morbid curiosity might relate to conspiratorial
thinking. We argue that morbid curiosity is an important yet hitherto unstudied predictor of
conspiratorial interest. Across three studies, we show that morbidly curious people perceive
greater threat in conspiratorial explanations of events, are more likely to hold general
conspiratorial beliefs, and are more likely to want to learn more about conspiratorial explanations
than non-conspiratorial explanations of events, which may result in negative social consequences
(see Jolley & Douglas, 2014; Jolley et al., 2020). Those who score high in the minds of
dangerous people subscale of morbid curiosity are particularly prone to believing and expressing
interest in learning about conspiracy theories. This is likely because these individuals are curious
about the intentions, desires, and beliefs of potentially dangerous actors, which are at the core of
conspiracy theories.
Although morbid curiosity may not be detrimental to well-being or indicative of antisocial
behavior, it appears to be related in some ways to conspiratorial belief and interest. As
conspiracy theory beliefs can have significant, negative consequences for the individual and
wider society (Jolley et al., 2020), it is important to understand their appeal to ensure the
effectiveness of interventions. Here we demonstrate that a seemingly benign, but relatively
common individual factor, morbid curiosity, is associated with increased belief in and interest in
learning more about conspiracy theories. Future research should examine how morbid curiosity
relates to other aspects of conspiracy theories, such as their genesis and spread, and in turn
whether particular interventions may be more or less effective in reaching individuals high in
morbid curiosity.
Morbid Curiosity and Conspiracy Theories PREPRINT 26/07/2022