Alcohol Use Disorder Within the Maternal Population
Author: Neyha Baddigam
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
This paper covers the presence of Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD) within the maternal
population. The paper takes a two-fold approach as it first discusses the issue from a twenty-first
century perspective. Utilizing blogs, social media posts, and interviews to discuss the beliefs of
the current maternal population in regards to drinking while pregnant. The second approach
utilizes various studies that discuss the risk of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) during the first
trimester.
Substance disorders is a colloquial term that pertains to a wide range of disorders that
deal with the overuse of drugs, both prescribed and illicit. Disorders of this kind can include the
use of opioids, marijuana, nicotine, stimulants, sedatives, hallucinogens, and alcohol. While this
is not an exhaustive list, these are the most common substance disorders. As characterized by
the DSM-5, for the overuse of these substances to be considered a disorder, at least two of the
eleven diagnostic criteria must be met. A few examples of the diagnostic criteria include feeling
sick after using the substance, participating in reckless activities while under the influence, and
needing more of the substance to elicit the same effect as when the original use occurred. While
substance disorders can occur within any demographic population, many risk factors increase the
chance of developing such a disorder, including, but not limited to genetics, gender, trauma, how
the drug is taken, and the type of drug. These risk factors affect the cycle of developing an
addiction, which starts with the initial use. The cycle continues to abuse, tolerance, dependence,
and eventually addiction. The speed of this cycle and the chance of relapse, the sixth and final
stage of the cycle, is dependent on the previously mentioned risk factors. This paper will
examine a specific subset of substance disorders, better known as Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD).
Furthermore, it will discuss the disorder as it pertains to the demographic of pregnant mothers
and the effect the disorder has on their experiences both prepartum and postpartum, as well as an
oversight on the effect of AUD on newborn infants. It is important to note how this paper will
refer to pregnant individuals as women, however, it refers to any individual (of any gender)
capable of carrying to full-term.
Drinking while pregnant most commonly occurs during the first trimester. This is mainly
because many women engage in binge-drinking-like behaviors before realizing they are
pregnant. The majority of these behaviors are halted upon realization, however, twenty to thirty
percent of pregnant women report drinking during their pregnancy, with the highest prevalence
during the first trimester (“Fetal alcohol exposure”, n.d.). More shockingly, eight percent of
women report binge drinking at some percent of their drinking, again with the highest prevalence
during the first trimester (“Fetal alcohol exposure”, n.d.). Substance abuse, specifically alcohol
abuse, during pregnancy poses risks to both the mother and the unborn fetus. The risks include
abnormal facial features (such as a smooth ridge between the nose and upper lip, also known as a
cleft lip), a smaller physique, poor motor cortex skills, ADHD-like symptoms, learning
disabilities, vision or hearing problems, and problems with the heart, kidney, or bones (“Alcohol
use during pregnancy”, n.d.). Lastly, maternal substance abuse is the only cause of Fetal Alcohol
Syndrome (FAS). FAS falls under the spectrum of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders (FASD),
which describe multiple medical disorders, including Partial FAS (pFAS, Alcohol-Related
Neurodevelopmental Disorder (ARND), and Alcohol-Related Birth Defects (ARBD). While all
of these disorders are caused by maternal alcohol-related substance abuse, this paper will focus
primarily on FAS.
FAS appears at varying degrees based on the number and severity of the resulting
symptoms. PFAS, for instance, is a subset of FAS and involves prenatal exposure, however, the
resulting symptoms are not as apparent as with FAS. Therefore, there is a clear correlation
between the amount and timing of alcohol intake and the residual effects on the fetus. Besides
the timing, the effect of alcohol intake on the fetus depends on three main components: the
quantity, the frequency, and as previously mentioned, the timing. Furthermore, the fetus is more
likely to be affected by alcohol intake if the mother has poor nutrition, is a multigravida (mother
with a previous pregnancy and birth), is a smoker, is older, or has a family history of heavy
drinking. Lastly, for DSM-5 criteria to be met, the pregnant individual must have prenatal
alcohol exposure and CNS involvement, meaning the individual’s cognition and adaptive
capabilities were impaired to some degree. Once DSM-5 criteria have been reached,
interventions take place to aid the pregnant individual to carry the fetus to a full term as well as
reduce the impact of alcohol abuse.
The interventions that exist to mediate the effects of alcohol abuse for pregnant women
are similar to that of non-pregnant individuals. However, interventions that are specific to this
population include the establishment of family support groups (Chang, n.d.). These support
groups provide physical and mental care to pregnant individuals to ease them during their
pregnancy and help the individual care for the newborn. Another common intervention is diet
management, during which, the pregnant individual is prescribed nutritional supplements which
allow for the proper development of the fetus during the rest of the pregnancy (Chang, n.d.).
Postnatal supplements may also be prescribed to the infant if the consequences of the AUD are
severe enough. Both of these interventions rely on the pregnant individual seeking care before
the end of their pregnancy, however, some interventions exist for the child after birth. They
involve educational and cognitive-based training, which allows children to build social,
problem-solving, and safety skills (Chang, n.d.). This type of intervention usually occurs during
school age and is facilitated by parents, schools, and therapists. While many interventions exist
to mitigate the effects of alcohol, once the alcohol has been consumed, there is a potential for it
to affect the gene activity of the developing fetus and result in FAS.
An overview of self-help group chats, Reddit forums, blogs, and social media apps
showed a common consensus, asking for help among the maternal population is extremely
difficult. At all stages of their addiction, the women felt extreme shame and guilt for their
decision to drink. While they felt hatred toward themselves or their situation, they felt nothing
but love and wanted nothing but the best for their unborn children. Women of higher
socioeconomic status appeared to drink more wine, whereas women of lower socioeconomic
status appeared to drink hard alcohol. Both groups felt remorse about their decisions and
commonly remarked about how the alcohol calmed their nerves in regards to the fact that they
were pregnant, to begin with, and their ability to care for their unborn child (“14 women confess
to drinking alcohol during pregnancy”, 2018). Furthermore, the pregnant women discussed how
they felt more anxious than before becoming pregnant due to the increased hormones, and
drinking alcohol was deemed to be the only that helped reduce their mental state. There was also
discussion of how women who were polysubstance abusers before pregnancy reverted to only
drinking alcohol and limiting, if not stopping their use of opioids, tobacco, and any other
substances they used to limit any harm they could do to their unborn child. The women
acknowledged the potential harm they were doing to themselves and their unborn child, but they
remarked about how the urge to drink was more powerful than any pre-cognitions they had.
They tried to mitigate the effects as much as possible by drinking smaller amounts or spacing out
the drinking, but they were aware of how their decisions may lead to FAS. While these women
shared the overarching themes of their pregnancy on an anonymous blog site, it was rare for
women to name themselves for fear of being shamed. Very rarely were mothers seen discussing
their experiences and thought processes behind drinking while pregnant openly.
Recently, studies have shown a weaker correlation between an occasional drink and FAS.
Michelle Ruiz shared her thoughts on the study, as well as her own experience with drinking
while pregnant in a very open interview with Cosmopolitan, she later published her thoughts.
She discussed how many of her friends drank throughout their pregnancy, and they did so openly
in bars and restaurants. Ruiz said she felt the shame of bartenders, waiters, and her family
members as she openly supported and drank in front of them. She was college-educated,
employed, and had a good family and living situation. She wasn’t remotely similar to what the
media portrays as your typical drug addict. Ruiz was completely aware of FAS and how her
actions could lead to birth defects, however, she was also well aware of newer research that
showed a poor correlation between drinking and neurocognitive effects in the child. A study
partly funded by the CDC showed that one to eight drinks per week, at any point during
pregnancy, resulted in no negative neurological effects on children at age five. Another study in
Europe and Australia showed that low to moderate drinking did not result in any long-term
behavioral deficits in children. Equipped with this information, Ruiz felt confident in her
decision to drink moderately throughout her pregnancy.
The main difference between Ruiz’s case and those that result in FAS is the degree of
drinking. Ruiz was vigilant about how much she was drinking and never qualified for any
diagnostic criteria as cited by the DSM-5, however, this is not the case for most pregnant
mothers who met enough criteria for diagnosis well before the time of their pregnancy. Stopping
or even reducing their drinking to “low and moderate” levels proved futile as the many
anonymous confessions depressed. For this reason and many others, Ruiz and many doctors
expressed the importance of telling pregnant women that drinking of any degree is harmful. This
prevents women from crossing the “eight drink” threshold, turning to alcohol to subdue the
anxiety caused by hormones, and developing AUD during their pregnancy. Ruiz’s interview
goes on to quote obstetricians and nurses who feel that the average individual can not be trusted
to drink in moderation, therefore, it’s easier to dismiss the idea altogether.
The individuals discussed in this study understood the consequences of their addiction
and were willing to accept the physical and mental effects of the addiction. This was seen in
every blog, interview, and testimony covered in this paper. The main difference seen, however,
was how pregnant women were willing to accept the consequences but maintained hope for their
unborn children. They still hoped for the best care and health for their children throughout their
pregnancy, during birth, and afterward. The deep and immense care for their unborn children
continued throughout pregnancy.
FAS, like many other disorders, occurs along a scale. With cases being more severe due
to genetic predisposition, epigenetics, and the amount of drinking. This clarification allowed
showed how even FAS, a syndrome with a strong biological basis occurs along a spectrum as do
many other psychological disorders.
Substance abuse affects members of all demographics, men, women, the wealthy, the
poor, the homeless, the educated, and every group in between. In the case of Alcohol Use
Disorder, an individual's choice to drink affects not only their health but the health of an unborn
fetus in the case of maternal substance abuse. This can lead to Fetal Alcohol Syndrome, which
results in numerous physical and mental disabilities. These symptoms occur on a scale as a
result of the degree to which the drinking occurred. While FAS tends to occur as a result of more
severe drinking habits, pregnant women are advised to not drink at any point of their pregnancy
as a precaution. However, more and more women have shared their experiences of drinking at
low and moderate levels throughout their pregnancy with no repercussions. However, medical
professionals and researchers still advise that pregnant individuals not drink during their
pregnancy. Further research into the direct correlation between the amount of alcohol
consumption and resultant effects is much needed to fully understand what conditions result in
FAS.
Citations:
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2021, June). Fetal alcohol exposure. National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Retrieved November 6, 2022, from
#:~:text=About%2020%20to%2030%20percent,typically%20during%20the%20first%20
trimester.&text=More%20than%208%20percent%20of,typically%20during%20the%20fi
rst%20trimester
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021, December 14). Alcohol use during
pregnancy. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved November 6, 2022,
from
20nervous%20system,to%20alcohol%20at%20any%20time.
Chang, G. (2020, June 30). Maternal substance use: Consequences, identification, and
interventions. Alcohol research: current reviews. Retrieved November 6, 2022, from
R/opiatesrecovery - I need help with a pregnant addict. Reddit. (n.d.). Retrieved November 6,
2022, from
ant_addict/
I'm pregnant and I can't stop drinking alcohol. Addiction Helper. (2018, December 19). Retrieved
November 6, 2022, from
FASD Case Study 3: 11-year-old female with parent concerns about attention, hyperactivity, and
sleep. American Academy of Pediatrics. (2021, November 29). Retrieved November 6,
2022, from
se-study-3/
14 women confess to drinking alcohol during pregnancy. Tommy's. Together, for every baby.
(2018, April 4). Retrieved November 6, 2022, from
midwives/14-women-confess-drinking-alcohol-during-pregnancy
Ruiz, M. (2022, July 8). Why I drank while I was pregnant. Cosmopolitan. Retrieved November
6, 2022, from