TEMPERAMENT AND CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
***Please note that this manuscript is currently being peer-reviewed and has not yet been
published. There may be changes to the final manuscript version.
Exploring Effortful Control as a Moderator of the Relationship Between Negative Affect
and Child Psychopathology
Hanna S. Osborne1, Isabella M. Palumbo1, and Erin B. Tone1
1 Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, USA
Corresponding Author:
Hanna Osborne, Department of Psychology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA.
Email: hosborne3@student.gsu.edu
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 2
ABSTRACT
The present study examined unique and interactive effects of effortful control (self-report
vs. task-based) on the relationship between negative affect and dimensions of psychopathology
in a group of children from the ABCD Study® aged 9-11 (n = 5,432). Results demonstrate that
the reactive temperament factor of negative affect showed strong and positive significant
associations with both dimensions of psychopathology, while the regulative factor of effortful
control showed a significant negative association with both dimensions of psychopathology via
Flanker, and a significant positive association with both dimensions of psychopathology via the
EATQ-R. These findings raise the possibility that early assessment of effortful control may aid
in the identification of early risk profiles for psychopathology and that interventions aimed at
maximizing flexible deployment of effort control could help to reduce children’s risk of
developing psychopathological symptoms.
KEY WORDS: Temperament, Negative Affect, Effortful Control, Developmental
Psychopathology, Individual Differences
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 3
Introduction
Temperament
In the past several decades, the body of research on individual differences in child and
adolescent temperament has grown substantially. Temperament, defined as a person’s innate and
stable style of experiencing and responding to the world, encompasses individual differences in a
wide range of traits [1]. Such traits include affective reactivity, which refers to excitability,
responsivity, or arousability; regulation, or the executive capacity to control attention and
behaviors that operate to modulate reactivity [2]; and sociability, commonly defined as a
preference to interact with others rather than to be alone [3,4].
Leading developmental scholars argue that temperamental predispositions lay the
foundation for the observable manifestation of personality [5,1]. Furthermore, findings
demonstrate continuity between early temperament styles and the development of personality
across the lifespan. For instance, in a longitudinal study following a cohort of 14-month-old
infants across three decades, Tang and colleagues examined whether behavioral inhibition, a core
component of temperament, may predict long-term personality, as well as social relationships,
education, and mental health outcomes in adulthood [6]. On average, inhibited infants in this
study grew up to become more inhibited adults, who also exhibited lower levels of social
engagement (i.e., fewer number of reported close friends, lower amount of time spent with
friends and family) and poorer mental health outcomes than did individuals with low behavioral
inhibition. These findings demonstrate a pattern of stability across infant temperament and adult
personality.
Theorists have proposed several frameworks, which Fu and Perez-Edgar described
thoroughly [7] , to conceptualize temperament (see [8, 9, 10, 11, 12] for reviews). Among those
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 4
that have received the most empirical support is one that Rothbart and colleagues proposed and
have developed over the last several decades [1, 10, 13]. This model defines temperament as
individual differences in positive affect (PA), negative affect (NA), and self-regulation [i.e.,
effortful control (EC)]. Positive affect, or the propensity to have frequent positive experiences
and reactions, such as excitement, joy, and interest [1], has been linked to positive outcomes and
functioning across the lifespan [14]. The other dimensions of temperament (i.e., negative affect
and effortful control) show fewer associations with desirable mental health outcomes (e.g., lower
attentional and emotional regulation or disinhibition) for children as they develop into
adolescents and adults. Their relations to dimensions of psychopathology (e.g., risk for higher
levels of anxiety, depression, or aggression) are the focus of the present study.
Temperament and Child Psychopathology
A substantial proportion of children and adolescents meet the criteria for at least one or
more psychological disorders across the lifespan [15], and many more exhibit psychopathology,
or behaviors or emotions that are maladaptive and cause distress or impair daily and adaptive
functioning [16], but do not cross diagnostic thresholds for a disorder [17]. The etiology of child
psychopathology is complex and multifactorial [15, 18, 19], and depends on the influence of
numerous risk and protective factors [20, 21]. However, as a broad range of findings show,
temperament is a consistent contributor to the manifestation and maintenance of varied forms of
psychopathology in youth [15, 22, 23, 24]. Connections among temperament, personality, and
psychopathology are frequently reported, although substantial work still needs to be done to help
us better understand the nature and implications of these relationships (see 18 for review). In
light of the well-documented stability of individual differences across the lifespan, there is
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 5
growing interest in empirically evaluating associations between childhood individual differences
and multiple dimensions of developmental psychopathology [4, 25].
Temperament and Internalizing versus Externalizing Psychopathology
Since the late 1970s, psychologists have worked to understand the structure of child
temperament and how individual differences on multiple dimensions may correspond in
distinctive ways with varied forms of psychopathology. In the New York Longitudinal Study
(see Thomas & Chess, 1977 for review [8]), researchers identified nine dimensions of
temperament. These included activity level, approach/withdrawal, intensity, threshold,
adaptability, rhythmicity, mood, attention span, and distractibility. Over time, these categories
have been refined to include the defensive reactions of fear and anger, approach reactions of
pleasure and intense stimulation, and attentional scales of effortful control [1, 26].
More recently, two broad, higher-order dimensions of temperament (i.e., negative and
positive temperament) have proved particularly useful to examine in efforts to distinguish among
different forms of psychopathology [26, 27]. Negative temperament encompasses heightened
negative emotional and behavioral reactivity (e.g., fear, sadness, anger, frustration), while
positive temperament refers to reward sensitivity and sociability [24]. Extreme levels of either of
these dimensions of temperament may relate prospectively to psychopathology across the
lifespan; depending on the degree to which an individual deviates from normative ranges on each
dimension, different patterns of psychopathology may emerge.
Historically, psychopathology has been defined categorically, such that it constitutes
discrete clinical conditions that can be distinguished from each other and from normative
functioning according to natural boundaries [28]. Categorical nosologies, however, have notable
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 6
limitations (for review, see [29, 30]). It is thus not surprising that efforts to identify and treat
youth who are at risk for psychopathology have been impeded by current categorical schemes of
psychiatric diagnosis [31, 32].
Of the limitations to categorical diagnostic systems, the one of most relevance to this
paper is that many ostensibly discrete disorders commonly co-occur; researchers have long noted
that high rates of comorbidity are particularly common among youth [33]. High rates of
comorbidity suggest common core processes underlying diagnostic categories, and the presence
of such shared mechanisms is inconsistent with the idea that disorders are discrete entities [34].
In response to this problem, alternative, dimensional models of psychopathology have emerged
that are grounded in efforts to identify patterns of covariance across psychiatric symptoms [35,
36].
Research examining the latent structure of common mental disorders supports a
conceptualization that comprises two broad, higher-order dimensions: internalizing (INT) and
externalizing (EXT; [36, 37, 38]). This structure is supported in samples of all ages [39, 40].
Dimensional models have the advantage of accommodating correlations between internalizing
and externalizing dimensions. They also include a wide array of predispositions and risk factors,
which allows for a more accurate representation and understanding of individual differences in
vulnerability to childhood psychopathologies across the spectrum [30, 41].
Conditions within the internalizing dimension are characterized by negative affect, which
may manifest as low mood, anxiety, fear, distress, and/or panic [42, 43, 44]. Thus, the
internalizing dimension typically includes anxiety disorders (e.g., generalized anxiety disorder,
separation anxiety disorder), major depressive disorder (MDD), phobias (e.g., specific, social),
and eating pathology [43, 45]. Conditions within the externalizing dimension, in contrast, are
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 7
characterized by disinhibition, aggression, rule-breaking, and antisocial behaviors, among others
[4, 46, 47]. The externalizing dimension typically includes oppositional defiant disorder (ODD),
conduct disorder (CD), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and borderline
personality disorder (BPD) [4, 35, 46].
Negative Affect and Associations with Psychopathology
Theories of temperament have consistently emphasized the relevance of negative affect in the
manifestation of child psychopathology. Negative affect (NA) – sometimes referred to as
negative emotionality or neuroticism [42] – reflects a stable and pervasive propensity to
experience aversive emotions [48]. Furthermore, it is a powerful and well-supported determinant
of psychological adjustment and outcomes [14, 49]. Widiger and Oltmanns asserted that high
NA is associated with a diminished quality of life, excessive worry, and increased risk for mental
health problems [49]. Indeed, children with high NA respond poorly to environmental stress,
interpret ordinary situations as threatening, and may get overwhelmed more easily than children
with low negative affect [43, 49]. As such, children with high levels of negative affect possess an
increased risk for emotional and behavioral disorders due to both their propensity to focus on
negative cues and their restricted engagement with the environment [38, 50]. Robust findings
support the notion that high NA is associated with both internalizing and externalizing disorders
[31, 42, 51, 52].
Decades of studies have demonstrated links between NA and internalizing
psychopathology, specifically [24, 42, 53]. NA frequently contributes to anxiety and depressive
symptoms, which may confer risk for internalizing psychopathology, such as mood disorders
[54]. Previous findings indicate a moderate positive relationship between NA and internalizing
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 8
symptoms that are observable from preschool age through adolescence (anxiety/depression; [18,
19, 43, 55, 56]. This pattern of association suggests that NA is an important contributing factor
for internalizing psychopathology; however, because correlations are typically moderate, there
are likely many additional factors that contribute to internalizing psychopathology. Internalizing
symptoms have the potential to turn into debilitating emotional disorders with significant
implications for cognitive and interpersonal functioning, as well as physical health [57].
Furthermore, within the context of the internalizing dimension, research suggests strong
associations between NA and distress disorders (e.g., depression, generalized anxiety disorder,
posttraumatic stress disorder), and moderate associations between NA and fear disorders (e.g.,
social anxiety, social phobia, panic disorder [58].
Additional research indicates an association between NA and externalizing behaviors [59,
60, 61]. These associations, however, are less robust than those for internalizing symptoms.
Singh and Irwin acknowledge that considerable portions of the genetic and nonshared
environmental influences underlying externalizing symptoms are shared with NA [60]. Further,
Tackett and colleagues (2011) found that NA may explain genetic influences on the presence of
conduct disorder in children and adolescents [62].
All told, robust findings provide evidence of a high correlation between NA and both
internalizing and externalizing symptoms. This is especially true in childhood, given the
tendency for youth to express high NA (e.g., frustration) outwardly (e.g., tantrums). Notably, the
associations between NA and psychopathology are moderate in nature, suggesting the presence
of additional contributing factors. Thus, examining the influence of possible moderating
constructs (e.g., effortful control) may help us better understand risk for varying manifestations
of psychopathology.
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 9
Role of Effortful Control in Psychopathology
According to Rothbart’s temperament model, one of the precursors to emotional and
general self-regulation is effortful control [3, 23, 22]. Effortful control (EC) is a small element of
the more complex process of emotion regulation and executive functioning and is relatively
stable over time. Effortful control has received increasing research attention as an important
transdiagnostic dimension that underlies both internalizing and externalizing symptomatology
[31, 63]. Effortful control can be characterized as the ability to direct attention to inhibit a
dominant response and activate a sub-dominant response in service of goal-oriented behavior [3,
26]. Measures of effortful control often encompass lower-order traits of attentional control, or
the ability to maintain and shift attentional focus upon task-based stimuli, and inhibitory control,
or the capacity to effortfully suppress inappropriate approach response [15, 64, 65]. Effortful
control can be assessed in childhood through parental report and laboratory tasks [61] and is
credited with playing a large role in the development of emotion regulation capacities and skills
[26]. Shifting attention changes perception of a stimulus field (e.g., inhibiting a dominant
response [61, 66]), which impacts how a child perceives and responds to their environment.
There is evidence that effortful control strengthens throughout the lifespan via the development
and integration of reactive and regulatory mechanisms in response to personal values and social
norms [67, 68].
Effortful control can influence adjustment and can contribute to the modulation of
behavior within an individual in ways that can yield positive or negative outcomes. Children who
struggle with EC may be at heightened risk for psychopathology via poor emotion reactivity and
regulation skills, which can also increase adjustment problems and create the possibility of more
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 10
serious problems emerging in adolescence [23, 69]. Poor effortful control, especially behavioral
dysregulation, is a key temperamental factor underlying both dimensions of psychopathology
[70]. More precisely, high behavioral inhibition is associated with internalizing
psychopathology, and low behavioral inhibition is more closely associated with externalizing
psychopathology.
These associations made EC a potential moderator of particular interest for the present
study. High correlations between internalizing and externalizing problems might be explained by
the presence of high NA in both types of condition; however, individual differences in EC may
contribute to whether an individual's feelings of negative affect are expressed inwardly, as in
internalizing conditions, or outwardly as in externalizing conditions. Many studies have focused
on specific findings about particular forms of psychopathology, rather than taking a more
comprehensive, multivariate perspective of the temperament/psychopathology relationship in
children [18]. Therefore, the present study seeks to examine both reactive (i.e., NA) and
regulatory (i.e., EC) facets of childhood temperament in efforts to more accurately determine risk
for dimensions of psychopathology.
Risk vs Resilience
Although NA and EC may be independent predictors of internalizing and externalizing
behaviors, the ways in which these characteristics manifest in tandem in children may promote
either heightened vulnerability or resilience to different forms of psychopathology [50, 59]. For
example, although individuals with high NA are predisposed to focus on the negative, possession
of strong effortful control capacities may protect against the development of psychopathology. In
contrast, individuals with disrupted effortful control capacities often lack the ability to inhibit
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 11
their negativity, which poses a risk for the emergence of psychopathological symptoms.
Ultimately, the presence and on-going duration of high NA during childhood increases risk for
emotional and behavioral disorders. However, the influence of NA as a reactive temperament
factor may be buffered by effortful control. Strong effortful control may provide children the
ability to practice flexible and effective coping strategies [51, 71].
Aim and Hypotheses
The primary aim of this study was to test whether associations between NA and
dimensions of child psychopathology may be moderated by EC. In addition, we examined
consistency between self-report and task-based measures of EC. Based on the literature, we
hypothesized that high NA and low EC would be independently associated with both
internalizing and externalizing problems. We expected that NA would be positively correlated
with both dimensions of psychopathology and that effortful control would be negatively
correlated with both dimensions of psychopathology. We also predicted that high NA, in
combination with low levels of EC, would be associated with high levels of child
psychopathology
Our main hypothesis focused on the relationships among all three target variables. We
predicted that temperamental effortful control would moderate the relationships between
negative affect and both internalizing and externalizing child psychopathology. Specifically, we
hypothesized that high levels of negative affect and low levels of effortful control would serve as
a risk factor for the development of internalizing and/or externalizing child psychopathology. In
contrast, we expected that low levels of negative affect and strong effortful control capacities
would serve as a protective factor against developing internalizing and/or externalizing child
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 12
psychopathology. Pre-registered hypotheses can be viewed on the Open Science Framework
METHODS
Participants
The current study used data that were collected as part of the Adolescent Brain and
Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study ®, funded by the National Institutes of Mental Health, to
examine associations between effortful control and negative affect in children ages 9-11 (mean
age= 9.9, SD= 0.62 years), as well as their interaction, and psychopathological symptoms. The
ABCD Study® is the largest longitudinal study of adolescent brain development to date in the
United States, and it includes a diverse sample of thousands of youth participating at 21 research
sites across the country. It incorporates measures of brain development, social, emotional, and
cognitive development, mental health, gender identity and sexual health, as well as a variety of
physical and environmental factors, and cumulative/curated data are released annually via the
NIMH Data Archive.
The sample for the current study included 5,432 children (2,847 males, 2,585 females)
who had complete data pertaining to the EATQ-R, CBCL, and Flanker Task. Of the sample, 68%
identified as White, 12.7% African American, 0.5% Native American, 3% Asian, 0.2% Pacific
Islander, 4% other race, and 11.6% as Multiracial. Because the EATQ-R was administered two
years after the ABCD® baseline assessment, cases within the CBCL and Flanker were filtered to
include data from the same interview time point for consistency.
Measures
Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL)
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 13
Parents completed the Child Behavior Checklist for ages 6-18 (CBCL; [72]), which has a
long history of use in research contexts and has ample evidence of reliability and validity [73] .
The CBCL is a 120-item questionnaire that describes a wide array of problem behaviors. Parents
rated each item on a three-point scale in terms of how much the item described their child in the
last 6 months (with 0= not true and 2=very often true). The CBCL provides information on
affective problems, attention deficit/hyperactivity, anxiety, oppositional defiance, somatic
problems, and conduct problems. The existing Internalizing and Externalizing Psychopathology
sub-scales were used in the present study as dependent variables. The INT sub-scale is composed
of anxious/depressed, withdrawn/depressed, and somatic complaints, while the EXT sub-scale is
composed of rule-breaking and aggressive behaviors.
Early Adolescent Temperament Questionnaire – Revised (EATQ-R)
Parents were also asked to complete the Early Adolescent Temperament Questionnaire-
Revised (EATQ-R; [74]) which includes 62 items and is widely used to measure reactive and
regulatory dimensions of temperament. Items in this scale are rated on a 5-point scale ranging
from 1 = almost always untrue of you to 5= almost always true of you. The EATQ-R captures
many different facets of temperament, although the present study focuses on using the items
relevant to creating NA and EC scales. The EC scale consists of the attention and inhibitory
control sub-scales. The NA scale is made up of the fear, frustration, and depressive mood sub-
scales. Total NA and EC scale scores served as independent variables in analyses, and higher
scores demonstrates lower EC while lower scores demonstrate higher levels of EC. The EATQ-R
is a widely used measure of child/adolescent reactive and regulative temperament that has been
proved useful and reliable (see [75] for extensive details).
Flanker Task
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 14
The ABCD Study® dataset includes data from task-based measures in the NIH Toolbox,
including a summary score for performance on the Flanker Task Inhibitory Control and
Attention Test. This 20-trial task requires participants to focus during each trial on a target
stimulus while inhibiting attention to distractor stimuli (e.g., arrows) and takes three minutes to
administer. In some cases, the middle stimulus is pointing the same direction as the "flankers"
(congruent) and sometimes it is in the opposite direction (incongruent). Scoring is based on a
combination of accuracy and reaction time, and higher scores demonstrate higher levels of EC
while lower scores demonstrate low EC. Luciana and colleagues [76], in an article describing the
ABCD cognitive battery, summarize research indicating that the task shows excellent reliability
and validity. Scores on the Flanker Task served as a task-based measure of EC. Furthermore,
results were used to examine consistency between self-report and task-based measures of
Effortful Control, given concerns about method invariance.
Statistical Analyses
Data analysis was completed using Mplus (Version 7.4; [77]). First, bivariate analyses
were conducted to examine zero-order associations among variables of interest, as well as to
identify potential covariates (e.g., age, sex, race). To estimate the unique predictive power of the
trait transdiagnostic constructs of interest (i.e., NA and EC), the Internalizing and Externalizing
dimensions were regressed onto the NA and EC variables. Finally, to test for moderating effects
of EC on NA with regard to psychopathological outcomes, interaction terms were computed via
the DEFINE function in Mplus (i.e., NA*EC) for both Flanker and EATQ-R indicators of EC.
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 15
RESULTS
trait measures, and psychopathology. A one way-ANOVA revealed significant sex differences in
Negative Affect and both internalizing and externalizing dimensions of psychopathology, such
that females displayed higher levels of NA, while males displayed higher levels of internalizing
and externalizing symptoms. Additionally, age was weakly and negatively associated with
EATQ-R NA score (r = -.05, p < .001) as well as Flanker performance (r = -.07, p < .001),
indicating that older subjects tended to report less NA and to perform slightly more poorly on the
behavioral EC task. The ANOVA also revealed significant differences as a function of racial
identity; Asian participants presented low levels of NA and Native Alaskan and Hawaiian
participants demonstrated extremely high levels of NA. Furthermore, Native Alaskan, Pacific
Islander, and Multiracial participants had higher scores on measures of psychopathology than
participants from other racial groups. Thus, age, sex, and race were considered as covariates in
the regression analyses.
As expected, EATQ-R NA evidenced strong positive associations with CBCL
Internalizing (r = .55, p < .001) and Externalizing scores (r = .49, p < .001), indicating that
greater parent-reported NA was associated with greater symptomatology. Additionally, EATQ-R
Effortful Control score was not associated with any covariates, but was moderately and
positively associated with Internalizing (r = .17, p < .001) and Externalizing scores (r = .22, p <
.001), consistent with expectations. Flanker score was significantly associated with age (r = -
0.07, p < .001) and race (r = -0.06, p < .001), but not sex. Furthermore, Flanker scores evidenced
moderate to strong, negative associations with CBCL Internalizing scores (r = -0.04, p < .01) and
Externalizing scores (r = .05, p < .001), also as expected.
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 16
Linear multivariate regression analyses were carried out to examine main and interactive
2). NA was a unique, significant predictor of both Internalizing and Externalizing symptoms
(ß = .56, p < .001; ß = .48, p < .001). Importantly, these effects were in the same direction,
INT EXT
consistent with the idea that NA is a transdiagnostic risk factor for symptomatology within both
domains of psychopathology. With regard to EC, distinctive patterns were observed for parent-
report and behavioral task performance. Specifically, both indicators evidenced significant
unique associations with Externalizing – and remained unassociated with Internalizing.
Associations with Externalizing problems appear in opposing directions (ß = .06, p < .001;
EATQ
ß = -.03, p < .05), but are actually the same considering their reversed scoring.
FLANKER
Finally, in partial support of the hypotheses, EC as measured by the EATQ-R, evidenced
a significant moderating effect on the relationship between NA and Externalizing (ß =
NAxEATQ
relationship that was stronger in the presence of low EC. Of note, high EC was not as strong a
protective factor as expected. Additionally, low EC was also a robust predictor of CBCL
Externalizing, regardless of level of NA. Importantly, this effect was not observed using Flanker
performance as the indicator of EC (ß = -.12, p = .193.Contrary to hypotheses,
NAxFLANKER
moderating effects of EC on the relationship between NA and Internalizing did not reach cutoffs
for statistical significance using either methodology (ß = .06, p = .694; ß = -
NAxEATQ NAxFLANKER
.04, p = .606).
DISCUSSION
The current study was designed to clarify joint and interactive contributions of affective
and regulatory dimensions of temperament to risk for internalizing and externalizing
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 17
psychopathology in children. The extant literature indicates a high correlation, especially during
childhood, between internalizing and externalizing symptoms, which may be highly influenced
by transdiagnostic NA. Notably, associations between NA and both dimensions of
psychopathology are moderate in size, suggesting the presence of additional contributing factors.
Thus, there appeared to be value in examining the influence of putative moderating constructs
(e.g., effortful control) to help determine whether individual differences among a moderating
trait might help determine whether problem behaviors manifest as internalizing or externalizing
psychopathology.
Consistent with the existing literature and our hypotheses, high NA emerged as a
significant independent predictor of greater psychopathology across both dimensions. This
finding aligns with [49], who asserted that high NA is a transdiagnostic personality domain
associated with poorer overall health and an increased risk for various psychopathological
outcomes. However, many people with high NA prove resilient [78], and in the present study the
moderate correlations between NA and both psychopathology dimensions suggest that at least
some participants with high NA were not exhibiting problematic symptoms.
The current results suggest that individual differences in effortful control matter more in
the expression of Externalizing symptoms than Internalizing symptoms among youth, which
aligns with existing literature supporting the centrality of EC to Externalizing symptoms [79].
Contrary to hypotheses, moderating effects of EC on the relationship between NA and
Internalizing did not reach cutoffs for statistical significance, regardless of whether behavioral or
self-report measures of EC were included in analyses (ß = .0322, p = .694 ß =
NAxEATQ NAxFLANKER
-.01, p = .606).
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 18
Whereas EATQ-R Effortful Control served as an independent predictor of externalizing,
but not internalizing psychopathology, behavioral EC (Flanker) scores showed no significant
associations with either dimension of psychopathology. This pattern of findings raises questions
about whether these two measures are capturing the same construct and underscores the need for
a more comprehensive (e.g., cross validation or multimodal) approach to measuring EC. Snyder
et al., (2021); [80] found that questionnaire vs task-based EC factors were only weakly
associated in their sample, even when using empirically supported latent variable models. There
are many possible reasons for the lack of consistency between methods. It is possible that self-
report EC is inaccurate, as youth may perceive or wish to convey themselves as having stronger
EC than they actually do. According to Williams et al., (2017); [81], individuals who are the
most likely to engage in self-enhancement of self-reported ability are also those who are most
likely to have objectively lower EC and overall cognitive ability. Also, both EC questionnaire
and task-based measures may accurately capture realistic behaviors but may not align with EC
responses in a structured, low-distraction laboratory environment. Therefore, environmental
context is an important factor to consider. Ultimately, the varying results for the EATQ-R and
Flanker suggest that self-report and task-based measures of Effortful Control may best be viewed
as complementary, but distinct, windows into self-regulation.
The hypothesis that EC would moderate the association between high NA and both
internalizing and externalizing psychopathology, was partially supported, such that high NA was
a robust predictor of externalizing symptoms which were exacerbated in the presence of low EC.
Contrary to predictions, however, this moderating effect was not observed for internalizing
symptoms. It thus appears that, at least in the present sample, NA is a significant predictor of
internalizing symptomatology, regardless of level of effortful control. These results suggest that
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 19
individual differences in EC have the most influence over the relationship between high NA and
expression of EXT behaviors (e.g., aggression, rule-breaking). This is consistent with previous
findings that indicate expression of externalizing behaviors may depend on one's level of
regulation [79]. Children with high NA but low EC are likely to be less able than peers to inhibit
their behavior in reaction to provocation, which increases their risk for behavioral outbursts that
could be aggressive.
We had predicted that the combination of low NA and strong EC would serve as a
protective factor against developing internalizing and/or externalizing child psychopathology.
However, findings were not consistent with this prediction. This could reflect a tendency for
children with low NA to display low levels of reactivity and modulate the intensity and duration
of their emotions internally so that they are relatively unlikely to express the negative emotion in
their outward behavior (i.e., EXT).
EC appears to vary in its relevance to different dimensions of psychopathology [26, 51,
82]. Sperry and Woodward (2022) emphasize the presence of divergent pathways between
manifestations of NA, EC, and INT and between NA, EC, and EXT, with different facets of EC
potentially playing mediating roles. In this study, they found a significant indirect path among
NA, activation control (component of EC), and Internalizing psychopathology, while they found
an indirect path among NA, inhibitory control (component of EC), and Externalizing
psychopathology. This suggests that different components of EC may be uniquely associated
with varying manifestations of psychopathology.
Limitations
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 20
The CBCL provides scaled scores of internalizing and externalizing psychopathologies,
but this measure comes with limitations. Previous literature suggests that these broad scales may
inappropriately lump together behaviors that may be only loosely related to each other [36].
Thus, there may be more value may in looking at specific symptoms or symptom clusters within
dimensions. Another approach to examining the covariation between internalizing and
externalizing problems that might be fruitful could be to use item responses to extract latent
factors for each dimension [38].
Finally, there may be value in examining a broader array of potential moderating
variables. Research has demonstrated, for example, that individuals with high negative affect
may experience frequent stress, emotional arousal, and inefficient coping mechanisms [82].
Considering additional moderators like these, as well as environmental factors (e.g., parenting,
culture, SES) may aid our understanding of the nature of the relationship between temperament
and child psychopathology [19].
Conclusion
Findings from the present study suggest that future research should continue to identify
specific cognitive and affective processes, as well as their interactions, in efforts to predict risk
for psychopathological outcomes emerging in childhood and adolescence. Such work might not
only encompass replication of these and similar findings, but also extend to new research that
considers other factors of temperament. Furthermore, these results support the conceptualization
of individual differences as entities that interact to predict psychological outcomes. The ability to
identify early risk factors provides important treatment and prevention implications to consider.
Summary
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 21
Temperament encompasses individual differences in transdiagnostic constructs such as
negative affect (NA)—dispositional fear, sadness, and frustration—and effortful control (EC)—
the ability to inhibit dominant responses in service of goal-oriented behavior. Empirical findings
suggest that high NA and low EC may relate independently and interactively to elevated
internalizing (INT) and externalizing (EXT) child psychopathology. The present study assessed
the moderating effect of EC on the association between NA and symptoms of both INT and EXT
psychopathology among children in the Adolescent Brain and Cognitive Development (ABCD)
study (N=5,432; 47.6% female; M = 9.9; SD = 0.62 years). Using multimodal measures, EC
age
was expected to exacerbate psychopathology in individuals with high NA, particularly with
regard to EXT problems. Regression analyses revealed that NA significantly predicted INT and
EXT problems (ß = .56, p < .001; ß = .48, p < .001, respectively). The two EC indicators
INT EXT
(parent-report and behavioral task performance) evidenced significant and unique associations
with EXT (ß = 0.06, p < .001, ß = 0.03, p < .05), but not INT. In partial support of
EATQ FLANKER
hypotheses, parent-report EC had a significant moderating effect on the relationship between NA
and EXT (ß = .62, p < .001), such that in individuals with high NA, high EC exacerbated
NAxEATQ
EXT problems. Results suggest that early assessment of EC may aid in the identification of risk
profiles. Moreover, effective interventions to strengthen EC may help to reduce the risk of
developing psychopathological symptoms.
CHILD PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 22