Facing the Facts About Test Score Gaps
Gregory Connor
Abstract: I first review seven separate lines of evidence which indicate that the
differences in average intelligence test scores between racial groups are partly
attributable to genetic variation across biogeographic ancestries such as African, East
Asian, and European ancestries. I focus on the U.S. Black-white test score gap for which
the evidence is most comprehensive. The widely promulgated public dogma that the
causes of the Black-white test score gap are entirely environmental is not empirically
plausible given these seven lines of evidence. Other race-related test score gaps may also
have a genetic component. I then confront the sensitive public policy question of whether
these findings should be openly acknowledged or suppressed.
Keywords: Race-IQ controversy, hereditarianism, environmentalism, fact-value distinction
Section 1: Motivation and key concepts
1.1: Motivation for the Paper
The existence of race-related differences in average intelligence test scores, such as the gap
between the average scores of self-identified Black and white Americans, is generally
acknowledged but the underlying causes of such gaps is a source of contention. In this paper I
first review multiple strands of evidence for a causal role of genetic variation associated with
biogeographic ancestry in partly explaining these differences. I focus on the Black-white
intelligence test score gap; this gap is not the only observed difference in average intelligence
test scores across racial groups but is the best studied. I describe seven mutually supportive
lines of evidence indicating that this test score gap is partly caused by genetic variation
between the Black and white racial groups related to their differing average proportions of
African and European ancestry. I reject as implausible the widely promulgated theory that the
gap is purely environmental. Other observed test score gaps, such as the white-East Asian gap,
may also have partially genetic causes. I then address the sensitive question of whether public
acknowledgement or suppression of these findings is best social policy. The durable, diverse,
and widespread evidence against the environment-only theory is now so strong that continued
adherence to that theory as the only publicly acceptable explanation for test score gaps may be
unviable and counterproductive.
Although evidence has been steadily accumulating for many years, public discussion of partially
genetic causes of race-related test score gaps is treated as toxic, particularly within the
administrative structures of government, academic, and research institutions. The dominant
institutional view is that genetic explanations for test score gaps should not be explored, any
positive findings supporting such explanations must be suppressed, and when questioned
publicly about such findings researchers and policy analysts must state (dishonestly, in fact)
that the evidence shows all root causes are due to environmental influences only. There is a
widespread institutional imposition of this Platonist Noble Lie as it is termed by Winegard et al. 3
A Noble Lie is a statement by knowledgeable elites that is factually untrue but is not necessarily
morally wrong for them to profess, since it propagates in broader society a false belief
conducive to social harmony.
The taboo against criticism of the environment-only theory is not usually stated explicitly, but
this taboo is deeply embedded in social and institutional practices. Research grant applications
and submitted research papers that are in any way critical of the environment-only theory
usually get swift rejection. Academics and others who publicly cast doubt on the veracity of the
environment-only theory, even if their comments are quite circumspect, are often harassed by
activists and administrators and sometimes fired.
Earlier papers have listed and discussed multiple lines of evidence contradicting the
environment-only theory. I do not repeat all the technical details covered in earlier papers; I
provide an up-to-date and accessible overview, with appropriate references. The goal of
Section 2 is to convince the open-minded reader that a large and diverse body of evidence
shows that the environment-only theory is false, at least for the case of the Black-white test
score gap. Section 3 discusses the implications of this large body of contrary empirical evidence
for the social desirability and long-term viability of the environment-only theory as the
dominant public paradigm. Section 4 concludes.
1.2: A caveat about frank discussion in this paper
When I described my plans to write this paper, a common response from colleagues was:
“Why bother? Everyone knows the environment-only theory is false, although few will
publicly discuss it.”
This paper violates the common (but not universal) convention of public silence about genetic
causes of race-related differences in cognitive ability. I honestly and openly describe the strong
evidence for a partially genetic explanation of the Black-white test score gap, and the possibility
of other genetics-based cognitive ability differences between socially-defined racial groups. My
uncensored approach will upset many readers. Many people find it deeply offensive to publicly
compare the average cognitive ability of identifiable groups and to link those average
differences to genetic variation. The paper is intended only for readers who can tolerate a
candid, uncensored review of the evidence. For those in need of a more uplifting story, there is
an ample supply of institutional-award-winning books and papers advocating the environment-
only theory.
In most areas of research, open and honest disclosure of findings is treated as a core scientific
value. Cofnas and Carl offer cogent arguments in defence of open inquiry for research on the
genetic causes of cognitive ability differences across racial and ethnic groups. A number of
heterodox authors similarly defend free inquiry for this and other politically or socially sensitive
genetic-ancestry-linked research topics. The institutionally dominant view is that public
discussion on this topic should be stifled. This dominant view is motivated by understandable
concerns about the social impact of potentially inflammatory research findings. There is an
unstated fear that widespread public acknowledgement of such findings might substantially
harm race relations, perhaps even reviving the white segregationist sentiments which were not
uncommon in earlier periods of US history. Although often expressed obliquely, such fears are
very strongly felt. This widespread sentiment generates enormous institutional power
suppressing public discussion about empirical weaknesses in the environment-only theory.
Proponents of the dominant view are forced to walk a fine line in expressing their fears since an
open call to suppress research findings is implicitly an admission of the findings’ existence.
Various rhetorical devices are used to propagate a Noble Lie without publicly espousing it. A
key advantage of my candid approach is that I can compare and evaluate the costs and benefits
of this Noble Lie without rhetorical disguises. This open approach allows me to directly address
the intertwined question whether suppression of findings remains a viable and appropriate
scientific policy choice. An obvious drawback of my candid approach is that it “gives the game
away” since talking openly about a Noble Lie is implicitly a decision to abandon it, at least
temporarily. This temporary breach of convention is necessary to have a meaningful discussion
about the Noble Lie’s social costs and benefits, and to assess its continued viability in the face
of strong evidence contradicting it.
1.3: Definitions of self-identified race and ethnicity and of biogeographic ancestry
There are two distinct systems of categorization associated with racial identity, one socially
defined and the other genetically defined. The socially defined categorization relies on the
standard Self-identified Race and Ethnicity (SIRE) question which is a mainstay of social
scientific research. Individuals are simply asked to describe their own race and ethnicity by
choosing one or more from a list of race/ethnicity categories. In the USA, the official set of SIRE
categories are defined by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). The main OMB
(2017) categories are:
Hispanic or Latino ethnicity: “A person of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, South or Central
American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race.”
White race: “A person having origins in any of the original peoples of Europe, the Middle East,
or North Africa.”
Black or African American race: “A person having origins in any of the black racial groups of
Africa.”
American Indian or Alaska Native race: “A person having origins in any of the original peoples
of North and South America (including Central America), and who maintains tribal affiliation or
community attachment.”
Asian race: “A person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast
Asia, or the Indian subcontinent including, for example, Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea,
Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam.”
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander race: “A person having origins in any of the original
peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or other Pacific Islands.”
SIRE choices need not be unitary: many US individuals have identities spanning multiple race or
ethnicity categories, for example, Black-white biracial, Black-Hispanic, Black-Native American,
or multiracial Black-white-Native American. In some research studies, final estimation samples
are restricted only to sampled individuals who choose single SIRE categories; in other studies,
various weighting rules are applied to best accommodate multi-race individuals in the statistical
analysis. The SIRE categories are defined by the OMB to be “social-political constructs” which
“should not be interpreted as being primarily biological or genetic in reference.” OMB notes
that they “may be thought of in terms of social and cultural characteristics as well as ancestry.”
The other race-related category definition has a genetic foundation. Following the completion
of the human genome project in 2003, researchers discovered that they could genetically divide
human populations into super-populations or biogeographic ancestry groups based on clear
genetic similarity. Moreover, they could accurately determine the ancestral composition of
individuals’ genomes, with respect to these groups, using statistical cluster analysis. For
analysis of the US population, the most appropriate biogeographic ancestry groups are the five
groups: Eurasian, African, Amerindian, East Asian, and Oceanian. The statistical methodology
to determine ancestry has advanced rapidly and now provides very accurate proportional
ancestry measurement at the continental level.
The two race-related category definitions are conceptually distinct, but there are some strong
statistical relationships between them. In the US population, self-identified membership in
OMB’s socially constructed categories is highly correlated with membership in the
corresponding biogeographic ancestry groups defined genetically. Only 0.14% of individuals
show a clear discordance between genetic cluster membership and their self-identified
race/ethnicity.
The test score gaps are measured using the SIRE categories, not the biogeographic ancestry
categories. The key scientific question to be confronted in this paper is whether the link
between SIRE and test scores is partly due to cognition-related genetic variation, as posited by
the mixed genetic/environmental theory, or whether this link is entirely non-causal as posited
by the environment-only theory.
1.4: Cognitive ability test scores and their meaning
Cognitive ability has been defined as “[T]he ability to think (intelligence), knowledge (the store
of true and relevant knowledge) and the intelligent use of knowledge.” Cognitive ability can
be measured using intelligence tests specifically designed to measure general cognitive ability,
or by using academic performance tests as a proxy since these tend to correlate strongly with
general cognitive ability. Cognitive tests are often sub-divided into component sub-tests that
measure specific domains of intellectual ability, such as verbal fluency and mathematical ability.
Individuals’ performances on these sub-tests tend to be positively correlated, that is, individuals
who do well on one subtest tend to do well on the others, and vice-versa for those who do
poorly. This reflects a common general intelligence factor underlying all the sub-test results.
The general intelligence factor, or g-factor as it is known, can be estimated by taking a weighted
average of the sub-test results, with the weights optimally adjusted for the variabilities and
correlations of the sub-tests. Some research papers on test score gaps use general
intelligence test scores whereas others use educational performance test scores as the unit of
comparison.
Like temperature scales, intelligence test scores can be rescaled by multiplying all scores by a
constant and/or by adding a constant to all of them. The two most commonly used scales are
the IQ scale, in which the mean test score is set to 100 and the standard deviation is set to 15,
and the standardized scale, in which the mean test score is set to zero and the standard
deviation is set to 1. A gap of 1.0 on the standardized scale equates to a gap of 15 on the IQ
scale.
Intelligence test scores statistically correlate with social and economic outcomes including
academic achievement, career progression, employment stability, and long-term income.
Somewhat surprisingly given the large Black-white test score gap, the predictive power of
intelligence test scores does not vary notably across Blacks and whites, so that the predictive
value of a given score for educational and career achievement is not notably impacted by the
racial self-identification of the individual.
Section 2: Multiple lines of evidence on race-related test score gaps
This section reviews multiple lines of evidence relevant to evaluating whether observed
intelligence test score differences across self-identified racial and ethnic groups can be
attributed to genetic variation associated with biogeographic ancestry or whether these
observed differences are entirely environmentally caused. The lines of evidence presented
below vary in their strength; researchers reasonably disagree about the importance and/or
strength of the various strands. Two principles of scientific inference are critical for reading the
section. One: the reader must balance the totality of evidence across these diverse, multiple
lines of evidence. Two: the reader must be able to decouple their political/moral concerns
about racism from their objective evaluation of the evidence on purely scientific grounds. This
rational decoupling does not diminish the importance of careful consideration of whether
public acknowledgement of the findings could generate an increase in racism; those concerns
are treated separately in Section 3.
I place a strong focus on the Black-white test score gap which is the most carefully examined
cognitive ability gap across socially defined racial groups; some other race-related test score
gaps are mentioned briefly.
2.1: The intractible Black-white test score gap
Synopsis: The environment-only theory predicts that the Black-white test score gap can be
closed by eliminating environmental impediments to Black cognitive development and learning.
After sixty years of aggressive policy measures in the US to address the gap, a very substantial
Black-white test score gap stubbornly remains.
Murray provides a careful review of the evidence regarding the magnitude of the Black-white
test score gap for Americans born during the seventy-year period 1920-1991, and in a follow-up
study covers additional years. There was a decline in the gap on educational performance
tests during the 1970s and 1980s, probably due to improved educational opportunities for the
Black population born in the late 1950s and after, but no noticeable change over the
subsequent thirty-year period, post-1990.
Roth et al. conduct a comprehensive meta-analysis of 105 studies, including standard general
intelligence tests, academic achievement tests, mass-conscription general intelligence tests of
military personnel, and private employment-based tests. The meta-analysis is restricted to
studies meeting various quality control criteria and covers an aggregate sample of 6,246,729
individuals. They argue convincingly based on this wide-ranging meta-analysis that the Black-
white general intelligence test score gap has a value of approximately one standard deviation
(15 IQ points). Estimates from two recent, carefully constructed cognitive development
research databases reproduce this unchanged value. The Philadelphia Neurodevelopmental
Cohort is a population-representative database consisting of 9,421 eight to twenty-one year
olds in the Philadelphia metropolitan area, all of whom self-identified their racial and ethnic
identities and took the carefully constructed Penn Computerized Neurocognitive Battery of
cognitive tests. The tests were taken during the sampling period 2010-2013. The general
intelligence factor scores computed from their test results give a Black-white score gap of 1.01
standard deviations. The Adolescent Brain and Cognitive Development database consists of a
nationally-representative sample of 10,370 nine and ten year-olds, who took the NIH Toolbox
Cognitive Battery of tests in the period 2018-2021, and had their parents or guardians declare
their racial and ethnic identities. The general intelligence factor test score difference between
white and Black individuals in this database is 1.03 standard deviations.
The stubborn secular existence of the test score gap despite half a century of ameliorative
policies is matched by its geographical uniformity. Reardon et al. obtained access to over 100
million student achievement test scores from the period 2009-2013, covering virtually the
entire US public school population, for a varying selection of test scores from school grades
three through eight during those four years. Carefully aggregating across school grades and
test scoring scales, they find that the average Black-white school achievement test score
difference equals 0.70 standard deviations in their comprehensive sample. Using an empirical
Bayesian estimate to control measurement error, they find a positive Black-white test score gap
in every single one of the 2,899 school districts in their sample; this excludes only those US
school districts with inadequate data. Under the mixed environment/genetic theory with a
substantial genetic component to the gap, this uniform statistical outcome across 2,899 school
districts is unsurprising. It would be a remarkable outcome if the environment-only theory were
true.
2.2: Cross-national comparisons of average cognitive ability
Synopsis: The environment-only theory of the Black-white gap predicts that the gap will exist in
countries/regions where racial discrimination-linked disadvantages push down Black scores. The
evidence indicates, on the contrary, that the gap exists worldwide.
The environment-only theory attributes the US Black-white test score gap to environmental
th
features which are quite specific to the US, including the legacy of Black enslavement in the 18
th
and 19 centuries, the impacts of racial discrimination in the Jim Crow period and up to the
present day, and associated dislocations in the US Black learning environment. These US-
specific explanations become strained once international test score evidence is included in the
analysis. The international data on test score performance shows a uniform, worldwide
underperformance of all populations with predominantly African biogeographic ancestry on
cognitive tests when compared to populations with predominantly European or East Asian
biogeographic ancestry.
The World Bank gives harmonized national average academic achievement test scores for
students in 174 countries. The scores are calibrated so that an individual student’s score of
300 corresponds to minimal attainment and 625 is advanced attainment. The 36 sub-Saharan
African countries in the database have an average national score of 366.3. The two Caribbean
countries in the database whose populations have predominantly sub-Saharan ancestry,
Jamaica and Haiti, have average national scores of 387.1 and 337.8, respectively, in the same
very low range as those in sub-Saharan Africa. The 41 European countries in the database have
an average national score of 486.6 and the 11 East Asian countries have an average national
score of 491.0; the US national score is 511.8.
Gust et al. use statistical inference and a comprehensive micro database of international and
regional achievement tests to map academic achievement of youths in 159 countries on to a
common measurement scale. They estimate that only 6% of youth in sub-Saharan Africa have
the basic academic skills necessary to be internationally competitive in the modern global
economy. This compares to 72% in Europe, 76% in North America, and 71% in East Asia and the
Pacific.
At the national level, there can be an interaction effect between genetic variation and
environmental influences on academic performance: nations where average cognitive ability is
low tend to have low per-capita income and a less enriched educational environment. This
interaction effect together with a partially genetic component to the gap can explain the
extremely large academic achievement and IQ gaps between sub-Saharan Africa and North
America/Europe/East Asia. A purely environmental explanation is much more difficult to justify.
2.3: Spearman’s Hypothesis
Synopsis: The environment-only theory predicts that the test score gap will be larger for
intelligence test questions which are more susceptible to environmental influences. Empirically,
the opposite holds: the gap is larger for intelligence test questions more strongly linked to
genetic influences and smaller for test questions more strongly linked to environmental
influences.
Some intelligence test questions have a stronger dependence on underlying general
intelligence than others; for example, correctly recalling strings of digits (conventionally called
digit span) tends to be less indicative of underlying general intelligence as measured by the g-
factor than correctly recalling and reciting strings of digits in reverse order (conventionally
called reverse-digit span). A question or sub-test which is closely tied to underlying general
intelligence is said to have a high g-factor loading, referring to its strong link to the g-factor of
general intelligence. Scores on sub-tests with high g-factor loadings tend to have higher
heritability, whereas scores on subtests with low g-factor loadings tend to be more susceptible
to environmental influences.
Spearman’s Hypothesis, fully explicated by Jensen but named after Charles Spearman, posits
that if the Black-white gap has substantial genetic causes then the relative size of the gap across
intelligence sub-tests will be positively correlated with the relative g-factor loadings of the
subtests. Conversely, if the gap has only environmental causes as posited by the environment-
only theory then this correlation should be zero. The evidence shows that the correlation is
strongly positive, indicating substantial genetic causes of the gap; there is a strong confirmation
of a positive correlation across a large number of independent studies. There is also some
evidence of an analogous positive correlation when comparing the performance of Hispanics
and whites and when comparing (opposite sign gap) East Asians and whites. This indicates that
there may also be a genetic component to the (smaller) Hispanic-white test score gap and the
(opposite in sign) East Asian-white test score gap. Warne provides a detailed discussion of
empirical evidence regarding the Spearman hypothesis and its implication that the Black-white
test score gap is partially genetically caused.
2.4: The low power of shared environment in explaining cognitive ability
Synopsis: The environment-only theory posits that test score gaps can be explained by within-
group shared environmental influences which differ across individuals with different racial
identities. Given the low statistical power of shared environmental influences in explaining
observed variation in cognitive ability, the implied difference between Black and white
environments would need to be extraordinarily large to fully explain the magnitude of the
observed US Black-white test score gap.
Jensen pointed out that the magnitude of the US Black-white test score gap, and its presence
over the entire life cycle from young adolescence to retirement age, is very difficult to reconcile
with established findings regarding the magnitude of shared environmental influences on test
scores. Using a reasonable linear approximation, the variation in cognitive ability across
individuals can be statistically decomposed into three components, 1. genetic variation
(inherited from parents’ DNA), 2. shared environmental influences (common environmental
effects across siblings raised together), and 3. non-shared environmental influences (individual-
specific environmental influences which are not common within the family). The environment-
only theory of a racial test score gap attributes all the test score gap to component 2, in
particular to the difference in average shared environment across the two racial groups. The
problem with this explanation is that in the contemporary US environment of universal public
education and adequate child nutrition the magnitude of shared-environment variation in
cognitive ability is very small. In this context the difference between the US Black and white
average shared environments would need to be incredibly large to account for a 15-point
difference in average cognitive ability.
2.5: Admixture regression with cognitive test scores
Synopsis: The environment-only theory predicts that the gap will be related to Black and white
social identity and not related to African/European genetic admixture except as this admixture
proxies for social identity. Admixture regression finds the opposite: the gap is strongly related to
African/European genetic admixture and shows almost no statistically identifiable connection to
Black/white social identity.
Admixture regression tests provide the cleanest and most robust evidence for a substantial
genetic contribution to the observed Black-white test score gap. The technique involves linear
regression of individuals’ test scores on the same individuals’ vector of biogeographic
admixture proportions, such as African, European, East Asian, and Amerindian, measured using
cluster analysis applied to personal DNA samples. The regression also must include race and
ethnic self-identification variables such as Black, white, Asian, and Hispanic SIRE, and can
include other social-based explanatory variables for cognitive ability. By including both
admixture proportions and SIRE variables, admixture regression identifies the separate
influences on cognitive ability of racial identity (captured by the SIRE identity variables) and
genetic variation (captured by the admixture proportions determined from DNA). The
environment-only theory predicts that the SIRE variables and other socially defined variables
will explain score disparities and that the genetically defined admixture proportions will not;
the mixed genetics/environment theory predicts that both sets of explanatory variables,
including crucially the genetic admixture proportions, will have explanatory power.
The admixture regression technique relies on the biological feature that inter-ancestry mating
randomly combines the genetic variants responsible for differences in cognitive ability across
individuals in proportion to their ancestries. For example, if genetic variation contributes to
differences in cognitive ability across African and European ancestries and inter-ancestry
mating is random with respect to cognitive ability, then an individual who has 60% African and
40% European ancestry will have a 60%-40% expected weighting of the cognitive-ability related
genetic variants from these two populations. This leads naturally to a simple linear relationship
between individuals’ vectors of ancestry proportions and their expected cognitive abilities.
Admixture regression greatly improves the ability to separate environmental and genetic
causes of ethnic and racial group differences in an array of medical, anthropological, and
behavioral traits. Admixture regression analysis has been used over the last two decades by
genetic epidemiologists and other researchers to study race and ethnicity related differences in
32 33 34 35 36
alcohol dependence, height, asthma risk, cardiovascular disease, sleep depth, cigarette
37 38 39 40
smoking behavior, metabolomics, cancer, and diabetes. With the empirical success of
admixture regression in explaining ethnicity and race related differences in this wide array of
medical and behavioral traits, the application of the technique to cognitive ability differences is
natural and inevitable. It is “controversial” in this application only due to the political sensitivity
of the findings.
Empirically, across a wide range of studies, there is a substantial and highly significant negative
regression coefficient linking cognitive ability test scores to African admixture proportions.
Other ancestry admixture proportions also show some statistically significant explanatory
power; East Asian ancestry often has a positive coefficient, but the evidence is less conclusive
than the negative coefficient associated with African ancestry. In many studies the SIRE
variables are surprisingly unimportant: their estimated coefficients are often relatively small
and sometimes statistically insignificant. Multiple studies using a range of different data sources
all find substantial and statistically significant negative coefficients for African ancestry
explaining cognitive ability in US sample data.
Fuerst explores the robustness of the finding of a negative impact of African ancestry on
cognitive ability by testing the sensitivity of the result to sample selection rules and
included/excluded explanatory variables. Across the full set of different tests, African ancestry
has a strong negative impact on cognitive ability, whereas the SIRE-linked identity variables
often have a measured impact not significantly different from zero. In terms of statistical fit,
Black/white identity is not a major source of the test score gap; it is mostly due to genetic
variation associated with biogeographic ancestry, in particular, African versus European
biogeographic ancestry.
2.6: Brain size differences across biogeographic ancestries
Synopsis: The environment-only theory does not predict any difference in average brain size
linked to biogeographic ancestry. Since brain size is correlated with cognitive ability, the
alternative theory of mixed genetic/environment causes fits naturally with brain size differences
across ancestries. The evidence finds substantial differences, with on average larger brains
among individuals with higher proportions of European versus African ancestry.
One of the early pieces of scientific evidence pointing toward a genetic component to test score
gaps was the discovery of average brain size differences between individuals with African,
European, and East Asian ancestry. Individuals with African ancestry have average cranial
volume 6% below those with European ancestry, whereas individuals with East Asian ancestry
have average cranial volume 1.3% higher. Although the link between brain size and cognitive
ability is not conclusive, the implication is strong. Statistical analysis shows a moderate
correlation between brain size and cognitive ability.
The African/European average brain size difference was first identified by pioneering American
th
scientist Samuel Morton in the 19 century, but this scientific knowledge was institutionally
“forgotten” following the 1981 publication of Stephen J. Gould’s widely praised book, The
Mismeasure of Man. 45 Gould claimed that his own re-examination of the brain size evidence
showed the earlier work to be sloppy and motivated by racial prejudice. He accused Morton
and other scientists who had found such differences of deliberate or clumsy errors, in part
motivated by their in-built racial animosity toward non-whites.
“During the summer of 1971 I spent several weeks reanalyzing Morton’s data….In short,
and to put it bluntly, Morton’s summaries are a patchwork of fudging and finagling in the
clear interest of controlling a priori convictions.”
Gould makes clear that Morton’s purportedly “fudged and finagled” measurements were
motivated by Morton’s racial prejudices:
“Morton began his first and largest work, the Crania Americana of 1839, with a
discourse on the essential character of human races. His statements immediately
exposed his prejudices.”
Gould’s intimating in his book that any research showing race-related brain size differences was
motivated by the researcher’s racial prejudices helped discourage further inquiry.
It took the technical innovation of magnetic resonance imagery (MRI) to restore previous
scientific knowledge of average brain size differences after Gould’s warmly received critique.
The pre-MRI measurements, which Gould had disparaged as the product of gross incompetence
by scientists motivated by their racial prejudice, were shown to be accurate. In defending
Gould’s book, Weisberg and Paul argue that Gould’s extensive critique of Morton’s work was
not intended to give the impression that Morton’s measurements were inaccurate, but only
that they might be.
Rushton notes that before Gould prepared the 1996 revised version of his book, newly available
MRI techniques verified the pioneering measurements by Morton that Gould extensively
attacks, yet Gould makes no substantive textual adjustments nor mention of this in his
revision. Gould’s book is best understood not as a popular science book but rather as a
political document designed to persuade people of the environment-only theory irrespective of
scientific evidence. Although he never stated it explicitly for obvious reasons, Gould felt that
perpetuation of the Noble Lie was more important than adhering to scientific accuracy. Viewed
from this alternative perspective, the book must be acknowledged as a resounding success. The
book’s powerful influence on the political milieu within the academic and scientific
establishment helped to slow down the pace of new findings which contradict the
environment-only theory, and to prevent such findings’ public dissemination.
2.7: New evidence on the recent evolution of intelligence-related genetic variation
Synopsis: Recent genomic research shows that patterns in genetic variation associated with
higher intelligence increased substantially in the European population over the last ten
thousand years. Parallel evolution in other regions could have similar effects after the African
dispersal of humankind to multiple continents, but the impact on average intelligence of any
such parallel evolution is unlikely to be exactly uniform worldwide.
Until the early years of this century, the genetic component of human cognitive ability could
only be observed indirectly, by using heritability-linked sorting variables such as in twin and
adoption studies. With the completion of the Human Genome Project and the subsequent
genomic revolution, a new frontier has opened for the measurement of the genetic component
of many human traits. Researchers have been able to create genetic-variant-based indices for
human traits, including cognitive ability. These indices, called polygenic risk indices, map an
individual’s genotyped DNA (which is a list the individual’s genetic variants) into a single
number that partly captures the genetic component of the observed trait for that individual. An
individual’s measured value from application of the index to their genotyped DNA is called their
polygenic risk score.
Kuipers et al. estimate a dynamic statistical model of genetic variation linked to several human
traits, thereby tracking the evolution of modern European ancestry from earlier genetic
ancestry. Their findings rely on the massive database of genotyped archaic human DNA
maintained by the Reich Laboratory at Harvard University. The Reich Laboratory database
provides genotyped records of recovered archaic DNA from human skeletal remains time-dated
using radiocarbon techniques. Each genotyped DNA record is geolocated to its recovery site.
The Reich Laboratory database has particularly strong coverage across the European
continental region. Kuipers et al. are able to map 827 samples of European-area archaic DNA
genotypes into a modern polygenic risk index for intelligence, and thereby calculate polygenic
risk scores for intelligence for these archaic genotyped DNA samples. They repeat the
procedure for 250 modern European genotyped DNA samples. Using this data they track the
intelligence-related polygenic risk scores of the European population over the long period from
40 thousand years ago to modern day. They find a strong positive trend in polygenic risk scores
for intelligence over the period from ten thousand years ago to modern day. Based on these
findings, they note:
“The strong increase in social complexity resulting from the Neolithic revolution and the
process of urbanization and occupational specialization are likely factors that could have
driven the evolutionary advantage of improved intelligence-related scores.”
Parallel evolution in other continental regions could have analogous impacts on genetic
variation there, but it is implausible that any such parallel evolution would result in a
completely homogenous worldwide statistical distribution of cognitive-ability-related genetic
variation.
Early research comparing polygenic risk scores across continental ancestries supports the
existence of cognitive ability differences tied to the evolution of genetic variation after
humanity’s African dispersal. The cognitive-ability-related average polygenic risk score for
academic achievement of Black SIRE individuals is significantly lower than that of white SIRE
individuals. Piffer directly connects average polygenic score differences to biogeographic
ancestries (African, European, East Asian) and shows that the observed relationship between
polygenic score differences and ancestries partly explains the observed relationship between
average test score differences and ancestries. Lasker et al. find that twenty percent of the
observed negative relationship between African ancestry and cognitive ability shown via
admixture regression is explained by the lower polygenic risk scores associated with higher
African ancestry. All these cross-ancestry findings are not yet definitive since they are
dependent to some degree upon the comparability of cross-ancestry polygenic risk scores.
For the lines of evidence based on new genomic methods (this section and Section 2.5 above) a
troubling new counterstrategy does not attempt to logically argue against the findings. Instead,
the new counterstrategy is to block their publication and eliminate genetic data access for
anyone who makes such findings public, on the grounds that the results are stigmatizing toward
vulnerable minorities. This enforced-ignorance counterstrategy is not logically coherent if one
simultaneously claims that the environment-only theory is true. If the theory were true, then
new research findings would tend to support it rather than reject it and thereby be “de-
stigmatizing” by such criteria.
Section 3: Should the Findings be Openly Acknowledged or Suppressed?
3.1: The Aggregate Implausibility of the Environment-only Theory
The multiple lines of evidence surveyed above all point toward the mixed genetic/environment
theory and against the environment-only theory of the Black-white test score gap. This has
58 59
been noted previously by others. Jensen and Rushton and Gottfredson describe the
consilience of the multiple-component evidence supporting the mixed genetic/environment
theory. They note that the lines of evidence on the Black-white test score gap are based on
different empirical methodologies and widely diverse data sources, yet the mixed
genetic/environment theory explains them seamlessly: the various empirical findings
complement each other and point toward a cohesive theoretical structure. The environment-
only theory, on the other hand, relies on a patchwork of explanations to counter each separate
line of empirical evidence against it. Winegard et al. make a similar point and discuss how the
observed findings might reflect regional variation in recent human evolutionary history.
Warne carefully delineates five lines of evidence and concludes that they show that the
environment-only theory is false. Fuerst et al. use the Adolescent Brain Cognitive
Development database of genomic and test score data on ten thousand U.S. adolescents to
empirically replicate and expand upon Warne’s five lines of evidence.
Is it plausible for a rational and honest individual to believe the environment-only theory of the
Black-white test score gap? The two modifiers “rational and honest” are critical. Emotional or
spiritual beliefs need not have rational foundations and therefore a sanctified belief in the
environment-only theory cannot be ruled out. Also, some commentators take a moral stance
that it is best to dishonestly espouse the environment-only theory “whether or not” it is true,
see, e.g., Dennett who states this explicitly. The willingness to be dishonest for a good cause is
usually left unstated since directly stating that one is lying reveals the lie. Also, the best way to
propagate a lie is to believe it, so individuals who feel morally bound to lie about the
environment-only theory are likely to internalize that dishonesty and effectively “believe it” by
any observable criteria.
Advocates of the environment-only theory have offered rejoinders to all seven lines of evidence
discussed above. A problem with piecemeal responses to the various lines of evidence is that
even if some of the responses are at least plausible, when aggregated together the responses
go from plausible to implausible. Seven diverse, extensive lines of evidence against the
environment-only theory are too many for that theory to remain credible. If one is scientifically
rational and honest, one is forced to acknowledge the mixed genetic/environment theory as
the clearly superior theory of the Black-white test score gap. Other test score gaps may also
have a genetic component.
3.2: Reasons that the environment-only theory dominates in the public arena
A large group of thoughtful and informed people, many of them presumably familiar with the
contrary evidence, remain active proponents of the environment-only theory. It seems clear
(although usually unspoken) that many scientifically informed people have personally decided
that only environmental explanations should be encouraged in public discourse and that any
evidence pointing toward partially genetic causes should be downplayed or suppressed
completely. This is justifiable if one believes that avoiding any potential increase in racial
hostility more than outweighs any costs of scientific dishonesty. Such people feel an ethical
obligation to publicly espouse the theory, to deliberately obfuscate or downplay the strong
evidence against it, and to block renegade research which might reveal its flaws. The relative
size of this activist group is difficult to document explicitly, for obvious reasons that the Noble
Lie cannot be openly acknowledged without damaging it.
By its very nature, publicly advocating the Noble Lie is logically complex. A proponent cannot
state openly “everyone should suppress the evidence about the falsity of the environment-only
theory in order to realize the social benefits from popular ignorance.” There is a Bertrand
Russell-like paradox: a person cannot publicly espouse the Noble Lie without thereby
undermining it; arguments must be hidden in subterfuge. Cofnas documents some of the
garbled combinations of scientific half-truths intermixed with emotion-laden statements of
moral principles that result when prominent thinkers attempt to shield the Noble Lie from
criticism while denying its existence.
Not all advocates of the environment-only theory support it on purely rational grounds. For
many people, the environment-only theory is such a deeply cherished component of their belief
system that they self-censor evidence contradicting it; the environment-only theory acts
effectively as a sanctified belief rather than a scientific one. These sanctified belief holders
emotionally equate a strong commitment to the moral stance that “all people are created
equal” to a scientific statement that “all races are identical” in terms of the statistical
distribution of genetic variation as it impacts average cognitive ability conditional upon race.
These two large groups, those who oppose honest disclosure of the weaknesses in the
environment-only theory on ethical grounds and those who accept the theory unquestioningly
as a sanctified belief, together constitute a formidable force. They shield the environment-only
theory from most public criticism, protecting it as a hegemonic doctrine that it is dangerous to
contradict.
Many individuals outside these two groups are privately aware of the evidence and personally
oppose scientific dishonesty but cannot publicly express any misgivings for fear of personal or
professional retribution. This can be a logical and morally justifiable personal strategy:
renegades who openly criticize the environment-only theory can face severe consequences.
Rindermann et al. surveyed the opinions of intelligence experts (anonymously) on the sources
of the Black-white intelligence score gap. In the survey, 49% of experts attribute the gap to
50% or more genetic causes, over 80% attribute the gap to at least 20% genetic causes. Only
16% adhere to the publicly dominant environment-only theory, assigning 0% of the Black-white
test score gaps to genetic causes. An earlier poll of intelligence experts had similar findings.
These polls expose a giant chasm between the private views of intelligence experts and publicly
available “expert opinion” which almost never mentions the possibility of partially genetic
causes of the gap. These anonymous polls make clear that many experts are aware of the
evidence but choose not to speak or write about it in non-anonymous communication
channels.
Genetic explanations of test score gaps are distasteful to modern sensibilities, socially
uncomfortable, and may (possibly) increase racial disharmony in American society. Most people
only tangentially interested in the topic find it intellectually challenging and uncomfortable to
consider alternative theories and have no incentive to go against the reigning orthodoxy. For
this reason and those described above, the environment-only theory reigns supreme in all
major academic and research institutions.
3.3: The social desirability of the Noble Lie about test score gaps
Given the overwhelming predominance of the environment-only theory in the public sphere, is
its position as the reigning orthodoxy secure despite the strong evidence against it? Should a
false scientific theory be promoted in the interest of racial harmony? This subsection considers
these difficult questions.
It is impossible to reliably assess the claim that public honesty about statistical links between
genetic ancestry and cognitive ability would open the floodgates to white racial supremacist
political movements or revive segregationist sentiment in US society. Public honesty could have
an exactly opposite effect, it might improve social harmony between races rather than
worsening it: it gives the possibility of knowledge-based solutions to social discord rather than
requiring ignorance-based ones. Which outcome is the more likely consequence of public
openness on this topic cannot be reliably forecast.
The widespread policy of suppression and censorship, although done with good intentions, can
have nasty unintended consequences. With the slow but inevitable accretion of these existing
findings into broader public awareness, the proportion of the educated populace who can be
convinced to honestly believe this scientifically untenable theory will continue to shrink,
thereby lowering the policy’s social benefits and increasing its social costs. Compared to earlier
decades, the accumulation of contrary evidence is now so strong that it is no longer possible for
a well-informed individual to accept the environment-only theory by giving it the benefit of the
doubt: there is not enough doubt left. A well-meaning policy of information suppression can be
very destructive of trust in scientific, academic, and media institutions. If the dominant strategy
continues to block honest discussion, cynicism toward the research, media and policy
establishment will increase as more people realize that mainstream authorities are being
disingenuous. As the Noble Lie becomes more transparent to more people, it may dangerously
erode social trust and democratic legitimacy.
Current findings on race-related test score gaps generate a clash between two very common,
deeply cherished beliefs: the belief that all people in positions of responsibility should work
diligently toward eliminating racial animosity in society, and the belief that open and objective
scientific methods should be employed to advance human knowledge. The harsh reality of
partially genetic causes of test score gaps puts these two cherished beliefs in conflict. Aiding the
progress of science by openly acknowledging current findings might potentially contribute to
increasing racial animosity (there is no guarantee that this would happen, but the possibility
cannot be denied). On the other hand, suppressing current findings is a clear violation of the
core belief that one should encourage open scientific discourse to advance human knowledge
and social progress. Everyone aware of the findings is forced to choose which cherished belief
matters more to them; there is no universal guidance as to which is the “correct” choice.
Depending upon one’s personal preferences, background, and upbringing, a deep personal
dedication to the fight against racism might override any concerns about abandoning scientific
principles of openness. For others, unimpeded scientific inquiry is so central to their beliefs that
it outweighs any social policy considerations. Advocates on both sides will be tempted to
rationalize away any internal conflict: scientists who are devout anti-racists will convince
themselves that the Noble Lie is actually true; individuals with a passionate devotion to the
pursuit of scientific truth will convince themselves there is no risk of stirring racial animosity by
being honest. Such rationalizations push the two sides further apart and, furthermore, the two
opposing camps never have an opportunity to debate their differing views.
Acknowledging a lie reveals the lie, hence those in favor of the Noble Lie strategy do not usually
publicly defend the strategy or engage in honest debate regarding its strengths and
weaknesses. This leaves no natural mechanism for open, democratic discussion between
opponents and proponents. Who gets to decide on this harshly enforced policy of dishonesty
and censorship? Some method must be found to allow democratic society to openly discuss the
Noble Lie’s costs, benefits, and net social value.
4. Conclusion
The core goal of science is to help society learn true facts about the world, but some scientific
findings can be extremely difficult for society to absorb. This is the case with research on the
observed differences in cognitive ability across racial and ethnic groups. In the mid-twentieth
century, a politically and socially appealing theory arose that all such observed differences were
entirely due to the differing environmental stresses experienced by these groups and not at all
to genetic variation across biogeographic ancestries such as African, European, and East Asian.
Although the evidence in support of this environment-only theory was always tentative, the
theory has been aggressively propounded by its many passionate advocates, with powerful
backing from government, academic and research institutions. The evidence against the theory
has grown progressively stronger over time, but its public dominance has so far survived
unimpeded. The penalties for publicly doubting its veracity can be extremely harsh.
This paper violates the widely imposed taboo against publicly questioning the environment-
only theory. Seven major weaknesses are reviewed, focussing on the special case of the Black-
white test score gap. Confronted by this strong, diverse evidence, the environment-only
explanation of the Black-white test score gap does not retain scientific credibility. The
hegemonic doctrine that the Black-white test score gap has only environmental causes endures
as a socially appealing falsehood, a Noble Lie. Other race-related test score gaps may also have
a genetic component.
Although it is no longer credible, the environment-only explanation of test score gaps continues
to hold an iron grip on acceptable public discourse. This reflects several strong influences: one,
people worry that public acceptance of partially genetic explanations might provide a spur to
racial discord and this leads them to deny or downplay adverse findings; two, some individuals
regard the absence of genetic influences on racial test score gaps as a sacred value that cannot
be questioned; three, for most people it is socially comfortable to accept the environment-only
theory but uncomfortable to consider the alternative; and four, the potentially career-
destroying reactions of aggressive activists keep many doubters quiet. Partially genetic
explanations are broached in private conversations between trusted confidants, or via
anonymous communication channels, or by renegade voices outside the circle of institutionally
acceptable discourse.
There is a reasonable argument, rarely made explicitly, that fabricated confirmation of the
environment-only theory serves a positive social role by aiding racial harmony. This must be
balanced against the costs of public deception and the concomitant erosion of social trust. The
tradeoff depends to some degree upon the credibility of the theory. The public dominance of
the environment-only theory needs a careful reevaluation taking into account its now obvious
empirical implausibility.
Endnotes
U. Neisser (chair) et al. (1996) Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns: Findings of a task force established by the
American Psychological Association, American Psychologist, 51: 77-101.
See for example R.E. Nisbett, J. Aronson, C. Blair, W. Dickens, J. Flynn, D. Halpern, E. Turkheimer (2012), Group
differences in IQ are best understood as environmental in origin, American Psychologist. 67 (6): 503–504, or E.
Turkheimer, K.P. Harden, R.E. Nisbett, Richard E. (15 June 2017), There's still no good reason to believe black-white
IQ differences are due to genes, Vox, Vox Media. For more discussion of this popular claim, see Warne (2020) In
the Know: 35 Myths About Human Intelligence, Cambridge University Press; Warne lists “Racial/Ethnic Group IQ
Differences Are Completely Environmental In Origin” as Popular Myth #28.
B. Winegard, B. Winegard and J. Anomaly (2020) Dodging Darwin: Race, evolution and the hereditarian
hypothesis, Personality and Individual Differences, 160: 1-10.
For a review of the Noble Lie concept from the perspective of political philosophy, see Dombrowski (1997) Plato's
'noble' lie, History of Political Thought 18 (4): 565-578.
See L.S. Gottfredson (2005) Suppressing intelligence research: Hurting those we intend to help; in R.H. Wright and
N.A. Cummings (editors), Destructive Trends in Mental Health: The Well-Intentioned Path to Harm, Routledge
Publishers, N.Y.; L.S. Gottfredson (2010) Academic freedom as lived experience, Personality and Individual
Differences, 49:4, 272-280; and N. Carl and M.A. Woodley of Menie (2019) A scientometric analysis of
controversies in the field of intelligence research. Intelligence 77: 101397.
Notable in this regard are A.R. Jensen and J. P. Rushton (2005) Thirty years of research on race differences in
cognitive ability, Psychology, Public Policy and Law, 11:2, 235-294; and R.T. Warne (2021) Between-group
differences in intelligence in the United States are >0% genetically caused: Five converging lines of evidence, The
American Journal of Psychology, 134: 480-501.
7 Such as S.J. Gould (1981) The Mismeasure of Man, W. W. Norton & Company, New York; A. Saini (2019) Superior:
The Return of Race Science, Fourth Estate Publishing, Inc.; and A. Rutherford (2021) How to Argue with a Racist:
What Our Genes Do and Don’t Say About Human Difference, Weidenfield & Nicholson, London.
N. Cofnas (2016) Science is not always “self-correcting”: Fact-Value conflation and the study of intelligence.
Foundations of Science, 21: 477-492; N. Cofnas (2020) Research on group differences in intelligence: A defense of
free inquiry, Philosophical Psychology, 33:1, 125-147; and N. Carl (2018) How stifling debate around race, genes
and IQ can do harm, Evolutionary Psychological Science, 4: 399-407.
Including J.R. Flynn (2018), Academic freedom and race: You ought not to believe what you think may be true,
Journal of Criminal Justice 59: 127-131; S. Pinker (2002) The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature,
Penguin Books Inc.; N. Wade (2014) A Troublesome Inheritance: Genes, Race and Human History, Penguin Books;
and J. Anomaly (2017) Race research and the ethics of belief, Bioethical Inquiry, 14: 287-297.
Office of Management and the Budget (1997)
See J.K. Pritchard, M. Stephens and P. Donnelly (2000). Inference of population structure using multilocus
genotype data, Genetics, 155: 945-959.
See N.A. Rosenberg, J.K. Pritchard, J.L. Weber, H.M. Cann, K.K. Kidd, L.A. Zhivotovsky and M.W. Feldman (2002).
Genetic structure of human populations, Science, 298: 2381-2385.
K. Bryc, E.Y. Durand, J.M. Macpherson, D. Reich, and J.L. Mountain (2015) The genetic ancestry of African
Americans, Latinos, and European Americans across the United States, The American Journal of Human
Genetics 96: 37-53.
H. Tang, T. Quertomous, B. Rodriguez, S.L. Kardia, X. Zhu, A. Brown, J.S. Pankow, M.A. Province, S.C. Hunt, E.
Boerwinkle, N.J. Schork and N.J. Risch (2005) Genetic structure, self-identified race/ethnicity and confounding in
case-control association studies, American Journal of Human Genetics, 76: 268-275.
15 H. Rindermann (2018) Cognitive Capitalism: Human Capital and the Wellbeing of Nations, Cambridge University
Press.
See A.R, Jensen (1998) The G-factor: The Science of Mental Ability. Praeger, Westport CT, ch. 4.
17 See R. Herrnstein and C. Murray (1994) The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life, The Free
Press for an extensive treatment.
18 See C. Murray (2021) Facing Reality: Two Truths About Race in America, Encounter Books, New York, p. 42-46.
C. Murray (2007). The magnitude and components of change in the black-white IQ difference from 1920-1991: A
birth cohort analysis of the Woodcock-Johnson standardizations, Intelligence, 35: 305-318; and Murray (2021) op.
cit.
P.L. Roth, C.A. Bevier, P. Bobko, F.S. Switzer, and P. Tyler (2001) Ethnic group differences in cognitive ability in
employment and educational settings: A meta-analysis, Personnel Psychology, 54:2, 297–330.
J. Lasker, B.J. Pesta, J.G. Fuerst and E.O. Kirkegaard (2019), Global ancestry and cognitive ability, Psych 1(1): 431-
J.G. Fuerst, M. Hu, and G. Connor (2021) Genetic ancestry and general cognitive ability in a sample of American
S.F. Reardon, D. Kalogrides, and K. Shores (2018) The geography of racial/ethnic test score gaps, CEPA Working
Paper No. 16-10.
24 World Bank (2021) Harmonized Learning Outcomes: Measuring Human Capital Using Global Learning Data,
Goldberg, P.K. et al. (2021), Measuring human capital using global learning data, Nature 592, 403–408.
S. Gust, E.A. Hanushek, and L. Woessmann (2022) Global universal basic skills: Current deficits and implications
for world development, Working Paper 30566, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
J. Te Nijenhuis and M. van den Hoek (2016) Spearman’s Hypothesis tests on Black adults: A meta-analysis,
Journal of Intelligence, 4: 6.
J. Te Nijenhuis, M. van den Hoek and J. Dragt (2019) A Meta-analysis of Spearman’s Hypothesis tested on Latin-
American Hispanics, including a new way to correct for imperfectly measuring the construct of g, Psych, 1: 101-
122.
C.T. Nagoshi, R.C. Johnson, J.C. DeFries, J.R. Wilson and S.G. Vandenberg (1984) Group differences and first
principal-component loadings in the Hawaii family study of cognition: A test of the generality of Spearman’s
hypothesis, Personality and Individual Differences, 6: 751-753.
R.T. Warne (2021) op. cit.
Jensen (1998) op. cit., pp. 445-460.
See R.T. Warne (2019) In the Know: Debunking 35 Myths about Human Intelligence, Cambridge University Press,
chs. 28-30 for an extensive treatment.
L. Zuo, X. Luo, J.B. Listman, H.R. Kranzler, S. Wang, R.F. Anton, ... and J. Gelernter (2009) Population admixture
modulates risk for alcohol dependence, Human Genetics, 125(5), 605-613.
N.S. Becker, P. Verdu, A. Froment, S. Le Bomin, H. Pagezy, S. Bahuchet, and E. Heyer (2011) Indirect evidence for
the genetic determination of short stature in African Pygmies, American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 145(3),
390-401.
C. Flores, S.F. Ma, M. Pino-Yanes, M.S. Wade, L. Pérez-Méndez, R.A. Kittles, R. A., … and J.G. Garcia (2012)
African ancestry is associated with asthma risk in African Americans, PloS One, 7(1), e26807.
A. Bidulescu, S. Choudhry, S.K. Musani, S. G. Buxbaum, J. Liu, C.N. Rotimi, … and G.H. Gibbons (2014)
Associations of adiponectin with individual European ancestry in African Americans: the Jackson Heart Study,
Frontiers in Genetics, 5, 22.
I. Halder, K.A. Matthews, D.J. Buysse, P.J. Strollo, V. Causer, S.E. Reis, and M.H. Hall (2015) African genetic
ancestry is associated with sleep depth in older African Americans, Sleep, 38(8), 1185-1193.
H. Choquet, J. Yin, and E. Jorgenson (2021) Cigarette smoking behaviors and the importance of ethnicity and
genetic ancestry, Translational Psychiatry, 11(1), 1-10.
M. Mehanna, C.W. McDonough, S.M. Smith, Y. Gong, J.G. Gums, A.B. Chapman, ... and R.M. Cooper-DeHoff
(2022) Influence of Genetic West African Ancestry on Metabolomics among Hypertensive Patients, Metabolites,
12(9), 783.
Rhead, B., Hein, D., Pouliot, Y., Guinney, J., De La Vega, F., and Sanford, N. N. (2022). Genetic ancestry
differences in tumor mutation in early and average-onset colorectal cancer, American Society of Clinical Oncology,
2022 Annual Meeting.
Parcha, V., Heindl, B., Kalra, R., Bress, A., Rao, S., Pandey, A., ... and Arora, P. (2022). Genetic European ancestry
and incident diabetes in Black individuals: Insights from the SPRINT trial. Circulation: Genomic and Precision
Medicine, 15(1), e003468.
J. Lasker et al. (2019) op. cit., R.T. Warne (2020) Continental genetic ancestry source correlates with global
cognitive ability score. Mankind Quarterly, 60:3., Fuerst et al. (2021) op. cit., and G. Connor and J.G. Fuerst (2022)
Linear and partially linear models of behavioral trait variation using admixture regression. In R. Lynn (Ed.).
Intelligence, Race and Sex: Some Controversial Issues: A Tribute to Helmuth Nyborg at 85. Arktos Publishers.
J.G. Fuerst (2021) Robustness analysis of African genetic ancestry in admixture regression models of cognitive
test scores. Mankind Quarterly, 62:2, 396-413.
J.P. Rushton and E.W. Rushton (2003) Brain size, IQ, and racial group differences: Evidence from musculoskeletal
traits. Intelligence, 31: 139-155, and Jensen (1998) op. cit. p. 437-440.
For a review of the many studies confirming this, see M.A. McDaniel (2005) Big-brained people are smarter: A
meta-analysis of the relationship between in vivo brain volume and intelligence, Intelligence, 33: 337-346. Also see
G.E. Gignac and T.C. Bates (2017), Brain volume and intelligence: The moderating role of intelligence measurement
quality. Intelligence, 64, 18–29.
45 S.J. Gould (1981) The Mismeasure of Man, W. W. Norton & Company, New York.
Gould (1981) op. cit., p. 45.
Gould (1981) op. cit., p. 56.
L. Betti, F. Balloux, W. Amos, T. Hanahara and A. Manica (2009) Distance from Africa, not climate, explains
within-population phenotypic diversity in humans. Proceeding of the Royal Society, Series B, 276: 809-814.
49 M. Weisberg and D.B. Paul (2016) Morton, Gould and Bias: A comment on “The Mismeasure of Science.” Plos
Biology, 14:4, e1002444.
J.P. Rushton (1997) Race, intelligence and the brain: The errors and omissions of the ‘revised’ edition of S.J.
Gould’s The mismeasure of man, Personality and Individual Differences, 23:1 169-180.
Y. Kuipers, J Dominguez-Andres, O.B. Bakker, M.K. Gupta, M. Grashoff, C.J. Xu, L.A.B Joosten, J. Bertranpetit,
M.G. Netea, and Y. Li (2022) Evolutionary trajectories of complex traits in European populations of modern
humans, Frontiers in Genetics, 13: 699.
Kuipers et al. (2022) op. cit., p. 7.
D. Piffer (2015) A review of intelligence GWAs hits: Their relationship to country IQ and the issue of spatial
correlation. Intelligence, 53: 43-50; and D. Piffer (2019) Evidence for recent polygenic selection on educational
attainment and intelligence inferred from GWAS hits: A replication of previous findings using recent data. Psych, 1:
55-75; and D. Piffer (2023) Signals of human polygenic adaptation: Moving beyond single-gene methods and
controlling for population-specific linkage disequilibrium. Qeios, doi: 10.32388/HDJK5P.
Lasker et al. (2019) op. cit.
See Fuerst et al. (2021) op. cit. for a discussion of this limitation.
See Lee (2022) Don’t even go there: The National Institute of Health now blocks access to an important database
if it thinks a scientist’s research may enter forbidden territory, City Journal, October 19 th for a discussion of this
scientifically worrying trend toward institutionally enforced ignorance.
Jensen and Rushton (2005) op. cit.
59 L.S. Gottfredson (2005) What if the hereditarian hypothesis is true? Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 11: 311-
319.
Winegard et al. (2020) op. cit.
Warne (2021) op. cit.
J.G. Fuerst, V. Shibaev, E. Kirkegaard and J. Te Nienhuis (2022) Cognitive ability, brain volume, and biogeographic
ancestry: A sixth component of a nomological network, working paper.
63 D.C. Dennett (2003) Freedom Evolves, Viking Press, NY, p. 19-20.
See footnote 2 for examples.
Cofnas (2016) op. cit.
See B. Winegard and B.M. Winegard (2015) A social science without sacred values, working paper, DOI
10.13140/RG.2.1.4542.5368, for a discussion.
H. Rindermann, D. Becker and T.R. Coyle (2017) Survey of expert opinion on intelligence: Intelligence research,
experts’ background, controversial issues, and the media. Intelligence 78.
68 M. Snyderman, and S. Rothman (1987) Survey of expert opinion on intelligence and aptitude testing. American
Psychologist, 42, 137-144.