Associations of Personality Traits and Emotional Intelligence
In Social Network Consumers via Data Mining Techniques
2 2 1
Giorgos Stamoulis , Niovi Christina Papavasileiou , Evgenia Gkintoni ,
2 2
Constantinos Halkiopoulos , Hera Antonopoulou
1Dept. of Psychology, University of Crete, Greece
2Dept. of Business Administration, Technological Educational Institute of Western Greece, Greece
Abstract
The present study aims to investigate personality traits and emotional intelligence in young adults’
consumers who use social networks to make shopping. Consumer behavior has long been of interest to
researchers. Contemporary research on Consumer Behavior considers a wide range of factors
influencing the consumer, and acknowledges a broad range of consumption activities beyond
purchasing. Νowadays, since online purchases is a daily practice, it is useful to study the behavior of
online consumers who are social network users and make shopping via social media. Two basic
components that influence consumer behavior are personality and emotional intelligence. Emotional
intelligence is both characteristic of personality and intellectual capacity, which a person inherits from
the genetic material of its parents and evolves - develops throughout lifetime. Personality’ refers to the
pattern of thoughts, feelings and behavior that makes each individual separate from others. These
affect the way of think, feeling and behaving towards itself and others.
The data were collected by completion of the self-report questionnaire Trait Emotional Intelligence
(TEIQue), as far as emotional intelligence concerned, and the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire
(EPQ) as far as personality traits of personality disorders concerned. Specifically, for the collection of
data electronic questionnaire TEIQue and EPQ were being created through Google Forms service and
selected for analysis, with relevant transformations in order to have a suitable form for the
implementation of the respective machine learning algorithms included in the software package R.
Furthermore, the parameters of the corresponding set of algorithms were determined depending on the
case of application to produce inference rules. Some of the algorithms implemented according to
specific research questions that were applied, were the classification algorithms for the production of
decision trees, regarding the four more general factors (welfare, self-control, emotionality and
sociability) of emotional intelligence and also personality traits of social network consumers. The
results obtained, after weighing and criteria basis, present consumers' rates, which in turn analyze the
degree of emotional intelligence and personality traits. Personality and emotional intelligence index
can play a crucial role in clarifying consumer behavior of social network users.
Keywords: Personality Traits, Emotional Intelligence, Consumers, Social Networks, R, Data Mining
1. INTRODUCTION
Contemporary research on Consumer Behavior considers a wide range of factors influencing the consumer
and acknowledges a broad range of consumption activities beyond purchasing. Two basic components that
influence consumer behavior are personality and emotional intelligence. Personality’ refers to the pattern of
thoughts, feelings and behavior that makes each individual separate from others. These affect the way of
think, feeling and behaving towards itself and others. Emotional intelligence (EI) can be defined as the ability
to monitor one's own and other people's emotions, to discriminate between different emotions and label them
appropriately and to use emotional information to guide thinking and behavior. Trait EI is "a constellation of
emotional self-perceptions located at the lower levels of personality." In lay terms, trait EI refers to an
individual's self-perceptions of their emotional abilities.
1.1. Eysenck Personality Questionnaire (EPQ)
Various personality theories have been proposed. Of these, special mention has already been made in so-
called "theories of traits". Such have been formulated by Allport, Guiiford, Cattell and Eysenck. These are
different theories with common trait the factorial analysis of the characteristics and traits of the personality,
as these are derived from a person's behavior. In this spirit, Eysenck's theory is about. It came from a
combination of the description of Kant's personality traits in relation to Wundt's four idiosyncrasies and
system dimensions and to some elements of Galen's
theory and can be represented schematically as follows:
The diagram proposed by Eysenck in 1947 distinguished
the two basic dimensions of the personality, represented
by two intersecting axes. At the two poles of the vertical
axis, the maximum and minimum values of the
dimension that Eysenck called "Emotionality or
Instability or Neuroticism" were placed. The maximum
value represented the existence of characteristics of
instability, neuroticism, while the minimum referred to
the existence of characteristics of emotional stability. On
the horizontal axis, the other dimension of the
personality was placed, the Inwardness - Extraversion.
As on the vertical axis, the maximum value was
referring to the personality traits of the extroverted type,
as opposed to the other pole, that of the minimum value,
which set the characteristics of introversion.
Image 1
The personality dimensions introduced by Eysenck are
separate types of people, each of which involves a set of features traced back to their habits and their specific
reactions. In particular, what is proposed is the detection of specific reactions of the individual, which will
give evidence of his usual reactions and hence of his usual behavior. This will allow conclusions to be drawn
for some key features of his personality. These attributes are considered as the factors that make up each of
the three dimensions of personality (types). The relationship between the reactions and their regular
appearance makes them reliable criteria for rendering certain characteristics to the personality of the person.
That is, dimensions or types of personality are notions that include a group of related characteristics, which
we deduce from the study of reactions and behavior of the individual.
1.1.1. Description of psychometric scale EPQ
In detail, the three dimensions of the personality that are proposed have the following characteristics:
Extraversion-introversion: One who is defined as extrovert is social, loves gatherings, has many
friends, and does not like reading and studying. Also, has a keen desire for emotion, does not lose
opportunities, likes danger, reacts immediately and is generally impulsive. The typical introvert is
quiet, isolated, intuitive who prefers books from people, is restrained and stays in a distance, except for
very close friends and does not love intense emotions, also treats everyday problems seriously and
prefers well-planned life, controls his feelings, is trustworthy, pessimistic and attaches great importance
to moral values. Extroverted and introverted differ in their behavior and beliefs.
Neurotism - Instability - Emotional Stability: Neurotism refers to the general emotional instability of
the individual, to its emotional hyperactivity and to the tendency to develop neurotic symptoms under
stress. People with high neurotic values are anxious, sad, sad, and often sad. When neurotism is
accompanied by high extroversion then the person is irritable, restless, even aggressive. Low prices, on
the contrary, refer to an emotionally stable person with mild reactions and a generally stable system of
values, attitudes and behavior.
Psychoticism: Further exploration of Eysenck's personality dimensions has led to the observation that
there is one more personality variable that manifests in the population as a whole - that is, in healthy
and divergent - in the form of reaction patterns and is indicative of the possible appearance of psychotic
elements. This variable was the third personality dimension, called "Psychotism" (P) and also refers to
subjective personality traits. This predisposition exists to varying degrees in all individuals, and only its
very high value may be an indication of some form of psychosis. The result of these observations was
the development of a measurement scale of the three dimensions of the personality (E, N, P) and a
complementary dimension of the L, which measures the falsehood of the answers given by the person
questioned during the questionnaire. The new scale, presented by the Eysenck couple in 1975, was
named the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire (E.P.Q.).
1.2. Trait Emotional Intelligence (EI)
For recording, tracing and evaluation concerning the emotional intelligence was used the standardized
scale Trait Emotional Intelligence (TEIQue) which examines the Trait model of EI as proposed by
K.V. Petrides. The Trait Emotional Intelligence Questionnaire is a self-report questionnaire that has
been developed to cover the trait EI sampling domain comprehensively. Questionnaire measures of EI
have been proliferating over the past few years, and it is important to mention three advantages of the
TEIQue over them to justify the focus of this research. First, the TEIQue is based on a psychological
theory that integrates the construct into mainstream models of differential psychology. Second, the
TEIQue provides comprehensive coverage of the 15 facets of the trait EI sampling domain. Several
independent studies have demonstrated the ability of the
TEIQue to predict criteria (outcomes) significantly
better than other questionnaires. Third, the full TEIQue
has excellent psychometric properties. Finally, the
TEIQue has been used in numerous studies wherein the
assessment of affective aspects of personality was
required. These include research in the areas of
neuroscience, relationship satisfaction,
psychopathology, addictions, reaction time, general
health, and behavioral genetics. The TEIQue provides
an operationalization for the model of Petrides and
colleagues that conceptualizes EI in terms of
personality. The test encompasses 15 subscales
organized under four factors: well-being, self-
control, emotionality and sociability.
1.2.1. Description of psychometric scale EI
Image 2
Well being: The Well-being factor comprises three different
traits: Happiness, Optimism and Self-esteem. They measure how people judge their general level of life
satisfaction. Well-being reflects people's perceptions of how cheerful and content they usually feel,
whether they are optimistic about the future and how much they value themselves.
Self control: The Self-control factor describes how far people think they can control their impulses or
are controlled by them. It comprises three different traits: Impulse Control, Stress Management and
Emotional Regulation.
Emotionality: The Emotionality factor comprises four different traits: Empathy, Emotion Perception,
Emotion Expression and Relationships. Together they indicate how aware you may be of your own
emotions and feelings, as well as those of other people. Scores on these traits tend to reflect how highly
you value this 'emotional literacy' and when and how you make use of it. Self-aware people, who use
emotionality in a balanced way, respond compassionately towards the emotions and feelings of others
at the right time.
Sociability: The Sociability factor describes how comfortable people feel in different social contexts,
from parties and social gatherings to formal business meetings. In completing the questionnaire, you
have suggested how confident you feel in dealing with diverse sorts of people, how far you believe you
influence others, and how comfortable you are in arguing your corner. The Sociability factor is a
combination of Emotion Management, Assertiveness and Social Awareness traits.
2. METHODOLOGY
In this paper were applied Machine Learning and Data Mining methods in order to evaluate the
personality dimensions (EPQ) with emotional intelligence quotient (TEIQue) of social network
consumers. The methodology, that was adopted, consists of three concrete phases. During the first
Subsequently, data were collected and preprocessed from the questionnaires. The data set for analysis
was consisted of demographics elements of responders, such as the gender, the birth-place, the place of
present residence, educational background of both the respondents and their parents, professional
occupation of parents and also of subscales of the EPQ and TEIQue tests. During the third phase, the
data set was analyzed based on Data Mining techniques and evaluate the results. More specifically, we
utilized classification algorithms so as to manage to describe the hidden patterns underlying in the data.
Decision trees are a powerful way in order to represent and facilitate statements analysis
(psychological) principally, comprising successive decisions and variable results in a designated
period.
2.1. Personality, Emotions and Decision-Making in Consumer Behavior
In international literature, the importance of emotion and traits of personality in decision making has
been studied (Gohm and Clore, 2002; Luce 1998; Ruth 2001). The research is about to fully understand
how consumers’ use emotional information to make effective decisions according to their traits of
personality. A growing body of research continues to focus on the emotions present in consumption
situations; however a better understanding of emotional processing abilities can have important effects
on consumer performance outcomes. The current research focuses on emotional intelligence, in
personality of consumer and in consumer behavior of young adults who are social network users.
Consumer emotional intelligence is defined here as a person’s ability to use emotional information to
achieve a desired consumer outcome, comprised as a set of first order emotional abilities that allow
individuals to recognize the meanings of emotional patterns that underlie consumer decision making
and to reason and solve problems on the basis of them (Mayer and Salovey 1997). A better
understanding of emotional ability can have considerable value in extending knowledge of consumer
behavior. For example, it can provide answers to questions such as; how does emotional processing
influence purchase decisions; which decisions do high vs. low EI consumers more readily make; how
might EI influence relationships between key consumer variables such as impulsivity and purchase
intention? Additionally, with this knowledge of emotional ability, we may be able to identify those
consumer’s who make the highest (and lowest) quality consumer decisions. For instance, consumers
with high levels of nutrition knowledge who lack the emotional ability to understand which emotions
are important and how to manage those emotions toward unhealthy eating, are likely to make poor
quality decisions. Understanding these emotional deficiencies can provide a means to subsequently
improve the quality of consumption decisions.
As far as the repercussion of personality traits in consumer behavior, recent advances in personality
psychology can help us predict consumer motivation. Traits are defined as enduring and stable patterns
of behavior, attitudes, emotions, that vary between individuals. Traditionally, researchers were
interested in understanding how individuals differ, and so they put a great deal of effort into
discovering how to measure, map, and define personality traits. An effort was made through trait
theory in order to define personality traits. Trait theory suggests that personality is made up of a set of
quantitative measurable characteristics or units known as traits. Traits are pre-dispositional attribute
and are relatively stable (McLeod, 2014). Every personality has a unique combination of traits and
given its stability, people with a given combination of traits can be expected to behave consistently
across situations and over time. The development of trait theory is attributed to the pioneering works of
psychologists such as, Gordon Alport, Henry Odbert Raymond Cattell and Hans Eysenck (Myers,
1995; Burger, 2000; Franzoi, 2002). The trait theory that is being examined through the current paper is
Eysenck’s theory. Eysenck (1947) developed a model of personality based on three traits:
“introversion/extroversion, neuroticism/emotional stability, and psychoticism” (Franzoi, 2002: 398).
Researchers are now reconceptualizing what traits are and where they come from--with traits being
understood as chronic motivators that drive their decision-making. For example, researchers have
linked personality traits to diverse outcomes such as experiential buying tendencies, political
orientation, natural language use, preference in pets, the state of one’s personal living space, and even
more important life outcomes such as divorce, morbidity, and occupational attainment. Some recent
data suggests that people who find themselves in disease-ridden environments tend to be less open and
extraverted, presumably because this makes them less motivated to explore and interact with others
(which reduces the chance they will become infected).
2.2. Data Mining Techniques
Data Mining is an emerging knowledge discovery process of extracting previously unknown,
actionable information from very large scientific and commercial databases. It is imposed by the
explosive growth of such databases. Usually, a data mining process extracts rules by processing high
dimensional categorical and/or numerical data. Classification, clustering and association are the most
well known data mining tasks. Classification is one of the most popular data mining tasks.
Classification aims at extracting knowledge which can be used to classify data into predefined classes,
described by a set of attributes. The extracted knowledge can be represented using various schemas.
Decision trees, "if-then" rules and neural networks are the most popular such schemas. A lot of
algorithms have been proposed in the literature for extracting classification rules from large relational
databases, such as symbolic learning algorithms including decision trees algorithms (e.g. C4.5) and rule
based algorithms (e.g. CN2), connectionist learning algorithms (e.g. back{propagation networks),
instance-based algorithms (e.g. PEBLS) and hybrid algorithms. Association rules can be used to
represent frequent patterns in data, in the form of dependencies among concepts attributes. In this
paper, we consider the special case, that is known as the market basket problem, where concepts-
attributes represent products and the initial database is a set of customer purchases (transactions).
3. RESULTS
Classification methods aim to identify the classes from some descriptive traits. They find utility in a
wide range of human activities and particularly in automated decision making. Decision trees are a
very effective method of supervised learning. It aims is the partition of a dataset into groups as
homogeneous as possible in terms of the variable to be predicted. It takes as input a set of classified
data, and outputs a tree that resembles to an orientation diagram where each end node (leaf) is a
decision (a class) and each non- final node (internal) represents a test. Each leaf represents the decision
of belonging to a class of data verifying all tests path from the root to the leaf. The tree is simpler, and
technically it seems easy to use. In fact, it is more interesting to get a tree that is adapted to the
probabilities of variables to be tested. Mostly balanced tree will be a good result. If a sub-tree can only
lead to a unique solution, then all sub-tree can be reduced to the simple conclusion, this simplifies the
process and does not change the final result. Ross Quinlan worked on this kind of decision trees.
Decision trees are built in "ctree (Conditional Inference Trees)" by using a set of training data or data
sets. At each node of the tree, "ctee" chooses one attribute of the data that most effectively splits its set
of samples into subsets enriched in one class or the other. Its criterion is the normalized information
gain (difference in entropy) that results from choosing an attribute for splitting the data. The attribute
with the highest normalized information gain is chosen to make the decision. During the construction
of the decision tree, it is possible to manage data for which some attributes have an unknown value by
evaluating the gain or the gain ratio for such an attribute considering only the records for which this
attribute is defined. Using a decision tree, it is possible to classify the records that have unknown
values by estimating the probabilities of different outcomes. Ctree builds decision trees from a set of
training data in the same way as ID3 or C4.5, using the concept of information entropy.
The training data is a set of already classified samples. Each sample consists of
a p-dimensional vector , where the represent attribute values or features
of the sample, as well as the class in which falls. At each node of the tree, "ctree" chooses the
attribute of the data that most effectively splits its set of samples into subsets enriched in one class or
the other. The splitting criterion is the normalized information gain (difference in entropy). The
attribute with the highest normalized information gain is chosen to make the decision.
The "ctree" algorithm then recurs
on the smaller sublists. In order
to specify the best result, it was
necessary to fit the data to the
model in a proper way. This task
was carried away by changing
and testing the controls of
"ctree".
The parameters in the control
function that were altered are:
• mincriterion: The
value of the test
statistic (for testtype
== "Teststatistic"), or 1 - p-value (for other values of testtype) that must be exceeded in order
to implement a split.
• minsplit: The minimum sum of weights in a node in order to be considered for splitting.
• mtry: The number of input variables randomly sampled as candidates at each node for
random forest like algorithms.
• maxdepth: The maximum depth of the tree.
Tree 1
✓ Depended variable: birthyear
✓ Independed variables: sex,
well_being, sociability,
emotionality, self_control
➢ ‘mincriterion’ value: 0.09
➢ ‘minsplit’ value: 50L
➢ ‘mtry’ value: Inf (Infinite)
➢ ‘maxdepht’ value: Inf
(Infinite)
Tree 2
✓ Depended variable: birthyear
✓ Independed variables: Rest
➢ ‘mincriterion’ value:
0.009
➢ ‘minsplit’ value: 50L
➢ ‘mtry’ value: Inf (Infinite)
➢ ‘maxdepht’ value: Inf (Infinite)
3.1. Mining Association Rules
Association Rule Mining is a common technique used to find associations between many variables. In
Data Mining, Apriori is a classic algorithm for learning association rules. Apriori is designed to operate
on databases containing transactions (for example data collected from surveys in this case). As is
common in association rule mining, given a set of item sets, the algorithm attempts to find subsets
which are common to at least a minimum number C of the itemsets.
Apriori uses a "bottom up" approach, where frequent subsets are extended one item at a time, and
groups of candidates are tested against the data. The algorithm terminates when no further successful
extensions are found. Apriori uses breadth-first search and a tree structure to count candidate item sets
efficiently. It generates candidate item sets of length k from item sets of length k − 1. Then it prunes
the candidates which have an infrequent sub pattern. According to the downward closure lemma, the
candidate set contains all frequent k-length item sets. After that, it scans the transaction database to
determine frequent item sets among the candidates.
Association rules present association or correlation between item sets. An association rule
has the form of A B, where A and B are two disjoint item sets.
The Goal: studies whether the occurrence of one feature is related to the occurrence of
others.
Three most widely
used measures for selecting
interesting rules are:
Support is the percentage of cases
in the data that contains both A and
B,
Confidence is the percentage of
cases containing A that also
contain B, and
Lift is the ratio of confidence to the percentage of cases containing B.
3.2. Apriori rules visualization
• Grouped Matrix plot
Antecedents (columns) in the matrix are
grouped using clustering. Groups are represented
as balloons in the matrix.
• Graph
Represents the rules (or itemsets) as a
graph. Specifically of our use, the parameters that
were altered are:
➢ control=list(type="item
s")
• Paracoord
Parallel coordinate charts
are a visualization that consists
of N amount of vertical axes, each
representing a unique data set of 61
rules, with lines drawn across the
axes. The lines show the relationship
between the axes, much like scatter
plots, and the patterns that the lines
form indicates the relationship. We
can also gather details about the
relationships between the axes when
you see the clustering of lines. Let’s
take a look at this using the chart
below as an example. Specifically of
our use, the parameters that were
altered are:
➢ control=list(reorder=TRUE)
Apriori rules
For the top 61 rules that were extracted from the apriori the following parameters were altered:
• support: A numeric value for the minimal support of an item set
• confidence: A numeric value for the minimal confidence of rules/association hyperedges
Specifically of our use: Support: 0.5, Confidence: 0.9
After the extraction, the top 12 rules, also, presented lift approximately 1.
lhs rhs support confidence lift
Age=[18-23], L_Lie.Social.Desirability=LOW, self_control=HIGH,sociability=LOW => {E_Extraversion.Introversion=LOW} 0.1097561 0.9000000 1.447059
{Age=[18-23], Mother_job=Housekeeping, well_being=HIGH, sociability=LOW} => {E_Extraversion.Introversion=LOW} 0.1097561 0.9000000 1.447059
Sex=Female, Mother_edu=Higher Education, self_control=HIGH} => {E_Extraversion.Introversion=LOW} 0.1097561 0.9000000 1.447059
{Mother_job=Public Servant, self_control=HIGH} => {E_Extraversion.Introversion=LOW} 0.1097561 0.9000000 1.447059
{Education=Higher Education, P_Psychoticism.Socialisation=LOW, N_Neuroticism.Stability=HIGH, sociability=LOW} => {E_Extraversion.Introversion=LOW} 0.1219
512 0.9090909 1.461676
{City=CEPHALONIA, L_Lie.Social.Desirability=LOW, self_control=HIGH} => {E_Extraversion.Introversion=LOW} 0.1219512 1.0000000 1.607843
{Education=Higher Education, N_Neuroticism.Stability=HIGH, self_control=LOW, sociability=LOW} => {E_Extraversion.Introversion=LOW} 0.1219512 1.0000000 1
.607843
{Sex=Female, Age=[18-23], City=ATHENS, sociability=LOW} => {N_Neuroticism.Stability=HIGH} 0.1219512 1.0000000 2.050000
{Sex=Female, Age=[18-23], self_control=HIGH, emotionality=HIGH} => {N_Neuroticism.Stability=LOW} 0.1341463 1.0000000 1.952381
{Age=[18-23], City=ATHENS, sociability=LOW} => {N_Neuroticism.Stability=HIGH} 0.1341463 0.9166667 1.879167
{City=ATHENS, Father_job=Retired,well_being=HIGH, self_control=HIGH} => {N_Neuroticism.Stability=HIGH} 0.1219512 0.9090909 1.863636
Age=[18-23], City=CEPHALONIA, self_control=HIGH, emotionality=HIGH} => {N_Neuroticism.Stability=LOW} 0.1219512 0.9090909 1.774892
4. CONCLUSION
One general determination of the results can be exported in order to conclude and explain the consumer
behavior of young adults in social networks. This paper can be a useful tool in the field of Marketing in
order to decode psychological issues of young adulthood in the sector of emotional intelligence
between males and females.