DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 1
Daily Dynamics of Grandiose Narcissism:
Distribution, Stability, and Trait Relations of Admiration and Rivalry States and State
Contingencies
1 2 1 1 1 1
Mota, S. , Mielke, I. , Kroencke, L. , Geukes, K. , Nestler, S. , & Back, M. D.
1 2
University of Muenster , University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
This is an unedited manuscript accepted for publication in the European Journal of Personality. The
manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of resulting proof before it is published
in its final form. Please cite as:
Mota, S., Mielke, I., Kroencke, L., Geukes, K., Nestler, S., & Back, M. D. (in press). The daily
dynamics of grandiose narcissism: Distribution, stability, and trait-relations of admiration and rivalry
states and state contingencies. European Journal of Personality.
Author Note
Additional materials can be found on the OSF via the following link
samples, R and Mplus codes for the main and supplementary analyses, and the SOM. The
SOM includes a detailed overview of our hypotheses (Supplement 1), additional analyses
concerning state distribution parameters (Supplements 2 – 4), additional analyses concerning
state contingencies (Supplements 5 – 9), visual representations of state-level data
(Supplement 10), data quality checks (Supplement 11), and information on our compensation
approach (Supplement 12).
Correspondence should be addressed to Simon Mota, Department of Psychology,
University of Münster, Fliednerstr. 21, D-48149 Münster; e-mail: simon.mota@wwu.de
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 2
Abstract
On the basis of the Narcissistic Admiration and Rivalry Concept and recent theories on
narcissistic pursuit of status, we provide a differentiated analysis of individual differences in
the within-person dynamics of grandiose narcissism. In two daily diary studies (Sample 1: 56
days; Sample 2: 82 days; total participants: N = 198; total observations: N = 12,404), we
investigated the degree, stability, and trait correlates of individual differences in average
narcissism-relevant states (perceived status success, perceived admiration and rejection,
positive and negative affect, and assertive and hostile behavior) as well as individual
differences in within-person contingencies between these states. The results indicated
substantial and stable between-person differences in averaged states that were related to their
corresponding narcissism trait self-reports. State contingencies showed substantial strength,
significant interindividual differences, and stability across the 56 and 82 days, respectively.
We only found weak support for associations between state contingencies and trait narcissism
self-reports. These findings support a differentiated approach to the conceptualization and
assessment of grandiose state narcissism and call for even more comprehensive and fine-
grained investigations.
Word count: 173 words
Keywords: narcissistic admiration and rivalry, state narcissism, state contingencies,
status pursuit
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 3
Daily Dynamics of Grandiose Narcissism:
Distribution, Stability, and Trait Relations of Admiration and Rivalry States and State
Contingencies
Research on grandiose narcissism has mostly followed a classical trait perspective:
Individuals differ in their narcissism trait scores, that is, in the extent to which they generally
possess typical narcissistic characteristics, such as grandiose fantasies about oneself or a
striving for supremacy and uniqueness (e.g., Miller & Maples, 2011; Tamborski & Brown,
2011). Although this approach has been extremely successful at capturing important between-
person differences in narcissism, it is incomplete as it cannot be used to target within-person
differences in the expression of narcissism over time. Following advances in theoretical and
empirical personality research more generally (Back, 2021; Beck & Jackson, 2020; Fleeson
& Jayawickreme, 2015; Mischel & Shoda, 1998; Wright & Kaurin, 2020; Wright & Simms,
2016), individuals are not expected to express narcissism-related cognitions, emotions, and
behaviors with equal intensity over a given timespan. Rather, the intensity with which these
states are expressed over short periods of time tends to fluctuate (e.g., Edershile et al., 2019;
Edershile & Wright, 2021; Giacomin & Jordan, 2016a, 2016b). Existing work on state
grandiose narcissism has mostly conceptualized grandiose narcissism as a unitary construct
and has not considered agentic and antagonistic aspects of it (Back et al., 2013; Back, 2018)
even though researchers have long suggested that narcissism is composed of agentic and
antagonistic components (e.g., Miller et al., 2011; Paulhus, 2001). Also, few studies have
looked at the environmental (e.g., status-related) triggers of narcissistic state expressions and
how individuals differ therein (e.g., Grapsas et al., 2020). The present research aims to
contribute to a more complete understanding of intra- and interindividual differences in
grandiose narcissism states.
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 4
The Multidimensionality and Multimodality of State Grandiose Narcissism: A
Narcissistic Admiration and Rivalry Perspective
Prior diary studies have shown that the amount of narcissism state variability within
persons (Giacomin & Jordan, 2016a, 2016b) is substantial but not as high as in other
personality domains (e.g., extraversion; Fleeson, 2001). Moreover, average narcissism states
have shown medium- to large-sized associations with questionnaire-based narcissism trait
scores (Edershile et al., 2019; Giacomin & Jordan, 2016a, 2016b). These results provide
promising initial evidence for the conceptualization of narcissism on a state level.
Previous research has, however, used unidimensional state measures of grandiose
narcissism and did not incorporate emerging consensus on its agentic and antagonistic aspects
(Back, 2018; Crowe et al., 2019; Krizan & Herlache, 2018). The two dimensions encompass
unique cognitive, affective, and behavioral expressions such that agentic narcissism is
characterized by assertiveness, self-assuredness, and admiration-seeking confidence, and
antagonistic narcissism is characterized by hostility, combativeness, and rivalrous aggression.
In addition, previous state measures of grandiose narcissism do not systematically distinguish
between cognitive, affective, and behavioral modalities but usually capture cognitive self-
concept perceptions or a blend of modalities.
A model that theoretically distinguishes between agentic and antagonistic aspects of
grandiose narcissism and between different state modalities is the Narcissistic Admiration
and Rivalry Concept (NARC; Back et al., 2013). According to the NARC, individuals high in
narcissism pursue the overarching goal of establishing or maintaining a grandiose self. There
are two strategies available for this purpose: One is a self-promotion strategy, which results in
dynamics that reflect narcissistic admiration (i.e., charming behavior, striving for uniqueness,
and grandiosity), and the other is a self-defense strategy, which results in dynamics that
reflect narcissistic rivalry (i.e., aggressiveness, devaluation of others, and striving for
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 5
supremacy). On a trait level, narcissistic admiration and rivalry are typically assessed by
administering the Narcissistic Admiration and Rivalry Questionnaire (NARQ; Back et al.,
2013). A number of studies have demonstrated that agentic and antagonistic aspects of
grandiose narcissism are associated with various outcome measures across different domains
in theoretically predicted directions (e.g., Back et al., 2013; Back, 2018; Geukes et al., 2017;
Leckelt et al., 2015; Wurst et al., 2017).
Capturing admiration and rivalry with all the modalities that are relevant on the state
level would allow to not only mirror associations that have been investigated on a trait level
but also to provide more direct tests of the within-person dynamics that are described in the
NARC and other self-regulatory models of narcissism. On the basis of the NARC (Back et
al., 2013), specific expectations can be derived for both the agentic and antagonistic pathway
on the state level: Individuals high on agentic narcissism should more often evaluate their
accomplishments in a positive way (cognitive state), more often feel positive affect (affective
state), and more often show assertive behaviors (behavioral state). Individuals high on
antagonistic narcissism should more often evaluate reactions to their performance as critique
and underappreciation (cognitive state), more often feel negative affect (affective state), and
more often show hostile behaviors (behavioral state). Thus, it should be possible to find
reliable and stable interindividual differences in the averages of all of these states. Moreover,
because existing trait measures of grandiose narcissism (e.g., the NARQ) are thought to
capture the typical expression of narcissism states, trait and average state measures should be
substantially correlated for both agentic and antagonistic narcissism, respectively.
Narcissism and State Contingencies
So far, we have argued that narcissism can be captured by interindividual differences
in the extent to which one experiences specific (narcissism) states (e.g., cognitive, affective,
and behavioral states) in everyday live. According to modern accounts that conceptualize
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 6
personality traits as interindividual differences in within-person state dynamics (Back, 2021;
Baumert et al., 2017; Fleeson & Jayawickreme, 2015; Geukes et al., 2018; Geukes & Back,
2017), narcissism can additionally be captured as interindividual differences in narcissism-
relevant state contingencies. State contingencies refer to all sorts of links between perceived
environmental characteristics and narcissism-relevant cognitive, affective, and behavioral
states (e.g., the relation between perceived status success and negative affect) as well as to the
relations among narcissism state components (e.g., the relation between positive affect and
self-assured behavior).
Dynamic conceptualizations of narcissism have incorporated ifs (or whens) and thens
between cognitions, emotions, and behaviors when describing narcissistic functioning and
self-regulation. Morf and Rhodewalt’s (2001) seminal article, for example, stated, “narcissists
are likely to become disenchanted with and respond negatively to their relationship partners
when flaws become apparent” (p. 187). Morf and colleagues (2011) also draw heavily on
specific if-then contingencies: “for narcissists, the typical self-signatures are: ‘IF opportunity
for promotion or demonstration of the grandiose superior self, THEN self-affirm, self-
promote, and self-enhance!’ as well as ‘IF threat to own grandiosity and superiority, THEN
strike back!’” (p. 402). This reasoning was also incorporated into the NARC (Back et al.,
2013), where the first self-signature captures the admiration pathway (self-promotion), and
the second self-signature captures the rivalry pathway (self-defense). Roche et al. (2013)
provided an overview of the typical ifs (e.g., greater sensitivity to perceiving interpersonal
transgressions, threats to agentic motives) and thens (e.g., agentic behaviors, interpersonal
dominance, antagonistic behaviors) for pathological narcissism. Also, Sadikaj et al. (2019)
stated, “The antagonism so characteristic of narcissistic individuals may emerge if they
perceive others as taking control or asserting their status” (p. 3).
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 7
However, empirical investigations of narcissistic if-then contingencies in everyday
life are scarce (see, e.g., Besser & Priel, 2010; Besser & Zeigler-Hill, 2010; Bushman &
Baumeister, 1998; Webster et al., 2007, for alternative experimental approaches). In a 7-day
daily diary study, Roche et al. (2013) reported evidence for the hypothesis that, for
individuals high in grandiosity, perceiving agency in another (if) evoked an underlying status
threat, which led to an agentic behavioral response (then). However, this pattern of “agentic
nonreciprocity” was found only when the interaction partner was also seen as more
communal. Giacomin and Jordan examined how state narcissism was related to other
psychological states such as self-esteem and stress (2016a) and subjective well-being
(2016b). State narcissism was higher on days when individuals experienced positive agentic
outcomes (e.g., having power over someone) or positive communal outcomes (e.g., helping
someone with a problem). By contrast, state narcissism was lower on days when people
experienced higher levels of felt stress. As outlined in greater detail below, Zeigler-Hill et al.
(2019) examined how narcissism was related to status pursuit and whether it moderated a
specific contingency (i.e., the relationship between daily perceptions of status and affiliation
[ifs] and state self-esteem [then]). In the clinical realm, Wright and colleagues (2017)
demonstrated that interview assessed narcissistic personality disorder (NPD) amplifies the
negative affect response to perceptions of dominance from another.
Thus, empirical research has only just begun to assess the ifs and thens of narcissism
in a state-like manner and to examine interindividual differences in these within-person
contingencies. Moreover, none of the previous findings have distinguished between agentic
and antagonistic aspects of grandiose narcissism. Also, the stability of interindividual
differences in narcissistic within-person contingencies has not yet been examined. We
expected that interindividual differences in such contingencies would be at least as stable as
interindividual differences in contingencies for other personality traits reported in the
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 8
literature (i.e., Sherman et al., 2015; Shoda et al., 1994; Smith et al., 2009). We also explored
the extent to which such differences correspond to classical trait measures of narcissism (i.e.,
in our case, a self-report questionnaire on narcissistic admiration and rivalry). It is currently
unclear how much classical questionnaire-based trait measures of narcissism capture dynamic
aspects that should be reflected by narcissism state contingency differences. Of the large
number of possible contingencies, as a starting point, we focused on directed contingencies
that follow from novel insights into the narcissistic pursuit of status.
Narcissistic Pursuit of Status
The NARC model has recently been related to the notion that the prime motivation for
those high in narcissism is the pursuit of status. Both dimensions of narcissism (admiration
and rivalry) were related to power and achievement motives (Rogoza et al., 2016) and a
higher striving for status (Zeigler-Hill et al., 2018; Zeigler-Hill et al., 2019). More
specifically, Zeigler-Hill et al. (2019) showed that admiration and rivalry were associated
with an agentic orientation toward the pursuit of status, whereas only rivalry was associated
with an antagonistic orientation toward the pursuit of status. Using a daily diary approach, the
authors further showed that individuals with higher levels of self-reported trait admiration
reported higher state self-esteem on days when they felt admired. Trait rivalry did not
moderate the link between perception of status and self-esteem.
In line with this research, Grapsas et al. (2020) postulated a self-regulation model that
specifies how those high in narcissism pursue social status through moment-to-moment
transactions with their environments. According to the status pursuit in narcissism (SPIN)
model, individuals high in narcissism select situations that afford status and vigilantly attend
to cues related to the status they and others have in these situations. In evaluating these
perceived cues, those high in narcissism are thought to appraise whether they can elevate
their status or reduce the status of others (to thereby indirectly elevate their own status).
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 9
Depending on these appraisals, they are supposed to engage in self-promotion (admiration
pathway) or other-derogation (rivalry pathway).
Combining the idea of state contingencies with status-related reasoning, perceptions
of success (or the lack thereof) in status pursuit can be identified as highly relevant ifs for
individuals high in grandiose narcissism. In turn, these ifs are likely to trigger specific
cognitive, affective, and behavioral responses (thens), which take on different forms
depending on whether the agentic or antagonistic pathway is activated. In other words, we
argue that individuals might differ not only in their tendencies to perceive status success, see
others as a source for admiration, experience positive affect, and behave in an assertive way
but also in the degree to which their perception of status success (if) triggers (1) specific
cognitions of being special and admired, (2) positive affect, and (3) assertive behavior (thens,
tendencies to perceive low status success, perceive others as critical and underappreciative,
experience negative affect, and behave in a self-defensive and hostile way but also in the
degree to which the perception of low status success (if) triggers (4) the perception of being
criticized and rejected, (5) negative affect, and (6) hostile behavior (then, see Rivalry
contingencies (1 to 3) compared with individuals low in agentic narcissism. For individuals
high in antagonistic narcissism, we expected stronger contingencies (4 to 6) compared with
individuals low in antagonistic narcissism. To sum up, in addition to investigating
interindividual differences in the average narcissism-relevant states, we investigated
interindividual differences in within-person state contingencies, their stability, and their
relations to classical questionnaire-based measures of trait narcissism.
Overview of the Narcissism State Contingencies Examined in this Study
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 10
Note. Panel A shows expected contingencies for the admiration pathway; Panel B shows
expected contingencies for the rivalry pathway. (+) = positive association expected; (-) =
negative association expected.
The Present Research
The present work expands the emerging research on state narcissism in two ways.
First, relying on the NARC framework, agentic and antagonistic aspects of state grandiose
narcissism (which has previously been conceptualized as unidimensional) were disentangled
by examining states relevant for narcissistic admiration and rivalry in different (i.e.,
cognitive, affective, and behavioral) modalities. We expected reliable and stable
interindividual differences in all narcissism-relevant states and medium- to large-sized
associations with their corresponding questionnaire-based trait measure. Second, connecting
recent accounts on narcissistic striving for status and the idea of if-then contingencies, we
systematically examined contingencies between social status perceptions and agentic as well
show reliable and stable interindividual differences, thereby potentially serving as useful
descriptors of trait narcissism. We also explored the extent to which these interindividual
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 11
differences correspond to classical questionnaire-based trait measures of grandiose
narcissism.
Method
We used data from two daily diary studies: The FLUX – fluctuations – Study (FLUX;
henceforth referred to as Sample 1) and the Fluctuations in Personality study (FLIP; Sample
2). Data collection for both studies took place in Leipzig, Germany. In the following, we
only refer to the methods that are relevant to the research questions addressed in the present
study. An overview of both samples with detailed information about the procedures that were
used and the variables that were assessed in the respective sample can be found in the
corresponding codebook in the OSF (see the Codebook folder at
using two study samples with very similar study designs, we were able to closely replicate
our findings and to substantiate the robustness of our results. All research questions and
hypotheses have been preregistered (see osf.io/we6tg and see Supplement 1 for an additional
overview). Data collection was already completed when we formulated the specific research
questions and determined analysis methods, however, no analyses were run prior to the
preregistration. To be transparent, we originally pre-registered 12 contingencies (i.e., six
contingencies related to social status and six contingencies unrelated to social status). During
the writing process, we decided to focus on status-related contingencies in the manuscript but
report all non-status related contingencies in the supplement (see Supplement 6 for results).
Sample 1
Participants
The initial sample consisted of 104 students, but six of them completed only one diary
in at least one of the four measurement bursts and were therefore excluded. The final sample
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 12
included 98 individuals (79% women, 3% other/could not identify with either the male or
female gender), who were between 18 and 38 years old (M = 23.44, SD = 3.96). The number
of completed daily diaries ranged from 31 to 56 (M = 50.58, SD = 6.48), and the total number
of diaries was 4,957. Attrition in Sample 1 was extremely low (i.e., 5.76%; see Supplement
11, osf.io/we6tg). In exchange for their participation, all participants received monetary
compensation.
Procedure
During four bursts of 14 days each (56 days in total), participants reported their daily
status perceptions, cognitions, affect, and behaviors in a daily diary using different statements
and adjectives. A break of 14 days was included between the bursts so that the complete daily
diary phase lasted for 4 months. State assessments were carried out on a smartphone using an
online questionnaire programmed in formR (Arslan et al., 2020). Specifically, every evening
at 6 p.m., participants were sent an e-mail containing a person-specific link (with a session
code) asking participants to complete the survey by 3 a.m. Each participant was given paper-
and-pencil surveys, which they could use if they encountered technical problems. The paper-
and-pencil surveys had to be submitted within a week. Before and after the daily diary
phases, participants filled out online surveys with trait questionnaires. Participants could
receive (among additional incentives) a monetary compensation of up to 50€ when all
surveys were completed. Detailed information on our compensation approach can be found in
Supplement 12 (osf.io/we6tg). The German Society of Psychology’s review board approved
the study (SN072018).
Sample 2
Participants
The initial sample consisted of 102 individuals, but due to one age outlier (> 40 years;
as defined in the preregistration) and one individual who reported only one diary in one of the
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 13
two data halfs, the final sample consisted of 100 individuals (81% women). Their ages
ranged from 18 to 37 years (M = 21.97, SD = 3.56). The number of daily diaries they
completed ranged from 33 to 82 (M = 74.47, SD = 10.12), and the total number of diaries was
7,447. Attrition in Sample 2 was extremely low (i.e., 0.99%; see Supplement 11,
osf.io/we6tg). All participants received monetary compensation in exchange for their
participation.
Procedure
The data collection process was similar to the procedure used in Study 1. Participants’
personality states were assessed via smartphone on 82 consecutive days (and on 8 additional
optional days around Christmas, but these were not analyzed in the present study).
Participants were asked to rate their retrospective status perceptions, cognitions, affect, and
behaviors on the respective day using different statements and adjectives as described for
Sample 1. Before and after the daily diary part, participants filled out an online survey that
asked about demographics and personality traits. Participants could receive (among
additional incentives) a monetary compensation of up to €50 when all surveys were
completed. Detailed information on our compensation approach can be found in Supplement
12 (osf.io/we6tg). The Ethics Committee of the University of Leipzig approved the study
(331/17-ek).
Measures
Questionnaire-Based Trait Narcissism
Narcissism was measured with the 18-item Narcissistic Admiration and Rivalry
Questionnaire (NARQ; Back et al., 2013). Participants rated each item on a 6-point Likert
scale ranging from 1 (do not agree at all) to 6 (agree completely). An example admiration
item read, “I am great,” and an example rivalry item read, “Other people are worth nothing.”
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 14
The admiration subscale evidenced high internal consistencies in the Sample 1 and Sample 2
(α = .84 and .82, respectively) as did the rivalry subscale (α = .80 and .82, respectively).
State Measures
Participants indicated the degree to which the respective item matched their cognitive,
affective, behavioral, and status-related experiences on the given day on a 6-point Likert scale
ranging from 1 (not at all) to 6 (extremely).
Perceived Status Success Versus Perceived Lack of Status Success. To capture
narcissism-relevant social status perception, an item that came from The Unified Motive
Scales (Schönbrodt & Gerstenberg, 2012) and was related to the power motive was
rephrased. The item read, “I exerted influence on other people,” and was supposed to capture
the perception of success in the pursuit of status. Accordingly, low levels on this variable can
be understood as a perceived lack of status success.
Admiration States. Three items were used to assess cognitive, affective, and
behavioral states related to narcissistic admiration. The first item was designed in accordance
with the NARC (Back et al., 2013) to tap daily cognitions of perceptions of oneself as special
and admired (perceived admiration). The item read, “I feel special and admired.” Although
this item contains the verb “feel,” it conveys more of a cognitive appraisal than an emotional
appraisal. The emotional appraisal was assessed somewhat differently in the two samples. In
Sample 1, one adjective for assessing positive affect (“cheerful”) was administered to study
participants. In Sample 2, positive affect was assessed with the affect grid (Russell et al.,
1989). Participants were presented with a 9 x 9 network of boxes and asked to select the box
that best described the valence and arousal level of their daily affect. For our analyses, only
affect valence was extracted to form a variable indicating participants’ affect (ranging from 1
= negative feelings to 9 = positive feelings). To capture admiration-relevant assertive
behavior, the item “Today, I was assertive” (Jacobs & Scholl, 2005) was used in both
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 15
samples. The three admiration states showed substantial correlations on both the between-
error, we also aimed to explore how the perception of status success was related to the
aggregate of the narcissism states. To this end, we additionally aggregated the cognitive,
affective, and behavioral admiration states into a global admiration state. The within-person
ωs for this aggregate admiration state measure were .64 and .62, the between-person ωs
were .77 and .66 in Sample 1 and Sample 2, respectively.
Rivalry States. Analogous to the assessment of admiration states, a set of cognitive,
affective, and behavioral aspects relevant to the rivalry dimension were assessed. Cognitive
aspects of the rivalry facet were measured with the item, “I feel unacknowledged and
criticized” (perceived rejection/criticism). Affective states were again assessed differently in
the two samples: In Sample 1, one adjective for assessing negative affect (“annoyed”) was
administered to the study participants. In Sample 2, participants' state affect was measured
with the affect grid, which ranges from negative to positive affect (on one bipolar dimension).
In contrast to Sample 1, the positivity of participants’ affect was thus not recorded
independently of the negativity of participants’ affect. Therefore, we defined the entire range
of the affect grid variable as positive affect and then reverse-scored it to form a variable
representing the negativity of participants’ affect (negative affect) for the selected analyses
(i.e., structure equation modeling analyses and examination of aggregate measures). For the
remainder of the analyses, results for negative affect were not reported for Sample 2 to avoid
redundancies. Rivalry-relevant antagonistic behavior was assessed with the item “Today, I
was hostile” (hostile behavior). Again, the three rivalry states were substantially correlated at
states, we additionally aggregated the cognitive, affective, and behavioral rivalry states into a
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 16
global rivalry state. The within-person ωs for this aggregate rivalry state measure were .71
and .61, the between-person ωs were .89 and .78 in Sample 1 and Sample 2, respectively.
Data Preparation
Due to the nested nature of the data (i.e., daily state reports nested in individuals),
multilevel models were calculated to determine the amount of within-person variation and to
address all research questions related to state contingencies. Prior to the analyses, all time-
invariant Level 2 variables (i.e., traits), except gender, were grand-mean centered (Hoffman,
2007), and the time-varying Level 1 variable perceived status success was person-mean
centered such that it represented the deviation from participants’ averaged daily levels. In
some of the models, we included a time variable to account for potential developmental
trends. This variable was coded 0, …, d – 1 (where d was the number of days measured for
i i
person i). For control analyses, gender was entered as a dummy-coded variable (0 = women, 1
= men).
Power for detecting small level 1 effects (.10) or medium level 2 effects (.30) was
high (i.e., ≥ .80). Moreover, satisfactory power (≥ .80) was given for cross-level interaction
effect sizes of around .40 (i.e., medium to large cross-level effects) for both samples. Power
for detecting small to medium cross-level effects (e.g., .20) was around .32 and .37 for
Sample 1 and Sample 2, respectively, suggesting that the power was not optimal for the full
range of cross-level interaction effect sizes (see Supplement 9 [osf.io/we6tg] for more
information on power analyses.)
Results
The data and code necessary to reproduce the results below can be found in the OSF
(osf.io/we6tg). The zero-order correlations between all measures used in this study are shown
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 17
Interindividual Differences in Average Narcissism States
Amount of Intra- and Interindividual Differences
Multilevel models were calculated to determine the amount of within- and between-
person variation in all narcissism-relevant states. Specifically, the intraclass correlation for
the state measures was calculated with a random-intercept only model. The ICC is a measure
of the amount of variance that can be attributed to interindividual differences. There was a
substantial amount of both within-person variation (ranging from 50.77% to 70.07% in
Sample 1 and from 47.78% to 74.18% in Sample 2) and between-person variation (ranging
from 29.93% to 49.23% in Sample 1 and from 25.82% to 52.22% in Sample 2). Supplement
2 (osf.io/we6tg) provides a more detailed overview on the amount of intra- and
interindividual differences for state averages (i.e., means) as well as for further state
distribution parameters (i.e., median, mode, minimum, maximum, standard deviation,
skewness, kurtosis) for all state variables and separately for both samples. Importantly,
regarding all examined narcissism-relevant states, the substantial amount of between-person
differences indicates that people differed in the degrees to which they typically experienced
narcissism-relevant states.
Reliability and Stability of Interindividual Differences in Average Narcissism States
The reliabilities for interindividual differences in the mean states (as determined via
the adjusted ICC) were all greater than .95 (with M = .97, Min = .96, and Max = .99).
ICC ICC ICC
Stabilities of interindividual differences were also high for all state averages even across
longer time intervals (.74 to .87 Sample 1, subsequent data blocks; .63 to .82 Sample 1,
distance of two data blocks; .57 to .78 Sample 1, distance of three data blocks; .74 to .91
Sample 2). Thus, average narcissism states qualified as reliable and stable individual
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 18
difference variables. Supplement 3 (osf.io/we6tg) provides a more detailed overview on the
reliability and stability of interindividual differences in state averages and further state
distribution parameters.
Average State-Trait Relations
To determine the average state-trait relations, we computed correlations between
narcissism state means and questionnaire-based trait measures and additionally computed
multi-level models to control for the day variable. Further information on the analytic
approach can be found in Supplement 4 (osf.io/we6tg). The results showed that the means of
the cognitive and behavioral admiration states were positively correlated with questionnaire-
based trait admiration, and the means of the cognitive, affective, and behavioral rivalry states
that individuals high in questionnaire-based trait admiration perceived more admiration and
were more assertive on average. Individuals high in questionnaire-based trait rivalry
perceived more rejection, experienced more negative affect, and were more hostile on
average. The coefficients were spread around the expected level of r = .30 (all ps < .05) with
generally higher associations in Sample 2 than in Sample 1, albeit only the association
between questionnaire-based trait admiration and perceived admiration state evidenced
associations that were significantly higher than .30 across both samples. Questionnaire-based
trait admiration and state positive affect were positively related in both Sample 1 (.13) and
Sample 2 (.16) but did not reach statistical significance in either sample. The mean of state
perceived status success was positively related to questionnaire-based trait admiration in both
samples. It was also positively related to questionnaire-based trait rivalry in Sample 2, not in
Sample 1. When controlling for the day variable in the multilevel models, these correlational
patterns were preserved except for positive affect, the admiration states and the rivalry states
as well as their aggregate measures could be predicted by their corresponding questionnaire-
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 19
states in Supplement 4 (osf.io/we6tg).
Evidencing theoretically expected relations with questionnaire-based narcissism traits,
these findings serve as initial support for the construct validity of the suggested
interindividual differences in average narcissism states.
Interindividual Differences in Narcissism State Contingencies
The Average Strength and the Degree of Interindividual Differences in Narcissism State
Contingencies
The strength of and interindividual differences in relevant within-person state
further preregistered contingencies can be found in Supplement 6, see osf.io/we6tg). In each
model, one narcissism-relevant state was regressed on person-mean-centered state perceived
status success. The slope of the state status success variable was allowed to vary across
participants. A timing variable was included in the model to account for possible time effects
(see above for the coding of this variable). The slope of the timing variable was treated as a
fixed effect. As noted above, we computed six (plus two additional) models: For the
admiration pathway, the outcome variables were perceived admiration, positive affect,
assertive behavior, and the state admiration aggregate; for the rivalry pathway, the outcome
variables were perceived criticism, negative affect, hostile behavior, and the state rivalry
aggregate.
contingencies between status perception and narcissism states were found in both samples.
This means that a specific if (perception of status success) was indeed contingent with
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 20
specific thens in different modalities such as the perception of being admired (cognition),
positive affect (affect), and assertive actions (behavior). Likewise, the perception of low
status success (if) was contingent with cognitions such as the perception of being rejected or
criticized and negative affect (both thens). For the within-person coupling of perceived status
success and hostile behavior, no associations could be found in either of the samples. In
general, state contingencies seemed to be stronger for the admiration pathway (near .30) than
for the rivalry pathway (near |.10|). The results pertaining to the analyses with the global
admiration and rivalry state measures showed that significant associations also resulted for
the contingencies related to the aggregated states and not only for the specific states.
the likelihood ratio test (LRT; LaHuis & Ferguson, 2009). For all preregistered state
contingencies, we found significant random effect variances. This indicates that individuals
varied substantially in the strength of narcissism-relevant within-person state contingencies
(also see Supplement 5 [osf.io/we6tg] for an illustration of these contingency differences).
Reliability and Stability of Interindividual Differences in State Contingencies
Prior to analyzing the stability of the state contingencies, all participants who reported
fewer than 10 states per burst (Sample 1) or data half (Sample 2) were excluded from the
analyses pertaining to RQ3.2, resulting in a total sample size of 82 and 98 for Sample 1 and
Sample 2, respectively. All state contingencies were computed for each participant and each
data block by fitting the multilevel models that were used to determine the strength of state
contingencies. For each of the six (plus two additional) contingencies, we read out
participants’ random slope effects, since they reflect individuals’ contingencies. Subsequently,
the stability coefficients were calculated by correlating the individual values for a state
contingency of two blocks. For Sample 1, six stability correlations (r , r , r , r , r ,
t1.t2 t1.t3 t1.t4 t2.t3 t2.t4
r ), and for Sample 2, one stability correlation (r ) resulted for each state contingency.
t3.t4 t1.t2
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 21
Correlations referring to the same distance in time (i.e., Time Lag 1 as in r , r , and r
t1.t2 t2.t3 t3.t4
or Time Lag 2 as in r and r ) were Fisher’s z transformed prior to averaging them. To
t1.t3 t2.t4
quantify the reliability of the within-person state contingencies, we used the within-person
coupling reliability (WPCR) approach described by Neubauer et al. (2020). This index
captures the interindividual reliability of the individuals’ within-person state contingencies
(and thereby addresses the question of whether it is possible to reliably separate individuals
with strong vs. weak contingencies). This approach was not included in the preregistration.
person state contingency: In Sample 1, the reliabilities ranged from .50 to .66; in Sample 2,
the reliabilities ranged from .55 to .73. On average, Sample 2 showed slightly higher WPCR
values (WPCR = .65) compared with Sample 1 (WPCR = .56). The lowest reliability
mean mean
resulted for Contingency 6 (perceived status success → hostile behavior) in both samples
(Sample 1: .50; Sample 2: .55).
The stability of the within-person state contingencies was tested by calculating
multilevel models for each data block and correlating the resulting individual state
contingencies can be found in Tables S40, S41, and S42 in the Online Supplement 6;
contingencies and time lags except for Contingency 4 (perceived status success → perceived
rejection) for Time Lag 1 and for Contingency 3 (perceived status success → assertive
behavior) for Time Lag 3 in Sample 1. Again, as was the case for the state-level stabilities,
somewhat higher stabilities were found in Sample 2 in comparison with Sample 1. Overall,
the stability of the state contingencies was substantially lower than the stability of the state
levels. Across contingencies and samples, the average stability amounted to r = .29 [.08, .48],
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 22
Supplement 7 (osf.io/we6tg) folder at osf.io/we6tgin for all single Spearman-Brown-
corrected contingency stabilities). These stabilities show that interindividual differences in
narcissism-relevant state contingencies were not mere random noise but captured at least
some stable differences between individuals. An individual who tended to react with
narcissism states to situations where status success was perceived in one assessment phase
was more likely to react in similar ways in a later assessment phase. In sum, within-person
contingencies showed substantial reliability as well as non-negligible stability over relatively
long time intervals (56 days in Sample 1; 82 days in Sample 2).
Associations Between Interindividual Differences in State Contingencies and
Questionnaire-based Trait Measures
Results for preregistered multilevel models that test for cross-level moderation of
questionnaire-based trait narcissism on state contingencies can be found in Supplement 8
(osf.io/we6tg). Here, we provide results of multilevel structural equation models (MSEMs)
that provide a more adequate test because they are designed to consider the unknown
measurement errors embedded in each indicator permitting more accurate estimates of
relationships among constructs. Furthermore, they allow for multiple dependent variables
(either observed indicators or latent constructs). Results of standard multilevel models and
MSEMs were very similar. In case results of multilevel models diverged from results based
on MSEMs, we will highlight this below.
We calculated MSEMs using Mplus 8.4 (Muthén & Muthén, 1998-2019). For each
sample, we tested one model reflecting the admiration pathway (the perception of status
success was modeled as a predictor variable, and the perception of being admired, positive
affect, and assertive behavior were used as criterion variables simultaneously) and one model
reflecting the rivalry pathway (the perception of status success was modeled as a predictor
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 23
variable, and the perception of being rejected/criticized, negative affect, and hostile behavior
were used as criterion variables simultaneously). The relationship between the persons’
within-person contingency coefficients (their Level 1 slopes) and their trait values
(questionnaire-based narcissistic admiration and rivalry) was modeled on the between-person
level. Specifically, the within-person state contingencies 1 to 3 (perceived status success →
(1) perceived admiration, (2) positive affect, (3) assertive behavior) were regressed on
questionnaire-based trait admiration, and the within-person state contingencies 4 to 6
(perceived status success → (4) perceived rejection/criticism, (5) negative affect, (6) hostile
behavior) were regressed on questionnaire-based trait rivalry. In all models, we also used the
trait variables to predict the interindividual differences in the intercept of the modeled state
variables. All models were estimated using a Bayesian approach. We used the default,
noninformative prior distributions as specified in Mplus. Furthermore, the parameter
estimates were based on the average of two chains with each chain having a length of 2,500
iterations (of which 1,250 iterations were discarded as burn-in). The results of the MSEM
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 24
Multilevel Structural Equation Modeling (MSEM) Results
Note. Models for examining the relationship between perceptions of status success and consequential cognitive (perceived admiration/perceived
rejection), affective (positive affect/negative affect), and behavioral states (assertive behavior/hostile behavior) specific to narcissism on a
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 25
within-person level. MSEMs on the left-hand side represent the admiration pathway; MSEMs on the right-hand side represent the rivalry
pathway. At the between-person level, these models additionally examined how a person’s standing on the narcissism traits (i.e., an individual’s
scores on admiration and rivalry) as measured with a classical narcissism trait questionnaire (i.e., the NARQ) was related to the associations (i.e.,
contingencies) between perception of status and narcissism states. These contingency-moderating effects are represented by a line ending with a
small black circle on the respective contingency. Additionally, interindividual differences in the intercepts of the modeled state variables were
Standardized estimates are reported, including point estimates and 95% credibility intervals. Bold values represent those in which the credibility
interval did not contain zero. Note that the negative affect variable represents the recoded version of positive affect in Sample 2.
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 26
For all six within-person state contingencies, significant associations could be found
on the within-person level in both samples. The associations were generally higher for the
admiration pathway compared to the rivalry pathway in both samples. This matches the
Contingency 6 (perceived status success → hostile behavior). Importantly, significant
associations emerged for each within-person state contingency, whereas the corresponding
other contingencies of the admiration or rivalry pathways were controlled for, respectively.
For the trait relations of the within-person state contingencies, the model shows that only one
of the six preregistered moderations of the within-person state contingencies was significant:
Questionnaire-based trait admiration positively predicted the strength of Contingency 1
(perceived status success → perception of being admired). This means that individuals high
in admiration reacted more strongly to perceived status successes compared to individuals
low in admiration. Analyses based on standard regression-based multilevel analysis approach
revealed an additional moderating effect of questionnaire-based trait admiration concerning
Contingency 2 (perceived status success → positive affect; see Supplement 8 [osf.io/we6tg]
for details). For Sample 1, none of the within-person state contingencies was moderated by
the questionnaire-based trait narcissism measures.
To sum up, the hypothesis that the strength of the within-person state contingencies
would be moderated by questionnaire-based trait narcissism was supported for only one
specific contingency (perceived status success → perceived admiration; moderated by
questionnaire-based trait admiration) and in only one of the two samples.
Discussion
The aim of the present work was to expand the emerging research on state narcissism
in two important ways. First, we differentiated between the agentic and antagonistic aspects
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 27
of state grandiose narcissism and their expression on different modalities by examining
cognitive, affective, and behavioral state reports of narcissistic admiration and rivalry in
accordance with the NARC framework. Second, following the idea of if-then contingencies
in states and recent accounts on the key role of status motivation in narcissism dynamics, we
systematically examined how social status perceptions triggered agentic and antagonistic
narcissism states. For both narcissism state averages and narcissism state contingencies, we
tested (a) how much individuals differed (i.e., the amount of interindividual variance in state
averages and state contingencies), (b) how stable these differences were, and (c) how much
they converged with established questionnaire-based measures of agentic and antagonistic
narcissism.
Intra- and Interindividual Differences in Narcissism State Density Distribution
Parameters
Results revealed substantial within-person variability in all states, a finding that
underlines the necessity to move toward more dynamic conceptualizations of grandiose
narcissism by considering both intra- and interindividual variation. In the current samples,
individuals experienced different expressions of narcissism over time that stretched across
almost the full possible range within persons. The amount of within-person variability in the
current samples was even higher than in previous studies (Giacomin & Jordan, 2016a,
2016b). This might partially be due to our use of concrete cognitive, affective, and behavioral
manifestations as opposed to the reformulated narcissism trait items that were used in most
previous examinations. That is, individuals varied substantially in narcissism-relevant
cognitions, emotions, and behaviors across days. The within-person fluctuations matched the
assumption of self-regulatory strivings toward a grandiose self (Edershile & Wright, 2021)
and therefore supported the dynamic and contextual models of narcissism that conceptualize
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 28
narcissism as a gradual and reinforcing process that is connected to situational features,
especially social ones (e.g., Back et al., 2013; Morf et al., 2011; Morf & Rhodewalt, 2001).
Importantly, the large amount of within-person variability is not at odds with
meaningful interindividual differences in narcissism. In fact, for all examined variables, state
averages showed a substantial amount of interindividual differences. These differences were
reliable and relatively stable. Finally, relations between averaged states and narcissism traits
as measured with a questionnaire indicated construct validity. That is, the means of the
admiration states were positively related to questionnaire-based trait admiration and the
means of the rivalry states were positively related to questionnaire-based trait rivalry in both
samples. Thus, interindividual differences in the typical expression of various narcissism
states can be applied to assess people’s general narcissistic tendencies, and these state-based
assessments converge to some degree with what classical narcissism questionnaires capture.
The present findings are in accordance with assumptions about the descriptive part of WTT
(Fleeson, 2012; Fleeson & Jayawickreme, 2015): The extent to which people typically
embody a given trait (e.g., how narcissistic they are) can be described by the average of those
everyday states that define a trait.
The results also underpin the need to distinguish agentic and antagonistic facets as
well as different modalities of grandiose narcissism states as proposed by the NARC. By
assessing cognitive, affective, and behavioral state aspects of both the proposed admiration
and rivalry pathways (albeit still in a rough and preliminary way), it was possible to more
closely mimic existing conceptual models than would be possible with generic state versions
of existing trait questionnaires. Also, interindividual differences in average admiration and
rivalry states were positively correlated with the respective congruent trait questionnaire
scores (i.e., admiration states with questionnaire-based trait admiration and rivalry states with
questionnaire-based trait rivalry).
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 29
Interindividual Differences in Narcissism State Contingencies
Across participants, the results revealed substantial strength in most within-person
state contingencies, characterizing the average association between daily perceptions of status
success and narcissism-relevant states on the cognitive, affective, and behavioral levels. That
is, on average across participants, cognitive, affective, and behavioral narcissism states were
indeed contingent on status-related perceptions. Only the average connection between
perceived status success and hostile behavior received less consistent support. This indicates
that perceptions of low status success are not necessarily associated with hostile and
aggressive behavior across most participants. This fits in with a number of studies that found
that more extreme forms of unsuccessful status pursuit (i.e., a failure in or a loss of social
status, e.g., as experienced by individuals who feel ostracized) can also trigger alternative
behavioral patterns such as avoidant behavior and social withdrawal. In other words, failures
in status pursuit can result in flight responses and do not necessarily trigger a fight response
(Wesselmann et al., 2015). Furthermore, we found that the state associations within the
admiration pathway were more pronounced than in the rivalry pathway. This could be due to
the fact that rivalry states are generally shown with less intensity (the same is true for
questionnaire-based rivalry traits compared with questionnaire-based admiration traits;
Leckelt et al., 2018), particularly among women (who made up the majority of our samples).
Even more important than these average contingencies were findings regarding
interindividual differences in these contingencies. In line with the idea that status reactivities
constitute a personality-like aspect, we found substantial interindividual differences in the
strengths of these contingencies, which were relatively reliable and moderately stable.
Notably, stability was also observed for state contingencies for which no or only small
average associations were revealed across participants. This finding shows that even
opposing reaction tendencies were stable across time (i.e., some always reacted with anger to
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 30
a perceived lack of status success, whereas others always reacted with avoidance and less
anger to a perceived lack of status success). The levels of stability found in the present study
were similar to those reported in the literature outside the narcissism field (e.g., Shoda et al.,
1994; Smith et al., 2009). When comparing the two samples, slightly higher stabilities were
found in Sample 2. Reasons for the higher stability in Sample 2 may be found in differences
in study design: Whereas in Sample 2, the individual measurements were obtained day after
day without any breaks; in Sample 1, there were 14-day breaks between the individual
measurement bursts, which might explain the lower stability found for the latter study. In
addition, Sample 1 had significantly lower power because it contained fewer measurement
points and shorter bursts.
Having fulfilled these three fundamental conditions (interindividual differences,
reliability, and stability) at least to some degree, interindividual differences in within-person
state contingencies might serve as additional, more dynamic measures of trait narcissism. In
accordance with WTT (Fleeson, 2012; Fleeson & Jayawickreme, 2015), they can be seen as
explanatory parts of trait narcissism that include a dynamic formulation of input (perceptions
of status success) and output (increases or decreases in narcissism-specific states) that
accounts for state fluctuations. Although both kinds of measures were reliable and stable, the
present research only provided very limited support for a convergence of state contingency
and questionnaire-based assessments of narcissism. They seem to capture distinct aspects of
trait narcissism. More research is needed to check the robustness of this finding and to
evaluate how it can be interpreted.
Grandiose Narcissism and Status Pursuit
Our findings also advance insights into the relation between status pursuit and
narcissism (Grapsas et al., 2020; Mahadevan et al., 2016; Mahadevan et al., 2020; Zeigler-
Hill et al., 2019). The explicit evaluation of status success as examined in the present study,
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 31
can, for example, be conceptualized as a result of the vigilance process described in the SPIN
model proposed by Grapsas et al. (2020; “Is my status pursuit facilitated or hindered?”).
Status success (operationalized as the exertion of influence on other people) would be an
indication for an individual that status pursuit was facilitated. Accordingly, a lack of influence
on others could be regarded as status failure (or a hindrance). As suggested in the SPIN
model, our data also support the idea that entering the admiration pathway is related to self-
promotional dynamics (i.e., more assertive behavior, positive affect, and the belief that one is
admired), a pattern that researchers regard as a consolidatory dynamic (i.e., higher perceived
status motivates even more status seeking; Mahadevan et al., 2020). Thus, stable
interindividual differences in the tendency to react to perceived status success might indeed
be a key dynamic aspect of agentic narcissism. Those who more strongly react with felt
admiration to perceived status success might be those who show agentic narcissistic
expressions more strongly than others.
Links between the perception of low status success and felt criticism, negative affect,
and hostile behavior fit the rivalry pathway described in the SPIN model. Thus, stable
interindividual differences in the tendency to react to unsuccessful status pursuit might indeed
be a key dynamic aspect of antagonistic narcissism. The SPIN model can also be used to
explore reasons for the existence of stable interindividual differences in the link between the
perception of status success and hostile behavior in the absence of an average link across
individuals (i.e., the existence of stable links in opposite directions). According to the model,
before individuals show hostile behavior (e.g., other-derogation), they must first have come
to the conclusion that self-promotion is a futile endeavor, and other-derogation has higher
utility for gaining status. Only then might individuals apply this costlier behavioral variant.
Thus, interindividual differences in either the vigilance (Is my status pursuit facilitated or
hindered?) or appraisal (Will self-promotion or other-derogation grant me status?) stages
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 32
might underlie differences in how much perceived lack of status success triggers hostile
versus less hostile behavior. Those who react more strongly with felt criticism to perceived
lack of status success and regard other-derogation as a viable alternative might be those who
show antagonistic narcissistic expressions (i.e., hostile behavior) more strongly than others.
By contrast, those who do not react with felt criticism but instead react with indifference or
even self-doubt might react with less hostile and more neutral or withdrawn behaviors. An
interesting avenue for future research would be to investigate whether those who react more
strongly to perceived status failure with negative narcissistic cognitions and affect but at the
same time see no utility in either self-promotion or other-derogation are the ones who could
be characterized as neurotic narcissists (see Back, 2018, for a similar reasoning).
Limitations and Future Directions
The current investigation has three important methodological limitations that future
research should address. They regard the sampling of participants, the assessment of
narcissism-relevant states, and the timing of state assessments. First, a more comprehensive
sampling of individuals is needed. While the present studies realized a comparatively large
number of daily assessments per individual, the number of individuals was small. This
particularly limited our ability to detect small cross-level interactions (i.e., associations
between questionnaire-based trait narcissism and state contingencies). Thus, the present
findings with regard to the lack of convergence between interindividual differences in
narcissism-relevant state contingencies and questionnaire-based narcissism need to be
cautiously interpreted. A higher power also on the between-person level is important to
provide robust insights on the convergence of these different ways of conceptualizing and
assessing trait narcissism. Future larger studies should also include more representative
samples with respect to gender and age composition.
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 33
Second, more comprehensive assessments of narcissism-relevant states and status
perceptions should be conducted. Whereas the states we examined were all narcissism-
relevant and constitute a first attempt to disentangle agentic and antagonistic aspects of
grandiose narcissism as well as distinct narcissistic modalities, they do not completely cover
the entire variety of relevant admiration and rivalry states. Although it might not be possible
to comprehensively analyze all kinds of states that are related to narcissism, the present
selection of cognitive, affective, and behavioral states needs to be extended by adding more
states and covering motivational aspects or other intrapsychic processes of admiration and
rivalry (e.g., having grandiose fantasies about oneself and internally devaluating others,
respectively). In addition to a global measure of affect, it also seems important to include a
broader set of state measures that cover narcissistic feelings in a more specific fashion. For
example, the global affect measure could be supplemented by including measures of
momentary pride, envy, and shame—emotions that are closely associated with narcissism (Di
Sarno et al., 2020; Lange et al., 2016; Tracy et al., 2009). Whereas the rivalry measures used
in the present study represented a negative affect laden conception of this narcissistic
dimension, future studies could assess state rivalry with additional items related to state
feelings of entitlement, lack of concern/empathy for others, or exploitation of others. A more
comprehensive capturing of narcissism states, including multiple indicators for each
admiration and rivalry modality, is also needed to control for measurement error. To paint a
more complete picture, future studies should also include states related to neurotic aspects of
narcissism. For example, studies could examine whether avoidant behavior patterns represent
an alternative way of dealing with status failure (i.e., a way that goes beyond assertiveness or
hostility as suggested in Back, 2018). Furthermore, alternative measures of social status
perceptions should be explored. This might include reports on more objective indicators of
social status or measures that place a stronger emphasis on meta-perceptions that capture
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 34
people’s perceptions of how others think about them (e.g., “I feel that people see me as an
important person”; Huo et al., 2010; Mahadevan et al., 2016; Mahadevan et al., 2020). A
more comprehensive assessment of status perceptions might also be applied to distinguish
between perceived assignment of status, perceived status attacks, and perceived disregard for
status (all of which might be uniquely relevant for an individual with high levels of
narcissism) as well as between different sources giving rise to perceptions of status success
(i.e., leadership, dominance, and prestige; Zeigler-Hill et al., 2021).
Third, the present study was limited in terms of temporal resolution. Specifically, in
both samples, participants retrospectively judged the intensity of their experienced narcissism
states and their perceived status success (vs. their lack thereof) at the end of the day. Thus,
specific experiences of status success over the course of a day were not measured on a
momentary basis but had to be aggregated, across the day, into an overall daily evaluation.
Whereas this approach reduced the risk of participant fatigue, it did not allow us to capture
more fine-grained variations across the day and more immediate reactions to status-relevant
environmental cues. It will therefore be an important addition for future research to measure
social status perceptions as well as narcissism states with a much higher temporal resolution.
Specifically, by using experience-sampling designs, researchers could implement repeated
measures across different situations within one day (e.g., Edershile & Wright, 2021). An even
higher temporal resolution could be achieved by capturing specific states across moments
within a situation. This could be accomplished by computer-aided analyses of videotaped
status-relevant interactions in the laboratory. Sampling data with high temporal resolution
would allow researchers to empirically test narcissistic specific moment-to-moment status
dynamics (as proposed in the SPIN model; Grapsas et al., 2020; or interpersonal theory;
Hopwood, 2018) in a comprehensive manner.
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 35
Conclusion
Research on grandiose narcissism is currently shifting from a questionnaire-based
investigation of narcissism as a static trait toward a more dynamic conceptualization of
narcissism as systematic interindividual differences in the within-person expression of
everyday narcissism states. The current study contributed to this novel direction in narcissism
research by (a) differentiating between agentic and antagonistic states of different modalities,
(b) considering the key role of social status perceptions, and (c) systematically investigating
the amount, stability, and questionnaire-based trait relations of both narcissism state levels
and state contingencies.
Beyond describing individuals in terms of interindividual differences in
questionnaire-based narcissism traits, the present study demonstrated that individuals can be
reliably described in terms of interindividual differences in the extents to which they
experience specific agentic and antagonistic narcissism-relevant states of different modalities
and their contingencies to social status perceptions in everyday life. However, the absence of
moderating effects of classical trait questionnaire measures on state contingencies points to
the possibility that trait and state measures assess independent aspects of narcissism. The
results further underline that grandiose narcissism needs to be distinguished into agentic and
antagonistic aspects, also on the state level, as they appear to be differentially related to the
perception of social status.
The results of the present study should encourage researchers in the field of
narcissism to expand on their novel, more dynamically oriented research efforts. Future
research should examine the dynamic nature of narcissism with high temporal resolution and
strive for a better understanding of relations between narcissistic self-concept and narcissistic
if-then state contingencies.
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 36
Data Accessibility Statement
The study materials, data and analysis scripts used for this article can be accessed at
osf.io/we6tg.
DAILY DYNAMICS OF NARCISSISM 37