Supplement to the Historiography I:9
Camille Akmut
December 29, 2022
COMICS
— Matt Furie. Boy’s Club [2006-...]
Pepe and his friends’ days consist in eating pizza, hot dogs, trying new chip
flavors, wearing cool t-shirts, discussing pop culture, reviewing movies (Batman
begins #1, Clooney #4, Alanis Morrisette #2, etc.), playing pranks on each
other, watching tv or videos on the computer, playing video games on console
or pc (e.g. Doom), posting on social media (Pepe is young-peezy), going on
outings to the cemetery...
Among others the comic evokes the value of kindness and hugs. Homosexu-
ality is also alluded to multiple times.
That a stoner-and-pizza, roommate comedy with a few left sensibilities and
otherwise no clear political orientation should have been appropriated by the
far right is indeed ironic. Did they not read the comic? And the pages with
dildos in them, talk of hooking up with male celebrities etc.?
Boy’s Club in every and all ways is as dangerous, and harmless as similar
comics like Megg, Mogg, and Owl. And, it shouldn’t surprise anyone that it was
hence picked up for a collected edition by Fantagraphics, the same publisher.
In fact it’s easy to see how Boy’s Club might have been an influence on that
later work : the puking, the shitting, the boiling dildos in hot water, the fast
food, the couch setting, the pop culture discussions and evaluations... Werewolf
Jones is practically Landwolf. Similarities extend to drawing style.
And, the worst part is that Pepe is actually one of the nicer characters, if
not the nicest – and tends to be the victim of pranks (similar to Owl, to con-
tinue with the comparison, while Landwolf is a bit the asshole of the group, like
Werewolf Jones ended up being for Megg...).
It would be so easy to re-appropriate Pepe from the right; there’s nothing in
Boy’s Club preventing it – on the contrary a lot of material lends itself to that
– and we believe the author himself has expressed such a wish.
Then, again, there are those who never acknowledged or recognized Pepe as
a right wing let alone far right symbol; which again is absurd considering the
source material, as we’ve described : a combination of weed, apolitical-having-
fun, roomies comedy... Boy’s Club is Friends updated to the new millennium,
and a bit more graphic (butts and penises mostly), little more.
In issue 1, the members of the group are presented. Pepe’s entire profile is :
like’s
- pop
- pizza
- talking on his cell
[1] beginning of the first issue [3] panel from which the ”feels good man” meme originated
Congratulations to the right for claiming a comic of such intense homoerotic
tones. [It’s a real pattern with the far right, somehow homoeroticism always
meets their aesthetic preference.]
In an already unusually nice comic, they picked the nicest guy (When Pepe’s
cell phone stopped working he started crying...)
PORTRAIT - DOUGLAS ENGELBART
“Some of what developed as the PARC view of future computing
was based on earlier work by Doug Engelbart, who worked at the
Stanford Research Institute in nearby Menlo Park. Engelbart was
the first computer scientist to pay close attention to user interface
- how users interact with a computer system. If computers could be
made easier to use, Engelbart thought, they would be used by more
people and with better results. (...)
During the 1970s, the Compiler Science Laboratory (CSL) at Xe-
rox PARC was the best place in the world for doing computer re-
search. Researchers at PARC invented the first high-speed computer
networks and the first laser printers, and they devised the first com-
puters that could be called easy to use, with intuitive graphical dis-
plays. The Xerox Alto, which had built-in networking, a black-on-
white bit-mapped screen, a mouse, and hard disk data storage”
[Accidental Empires, pp. 81-82]
“Stanford Research Institute (later it severed its ties to Stanford and
became just SRI) had been chosen as one of the first sites because
Doug Engelbart, a scientist of extraordinary vision, worked there.
Several years earlier, when Bob Taylor was at NASA he had funded
Engelbart’s invention of the first computer mouse (Engelbart received
a patent for the device as an “X-Y position indicator for a display
system”), and for years afterward Taylor pointed with pride to his
support of Engelbart’s mouse.
Engelbart had been in attendance at the 1967 Ann Arbor meeting
of ARPA’s principal investigators when Taylor and Larry Roberts
announced that a dozen or so of them would be expected to tie their
computers together over an experimental network and that each site
would be expected to make its computer resources available on the
network. While others had responded skeptically to the plan, En-
gelbart had been delighted with it. At the time, he was directing an
SRI computer research lab. Not unlike Licklider, Engelbart was in-
terested in using computers to augment human intellect. Under a
contract from ARPA, he was developing a system (called NLS, for
oNLine System)”
[Where Wizards Stay Up Late, ch. 2]
The lab in question is likely the Augmented human intellect Research Center
that Engelbart mentions at the beginning of his famous 1968 demonstration.
When it comes to personal computing beginning from the hypothesis that
’Douglas Engelbart invented everything’ is not entirely unreasonable.
PRIMARY SOURCE : TECHNICAL DEMOS
— Engelbart’s 1968 demo.
At about 30 m. Engelbart demonstrates the mouse and introduces the, now
ubiquitous and unremarkable, device :
"OK, to talk about control devices we’ll use this overhead camera shot
where you can see the devices that I’m using. I use three, and they’re
not all standard. We have a pointing device called a ’mouse’, a standard
keyboard (...)"
Around 15 to 20 m. Engelbart appears to demonstrate a hyperlink system (among which a feature he refers to as
“jump on a link ”).
"Let’s switch away from the tool we have here and talk about some of the general features of the
program (...) I’m going to do something called jump on a link. And the link is something that will go
between files."
Directly before this Engelbart had shown an example of a tool that would graphically represent a route (from
work to home, and doing tasks in-between such as grocery shopping) and the ability to click on each node to get
information about the location : e.g. produce available at the market, overdue books at the library, what to buy at
the drug store etc.