Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan
Impulsiveness, Loneliness and Perceived Stress as Predictors
of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the Lifespan
1 2
Michael A. Rapp, MD, PhD , for the ReCoDe consortium
Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany
Members of the ReCoDe Consortium are listed in Supplementary Note 1
Acknowledgement: Supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG grant TRR
265/1).
Corresponding author: Michael A. Rapp, MD, PhD, Professor and Chair, Social and
Preventive Medicine, University of Potsdam, Am Mühlenberg 9, 14467 Potsdam,
Germany. (email: michael.rapp@uni-potsdam.de)
Key words: Alcohol use disorder, adolescents, young adults, middle-aged adults,
psychosocial predictors.
7275 words, 3 Tables, 4 Figures
Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan
Abstract
From adolescence to young adulthood to middle age, alcohol consumption (AC) varies
across the lifespan. Here we show that the magnitude of the association of psychosocial
variables predictive of AC and alcohol use disorder (AUD) varies as a function of age and
gender. We examined the cross-sectional association of four psychosocial correlates
(impulsiveness, stress, depression, and loneliness) of AC in 601 subjects (234 women and
367 men; aged 37.9 years ± 12.9 years; range 17 to 66 years) suffering from AUD from the
TRR 265 cohort, controlling also for cognitive status (i.e., digit-symbol substitution). Due
to collinearity of stress and depression, these two variables were transformed to their two
principal components (indicating stress and depression versus coping).
Specifically, we hypothesized and found impulsiveness to exhibit stronger associations in
and young adults; for men the strong association also extended to early middle-aged adults.
Likewise, the hypothesized effect of stress and depression significantly interacted with age
and gender: for men, higher levels of stress and depression were associated with an increase
of alcohol consumption, but this association decreased with age. For women, higher levels
of stress and depression were associated with increased alcohol consumption only in late,
but not in middle-age, and stress and depression were associated with decreased alcohol
consumption in adolescent and young women. Counter to expectation and presumably due
to a high correlation with stress and depression, there was no evidence for significant
effects associated with loneliness in the multivariate model. There was evidence that
coping was associated with a decrease in AC for participants with high and medium
cognitive status.
The prominent age- and gender related differences in psychosocial predictors of AC reveal
that different behavioral mechanisms contribute to AC in men and women at different ages.
Further research is needed to delineate the temporal dynamics of these predictor sets. Our
results will directly inform more targeted preventive interventions in men and women of
different age groups in the framework of the ReCoDe consortium.
Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan
Introduction
There is robust evidence that self-reported alcohol consumption (AC) patterns vary across
the lifespan (Merline et al., 2008, Britton et al., 2015, Deeken et al., 2020, Tschorn et al.,
2022) in the general population. In addition, a meta-analysis of cohort studies (Britton et
al., 2015), as expected, showed large gender differences in the amount of alcohol
consumed. However, beyond these mean differences, there were gender-related differences
in AC across the lifespan: women showed a moderate increase in AC from age 15 to 35,
followed by a moderate decline after age 55. In men, there is evidence for a sharp increase
in consumption and especially binge drinking from age 16 to the mid-twenties, with a
subsequent sharp decrease from age 30 up until age 55. In older adults, estimates show
slowing of this decrease at around age 55 to 70 (Britton et al., 2015). At the same time,
there is initial evidence that both protective and risk factors exhibit differential impact on
the development and maintenance of alcohol use disorder (AUD) in different age groups
(Merline et al., 2008, Moos et al., 2010, Whelan et al., 2014).
For the case of psychosocial predictors of AC and AUD, in adolescents and young adults,
age at first drink, impulsiveness and other externalizing behavioral traits, life events
(especially romantic love) and anxiety symptoms were associated with both current and
future AC, and effects were moderated by current cannabis and tobacco consumption
(Merline et al., 2008, Whelan et al., 2014). Especially impulsiveness has been studied as a
predictor of AC in AUD in several studies: in a meta-analysis, Stautz and Cooper (2013)
examined different aspects of impulsiveness, including urgency, lack of premeditation,
lack of perseverance, and sensation seeking, and found positive associations between these
traits and both AC and problematic alcohol use in adolescents. Task-based assessments of
impulsiveness, including delay discounting, risk taking, and behavioral inhibition, likewise
showed a consistent association with AC in a longitudinal cohort of adolescents over two
years (Fernie et al., 2013).
In young and middle-aged adults, adverse childhood experiences, parental alcohol use and
comorbid substance abuse have been proposed as risk factors for an increase in
consumption (Merline et al., 2008, Leung et al., 2015). There is also epidemiological
evidence for different types of stressors to take effect in middle age: specifically, both
Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan
childhood maltreatment and stressful life events increase the risk for impulsiveness (Heinz
et al., 2011) and AUD in middle-aged adults (Keyes et al., 2011).
As to the type of stressor, gender effects have been reported, in that family-related
problems were a specifically salient risk factor for women (Brennan et al., 1993).
Furthermore, stress exposure and biological markers of stress sensitivity have been
associated with key cognitive and behavioral mechanisms associated with alcohol intake
(Sinha 2008, Stalder et al., 2010, Spanagel et al., 2014, Wiers et al., 2014, Friedel et al.,
2017).
Epidemiologically, on average, the tendency towards a decrease of AC reverses in late
middle age, and this effect seems to be driven by 20-25% of middle-aged adults who exhibit
increases in consumption patterns from around age 55 onward (Johnson 2000, Britton et
al., 2015). Predictors of increased consumption in late middle age proposed are anxiety,
depression, loneliness, bereavement and role transitions (Johnson 2000, Crome et al.,
2012). In addition, there is evidence from longitudinal studies indicating that risky drinking
behavior in midlife, high socioeconomic status, male gender, being unmarried and the
presence of loneliness significantly increase the risk of AUD development in later life
(Moos et al., 2010, Platt et al., 2010). With respect to loneliness, it has been posited that
loneliness may be more likely an antecedent of alcohol use in women, while it may rather
represent a consequence or correlate of excessive AC in men (Brennan et al., 1993, Erol &
Karpyak 2015).
The specific aim of this study was to assess differential age and gender-related effects of
key psychosocial risk factors for AC in a sizeable cohort of subjects suffering from AUD
using cross-sectional analyses. A key question of this endeavor was whether
epidemiological evidence from the general population translates to subjects suffering from
AUD, in order to delineate target populations for tailored interventions in AUD. Derived
from epidemiological evidence in healthy controls, we chose to test the effects of
impulsiveness, stress, and loneliness given their propensity to exhibit age- and gender-
based differences in their association with AC. Specifically, we hypothesized
impulsiveness to be associated with AC in adolescents and young adults, but to a lesser
degree in middle-aged adults. Conversely, we expected loneliness to be associated with
Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan
AC in middle-aged AUD subjects, but not in young adults. Furthermore, we expected self-
reported stress to have increasing effects with age, and more so in women. We tested these
effects in a large cohort of adolescents, young and middle-aged adults (234 women and
367 men; aged 37.9 years ± 12.9 years; range 17 to 66 years) with 2 or more DSM-5
symptoms of AUD (APA, 2013), examined in the framework of a larger research
consortium (TRR265; Heinz et al., 2020).
Methods
Design
This 12-month follow-up cohort study was conducted within the framework of the
Collaborative Research Centre Transregio 265 (TRR265) (Heinz et al., 2020). Between
February 2020 and July 2022, we screened 3,492 individuals; of these, 711 females and
males with mainly mild-to-moderate AUD were enrolled at three study sites in Germany
(Charité University Medicine Berlin, Technical University Dresden, and Central Institute
of Mental Health [CIMH] Mannheim) (TRR265 cohort; preregistration: DRKS00020580).
The study design included four visits (baseline and follow-ups scheduled 4, 8, and 12
months after enrollment) accompanied by real-life Ecological Momentary Assessments
(EMA; Deeken et al., 2022). The project was approved by the local ethics committees of
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Technical University Dresden, and Heidelberg
University and written informed consent was obtained from all study participants.
Participants
Participants were included if they fulfilled two or more criteria of AUD according to the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fifth Edition) (DSM-5) (APA,
2013) were able to understand the study protocol, and gave written informed consent.
Exclusion criteria comprised the intake of central nervous system agents in the last 10 days
or less than 5 half-life periods ago, contraindications for magnetic resonance tomographic
scans, DSM-5 bipolar disorder, psychotic disorder, schizophrenia or disorder from the
schizophrenic spectrum, or substance addiction except for alcohol, nicotine, and cannabis
in medical history, severe injury of head or other severe diseases of the central nervous
system in medical history, pregnancy, and breastfeeding.
In the present analyses, we included 601 of 711 subjects with a complete data protocol.
They had mild, moderate, and severe AUD yet without the need for medically supervised
Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan
alcohol withdrawal and no desire for therapeutic intervention with a mean age of 37.9 years
(SD = 12.9 years; range from 17 to 66 years). 39% (n = 234 of 601) of the sample were
female; no participants reported diverse gender. Participants reported a median of 4
symptoms for AUD (interquartile range 3-5).
Assessment
Clinical and demographic data were assessed from February 2020 until June 2022 by
specifically trained raters. For the present analyses, we focussed on the effects of
impulsiveness, loneliness, and stress on alcohol consumption. Sociodemographic variables
were used as covariates.
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale German short-version (BIS-15; Spinella, M., 2007; Meule, A.
et al., 2011): The BIS-15 is a short form of the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-11)
(Patton et al., 1995) and measures three factors of impulsiveness: nonplanning
impulsiveness, motor impulsiveness and attentional impulsiveness. Items are rated on a
scale from ‘rarely/never’ to ‘almost always/always’ (1 = rarely/never, 2 = occasionally, 3
= often, 4 = almost always/always). Total scores of the BIS-15 range between 15 and 60.
UCLA Loneliness Scale (UCLA): Loneliness and feelings of social isolation had been
assessed with a 12-item version of the UCLA Loneliness Scale (Russel et al., 1980). Items
were rated on a scale from ‘never’ to ‘always’ (1 = never; 2 = rarely; 3 = sometimes; 4 =
always). The average of the scores was calculated as the total score.
Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-10; Cohen et al., 1983): The PSS-10 is a self-report
questionnaire with 10 items rated on a 5-point Likert scale from ‘never’ to ‘very often’ (0
= never, 1 = almost never, 2 = once in a while, 3 = often, 4 = very often). Four of the items
are positively stated and needed to be reversed. Total scores were calculated by summing
up all scores, with possible total scores ranging from 0 to 40. Higher scores indicate higher
levels of perceived stress.
The Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depression (CES-D) scale (CES-D; Radloff,
1977): The CES-D is a self-rating instrument for symptoms associated with depression,
such as restless sleep, poor appetite, and feeling lonely. Response options range from 0 to
3 for each item (0 = Rarely or None of the Time, 1 = Some or Little of the Time, 2 =
Moderately or Much of the time, 3 = Most or Almost All the Time). A 15-item German
Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan
version was used. Scores range from 0 to 45, with high scores indicating greater depressive
symptoms.
Digit symbol substitution (DSST): The DSST is a paper-and-pencil test highly sensitive to
age effects and general neuropsychological dysfunction (Lezak et al., 2004). It consists of
nine digit-symbol pairs (e.g., 1/-,2/┴ … 7/Λ,8/X,9/=) followed by a list of digits. Subjects
are instructed to write under each digit the subject the corresponding symbol as fast as
possible. The number of correct symbols within 90 seconds was measured.
Alcohol consumption: Alcohol consumption (AC) in the last 3 months (since the last
assessment), i.e., our primary outcome, had been assessed with two questions at all four
measurement time points: (1) ”In the last 3 months (since the last appointment), on how
many days did you drink at least 1 glass of alcohol? [An wie vielen Tagen tranken Sie in
den letzten 3 Monaten (seit dem letzten Termin) zumindest 1 Glas Alkohol?]”. (2) “On
these days you drank alcohol in the last 3 months (since the last appointment), can you tell
me what and how much you usually drank in a day based on the list? [An diesen Tagen an
denen Sie in den letzten 3 Monaten (seit dem letzten Termin) Alkohol tranken: Können Sie
mir anhand der Abbildungen auf der Liste angeben, was und wie viel Sie üblicherweise an
einem Tag tranken?]“. (Selective list of alcoholic drinks with indication of amount (cl) and
alcohol by volume).
Sociodemographic variables: As socio-demographic data, information of age, gender,
education, and socioeconomic status were used in this analysis.
Statistical Analyses
Statistical analyses were carried out in the R enviroment for computing and graphics
(version 4.2.2; R Core Team, 2022) using the tidyverse (Wickham et al., 2019) and
easystats (Lüdecke et al., 2022) suite of packages. Linear mixed models were estimated
with the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015).
AC and covariates used as its predictors were assessed at four occasions and averaged for
the following multiple regression analyses. A linear mixed model with repeated measures
across the four assessments is included as control analyses. In a first step, as expected from
prior research, scales of stress and depression were found to be collinear (r=.745). Such a
collinearity greatly reduces the statistical power for tests of interaction effects. Therefore,
we computed the average z-score for both variables (i.e., their first principal component
Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan
PC1) as a proxy measure of distress and the difference between the two z-scores [i.e., the
second principal component PC2 as z(PSS)-z(CES-D)] as a proxy measure of coping. This
transformation has also the advantage that the two PC-based scores are uncorrelated. We
included PC1 and PC2 as covariates along with gender along with centered age, BIS-15,
UCLA, and DSST in the multiple regression with the log of AC as dependent variable.
The final multiple-regression model was the result of a backward selection, starting with a
model that included many higher-order interactions between the variables of theoretical
interest to ensure that significant interactions moderating theoretically postulated low-
order interactions and main effects are not overlooked. Backward selection was to remove
blocks of higher-order interaction terms and check whether their removal would cause a
significant loss in goodness of fit. Effects and interactions of theoretical relevance were
kept in the model irrespective of their significance.
Results
Demographic and Clinical Characteristics
At the time of this report, data were available for 711 participants; 601 contributed data for
all covariates at least at one of the four assessments (4 assessments: 269; 3: 100, 2: 121,
current study broken down by Age and Gender. The three age groups are formed as
conceptualized in the study design and are used for the visualizations of covariate x Age x
Gender interactions. In the multivariate models, however, age was always included as a
Selection of multiple-regression model
Inferential statistics are based on a hierarchical multiple regression. In the most complex
model, in addition to the main effects of gender and age, BIS-15, UCLA, DSST, as well as
PC1 and PC2 computed from PSS-10 and CES-D, we included interactions between, one
the one hand, the set defined by gender, age, and DSST and their interactions and, on the
other hand, the set of BIS-15, UCLA, PC1, and PC2 and their bivariate interactions.
In the first reduction of complexity, we removed all bivariate interactions in the second set
of variables without loss of goodness of fit; Δdf = 48; F=0.77, p=0.87.
Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan
In the second reduction of complexity, we also removed all interactions with DSST, except
with coping (i.e., PC2), without loss in goodness of fit; Δdf = 21; F=0.91, p=0.57. This
model contained all terms of theoretical relevance and is considered the final model, that
is UCLA and interaction terms associated with it were kept in the model although they
could have been reduced without significant loss of goodness of fit.
3. Also included are estimates for two simpler models, that is removing UCLA and its
Significant effects and interactions
The primary theoretical questions relate to how the relation between AC and psychosocial
predictors is moderated by age and gender. In general and as expected, AC was
significantly larger for men than women and increased more strongly with age for men
Age and gender significantly moderated the AC predictions by impulsiveness (t=2.07,
hypothesized, adolescent and young impulsive adults exhibited a strong association with
AC. The association was also observed for early middle-aged men, but not for early
middle-aged women. This moderation by gender was not predicted. Moreover, there was
no evidence for an association for late middle-aged adults.
also significantly interacted with age and gender. Specifically, for men increasing levels of
distress predicted an increase of AC, but this association strongly decreased with age. For
women, high levels of distress were associated with an increase of AC only for late middle-
age, but not early middle-age, and associated with a decrease of AC for adolescent and
young women.
Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan
This pattern of this interaction was not expected. Adolescent and young female and male
participants show a strikingly opposite effect of distress on AC. Their correlations with AC
are also stronger (more negative slope for women, more positive slope for men) than those
for early and late middle-aged adults.
cognitive status (DSST) and coping (i.e., difference of z-scores for depression and stress;
t=-1.88, p=.060; significant in the reduced model: t=-1.97, p=.049): The combination of
high cognitive status and middle to high coping appears to be associated with lower AC.
Although the interaction term was significant, its removal (along with the two main effects)
did not lead to a significant loss in goodness of fit; Δdf = 3; F=1.68, p=0.18. Thus, the
significance of this interaction is tenuous. Moreover, there was no support for hypotheses
relating to the relevance of loneliness (all |t|-values < 1.0). Removal of UCLA and
associated terms did not lead to a significant loss in goodness of fit, Δdf = 4; F=0.4, p=0.81.
Model diagnostics
normality and homoskedasticity of residuals (Lüdecke et al., 2021). These statistics did
not provide evidence for any violation of these assumptions.
Control analysis: Quadratic age effects
All covariates were included as linear trends. Given the large age range, some acceleration
in young or deceleration in old age were not implausible outcomes. However, including
age as a quadratic trend, did not increase the goodness of fit of the final model; Δdf = 8;
F=1.2, p=0.28.
Control analysis: Effect of time of assessment (linear mixed model)
Participants contributed one to four measures of alcohol consumption; covariates were
assessed as well. Thus, the design also afforded analyses with linear mixed models with
time of assessment (ToA) as a repeated-measures factor and time-varying covariates. We
added ToA as a four-level factor specifying three orthogonal Helmert contrasts to test the
change of alcohol consumption across ToA to the multiple regression models reported
above (Schad et al., 2021). Given the highly unequal number of assessments between
Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan
participants, we did not include interactions terms for the ToA contrasts. With four
measures only varying intercepts were specified for the random factor participant.
3). Model comparisons replicated the results reported for multiple regressions. There was
a significant drop in alcohol consumption from the initial to the second assessment, but no
further change from there on. In the LMM, age x gender and age x gender x distress (PC1
of stress and depression) were also significant. As far as impulsiveness is concerned, only
the impulsiveness x age, but not the further moderation by gender was significant. Finally,
the DSST x coping interaction was not significant in the LMM.
Discussion
To our knowledge, this is the first cohort study to investigate the predictive value of self-
reported psychosocial predictors for AC in AUD subjects from adolescence through late
middle-age. In line with our hypotheses, we found a significant interaction effect between
impulsiveness and age, in that young adults exhibited a stronger association between
impulsiveness and AC as compared to middle-aged and older adults. With respect to
gender, specifically, this interaction was prominent in adolescent and young women who
exhibited a strong association between impulsiveness and AC, while there was no such
effect in early and late middle-aged women. In men, the association between impulsiveness
and AC was strongest in adolescents and young adults and decreased in early and late
middle adulthood. Thus, as hypothesized from the general population, we consistently find
strong effects of impulsiveness in adolescent and young adult AUD subjects across gender
(Deeken et al., 2020; Kaiser et al., 2022). Beyond that, in middle adulthood, we observed
an attenuation of the effect of impulsiveness on AC in males, while the effect disappeared
in women. Thus, we clearly show an attenuated but persisting effect of impulsiveness
beyond young adulthood in AC in men, but not in women. Interventions aimed at
impulsiveness in AUD may thus prove useful to extend into male adulthood, although the
temporal dynamics between impulsiveness and drinking events and consumption patterns
remain to be examined.
Contrary to our hypotheses, there was no evidence for interactions with loneliness when
tested together with the other psychosocial indicators. However, loneliness correlated .54
with distress (i.e., the stress and depression composite). Without distress in the model, the
Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan
interaction between age, gender, and loneliness was significant (t=-2.8, p<.01), indicating
that in this model loneliness is predictive of AC for young and early middle-aged men and
trends were in the opposite direction for the complementary gender-x-age groups. Thus,
absence of evidence for the loneliness effect may not be evidence for its absence in the
complete model. Two possible reasons are (1) loneliness may be a specific condition
subsumed under distress or (2) UCLA loneliness may have lower reliability than the
distress composite. In the latter case, the interaction may turn significant when data
collection is completed. There is evidence that loneliness and social isolation impact mental
health via stress pathways (Brandt et al., 2022). At the same time, loneliness has been
reported as an important risk factor for alcohol consumption in healthy young and middle-
aged adults (Bonin et al., 2000). Here we present first preliminary evidence of this effect
for male adults who exhibit AUD criteria in this age range.
Regarding stress and depressed mood, a mixed picture emerged: especially in male young
adults, an increase in stress and depressed mood was associated with increased AC, which
attenuated again in middle to late middle age. The effects of high levels of perceived stress
as correlates of AC in adolescent and young adult men have thus far been poorly
investigated (but see Heinz et al., 2011). In women, increased self-reported stress and
depressed mood was associated with decreased AC in adolescence and young adulthood,
an effect which did not emerge in early middle-age but reversed in late middle-aged
women. Thus, stress and negative affect may exert its effects in women only later in life.
Furthermore, the distress shown here to be conducive of AC may reflect specific types of
stressors and depressed mood in women (Keyes et al., 2011; Merline et al. 2008, Leung et
al. 2015). Targeted gender- and age-based interventions could take both the type of stressor
and risk into account.
With respect to cognitive status, we found for a reduced model that high coping scores (i.e.,
the larger the difference between depression and stress) predict a decrease of AC, but only
for participants with high and medium levels on the DSST, a proxy for neuropsychological
Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan
dysfunction. Thus, at the cohort level cognitive control functions may moderate an
expected positive effect of coping on AC in subjects with AUD.
As expected, we found a main effect for gender in that men had higher levels of AC as
compared to women. Across the lifespan, in our sample of AUD subjects, AC increased,
and more so in men. While this finding of an age-related increase is inconsistent with the
epidemiological literature in the general population (compare Britton et al., 2015), both an
increase with age, and more so in men, has been reported for AUD in prior studies (e.g.,
Brennan et al., 1993) and may reflect a cumulative increase in problematic AC with age,
pronounced in men.
Our results clearly point to differential effects of age and gender for the predictive
association of key variables such as distress (i.e., stress and depressive mood) and
impulsiveness with AC in AUD (compare Kaiser et al., 2022). Our cross-sectional
assessments allow for the identification of key age-specific psychosocial correlates of AC
in AUD. At the same time, there is significant variation with gender in the association of
AC with distress in adolescents and young adults. Critically, the continuous follow-up in
our sample with high-density recordings will allow us to test specific temporal associations
based on these risk factors. This approach, based on trajectories of consumption and
predictors thereof, will inform targeted treatment interventions in AUD. Such treatment
interventions can be designed to be gender- and age-specific and could for example,
represent emotion control interventions in highly impulsive adolescents, or cognitive
reappraisal interventions in young men and middle-aged women. Future research could
thus not only critically inform novel prevention and intervention strategies by identifying
groups of individuals at specific risk, but also enable direct tests of such hypotheses in a
targeted treatment approach for AUD.
Predictors of Alcohol Consumption in Alcohol Use Disorder Across the
Lifespan