TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 1
Task-Adaptive Changes to the Target Template in Response to Distractor Context:
Separability Versus Similarity
Xinger Yu1, Raisa A. Rahim1, and Joy J. Geng1, 2
1Center for Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis
2Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis
Author Note
The study was funded by the National Institutes of Health to Joy J. Geng (R01-
MH113855).
The data were presented as a poster at the 2023 annual meetings of the Vision Science
Society, St. Pete Beach, Florida, United States. The authors declare no conflict of interest for
this study.
Xinger Yu served as lead for data curation, formal analysis, and validation and
contributed equally to conceptualization, writing–original draft, and writing–review and editing.
Raisa A. Rahim served in a supporting role for conceptualization, writing–original draft, and
writing–review and editing. Joy J. Geng served as lead for conceptualization, funding
acquisition, supervision, writing–original draft, and writing–review and editing.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Joy J. Geng, Center for
Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis, 267 Cousteau Place, Davis, CA 95618, United
States. Email: jgeng@ucdavis.edu
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 2
Abstract
Theories of attention hypothesize the existence of an attentional template that contains target
features in working or long-term memory. It is frequently assumed that the template contains a
veridical copy of the target, but recent studies suggest that this is not true when the distractors
are linearly separable from the target. In such cases, target representations shift “off-veridical” in
response to the distractor context, presumably because doing so is adaptive and increases the
representational distinctiveness of targets from distractors. However, some have argued that the
shifts may be entirely explained by perceptual biases created by simultaneous color contrast.
Here we address this debate and test the more general hypothesis that the target template is
adaptively shaped by elements of the distractor context needed to distinguish targets from
distractors. We used a two-dimensional target and separately manipulated the linear
separability of one dimension (color) and the visual similarity of the other (orientation). We found
that target shifting along the linearly separable color dimension was dependent on the similarity
of targets-to-distractors along the other dimension. The target representations were consistent
with a post-experiment strategy questionnaire in which participants reported using color more
when orientation was hard to use, and orientation more when it was easier to use. We conclude
that the target template is task-adaptive and exploit features in the distractor context that most
predictably distinguish targets from distractors to increase visual search efficiency.
Keywords: Attentional template; Visual search; Distractor context; Attentional shifting;
Simultaneous contrast effect
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 3
Public Significance Statement
Searching for a target object among perceptually similar distractor objects (e.g., finding an
orange-colored pencil among yellow-colored pencils) is relatively difficult. In order to optimize
the ability to distinguish targets from distractors, the target representation may shift “off-
veridical” (i.e., prioritizing search for the reddish color within the orange target). The present
study shows that this type of target shifting occurs more strongly when it facilitates the ability to
find the target; it is greatly reduced when other properties of the distractor context, such as
dissimilarity, make the target easier to find using another feature dimension. These results
suggest that target shifting is a task-adaptive mechanism to increase the representational
distinctiveness of targets from distractors during visual search and highlights the sensitivity of
the target template to multiple features of the expected distractor context.
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 4
Introduction
The visual world is filled with numerous pieces of sensory information, but only a small
fraction is relevant to behavior. How is our attention guided to objects of interest? Theories of
visual search posit that this occurs by using information held within a memory representation
(i.e., the target or attentional template) to bias sensory processing toward target features and
serve as a decision boundary for target selection (Duncan & Humphreys, 1989a; Eimer, 2014;
Geng & Witkowski, 2019; Wolfe, 2021). The target template has been largely assumed to
contain a single, static, and veridical representation of what we are looking for, akin to a
photograph of the target object. However, recent studies in which the search target appears
predictably among linearly separable distractors (e.g., search for an orange tiger amongst
yellower grassland “distractors”) have shown that the target template may not always contain
veridical sensory features but instead shifts “off-veridical” away from distractors (Becker et al.,
2013; Chunharas et al., 2022; Geng et al., 2017; Kerzel, 2020; Meeter & Olivers, 2014;
Navalpakkam & Itti, 2007; Scolari & Serences, 2009; Tünnermann et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2022;
Yu & Geng, 2019). It remains unclear, nevertheless, whether shifting away from distractors is
due to a strategic adjustment that serves to increase the representational distinctiveness of
targets from distractors and optimize attentional selection or due to a passive, automatic
contrast effect in the visual system that alters the perception of targets.
Off-veridical target representations refer to the finding that target features are shifted, or
distorted, away from distractors that are predictably linearly separable (Bauer et al., 1996;
D’Zmura, 1991; Hodsoll & Humphreys, 2001; Navalpakkam & Itti, 2007). For example, when
looking for an orange object among yellower distractors, the target is represented as being
“redder” than the actual orange; this leads attention to be guided toward “orange-reddish” color
values in the visual field. Similar shifting of target features has been found for varied stimulus
dimensions, including size, shape, luminance, orientation, direction of motion, and even more
complex facial expressions, and has been measured using a number of methods, including eye
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 5
movements during visual search, irrelevant cues for attentional capture, working memory
estimation probes, and two-alternative forced choice identifications (Becker, 2010; Becker et al.,
2014; Geng et al., 2017; Kerzel, 2020; Scolari et al., 2012; Won et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2022).
Interestingly, the impact of linear separability of distractors on target representations occurs only
when this linear separability is predictable across trials (Yu & Geng, 2019).
Although there is clear evidence that the target representation shifts in response to
linearly separable distractors, different underlying mechanisms have been proposed. One
explanation is that shifting increases the representational distinctiveness of the target from
concurrent search distractors, which then allows the target to be found more efficiently (Geng &
Witkowski, 2019; Navalpakkam & Itti, 2007; Yu & Geng, 2019). For instance, Yu et al. (2022)
found that observers who established more optimally shifted templates showed faster drift rates,
reflecting easier discrimination of targets from distractors. Others have argued, however, that
shifting away from distractors is caused by perceptual contrast effects between the highly
similar search target and distractors (Hamblin-Frohman & Becker, 2021; Pouget & Bavelier,
2007). Perceptual contrast effects result from lateral inhibition between neighboring neurons
and reflect the sensory environment independent of the current task demands. Simultaneous
contrast may bias the perception of an orange target to make it appear redder (Brown &
MacLeod, 1997; Singer & D’zmura, 1994) and these shifts in color perception would be encoded
as a shifted target representation from the true color value. While a perceptual color shift might
effectively increase the target-to-distractor distinctiveness, it is a perceptual mechanism that is
agnostic to the task and goals of the observer.
The purpose of the current study was to determine whether shifting the target
representation away from distractors is adaptive to the visual search task or whether it is purely
a consequence of color contrast effects on perception. We addressed this question using a two-
dimensional target (e.g., a 54° oriented, green-blue bar). The target was distinct from distractors
in both color and orientation and therefore it could be identified based on either feature
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 6
dimension. The critical manipulation was the distractor context in the visual search task across
from one direction on the color wheel (e.g., bluer than the target color). As a result, the linear
separability of the distractor colors could be predicted from trial to trial in both groups. In
contrast to color, the distractor orientations on each trial were linearly separable on a single trial
(i.e., all rotated from the target clockwise or counterclockwise), but the direction of the
distractors were unpredictable from trial to trial. Therefore, it was impossible to predict on a trial-
by-trial basis the orientation of distractors, precluding the use of this feature for strategic search.
The manipulation of making targets linearly separable from distractors in both color and
orientation on a single display was employed to balance the perceptual effects of linear
separability on a single trial. This manipulation also restricted attentional predictions to be made
solely for color linear separability. Notably, even though the direction of distractor orientations
was unpredictable across trials, the similarity of these distractor orientations to the target
orientation was predictable. In the high-orientation-similarity group, the distractor orientations
were always highly similar to the target orientation, while in the low-orientation-similarity group,
the distractor orientations were substantially different. Distractor similarity is well known to affect
the ease of visual search: when distractors are more perceptually dissimilar from targets,
perceptual selection of the target is easier (Duncan & Humphreys, 1989b; Wolfe & Horowitz,
2017). If shifting of the target representation is a primarily task-adaptive mechanism to increase
target distinctiveness in response to the distractor context, then we would expect color shifting
to only occur in the high-orientation-similarity group when orientation is difficult to use and color
information is more diagnostic of the target; but we would also predict that this does not occur in
the low-orientation-similarity group because it will be easier to select the target based on
orientation. On the other hand, if shifting is an automatic perceptual response to targets
embedded within linearly separable distractors, the magnitude of color shifting should be similar
in the two groups because the color distractors were identical. Nevertheless, it is also possible
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 7
that the mechanism of shifting could be a combination of both task-adaptive and automatic
perceptual processes, rather than a clear-cut choice between the two hypotheses.
Method
Participants
The sample size of 140 was determined by a power calculation (.8 power, .05 two-tailed
significance) using results from Experiment 2 in Yu, Hanks, et al., (2022). Data were collected
participants after exclusion criteria were applied. 53 participants were excluded from the
analysis because of poor performance in standard search trials (accuracy was below 70%). A
large number of outliers was expected because the experiment was conducted online through
SONA and course credit was not tied to performance. 140 students (self-reported females =
103, males = 32, non-binary = 5, left-handed = 8, age range = 18 – 30 years) from the
University of California, Davis participated in partial fulfillment of a course requirement. They
were randomly assigned into the high-orientation-similarity or the low-orientation-similarity
groups (N=70 per group). All procedures were approved by the University of California, Davis
Internal Review Board (IRB).
Transparency and openness
This experiment was not preregistered. Deidentified data and the data analysis scripts
Stimuli
All oriented color bar stimuli were created in Illustrator, saved as PNG files, and
uploaded to Testable.org. Bars were 35 pixels wide and 85 pixels long. All stimuli were
presented against a mid-level gray background (RGB values: [128, 128, 128]). The colors of
stimuli were selected from a color wheel defined in CIELAB color space that only varied in hue
(coordinates: a = 0, b = 0; luminance = 70; radius = 38; from Bae et al., 2015). The color wheel
was an approximation to the cited color space as individual monitors were not calibrated. Two
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 8
conjunction targets (190° Color – 54° Orientation and 324° Color – 126° Orientation) were
counterbalanced across participants. The noncanonical colors and orientations were chosen to
avoid potential category effects on responses (Bae et al., 2015). Because the targets did not
influence search performance (ps > .13), the data were collapsed in all subsequent analyses to
maximize statistical power. The experiment consisted of two types of trials: visual search trials,
which were used to establish expectations for the distractor context, and memory probe trials,
which were used to measure the template contents independently of simultaneous distractor
competition.
Visual search trials. Of the total trials, 91% were visual search. Of those, 90% were
“color standard search trials.” On standard trials, the target was always present and was located
randomly at one of the 4 vertexes along an imaginary square (200 horizontal and vertical pixels
orientation-similarity group, the distractor orientations were either positively (i.e., 6°, 12°, and
low-orientation-similarity group, the distractor orientations were less similar to the target and
were either positive (i.e., 42°, 48°, and 54°) or negative rotations (i.e., -42°, -48°, and -54°) from
separable within a given trial, even though this separability was not consistently predictable
across trials. This decision was made to control for potential perceptual adaptation effects within
each feature dimension that might impact performance during a single trial. The distractor colors
were always the same and were rotated by 6°, 12°, and 18° from the target color. We chose to
only use color as the linearly separable feature because it commonly dominates visual search
(Alexander et al., 2019; Huang, 2015; Hulleman, 2020), however, see Experiment 2 in the
Supplemental Materials.
On the remaining 10% of visual search trials, the distractor colors were “reversed”
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 9
(i.e., -6°, -12°, and -18°). If visual search for the target was based on a shifted color
representation, reversal trials should produce a large performance decrement (lower accuracy,
longer RT) because distractors would suddenly become closer to the remembered target
feature than on standard trials.
Memory probe trials. Memory probe trials occurred in 9% of the total trials. During these
The color wheel contained 60 feature segments of different colors, respectively, split into 6°
bins. Each color segment was associated with a number from 1 to 60. Because the orientation
space spans only 180°, the orientation wheel was reflected across the vertical axis to extend the
range to a full 360° circle. This means that each orientation segment occurred twice, 180° apart.
asked to report the number next to the remembered target feature. There were 8 possible
rotations of the wheel.
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 10
participants were shown an example of the conjunction target. On 91% of the total trials, participants
performed a visual search task for a predefined target object and reported the number inside. The
remaining 9% of the trials involved a memory probe task, where participants were presented with either a
color wheel or an orientation wheel, and were asked to report the remembered target feature by selecting
the number associated with that feature. B) Illustration of distractor sets on visual search trials. Color
standard search (90% of search trials): The distractor colors were identical in the high-orientation-
similarity and low-orientation-similarity groups. They were drawn from the positive side of the color wheel
(i.e., bluer than the target color) and had a high degree of similarity to the target. However, while the
distractor orientations were consistently either positively or negatively rotated from the target within a
single trial, the direction was unpredictable across different trials. We anticipated that the predictable
linear separability of color across trials would play a role in shaping the target template, whereas the local
linear separability of distractor orientations, confined to a single trial, might have a limited impact. The
distractor orientations in the high-orientation-similarity group were highly similar to the target, whereas
they were more distant from the target in the low-orientation-similarity group. Color reversal search (10%
of search trials): Distractors were the same as those on standard search trials, with the exception that
now the distractor colors were negatively rotated from the target (i.e., greener than the target color). Here,
the dashed white squares highlight the target but were not visible to participants. Colors are exaggerated
for greater visibility.
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 11
Design and procedure
An example of the conjunction target was presented prior to the beginning of the
experiment. On visual search trials (91% trials), participants searched for the predefined target
and reported the number inside by pressing the button “U” for 1, “I” for 2, “O” for 3, or “P” for 4
with their right hand. Visual feedback (300 msec) was provided immediately following the
response. On memory probe trials (9% trials), participants were required to type the number of
the feature segment that best matched the target in memory in a response box at the bottom of
the screen. Both the search and probe display remained on the screen until the manual
response or up to 10 sec. After the response, a central fixation cross was presented for 800 –
1200 msec before the next trial started. Participants were instructed to fixate on the center cross
until task stimuli were presented.
After receiving instructions, participants began with a practice block of 20 standard
search trials. The main experiment was composed of 72 standard search trials, 8 reversal
search trials, and 8 memory probe trials (50% color probe and 50% orientation probe). Trials
were presented in 8 blocks, each containing 9 standard search trials, 1 reversal search trial, and
1 memory probe trial. The three types of trials were randomly interleaved within each block, with
the limitations that the probe trials appeared only after the standard search trials and that there
were no consecutive probe trials.
Following the main experiment, participants filled in a brief questionnaire, which was
intended to gauge awareness of the strategic use of each feature dimension to discriminate the
target from distractors. Two questions were posed simultaneously, “How frequently did you use
color to find the target?” and “How frequently did you use orientation to find the target?”
Participants answered each question by clicking on buttons corresponding to “Never,” “Rarely,”
“Sometimes,” “Often,” or “Always.” Because the questionnaire was given at the end of the
experiment, it could not influence performance on the visual search task.
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 12
Statistical analysis
Visual search trials with RT less than 250 msec or greater than 2500 msec were
excluded from data analyses, which accounted for 3.55% of data. The extent of disparity
between the probe responses and the actual target, measured at 6° intervals, serves as an
indicator of how closely the target representations in memory align with the veridical target
features. Probe trials with response errors beyond ±60° were excluded from data analyses,
which resulted in the removal of 0.18% of color probes and 1.96% of orientation probes. These
responses exceeding ±60° have already surpassed the defined boundaries for the two target
colors (Bae et al., 2015). These outliers are unlikely to genuinely reflect memory representations
(Störmer & Alvarez, 2014; Wang et al., 2015); rather, they are more likely due to accidental
response errors. Despite the difference in the full range of the two wheels, the actual “response
range” was similar and narrow in both feature dimensions. To ensure an adequate number of
data points for fitting with a Gaussian function, we did not average the memory probe responses
collected from each participant.1 Instead, we aggregated the memory probe responses across
parameters: μ, which represents the magnitude of template shifting away from the true target,
and σ, which represents the precision of the template. Smaller σ values indicate higher
precision.
All parameters from the Gaussian functions were estimated using a hierarchical
Bayesian parameter (HBA) estimation method. To perform HBA, we used the R package,
Bayesian Regression Models using “Stan” (brms) (Bürkner, 2017, 2018), and the probabilistic
programming language Stan (Carpenter et al., 2017). Normal and Gamma distributions were
used to set the hyperpriors of the normal mean (μ ~ Normal (0, 1)) and standard deviation (σ ~
Gamma (5, 1)). The range of Gelman-Rubin statistics across all parameter estimates was
1 Conventional frequentist statistics, where individuals were treated as a random factor, revealed similar
results of a shifted mean in the high-orientation-similarity group, but only for the color memory probe task.
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 13
between 0.99 – 1.01, suggesting satisfactory convergence. Goodness of fit was visually
In addition to using the Gaussian function, we also conducted a mixed 2 group (high-
orientation-similarity, low-orientation-similarity) × 2 dimension (color, orientation) ANOVA to
directly compare the mean of each participant’s memory probe responses. This analysis
complements the analysis of μ from the Gaussian function by considering both within-subject
and between-subject variance. The results of this analysis can be found in the Supplemental
Materials.
distribution of actual responses (histograms). Distance from the true target value (0°) is in color and
orientation degrees.
Results
Memory probe performance
Our main hypothesis was that shifting of the representation of the target color would only
occur when orientation similarity was high and hard to use (high-orientation-similarity group).
Under these conditions, target selection would be expected to rely more on color. However,
when orientation similarity was low (low-orientation-similarity group), color shifting would be less
adaptive because observers can easily use target orientation to select the target. To test this
hypothesis, we looked at the posterior distribution of the mean parameter (μ) estimated from
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 14
for each group and each dimension, which describes the 95% most credible values for the
parameter (Kruschke, 2018). The fitted models estimated the value of μ to be -5.15° (HDI 95%
col
= -5.81°, -4.50°) for the high-orientation-similarity group and -1.48° (HDI 95% = -2.36°, -0.60°)
for the low-orientation-similarity group. We found that the μ of both groups was significantly
col
shifted from the true target color (0°), probabilities > .99. Moreover, the fact that these intervals
are non-overlapping (probability > .99) indicates that the high-orientation-similarity group shifted
their color representation farther away from the target (in the direction opposite to distractor
colors) than the low-orientation-similarity group. This result is consistent with the argument that
target shifting has an adaptive function. In contrast to color, there was no difference between
groups in the estimation of target orientation (high-orientation-similarity group: Mean = -0.11°,
HDI 95% = -0.58°, 0.36°; low-orientation-similarity group: Mean = -0.90°, HDI 95% = -1.73°, -
0.04°), probability = .09. The estimated central tendency of memory for the target orientation
(μ ) was similar in both groups, and centered around the true value, as would be expected for a
ori
target flanked by distractors of both positive and negative rotations.2
2 We divided the orientation memory probe trials based on preceding visual search trials, distinguishing
between those with positively oriented distractors and those with negatively oriented distractors. No
significant differences were found in the probe responses within both groups. This indicates that the
orientation representation was not influenced by the local orientation linear separability in the immediately
preceding trial, but rather by the cumulative evidence across multiple trials (see the Supplemental
Materials).
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 15
dimension. Colored bars at the bottom indicate the 95% HDI for each group and each dimension. The
high-orientation-similarity group shifted their color representation farther away from distractors than the
low-orientation-similarity group. However, there was no difference between groups in the estimation of
target orientation.
Next, we assessed whether the standard deviations (σ) differed between groups. The
results showed that the σ estimated by the model was smaller in the high-orientation-similarity
Col
group (Mean = 7.36°, HDI 95% = 6.55°, 8.24°) compared with the low-orientation-similarity
group (Mean = 9.89°, HDI 95% = 8.91°, 10.97°), probability > .99. This means that the high-
orientation-similarity group had more precise memories of the target color than in the low-
orientation-similarity group even though the central tendency of that color memory was more
shifted. This indicates that shifting is not a result of poorer memory but rather an adaptive
process that moves target representations away from distractor features when doing so is useful
for visual search. Consistent with that interpretation, the σ of the orientation distributions did not
differ between groups (high-orientation-similarity group: Mean = 9.57°, HDI 95% = 9.02°, 10.14°;
low-orientation-similarity group: Mean = 8.82°, HDI 95% = 7.84°, 9.90°), probability = .14.
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 16
each dimension. Colored bars at the bottom indicate the 95% HDI for each group and each dimension.
The representation of the target color was more precise in the high-orientation-similarity group than in the
low-orientation-similarity group. In contrast, the precision of the target orientation did not differ between
groups.
Dimension reliance
Was color shifting associated with a stronger self-reported reliance on color
representation to locate the target? To answer this question, we transformed each response
option to a numerical value representing its relative frequency (i.e., “never”: 1; “rarely”: 2;
“sometimes”: 3; “often”: 4; “always”: 5). We performed a mixed 2 group (high-orientation-
similarity, low-orientation-similarity) × 2 dimension (color, orientation) ANOVA on these
was no effect of group, F(1, 138) = 1.93, p = .17, η 2 = .01, no effect of feature dimension, F(1,
138) = 1.95, p = .16, η 2 = .01, but there was a significant interaction, F(1, 138) = 201.26, p
< .0001, η 2 = .59. The results revealed that the high-orientation-similarity group reported using
color more often to find the target (M = 4.51, SD = 0.79), t(69) = 11.87, p < .0001, d = 2.01,
whereas the low-orientation-similarity group reported using orientation more frequently (M =
4.56, SD = 0.63), t(69) =10.55, p < .0001, d = 1.78. Therefore, consistent with the probe data,
self-reports of search strategies suggest that participants used color when orientation was
difficult but switched to rely more on orientation when it was more dissimilar and presumably
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 17
easier to use than color to find the target. This suggests that the ability to distinguish targets
from distractors depends heavily on feature (dis)similarity but that shifting is employed when it is
possible to use (i.e., when distractors are linearly separable) and confers an advantage (i.e.
when perceptual similarity along other feature dimensions is high).3
shown separately for color and orientation dimensions. All error bars represent the standard error of the
mean (SEM). The high-orientation-similarity group reported preferring to find the target using color but the
low-orientation-similarity group opted to use orientation.
Visual search performance
mixed 2 group (high-orientation-similarity, low-orientation-similarity) × 2 trial type (standard
search, reversal search) ANOVAs. For accuracy, there was a significant main effect of group,
F(1, 138) = 160.04, p < .0001, η 2 = .54, a significant main effect of trial type, F(1, 138) = 82.34,
p < .0001, η 2 = .37, and a significant interaction, F(1, 138) = 81.56, p < .0001, η 2 = .37. Post
p p
hoc t-tests found that the high-orientation-similarity group had significantly lower accuracy on
reversal search trials (M = .59, SD = .27) than on standard trials (M = .89, SD = .06), t(69) = -
9.30, p < .0001, d = -1.11. In contrast, accuracy in the low-orientation-similarity group was
3 Participants in the high-orientation-similarity group were divided into three subgroups, depending on
how often they reported using color and orientation. Among these subgroups, the one that relied more
heavily on color had the most significant negative bias in color representation and showed the highest
visual search accuracy. In contrast, the subgroup that relied primarily on orientation demonstrated no bias
in color representation and performed the worst in visual search. These results provide additional support
for the notion that target shifting is a task-adaptive mechanism (see the Supplemental Materials).
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 18
nearly at ceiling on both trial types (reversal search: M = .96, SD = .06; standard search: M
= .96, SD = .03), t(69) = -0.09, p = 1, d = -0.01.
For RT, there was a significant main effect of group, F(1, 138) = 22.33, p < .0001, η 2
= .14, a significant main effect of trial type, F(1, 138) = 92.87, p < .0001, η 2 = .40, and a
significant interaction, F(1, 138) = 46.58, p < .0001, η 2 = .25. Post hoc t-tests found that RT in
the high-orientation-similarity group was significantly longer for reversal trials (M = 1502 msec,
SD = 331 msec) than for standard trials (M = 1131 msec, SD = 213 msec), t(69) = 9.42, p
< .0001, d = 1.12. Although RT significantly differed between reversal (M = 1187 msec, SD =
218 msec) and standard (M = 1124 msec, SD = 176 msec) trials in the low-orientation-similarity
group, t(69) = 2.89, p = .01, d = 0.34, the difference (63 msec) was much smaller than in the
high-orientation-similarity group (371 msec). These results indicate that participants in the high-
orientation-similarity group experienced more interference from the negative distractor colors on
reversal search trials. This is consistent with the probe data showing that individuals in the high-
orientation-similarity group shifted the representation of the target color more than the low-
orientation-similarity group and also with the greater self-reported reliance on color in the high-
orientation-similarity group.
In addition, we compared performance on standard search trials between groups. The
accuracy of the low-orientation-similarity group was on average 7% higher than that of the high-
orientation-similarity group, t(138) = 9.15, p < .0001, d = 1.55. There was no statistical
difference in RT between the two groups, t(138) = 0.22, p = .83, d = 0.04. This suggests that
visual search was easier when it could rely on orientation dissimilarity than when it relied on
color shifting. Together, the accuracy and RT results indicate that shifting and sharpening the
target representation away from expected distractors is done to effectively increase the
psychological distinctiveness of the target from distractors to enhance performance (Yu & Geng,
2019) but that this only occurs when simpler solutions, such as relying on feature dissimilarity in
another dimension, is unavailable.
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 19
groups, separated by standard search (90% of visual search trials, the distractor colors were positively
rotated from the target color) or reversal search (10% of visual search trials, the distractor colors were
negatively rotated from the target color). All error bars represent the standard error of the mean (SEM).
Results show that the high-orientation-similarity group performed worse in reversal trials than in standard
trials, whereas the low-orientation-similarity group did not. This is consistent with the use of adaptive
shifting of target color in the high-orientation-similarity group but not the low-orientation-similarity group.
General Discussion
The current study investigated the mechanisms by which the target template and
attentional guidance are shaped by the distractor context. We used a target search task to
create expectations of distractor context and a separate memory probe task to measure the
representation of the target template. The critical question was whether the representation of
the conjunction target’s two dimensions would be affected by the utility of each dimension for
localizing the target. We hypothesized that the use of target shifting, a mechanism that
increases the distinctiveness of targets from linearly separable distractors, would only be
employed when distractor similarity along the other dimension was high and therefore less
useful for discriminating the target; however, when target-to-distractor similarity was low, target
shifting would no longer occur to the same degree. Our results were consistent, demonstrating
that target shifting is a task-adaptive mechanism and not just a passive perceptual outcome.
Moreover, the target template is highly flexible and reflects the necessary information that best
predicts what will distinguish targets from distractors based on previous experience.
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 20
Although target shifting in response to linearly separable distractors has been shown in
different contexts, there remains a question of whether the effects are due to task-adaptive
mechanisms or passive simultaneous contrast effects (Bauer et al., 1996; Chapman et al.,
2023; Kerzel, 2020; Pouget & Bavelier, 2007; Yu & Geng, 2019). The current experiment
addressed this long-standing question by manipulating the target-to-distractor similarity in
orientation across groups while keeping the linear separability of targets and distractors in color
was shifted further away from distractor colors in the high-orientation-similarity group;
correspondingly, reversal trials only impaired visual search performance in the same group. Off-
veridical color shifting in the target template was more pronounced when color was relied upon
more to discriminate the target from distractors, illustrating that target shifting in visual search
contexts cannot be attributed to that of simultaneous stimulus contrast alone. These data
suggest that target shifting reflects a task-adaptive mechanism that serves to increase the
representational distinctiveness of targets from expected distractors and improve visual search
performance.
The off-veridical shift and high precision of the target color in memory in the high-
orientation-similarity group replicate Yu and Geng (2019). When highly similar distractors come
from only one side of the target space, the template shifts away and is more sharpened,
increasing the efficiency of visual search performance (Kerzel, 2020; Lau et al., 2021).
However, when the conjunction target was more discriminated along the orientation dimension,
there was no longer a need to build a more distinct representation of the target color. Instead,
participants could rely on the easier dimension, orientation, to locate the target, negating the
need to adjust the color representation. One reason that shifting might not occur when distractor
similarity is low (and search is easy) might be that shifting is an active internal mechanism to
reduce competition that requires some form of cognitive effort but similarity is a perceptual
property of the external display in which competition is already low. However, future
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 21
experiments are necessary to precisely determine how to quantify the relative effortfulness of
using different feature information.
This interpretation is consistent with the surprise self-report questionnaire at the end of
the experiment. Participants in the high-orientation-similarity group reported using color more to
find the target whereas participants in the low-orientation-similarity group reported using
orientation more. The visual search accuracy and RT results converge with the self-report
responses to strengthen our previous conclusions that shifting and sharpening are more effortful
strategies that are only used when necessary to counteract pressure from competitive
distractors (Geng et al., 2017; Lau et al., 2021; Yu & Geng, 2019). The adaptive use of feature
information in attentional control is in line with the idea that visual search operates on the
simplest, good-enough information to rapidly pick out targets with minimal cognitive effort
(Draschkow et al., 2020; Droll & Hayhoe, 2007; Irons & Leber, 2018; Yu et al., 2023).
It should be pointed out that the color representation in the low-orientation-similarity
group was also shifted away from the distractor colors, although the magnitude of this shift was
only about -1.5°. This suggests that simultaneous contrast does play a role in creating a shift in
the target representation, but does not account for the entire effect during visual search (see
also Chapman et al., 2023). This result may superficially appear to be at odds with findings from
Hamblin-Frohman and Becker (2021), in which they observed a strong perceptual color contrast
effect when the target was surrounded by target-similar distractors. However, their task differed
from ours on a number of dimensions, including the number and color homogeneity of the
distractor set, as well as the size and distance of distractors. Perhaps more importantly, the task
in Hamblin-Frohman and Becker (2021) was to report the unique color in the search arrays,
which relied on color information generally but not on the representation of a specific color
defining target identity. Additionally, our task gave participants the option to find the target solely
based on orientation. It is still an open question how the exact stimulus configurations and task
demands play a role in task-adaptive color processing versus color contrast effects.
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 22
Nevertheless, our results demonstrate a case in which color shifting is reduced when color is
used less to guide attention, illustrating conclusively that target shifting involves task-adaptive
mechanisms.
Successful achievement of sophisticated visual search tasks requires the ability to
selectively enhance goal-relevant information in variable distractor contexts (Gottlieb, 2018;
Nobre & Stokes, 2019; Wolfe, 2021). The best approach to finding a target might seem to be to
use all of its known features, but our results suggest that attentional control mechanisms
compared the computations required to distinguish targets from distractors along each feature
dimension and prioritized the more diagnostic one. Similar results have been found in other
situations. For example, when distractors are more similar to the target in one dimension, the
less similar dimension is prioritized (Barras & Kerzel, 2017; Boettcher et al., 2020; Lee & Geng,
2020; Liesefeld & Müller, 2019). Attention also prioritizes the more reliable target feature
(Witkowski & Geng, 2019, 2022). These results fit well with the “dimension-weighting” account
of visual attention, which hypothesizes that information from each target feature is weighted
based on expectations of how informative each dimension will be (Müller et al., 1995; Tollner et
al., 2012; Töllner et al., 2010; Weidner & Muller, 2013). Our current results go beyond to show
those additional task-adaptive mechanisms, such as target shifting, are only activated when that
dimension is currently prioritized for target selection.
Our findings suggest that target representations may lean more towards relying on
statistics that predict the most efficient approach for selecting targets from distractors within the
expected context, rather than an immediate computation of the current context. This observation
is consistent with the statistical learning literature, which emphasizes that attention is highly
sensitive to the anticipated (i.e., probable) perceptual context in which targets occur (Chun &
Jiang, 1999; Fiser & Aslin, 2002; Geng & Behrmann, 2005; Hansmann-Roth et al., 2023; Jiang
& Song, 2005; Rogers et al., 2021; Vickery et al., 2010). Future experiments will be essential to
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 23
assess how the weighting of dimensions dynamically shifts based on the accumulated evidence
learned across trials, and the present evidence within the ongoing trial.
Taken together, the present study provides strong evidence that the target template is
task-adaptive and can be dynamically adjusted by distractor context. Expectations regarding the
linear separability of the distractor set from the target produced a systematic shift in the target
template away from distractors. However, this modulation is an adaptive mechanism to increase
the representational distinctiveness of the target from distractors, even if it means compromising
the precision of the template-to-target match. Nevertheless, when shifting is unnecessary for
achieving the goal of distinguishing the target from distractors, it does not happen. Our work
joins a growing literature that reframes the target template as a custom set of information that
best differentiates the target from non-targets in the current environment (Geng & Witkowski,
2019; Lleras et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2023).
Constraints on generality
Our study includes mainly Asian and Caucasian undergraduates who are highly
educated, with an overrepresentation of females. Thus, we advise being careful when
generalizing our findings to other populations. However, we focused on examining fundamental
characteristics of visual search that are typically explored across human subjects. As a result,
we anticipate that the general principles we investigated here will not differ significantly between
human subjects, including individuals of varying genders, ethnicities, or cultural backgrounds.
TASK-ADAPTIVE TEMPLATE SHIFT 24