Female idols in Japan: Desiring desire, fantasmatic consumption and
drive satisfaction
East Asian Journal of Popular Culture EAJPC 6.1. (1 April 2020), pp. 93-109 (preprint)
Pieter-Jan Van Haecke, independent scholar
ABSTRACT
In this article, the author explores the idol-phenomenon in Japanese society and, more
specifically, how the relation between the idol-image and the otaku should be
understood. By analysing the way in which the otaku interacts with his desired idol-
image, the author is able to explain how an otaku comes to desire an idol-image and
how his supportive consumption of her commodities constitutes an investment in her
grand-narrative of lack. He also shows how this consumption, as driven by the otaku’s
desire to desire, concerns a consumption of fantasies of the supposedly writable sexual
relationship as well as a consumption of images that satisfies the scopic drive.
Eventually, the author concludes that the interaction of the otaku with his desired idol-
image, an interaction devoid of female subjects, remains beyond any true love
whatsoever.
KEYWORDS: idols, otaku, Lacanian theory, desire, scopic drive, fantasy
INTRODUCTION: THE IDOL AS A PRODUCED, LIFE-SIZED IMAGE
Egao YES nude
anata dakara watashi na no yo
aishiaeba tomaranai wa
owari shiranu romio to jurietto.
(Morning Musume 2007: track 4)
Wherever one walks in Japan, one has the chance to encounter advertisements of idols
promoting the latest products. Likewise on television, be it in commercials, variety
shows, game shows, etc., one is regularly greeted by cute smiling girls. Idols are even
featured in manga magazines (Young Animal) and in gravure magazines (Entame).
Considering this widespread presence across multiple fields in Japanese society, one
would almost forget that these idols are, first and foremost, singers and dancers.
The fact that idols are so omnipresent and idol-groups endlessly proliferate has
not escaped the attention of scholars around the world. Exploring this aidoru genshō
(Idol phenomenon), scholars underline three important facets that characterize these
energetically dancing and singing girls.
The first characteristic concerns the fact that idols are, in essence, images.
Galbraith (2012: 186) convincingly argues that idols ‘occupy the same conceptual space’
as anime, manga and videogame characters. The signifier imēji kyarakutā (image
character), which is also used to denote idols in marketing campaigns, further highlights
the image-essence of the idol.
The second characteristic scholars have sufficiently explored concerns the role
of the jimusho, i.e. the performer management companies that dominate and structure
the Japanese entertainment industry. The jimusho are responsible for training the
female subjects who come to embody the idol-image they have carefully produced for
them. That the jimusho, acting as mothers, raise ‘them in singing, dancing and other
skills, [schedule] […] daily activities, [book] […] television appearances […] and
[coordinate] […] live performances’, implies that the idol-images are products of their
jimusho and that the female subjects have very little creative input in the process of
embodying their idol-image (Condry 2006; Marx 2012: 38). A final characteristic
concerns the fact that the female subjects who are chosen by the jimusho are usually
not extraordinarily talented in singing, dancing and/or acting – their ‘talent’ generally
ranges between ‘fairly untalented’ and ‘having talent just above average’. Both the
signifier hijitsuryoku (non-ability), which emerged in the mid-80s to denote what fans
desired in an idol, and the signifier tōshindai (life-sized) underline that the idol-image
finds its support in the female subject’s absence of extraordinary talent (Aoyagi 2005;
Galbraith 2012).
While these elements (image, being produced and life-sized) already give
important indications to understand the Japanese idol, this article aims to provide a
deeper understanding of these life-sized manufactured idol-images. In the first part of
this article, the imaginary, the symbolic and the real dimensions of the idol will be
successively explored. By approaching these dimensions from the viewpoint of the
idol-image’s most ardent fans, i.e. the male idol-otaku, I will be able to highlight how
the idol-otaku enters into relation with an idol-image and how this relation should be
characterized. In the second part, a deeper examination of the specificity of this relation
will be provided. This will allow us to show how the idol-otaku keeps consuming,
which function the idol-image has for the otaku, and how the otaku can satisfy himself.
Finally, I will question if the relation between the otaku and the idol-image can be
understood as a love relationship.
CAPTURING THE DESIRE OF THE OTAKU: THE AIMED-FOR-OBJECT A
The first thing I need to clarify is how a particular idol-image can become desirable for
the idol-otaku. How is the idol-otaku able to encounter an idol-image he can desire
among the endless proliferation of idol-images in Japanese society, among a near
endless supply of idol-images aiming to become desired by him?
That not every idol-image can become desirable for an otaku-subject or, as
Galbraith (2012: 188) formulates it, that it has become ‘increasingly difficult [for
producers] to predict consumer tastes’, underlines the fact that whenever an otaku is
faced with an idol-image his subjectivity is in play. Whether an idol-image is raised to
the status of oshimen, i.e. one’s favourite idol-image from a certain idol-group, or one
enters into a relation of gachi-koi (serious love) depends solely on the particularity of
the otaku as such. While an otaku can have more than one oshimen, the gachi-koi
relation entails the otaku’s loyal dedication to only one idol-image while having
virtually no interest in other idol-images or subjects of the other sex.
The possibility for an idol-image to capture the desire of the otaku has to be
situated in the otaku’s meeting with the idol as image. In this meeting the otaku-subject
does not meet the idol-image in its entirety, but encounters a partial aspect, a difficult
to concretize ‘something’ of the body-image. That diffuse ‘something’ that the otaku
encounters in the idol’s body-image as embodied by a particular female subject, that
aspect that glistens in the eye of the otaku, is nothing other than the hidden presence of
the agalmatic object (Miller 2004). In order to highlight that this encountered object is
an experience residing on the side of the otaku as a subject and not anything that the
idol-image as such possesses, I need to introduce the difference that Miller makes
between object a as object-cause of desire and object a as the aimed-for-object (Miller
2004). While the object a that causes the otaku’s desire resides on the side of the subject,
the otaku’s perception of a glistening object a in the body-image gives his desire its
aim. The latter object, while possessing the important function to lure the desire of the
otaku, is nothing other than a deceptive semblance (Miller 2004).
That the jimusho, the performer management companies, have a persevering
aspiration of ensnaring the male gaze of the otaku and his desire is illustrated by the
endless exhibition of the idol-body-images embodied by these female subjects in a
societal space. While this aspiration is already hinted at by the diffused presence of
idol-images at different levels of Japanese society as such, one can find the best
illustration of it in Promotional Videos (PVs) and Music Videos (MVs). These videos,
besides aiming to promote new-to-be-released singles, also showcase the idol-images
as such. Especially, the close-up sections that exhibit a particular idol-body-image as
she makes eye contact with the spectator aim to force a luring encounter with the aimed-
for-object that can capture his desire and thus instigate his consumption. This seducing
feature of these videos is clearly illustrated by the PV’s of Tsuribit (2015) and
S/mileage (2014).
IMPLICATIONS FOR CONSUMPTION: SUBJECTIFIED COMMODITIES
The aspect of meeting the aimed-for-object in the body-image of the female subject
who embodies the idol-image has far-reaching implications on how idol-image related
commodities should be understood. While it makes sense from the perspective of the
entertainment industry to conceptualize the idol-image as a commodity in itself or as
image-commodity as Lukács (2010) puts it, this conceptualization appears insufficient
when approached from the perspective of the subjectivity of the male otaku. Since
commodities, as carriers of idol-images, only gain subjective value by the object a the
otaku-subject perceives in the idol-image, I propose to use the more appropriate
signifier ‘subjectified commodities’. With this signifier, I aim to underline that the
‘external’ idol-image can only become a catalyst for consumption by becoming an
‘internal’ presence for the otaku. In other words, the idol-image that adorns the
commodities is desired and consumed precisely because this idol-image, by becoming
an internal presence in the desiring economy of the subject, loses its externality. The
consumption of commodities of his desired idol-image is therefore driven by the
internal presence of that external idol-image. The perceived possession of object a in
the body-image of the idol makes the externality of her image and the commodities her
image adorns continuous with her internality.
But what is the function of the otaku`s consumption of the subjectified
commodities of either his oshimen or the idol-image implicated in a relation of gachi-
koi? In my view, the otaku’s consumption allows him to construct the narrative that
structures his desired idol-image.
THE IDOL-IMAGE AS A GRAND-NARRATIVE OF LACK
Donna koto mo futari de issho ni norikoe te ikitainda
Dare ni mo mane dekinai SUTOORI
Itsu made mo anata dake no tame ni
Utaitsudzukete iku kara ne yakusoku.
(Kashiwagi 2013: Type-A track 3)
By introducing the narrative dimension or the symbolic dimension of the idol-image, I
want to emphasize that the idol-image can only produce signification for the otaku as a
narrative. In order to explain how the consumption of (subjectified) commodities
enables the otaku-subject to construct his desired idol-image’s narrative, i.e. the
network of signifiers that give meaning to her presence in the Japanese societal space,
it’s fruitful to introduce Eiji Otsuka’s theory of Monogatari Shohiron (narrative
consumption theory).
Using the example of bikkuriman chocolates, Otsuka (2010) convincingly
argues that the main object of consuming these chocolates was to obtain the grand-
narrative, rather than the chocolate or the individual stickers. Only by way of gathering
stickers, i.e. ‘the differential and fragmented “small narrative” commodity form[s]’,
children were able to gain hold of the grand-narrative (Otsuka 2010: 109). In a similar
way, I argue that the narrative of the idol-image constitutes such kind of grand-narrative,
a narrative grounded by her own name and/or nickname that is only accessible by
consuming the (subjectified) commodities, the small-narratives of that idol-image.
Nevertheless, contrary to Otsuka’s theory, the grand-narrative of the idol-image is not
a given before consumption, but something that is to be consumed in its process of
becoming, a metonymic consumption of small narratives writing the grand-narrative up
until the final small-narrative. The myriad of small narratives are, in other words, the
very coordinates by which the consuming otaku is able to construct the grand-narrative
of his desired idol-image.
The coming-into-being of her grand-narrative, which highlights the temporal
aspect of the idol-image’s grand-narrative, coincides with the process of becoming that
marks the idol-image as such. The grand-narrative tells, in its process of being written
by the proliferation of small-narratives, a narrative of becoming. This narrative of
becoming can only function because it circles around lack.
The lack that underpins the idol-image’s grand-narrative of becoming can be
situated at two different levels. The first lack, a structural lack, is found at the level of
the temporal frame of the grand-narrative. The grand-narrative is ever framed by the
transient period between ‘not being a child anymore’ and ‘having become a woman’
and is thus characterized by a lack of mature womanhood or by an infinite girlhood.
This lack is usually emphasized by visual references (e.g. school uniforms, junior or
high school settings for PV or MV’s, etc.) to the junior and senior high school period,
which spans from 12 to 18 years old. In some cases, this school-period is explicitly
referred to in the idol-band’s name, as Shiritsu Ebisu Chugaku (Ebisu Private Junior
High School), Sakura Gakuin (Cherry Blossom Academy), Flap Girls School and
Aoyama Saint Hachamecha High School illustrate. In other cases, such as Yumemiru
Adolescence and groups with ‘girls’ in their name, the lack of womanhood is explicitly
mentioned.
It might come as a surprise that many female subjects embodying an idol-image
have enjoyed their seijin-shiki (coming of age ceremony at the age of 20), but this only
reveals that the evoking of this transient period, this girlhood – with or without the
backdrop of the high school years – is far more important than the actual age of the
female subject or the actual school year she is in. The idol-image’s girlhood, her lack-
of-surplus, forms the structural fantasmatic backdrop of her entire grand-narrative.
Within the grand-narrative of the idol-image, as marked by an infinite girlhood,
another lack is ever in play. This lack, which gives direction to the idol-image’s grand-
narrative, is evoked by the dreams (of becoming an actress, of becoming better at
dancing among others) that a given idol-image expresses. Even though these dreams
and the lack they denote may shift as the idol-image’s grand-narrative unfolds, the
presence of a lack the idol wants to resolve is never annulled.
The fact that the idol-image wants to realize certain dreams structures the
interaction between the otaku and his desired idol-image around the notion of ganbaru
(to support). Every interaction between the otaku and his desired idol-image is, in
essence, an interaction of ganbaru. It is only because his desired idol-image is lacking
with respect to a certain ideal-image she wants to realize, that the support of the otaku-
subject becomes meaningful. It is, in other words, her energetic intention to realize that
ideal-image that resonates with the otaku-subject and gives rise to his supportive
consumption. That the easiest way for the idol-otaku to support his desired idol-image
is by consuming her small-narratives that trace out her grand-narrative of lack, should
not surprise anyone.
ACCESSING HER GRAND-NARRATIVE BY CONSUMING SMALL-
NARRATIVES
Having revealed the lack expressed at the level of dreams and the lack of womanhood
that imprisons her in an infinite girlhood, both of which serve to structure the idol-
image’s grand-narrative, I can now turn our attention to the small-narratives by which
the idol-otaku can express his support and construct the grand-narrative of lack that
structures his desired idol-image.
I propose to classify the abundance of small-narratives into three different
categories. The first category, the small-image-narratives, is mainly preoccupied with
the exhibition of the idol-body-image. This category includes shashin-shū
(photobooks), gravure, photographs that are either signed, kissed (by way of lipstick)
or sprayed by her perfume, ishou kadou (costume cards), Instagram profiles,
commercials and promotional campaigns. The small-image/signifier-narratives, the
second category, emphasize signifiers and image in an equal manner and include imeiji
bideo (image video), concerts, PVs, MVs, akushukai (hand-shake events),
Showroom, and television appearances. In the third category, the small-signifier-
narratives emphasize the idol-image’s narrative dimension. These small-narratives
include CD’s, twitter-profiles, Line and Ameba-blogs, magazine interviews and
messages on official Facebook pages.
The reason why such a classification is important is to reveal that the categories
where the idol-body-image is on the fore enable the otaku-subject to keep encountering
the aimed-for-object of his desire, while the categories where signifiers are on the
foreground introduce the idol-otaku to the lacks that mark his desired idol-image’s
grand-narrative.
Lastly, it is important to note that the consumption of small-narratives as
subjectified commodities means that the idol-image’s grand-narrative of lack can only
be read as a subjectified grand-narrative of lack. The idol-otaku is, in other words, only
able to read his desired idol-image’s grand-narrative of lack by inserting – via the
consumption of images and signifiers – his own position of support within this grand-
narrative of lack. This supportive position, a position inaugurated by the capturing of
the otaku’s desire and supported by the dreams the desired idol-image has, is thus not
only the fundamental dimension that marks the idol-otaku’s interaction with his
oshimen or the idol-image subjected to his gachi-koi, but also the way he marks the
grand-narrative of his desired idol-image with his subjectivity.
THE BODILY SUPPORT OF THE GRAND-NARRATIVE OF LACK
Karada dake ga otona ni natta you na
Kimetsuke de mikudasu to naki miru yo
Mou sukoshi surya makka na kuchibeni de
Anta no kokoro wo zenbu sometageru
Makenai yo.
(Juice=Juice 2016: track 2)
Even though idol-images only receive signification when their subjectified small-
narratives are consumed, the idol-images and their grand-narratives cannot function
without a material bodily support. An idol-image needs, in other words, a real body
(and a real voice) to animate and vitalize the double lack that marks its grand-narrative.
While I already touched upon this bodily support in our explanation of how the
desire of the otaku is ensnared by the idol-body-image, the role the body plays can only
be grasped by contrasting it with the bodily supported idol-image with Hatsune Miku,
world’s first true virtual idol-image.
In the case of Hatsune Miku, her ‘body’ as well as her ‘voice’ are non-material
commodities. Programmes like MikuMikuDance and MikuMikuMoving enables the
idol-otaku to animate the virtual body of Miku and by using Yamaha’s vocaloid
software technology the otaku is given the tools to make Hatsune Miku sing whatever
lyrics he can come up with. As there is no bodily support whatsoever, since Hatsune
Miku is nothing but digital data, the male otaku is given the responsibility to vitalize
the virtual idol-image with his subjectivity, i.e. his signifiers and his fantasies. The
contrast between this and the commodification of the body and the voice and the
grounding of the idol image in a living speaking/singing body enables us to unearth
three additional characteristics of the non-virtual idol-image.
The first characteristic is spatial in nature and concerns the seemingly trivial
fact that the bodily support gives the idol-image an ‘independent’ spatial presence in
the social space. In other words, the idol-image moves and dances and speaks and sings
of her own accord. This is easily experienced at handshake events and live
performances. And even in the fixation of the idol-image as a surface-reality (for
instance, in gravure, MV/PV’s, photobooks and image-videos) her spatial existence is
ever implied. Thus, while the idol is an image with a narrative, she is, due to this bodily
support, more than just a ‘reality’ confined to the two-dimensional surfaces of the
Japanese societal space.
Secondly, the presence of bodily support installs a temporal dimension. The
temporal presence of a particular bodily support inaugurates the barebones structure of
the idol-image’s grand-narrative of lack, a grand-narrative starting with her
promotion/selection and ending with her sotsugyō (graduation), i.e. her graduation from
girlhood. The ‘heavy rotation’ of bodily supports, the ebb and flow of bodily supports,
furthermore implies that, while the idol-image needs to be animated by a body, its
grand-narrative of lack functions irrespective of the body that brings this narrative to
life.
The last characteristic concerns the lack present in the bodily support as such, a
bodily lack supporting the evocation of the lack of womanhood as well as the lack
expressed through the dreams signifying the idol-image. As the age when female
subjects become a support for the idol-image is generally young, their bodies
corroborate the lack of womanhood endlessly evoked in the small-narratives. Of course,
as the female subject ages – as she passes the adolescence, her body grows towards
adulthood as well. The otaku-subject is thus given, in accordance with his position of
support, the chance to experience the bodily ‘growth’ of his oshimen or the idol-image
subjected to his gachi-koi. Nevertheless, a lack of well-pronounced secondary sexual
characteristics is not a fundamental condition for the idol-image’s grand-narrative of
lack to be able to function. As the gravure spreads of Asakawa Nana (from
SUPER☆GiRLS) and Nemoto Nagi (from Niji no Conquistador) for example illustrate,
having well-pronounced bodily aspects, i.e. a notable cup size, is not problematic in
any way. The interplay between this bodily surplus and the lack-of-surplus inherent to
the schoolgirl position can, in fact, even enhance the potency of the idol-image to
capture the otaku’s desire.
The bodily lack is also made present by the imperfection that marks the singing
and dancing performances of idol-images. This lack of having extra-ordinary talent,
designated by the signifier life-sized in our introduction, generally finds its echo in the
dreams idol-images have, her dreams of becoming a better dancer, a better singer, etc.
Because of its link to the idol-image’s dreams, this lack never fails to empower the
interactions of support between the idol-otaku and his desired idol-image. That the
bodily lack corroborates the lack brought to the fore in many small-narratives, gives the
support of the idol-otaku, a support underpinned by his desire, a dimension of
necessity. It is only through his supportive consumption, which coincides with his
subjectification of his desired idol-image’s grand-narrative, that the idol-otaku is able
to take part in (and supposedly enable) the idol-image’s process of ‘growing to be less
lack-ing’, i.e. the seicho o miru (to see growth) (Galbraith 2012: 196).
KAWAII AND ITS RELATION TO THE LACK OF WOMANHOOD AND THE
AIMED-FOR-OBJECT
Having explained the importance of the aimed-for-object in capturing the otaku’s desire
and the importance of lack, bodily as well as at the level of the small-narratives, in
sustaining the supportive position of the otaku, I can now further explore the
particularities surrounding the relation of the otaku to his oshimen or the idol-image
subjected to his gachi-koi.
First of all, there is a need to clarify the link between kawaii (cute) and the
double lack that structures the grand-narrative of the idol-image as well as its relation
to the beautification of the aimed-for-object perceived by the otaku in his desired idol-
image.
The notion of kawaii, a polysemic signifier used to denote all sorts of images
(persons, animals or objects) as cute, is generally used to aesthetically uplift
imperfection and incompleteness. The centrality of lack in the kawaii discourse is
evident in the modern origins of this discourse, i.e. ‘the cute handwriting craze’ that
started in 1974 and became a nationwide phenomenon by 1978 (Kinsella 1995: 222).
Burikko-ji (fake child writing) and the kawaii fashion it engendered constituted a form
of rebellion against traditional Japanese social values or, in our words, an appropriation
of lack with respect to the traditional expectations structuring Japanese society. Kawaii
thus implicitly damned adulthood.
It is not difficult to see that the lack of womanhood that structures the idol-
image’s grand narrative is important for framing her as kawaii. The idol-image,
suspended from womanhood and the implicit and explicit societal expectations of
sekinin (responsibility) that marks such womanhood, is kept in a continual state of pure
and innocent girlhood. The kawaii nature of the idol-image’s girlhood is mainly
corroborated through gestures, comportments, speech and the way she has been clothed,
e.g. with certain types of costumes, make-up and hairstyles.
The fact that almost any aspect of the idol-image can evoke kawaii-ness implies
that kawaii has to be understood as an aesthetic discourse within the Japanese Other,
the Other being ‘the locus of the treasure trove of signifiers’ as well as the ‘complex
network of rules and other kinds of presuppositions’ that one accepts and relies on to
ground one’s reality (Lacan [1966] 2005: 682; Žižek 2007: 8). In other words, kawaii
is a discourse of the Other, an Other ‘supported’ by all the individuals subjected to the
very signifiers, rules, and discourses this Other consists of. This aspect enables us to
understand why this aesthetic discourse, as enclosed in the Japanese Other, functions
like ‘the desire of the Other’ with respect to ‘the desire of man’, of the otaku (Lacan
[1973] 2004: 235). As the otaku, like any other individual, comes-into-being in the
Japanese Other by becoming subjected by the signifiers of the Other, his desire is
mediated by this Other he derives his symbolic existence from. But the kawaii discourse
can only influence the desire of the otaku by structuring the intermediary element: the
fantasy of the otaku.
As the fantasy provides the subject with ‘the coordinates of his desire, specifies
its […] [aimed-for-object], and allocates him the position he assumes in it’ (Žižek 1991:
6), it is not that difficult to understand why the aimed-for-object of the otaku is always
marked by kawaii aesthetics. It is because the very possibility of encountering the
aimed-for-object in the body-image of the idol-image is in function of the otaku’s
fantasy.
That the aimed-for-object is marked by kawaii aesthetics is illustrated by the
way the otaku uses the signifier kawaii. While this signifier is used to deem all kinds of
appearances, comportments and statements of one’s oshimen or the idol-image subject
to his gachi-koi as ‘sweet’ and ‘cute’ – elements pointing to her lack, the otaku’s use of
this signifier comes down to an attempt to qualify the aimed-for-object a, the ‘zero-
point of desire’, that the otaku encountered and keeps encountering in the body-image
of his desired idol (Lacan [2004] 2014: 241–42). The otaku’s use of kawaii as a
signifier thus implies a corroboration of his desire for his oshimen or the gachi-koi-
image as such.
REN’AI KINSHI: THE DESIRE TO DESIRE AND THE DESIRE FOR
RECOGNITION
Even though I have explained the supportive relation between the otaku and the idol-
image as instigated by his desire, a desire directed towards the perceived kawaii aimed-
for-object, I have not touched upon the fundamental question of what the otaku actually
desires.
It is the rule of ren’ai kinshi, a rule mediating the relation between the otaku and
the desired idol-image, that gives us the first indication of what the otaku’s desire aims
for. This rule, a common rule in the Japanese entertainment industry, forbids female
subjects who embody the idol-image to be publicly involved in romantic relationships
with fans or other men. Could one, based on this rule, assume that the idol-otaku desires
a romantic relationship with his oshimen or the idol-image subjected to his gachi-koi?
Is the desire, a desire directed at the aimed-for-object, a desire to have a relationship
with the idol-image as a whole?
The answer is surprisingly no. As most idol-otaku’s fully realize that their idol-
image, while having a bodily support, is but a fictional performance, the ren’ai kishi
should be viewed as a translation of an inherent impossibility that structures the
supporting interaction between the otaku and his desired idol-image (Okudara 2016).
This impossibility is underlined by the consequences of transgressing the rule of ren’ai
kinshi. Such a transgressing, denoted by the signifier tsunagaru (to be connected to),
annuls the distance the rule installs between the otaku and the idol-image. The annulling
of this distance, through establishing a relationship with one’s desired idol-image,
forces the female subject who up until that point embodied the desired idol-image to
manifest herself as a subject. Such a forced appearance destroys by definition the
necessary fictionality of this image.
The impossibility of transforming the supportive relation of desire into a
romantic relationship with one’s desired idol-image, in fact, supports the otaku in a
desire not to realize their desire. Their desire is, in essence, not a desire for a relationship.
Instead, the otaku-subject unconsciously realizes ‘the essential dimension of desire’
which is ‘the desire of desire’ (Lacan [1986] 1992: 14). The otaku needs the distance
corroborated by ren’ai kinshi in order to keep his desire in a state of desiring.
Nevertheless, the distance safeguarded by ren-ai kinshi also supports another
(more imaginary) desire, a desire underpinned by the unconscious desire to desire. This
desire concerns the ‘desire of recognition’ or, in better words, the desire to have one
desire recognized (Kojève [1947] 1980: 7). The importance of this desire is revealed by
the signifier resu (response). Resu is used to designate those moments at live
performances where one’s oshimen or the idol-image subjected to one’s gachi-koi
makes some form of eye-contact with the otaku. This kind of eye-contact, which of
course elicits some pleasure, has no other effect than validating the otaku’s desire and
the relation of support he installed. The importance of having one’s desire validated is
also underlined by the signifier ninchi (acknowledgement). This signifier is used when
the desired idol-image remembers the otaku’s face and name. The derived signifier
blog/twitter ninchi, which concerns the recognition of one’s blog or twitter by the idol-
image – a recognition that provides possible conversation topics at handshake events –
further pleasures the otaku’s desire to have one’s desire recognized, while engendering
feelings of closeness.
The importance of such recognition of one’s desire is most clearly illustrated by
the unusual but tragic stabbing-incident (Stabbed idol 2016). When Tomohiro Iwazaki,
who wanted to know why Mayu Tomita, his desired idol as image, returned his gift,
attacked the girl embodying the idol-image he desired with a knife, he did not
experience her refusal of his gift and her ‘unsatisfactory’ explanation as a refusal to
satisfy his desire but as a refusal to recognize and legitimate his desire.
Now, the relation between ren’ai kinchi and the otaku’s desire can be better
understood. This rule safeguards the distance between the otaku and the desired idol-
image, so that the otaku’s desire to desire can subsist and the otaku can extract some
pleasure by seeing his desire recognized. Desire needs this obstacle of distance in order
to remain desiring (Hoornaert 2018). But this continuous desiring state, as already
touched upon earlier, also needs the support of the otaku’s fantasy, which is formed by
his birth in the Japanese Other (Lacan [1973] 2004). The question now becomes: what
kind of fantasy sustains the otaku’s desire?
THE FUNCTION OF THE IDOL-IMAGE: FANTASMATIC CONSUMPTION
I love you ja mono tan’nai
You love me ga nakutcha ne
You & Me de aishi aou
Motto, motto, motto.
(Gem 2015)
The fantasy that supports the otaku’s desire and enables him to locate his aimed-for-
object of desire is nothing other than the otaku’s private fantasy of writing a sexual
relationship. As there is no harmonious, natural relation between the sexes – ‘the sexual
relation does not exist’ as Lacan pronounced, such private fantasy gives out the
particular coordinates by which a sexual relationship might be written (Lacan [1991]
2007: 134).
That the otaku’s fantasy of a writable sexual relationship is able to sustain his
desire for a certain idol-image is caused by the very dynamic his supportive position of
consuming puts in motion. By consuming her signifiers, the signifiers expressed in her
small-image/signifier-narratives, e.g. PVs and image-video’s, and the small-signifier-
narratives, e.g. songs, the otaku is not only able to appropriate the grand-narrative of
lack of his desired idol-image, but also to revel in the fantasies she endlessly produces.
These fantasies exploit her lack of romance (as ensured by ren-ai kinshi) in order to
evoke a supposedly writable sexual relation with her.
These small-narratives, which are always fantasmatic in nature, call the singular
fantasy of the otaku into play. The signifiers expressed in the consumed and subjectified
commodities reflect the otaku’s own desire as well as evoke what is/should be desirable
as such. The fantasmatic commodities (of a writable sexual relationship) are thus not
scenarios that fulfil the otaku’s desire, but scenarios that ‘realizes, stages, […] [his]
desire as such’ (Zizek 1991: 6). That the otaku’s fantasy, ever in perpetual
communication with the fantasmatic small-narratives, succeeds in sustaining (rather
than fulfilling) the otaku’s desire indicates that his fantasmatic consumption of small-
narratives or small-fantasies has a specific function for the otaku.
The small-fantasies that exploit a certain lack marking his desired idol-image
provide the possibility for the desiring otaku to temporally efface his own lack as
subject. By consuming the signifiers, especially those expressed through speech, in
songs and image-videos, the otaku is able to situate himself as the answer to the
question, [w]hat does my oshimen or the idol-image subjected to my gachi koi desire?.
In other words, the supportive consumption of the otaku gives him the ability to meet
himself as possessing the phallus, i.e. that imaginary object which would make a sexual
relationship with her possible. It is important to underline that the phallus is a veiled
and enigmatic signifier without a signified (Lacan [1966] 2005). Even if the otaku’s
supportive consumption of the idol-image’s lack at the level of romance enables him to
temporally position himself as possessing the phallic complement, this phallic element
has no substance. It is the very veil that hides the phallus as lack that allows the otaku
to temporally fantasize himself as having the enigmatic element that the idol-image
desires in his possession.
The endless offering of her lack at the level of romance by which the male otaku
can temporally feel himself as possessing her phallic complement underlines why the
idol-image has to have a ‘zettai-teki na sonzai’ (absolute existence) (Sasakibara 2004:
50 [O.T]). The idol-image allows the otaku to substantiate his value as man. Or as
Tsunku formulates it, the function of the girl marked by lack is to enable the otaku to
believe ‘that [he] can […] take care of her’ (2000: 99 [O.T]). Needless to say, the
possibility of fantasmatically experiencing himself as the phallic complement that
would negate his desired idol’s lack at the level of romance provides some pleasure for
the consuming otaku.
But even though this fantasmatic consumption, just like the recognition of his
desire, allows the idol-otaku to gain some pleasure, the satisfaction the otaku derives
from his supportive consuming interaction with his oshimen or the idol-image subjected
to his gachi-koi is situated at a different level: the level of the drive.
SATISFYING THE SCOPIC DRIVE: KAWAII EROTICA
The possibility for the otaku to satisfy his drive is closely related to how the otaku’s
fantasy, which allows the otaku to find what his desire aims at, and ren’ai kinshi, which
safeguards the desiring state of desire, sustains the supportive consumption of
subjective commodities. It is, in other words, due to the establishment of the kawaii
aimed-for-object that the possibility of satisfying the drive by way of consumption is
opened up. But in order to satisfy the drive, the otaku does not consume his desired
idol-image at the level of the small-fantasies she produces, but at the level of the
proliferation of objectifying images of her body, i.e. her small image-narratives like her
photobooks and small image/signifier-narratives like her image-videos, PVs and MVs.
The drive that the otaku is able to satisfy is thus first and foremost his scopic drive.
In order to explain how the consumption of idol-body-images can satisfy the
otaku’s scopic drive, it is necessary to refer to Lacan’s schema of the partial drive (see
other than the kawaii aimed-for-object, the object-cause of desire as situated by the
otaku in the body-image of the idol. It is this aimed-for-object that the otaku keeps on
seeing by consuming the body-images of his oshimen or the idol-image subjected to his
kachi-goi.
The thrust of the drive arises from the eye as a rim-like structure only to return,
after tracing a circuit around the kawaii aimed-for-object or, as Miller (1997) calls it,
the hetero-object, to its source. It is only by starting from and returning to the eye of
the otaku that the visual consumption of body-images becomes auto-erotic. The goal of
the drive is not to attain this kawaii aimed-for-object, but to repeat, by supportive
consumption, this circuit and attain the satisfaction that the circling as such generates.
In other words, the temporary scopic satisfaction that such circling enables motivates
the otaku to keep consuming the image-based small-narratives of his desired idol-image.
This satisfying circling around the object a reveals that the kawaii-aesthetic,
beyond its use-value as the aimed-for-object, also functions as erotica. The otaku’s
scopic satisfaction, as generated by a consummative looking that eroticizes the body-
image of his desired idol-image, is intimately linked with the kawaii aesthetics that
mark the representation of the idol-image.
Of course, the possibility for the otaku to visually enjoy his desired idol-image
is supported by the way in which the body-image of the idol is presented in her
photobooks, image-videos, etc. Kawaii aesthetics are generally applied in order to
highlight the tension between the idol-image’s body-image, which is often marked by
a bodily surplus, and her (fictional) lack of knowing her own sexuality. In this case, it
is the visual evocation of her innocence as linked to being not-yet-a-woman that is
offered to the otaku’s circling scopic drive. In other instances, it is a playful interplay
between her body-image, as framed by kawaii aesthetics, and the subtle hinting towards
her consciousness of being a sexualized being that is donated to the otaku’s auto-
erotism. Both the exploitation of her girly innocence and the teasing of her nascent
sexual consciousness as woman underline that the idol-image is, by the jimusho,
manufactured as a commodity to be eroticized, as a commodity that the body of the
otaku can use to satisfy itself.
Having introduced the dimension of drive satisfaction, a differentiation between
the otaku with oshimen and the otaku that subjects an idol-image to his gachi-koi can
finally be made. While the desire to desire leads to fantasmatic consumption and scopic
consumption for both types of idol-otaku, the emphasis in their supportive position with
respect to the desired idol-image is different. The otaku organizing multiple oshimen
around him, creates, following the erratic nature of desire, a harem of idol-images that
he consumes, first and foremost, at the level of the fantasy, at the level where he can
fantasize himself as her complement. The ease by which this otaku is able to change his
oshimen – the changing of one’s oshimen is called oshihen – further underlines that his
fantasmatic consumption follows the irregularity of desire. The second type of otaku
fixates his supportive consumption on one idol-image. While his desire is kept in a
desiring state, his supposed love for his desired idol-image halts the metonymic nature
of desire and allows him, first and foremost, to satisfy his scopic drive by visually
enjoying the proliferation of her body-images.
CONCLUSION
Maybe, maybe
Sonna yuki wanai
Zutto wanai kono mama
Kataomoi de ii
iiwaken, maybe.
(AKB48 2009: track 1)
Given our exploration of the dimensions of desire, fantasy and the drive in the otaku’s
interaction with his desired idol-image, can the otaku’s supportive consumption by
characterized as ‘love’?
If love is conceptualized as a ‘subject-to-subject relationship’ as ‘based on a
certain relationship between two unconscious knowledges’, then the relation between
the otaku and his desired idol-image can’t be qualified as a relation of love because the
otaku never, in his supportive consumption, meets the female subject behind his idol-
image (Lacan [1975] 1998: 144). The space where idol-images function is a space
where female subjects are lacking. It is, as Lamarre states, ‘a world […] without actual
women’ (2006: 241). But it is precisely because female subjects as such are lacking that
the idol-image as produced by the jimusho can be so successful. It is only because the
otaku at no point in his consumption whatsoever meets a female subject that his desire
to desire can be exploited.
This evading of women as subjects constitutes a crafty manipulation of the way
non-otaku male subjects commonly engage with the female subjects they desire. While
the non-otaku subject eventually has to deal with the woman as a subject, the otaku
only ever meets his desired idol as an image and as a narrative. In fact, he can only
show his desire and find recognition for his desire by consuming her small-narratives
and inscribing himself in her grand-narrative of ‘growing-to-be-less lacking’.
The very impossibility of meeting the female subject, as safeguarded by ren-ai
kinshi, allows the otaku to employ his desired idol-image for his own pleasure and own
satisfaction. The otaku gains pleasure by consuming the signifier-based narratives of
his desired idol-image as fantasies of a sexual relationship that could be written and
finds auto-erotic satisfaction by consuming her image-based narratives at the level of
his scopic drive.
While the interaction between the otaku and his desired idol-image resembles
the structure of courtly love – the otaku desiring the idol-image and the sexual
relationship that could be written with her from a distance – the otaku-subject’s
consumption of the commodities of the desired idol-image reveals that this supportive
interaction is, when all is said and done, beyond any true love whatsoever.