Supplement to the Historiography I:10
Camille Akmut
December 30, 2022
SPECIALIZED TV
— The Internet Cafe / Net Cafe
Hosted by Stewart Cheifet, of Computer Chronicles - a similar, older series dedicated to a variety of topics related to computers,
including political, social dimensions... Each episode was about 25 minutes.
Hackers 1996 Dan Farmer, Aleph One, White Knight and Reid Fleming
Politics on the Web 1996 Eric Hughes, Ramsey Kanaan, anarchist websites
Dan Farmer talked COPS (“a security audit program, it basically diagnosed a Unix computer and told you what was wrong
or right about the system”) and SATAN (“a security administrator tool for analyzing networks”); Aleph One underground.org
(“security papers, security tools, database of security vulnerabilities”). White Knight and Reid Fleming discussed cDc, claiming “I
think we’re primarily hackers that don’t hack anymore.”
"Cheifet - You guys are members of the Cult of the dead cow, a kind of pretty select group of about 12 members...
Reid Fleming - Right.
Cheifet - And this is a (...) group of what, hackers? Do you call yourself a hackers organization?
WK - I think we’re primarily hackers that don’t hack anymore. We’re an electronic zine for the, you know the
hack phreak community, people like us.
Cheifet - Okay, and now why don’t you hack anymore?
WK - I think most of us have outgrown it to an extent. Um, we started very early in the early 80s, when it was
really exciting, new and fresh. And these days it just isn’t that way anymore.
Cheifet - When you say outgrown is that cause you’re older or like the world is different?
RF - I think the world is different. It used to be that one person on his own could exploit or discover features
of computer systems that were still in development, things that were constantly renewing themselves; Now both
the computer technologies have settled down and also it’s much more difficult to do something on an individual
basis."
Eric Hughes explained what the cypherpunks are and spoke about free speech :
"EH - Cypherpunks is a mailing list, and a name for a group of people that would hang out on that mailing list.
Cheifet - And what is a cypherpunk, what do you guys stand for?
EH - Cyberpunks are cryptography activists, we believe in personal privacy for everybody.
Cheifet - We’re talking basically about politics tonight, and politics and the Web. And I guess there’s the theory
that for politics, for democracy to work you need free speech, I mean First Amendment, those are the first rule.
And, to you does free speech have to be anonymous speech then?
EH - It doesn’t have to be anonymous, but it should be able to be anonymous when it needs to be anonymous. The
idea is that unless you’re able to make an anonymous speech act at some point there are things that people will
feel not free to say, things that they might otherwise say which are valuable in discourse. Which are unpopular
kinds of speech. It’s only unpopular speech that needs protection."
The founder, we assume, of AK Press appeared on an episode of The Internet Cafe dedicated to politics on the Web (or
‘cyberpolitics’) credited only as “ramsey” :
"- So can you tell me what the AK Press is all about?
Ramsey - Yeah, we are a workers cooperative whose primary function is we publish and distribute a wide variety
of anarchist, anti-authoritarian and other progressive literature.
- What type of information would you consider "anarchist"?
Noam Chomsky, so I guess it’s from Chomsky back to, uh, (...) in the past, Nestor Makhno, Durruti and everyone
in between interesting."
Jory Bell was tasked with presenting the wider anarchist Web :
"- What would you consider some other interesting anarchist sites that are now on the net?
JB - well there’s a whole network of anarchist sites, the Portland Anarchist Web page has a searchable database
of all the rest of the sites, you can search by topic or by name of the site.
- So it’s actually like a search engine for anarchy.
JB - It’s a search engine for anarchists and for anarchist sites in particular, and all the sites are both linked
together and there’s a mailing list for the webmasters of those sites so they can coordinate efforts. And, recently
in Germany an anarchist website was censored by the German government under kind of some anti-terrorist laws
that were designed to fight fascism and the mailing list resulted in having that website be relocated to a site
in the United States, so that could be available still."
— Computer Chronicles
Cyber cafes 1996
In 1996, (the same year that The Internet Cafe began, in our understanding), Computer Chronicles did an episode on Internet
cafes and there seems to be a link between that episode and The Internet Cafe series : at least some footage from the Cyber cafes
episode appears to be re-used as introduction sequence for The Internet Cafe. And some of the cafes visited in that episode also
seem to be re-used as setting (e.g. CoffeeNet, Cybersmith) - a signature of the newer program being the Internet cafe setting.
Asked by Cheifet what the purpose or attraction of Internet Cafes are, the owner of Cybersmith (Marshall Smith, hence the
name) answered that it was to learn about the Internet, technology and socialize; It has a T1 connection, faster than home access
for those already on the Internet. A feature of the cafe is also the ability to try software sold at its store on the computers.
"Hi and welcome to the Computer Chronicles, I’m Stewart Cheifet and we’re here in a cyber cafe. In fact this
one is called Cybersmith, and it’s called that because the guy who owns it is a Marshall Smith and that’s the
guy over here. Marshall let me ask you about the cyber cafe thing : why do people come here, what’s the point
in a cyber cafe?
- Mmh people come for lots of different reasons, I think the primary part of it is that people come to learn
about the Internet, what is it that’s happening in technology. Other people come because they’re already on the
Internet but (...) want to be in a social setting."
"Cheifet - Now, what’s really cool about logging onto the Net, or the Web here is it’s really fast compared to
at home, right?
- Right. We use T1 fiber optic cables, and they’re 52 times faster than 28.8 modems, which is what most people
have in their home computers."
Il. Cybersmith, Cambridge MA [5] VR area [6] owner Marshall Smith
Il. CoffeeNet, San Francisco (SoMA) [2] owner Richard Couture
DOCUMENTARY
— Vox. 2016. “The hippest internet cafe of 1995” circa 9 m.
Il. @Cafe, NYC (Manhattan)
One of the founders of @Cafe got the idea from living in Japan in the 1980s (and game arcades), it took 9000 dollars a month
to pay for its T1 line, and they cooled the server room with a garbage can full of ice... Phiber Optik visited “all the time” (after
his release from prison). Founded in January 1995, a year later the cafe closed down in 1996: “It was horrible from the beginning.
we never broke even”. Previously, an independent bookstore was at the 12 St. Marks Place location.
Glenn McGinnis is interviewed :
"I was actually bitter that I named it @Cafe. I had to explain to everybody (...) even people who came to work
there - I had to explain what the @ symbol was."
"I lived overseas a lot as a kid (...) and in 1980 we moved to Tokyo (...) In Asia, most of the video games were
tabletop. So you’d sit, you could have coffee or whatever on the games. And they had coffee shops with these
tabletop games. I thought of the internet cafe probably because of the Tokyo experience with the tabletops."
"Phiber Optik and his whole crew, when he got out of jail, he made that his hangout spot. He was there all the
time."