A New Complex Mental Health Test in a Positive Psychological Framework
1, 2,3 1 1, 4
Virág Zábó *, Attila Oláh , András Vargha
Positive Psychology Research Group, Institute of Psychology, Faculty of Education and
Psychology, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary
Doctoral School of Psychology, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary
Institution of Research on Adult Education and Knowledge Management, ELTE Eötvös Loránd
University, Budapest, Hungary
Person- and Family-oriented Health Science Research Group, Institute of Psychology, Faculty of
Humanities and Social Sciences, Károli Gáspár University of the Reformed Church in Hungary,
Budapest, Hungary
* Correspondence:
Virág Zábó
zabo.virag@ppk.elte.hu
Keywords: happiness, subjective well-being, mental health, Mental Health Test, Maintainable
Positive Mental Health Theory, positive psychology, positive psychological assessments
Abstract
According to the Maintainable Positive Mental Health Theory (MPMHT), the main pillars of positive
mental health are global well-being, efficient coping that enables an individual to maintain positive
conditions and functioning, savoring capacity, resilience, and dynamic self-regulation. This study
presents the validation of a new five-scale mental health test, the Mental Health Test (MHT) that
operationalizes MPMHT. The methodology comprised two online cross-sectional studies using self-
report questionnaires. Participants in Study I (n = 1,736; 448 males, 1,288 females; mean age 51.3
years; SD = 11.6 years) filled in the MHT, the Flow, the PERMA Questionnaire (PERMA-Profiler),
and the Flourishing Scale. Participants in Study II (n = 1,083; 233 males, 847 females; mean age 33.9
years; SD = 12.2 years) filled in the MHT, the Shortened Aspiration Index, the short form of the
Beck Depression Inventory, the WHO Well-Being Index, the Satisfaction with Life Scale, the
Purpose in Life Test, and the Schema Questionnaire–Short Form. Exploratory factor analysis
identified a five-factor structure with 17 items in Study I that was confirmed with excellent fit
measures in confirmatory factor analysis in Study II. Both studies indicated a high level of internal
consistency (above .70). In each subscale, a minimum part of 44% did not overlap with the set of the
other subscales. The content validity of the subscales was confirmed by 10 tests of mental health. We
found a positive correlation of the self-regulation and resilience subscales with age, while women
showed a higher level of savoring than men at all age levels. When Study I was replicated after two
weeks and again after 11 months, excellent internal consistency and good test–retest correlation
values of the MHT scales were found. The MHT can thus be considered a reliable and valid
measurement tool for mental health.
1. Introduction
The present study proposes a new theory of mental health, the Maintainable Positive Mental Health
Theory (MPMHT). First, we present the theoretical framework of our new positive mental health
concept. In the next step, we provide an overview of the models of well-being and mental health to
date, and we highlight the gaps between these and our proposed concept. By presenting the five
pillars of MPMHT, we aim to shed light on how our new model integrates and complement the
accumulated knowledge of the science of mental health measures to date.
1.1. The conceptualization of Maintainable Positive Mental Health Theory (MPMHT)
A central topic in positive psychology is the identification of indicators (symptoms) of mental health
and the elaboration of models to serve as a theoretical framework when developing a diagnostic
system in the realm of positive mental health. Such a diagnostic system could provide a positive
alternative to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), which has long
been used in clinical practice. Given that, in identifying mental health, the absence of mental disease
is not an adequate definition, it is necessary first to develop a positive concept of mental health.
We argue that the clarification of the concept of well-being, the theoretical and empirical analysis of
the relationship between well-being and mental health, and the rehabilitation of classical
interpretations of mental health can lead to an integrative concept of the positive realm of mental
health. According to our Maintainable Positive Mental Health Theory (MPMHT), the level of well-
being will depend both on the presence or absence of the capacities and psychological resources
needed to ensure positive mental health, and on the ability to use these capacities. Such a concept
would treat all theoretically and empirically identified components of well-being as the set of
symptoms of mental health that reflect the presence and proper functioning of the psychological
capacities needed to ensure and maintain positive mental health.
This new approach is in line with the mental health definition of the WHO (Galderisi et al., 2015).
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines mental health as “a dynamic state of internal
equilibrium which enables individuals to use their abilities in harmony with universal values of
society. Basic cognitive and social skills; ability to recognize, express and modulate one’s own
emotions, as well as empathize with others; flexibility and ability to cope with adverse life events and
function in social roles; and harmonious relationship between body and mind represent important
components of mental health which contribute, to varying degrees, to the state of internal
equilibrium” (Galderisi et al, 2015). In other words, the components of well-being are not the only
agents that contribute to positive mental health; resilience, accommodation to changes, and the
development of efficient coping capacities (savoring and the ability to establish positive states and
handle negative states) are also major contributors.
MPMHT endorses the view of what Keyes (2007, Keyes et al., 2021) emphasized, which is that
mental disease and mental health are two separate dimensions that must be treated as independent
continuums. At one pole of mental disease are intensive and frequent occurrences of mental
disorders, while at the opposite pole are symptoms of mental disorders that are rarely present or that
take insignificant forms. In the case of mental health, one pole represents the rare occurrence and
weak appearance of mental health indicators, while the opposite pole represents the high frequency of
symptoms of positive mental health.
1.2. An overview of the concepts and the dimensions of previous models of well-being and
mental health
Running Title
Just as mental disorders comprise a theoretically based and empirically demonstrable set of
symptoms, positive mental health can also be characterized by a clearly identifiable set of symptoms
that can be framed within an appropriate theory and demonstrated and studied empirically.
1.2.1. Mental health as multidimensional well-being
According to one approach in positive psychology, mental health can essentially be defined
according to the pillars of multidimensional well-being. Ryff’s (1995) multifactor psychological
well-being scale integrates the six components of overall well-functioning but does not cover hedonic
well-being which is also an important component of mental health. Keyes’ (2007) 13-dimensions
mental health questionnaire does not comprehensively include all the important capabilities (e.g.,
savoring, self-regulation, resilience) and components (e.g., spiritual well-being) which are essential
in achieving a high degree of positive mental health. Diener’s and his colleagues’ flourishing scale
(Diener et al., 2009) only measures psychological well-being, SPANE (Diener et al., 2009) only
assess emotions, and PERMA (Seligman, 2018) describes the factors of well-being, but none of them
cover the competencies and abilities that play an irreplaceable role in mental health.
1.2.2. Mental health as mirror opposite to the symptoms of mental disorders
An alternative approach is to argue that mental health is characterized by symptoms that are the
mirror opposite of mental disorders (Huppert & So, 2013; Caprara et al., 2019; Oláh, 2019). For
example, the Positivity Scale (Caprara et al., 2019; Oláh, 2019) measures a combination of high self-
esteem, life satisfaction, and optimism as suggested sources of a syndrome of optimal functioning.
These models do not include any ability or capacity to guarantee mental health, only the resilience
appears in Huppert and So’s (2013) flourishing questionnaire.
1.2.3. Mental health as flourishing
Although these approaches differ, 70% of their components, from which the multidimensional
domain of mental health is constructed, are more or less identical. They share the common feature of
integrating the hedonic and eudemonic approaches in the metaphoric concept of flourishing, which
can be characterized by the simultaneous presence of positive feelings and good psychological
functioning. Flourishing, as an umbrella concept for the components of well-being, is the positive
pole or uppermost zone on the mental health continuum.
1.2.4. Mental health as “hedo-eudemonic” well-being
“Flourishing” is also used in the names of measurement tools that operationalize “hedo-eudemonic”
models of well-being, for example Global Well-being Scale (Oláh, 2019; Oláh et al., 2020), Positive
Mental Health Scale (Lukat et al., 2016) and Positive Functioning Inventory (Joseph & Maltby,
2014) capture only the hedonic and eudaimonic aspects of mental health. Diener’s and his
colleagues’ flourishing scale (Diener et al., 2009), SPANE (Diener et al., 2009) and a version of
PERMA extended with overall well-being, negative emotions, loneliness, and physical health
components (PERMA Profiler, Butler & Kern, 2016). In terms of their targets and measured content,
these measurement tools (or diagnostic scales) encompass the major components of well-being and
the symptoms of positive mental health. Nevertheless, these hedo-eudemonic models do not cover all
aspects of well-being (e.g., self-acceptance, spiritual well-being). In a recent review paper that
outlined empirical studies covering 99 well-being measurement tools, 196 different components of
well-being were identified (Linton et al., 2016).
1.2.5. Classical models of mental health
In the so-called classical models of mental health (Jahoda, 1958; Vaillant, 2003, 2012) the focus is on
personality traits that guarantee efficient self-regulation and flexible accommodation, and on
psychological resources that foster fulfillment. For instance, the use of the character strengths that
leads to human flourishing (Mayerson, 2020) are only predictors of the optimal mental health. The
presence of personality traits resources is also regarded as a primary factor in positive mental health
in salutogenic theory (Antonovsky, 1991), according to which mental health is maintained by
efficient stress management, resilient self-regulation, and flexible accommodation to the
continuously changing world (Block & Block, 2014; Block & Kremen, 1996). In theories of this
kind, well-being is the consequence, or the result, of mental health and is due to resilient
accommodation, capacities that establish a physical, psychological, and environmental balance, and
well-functioning health maintenance skills. The PISI (Oláh, 2005) includes skills for self-efficacy
and self-regulation, but does not cover global well-being, savoring, and resilience.
1.2.6. Balanced models of mental health
According to a recent model, the life balance and harmony model, the key to well-being is to
maintain balance and harmony in all areas of human functioning (Lomas, 2021). In the equilibrium
theory, a key factor in well-being is the maintenance of a relative balance between challenges and
available resources, with an emphasis on the capacities needed to handle situations that are out of
balance (Dodge et al., 2012). Apart from omitting some important elements of well-being, these
models do not imply the abilities and capacities. Balance, harmony, and equilibrium could be a
principle in the dynamic interaction of the pillars of mental health. Also, according to the capability
theory of Amartya Sen (see, e.g., Walker & Unterhalter, 2007), capacities can explain the
establishment and maintenance of all possible aspects of well-being. The focus of the model deviates
from the essence of positive mental health and this approach can be a potential predictor of positive
mental health. Sustainable Mental Health Model (Bohlmeijer & Westerhof, 2021) integrates
dysfunctional and functional perspectives of mental health.
1.2.7. Mental health as the sum of the components of well-being
In earlier tools for the measurement of the realm of positive mental health (Bech et al., 1996; Diener
et al., 2009; Huppert & So, 2013; Lamers et al., 2011; Butler & Kern, 2016; Lukat et al., 2016; Oláh
et al., 2020), the focus has been primarily on the components of well-being, without taking into
account all the aspects of mental health referred to in the WHO definition and in classical theories of
mental health. Another feature of these tools is that they cannot be considered as the
operationalization of a comprehensive mental health model. It is also important to note that the
number of published measures of well-being and mental health has decreased significantly since
2010 (Lomas et al., 2021).
1.3. Extracting the pillars of Maintainable Positive Mental Health Theory
The holistic concept of positive mental health must integrate the realm of well-being models, the
psychological resources and capacities needed to ensure and maintain positive mental health, and the
skills that guarantee their efficient functioning.
Our main goal is to develop a construct of mental health that differs both theoretically and
empirically from other theoretically defined constructs of multidimensional well-being (flourishing,
PERMA, etc.) called often as an equivalent or the top-zone of mental health. We assert that mental
Running Title
health is a broader concept than well-being, justified by research based on the classical theories of
mental health (Antonovsky, 1991; Vaillant, 2012) and on our own studies (Oláh, 2021; Nagy et al.,
2022), which is also consistent with the mental health definition of the WHO (Galderisi et al., 2015).
However, we do not encounter in the literature a measurement tool of mental health that could be
considered an operationalizing construct of the WHO description of mental health, and we do not
know also a mental health model that would integrate suggestions of scientific approaches for the
pillars of positive mental health from classical models up to most recent theories of positive
psychology. Keyes concept of mental health, the Flourishing construct of Diener and Huppert, and
the PERMA model of Seligman all construe positive mental health based on well-being components.
Building on classical and recent ideas of positive mental health, in the concept of Maintainable
Positive Mental Health we would like to clarify that mental health is a function of individual
capacities (resilience, creative and executive competencies) by means of which the individual can
work up an equilibrium with the outside world, promoting his/her development, creating a steady
state for within-person functioning (self-regulation), and an equilibrium of positive and negative
emotions (coping, savoring). The existence and efficient functioning of these elements may lead to
the global well-being, a multifaceted component of positive mental health. Summarizing, in our
suggested definition mental health is a high level of global well-being which goes-together with
psychological, social, and spiritual well-functioning, resilience, efficient creative and executive
functioning, coping and savoring capacities, all pillars insuring the maintainability of mental health.
The first pillar in our new model is Global Well-being. MPMHT integrates existing well-being
theories and the identified dimensions of well-being in the global well-being pillar. Global Well-
being means multi-component subjective well-being encompassing emotional states and
psychological functioning in the emotional, psychological, social, and spiritual areas in life (Oláh &
being which goes hand in hand with savoring capacity, creative and executive efficiency, self-
regulation, and resilience.
The second pillar is Savoring which refers to the ability and capacity which allows individuals to
mentally mobilize their joyful memories and experiences to generate mental well-being, reliving
them in the present and, furthermore, extending them to future events (Bryant & Veroff 2007).
Savoring is also a prerequisite for MPMHT because it is an ability that can guarantee the
achievement and maintenance of positive mental health (Bryan et al., 2022).
Thirdly, utilizing Creative and Executive Efficiency competence, an individual becomes able to cope
with the difficulties they encounter by mobilizing their various competencies in the difficult,
stressful, and challenging situations of life. Furthermore, it indicates how individuals are able to
provide successful individual and social problem-solving behavior (Oláh, 2005; Oláh et al., 2020).
Fourthly, the ability to regulate and control emotions, temperament, and negative states and to persist
in achieving a given goal plays an important role in mental health (Oláh, 2005; Elliot, Thrash, &
Murayama, 2011; Singh & Sharma, 2018). Self-regulation is the capacity of the individual to
disregard prominent responses and to regulate affects, cognitions, and behaviors. It is the ability to
alter thoughts, feelings, desires, and actions in the perspective of such higher goals and would
represent one of the most adaptive variables of human behavior (Vohs & Baumeister, 2004).
The fifth pillar is Resilience. With the ability of resilience, an individual is able to mobilize their
mental capacities and resources to maintain positive mental health when they face unexpected,
stressful, and difficult situations. The higher the level of resilience, the more quickly the individual is
able to recover from a sudden, unexpected stressful situation (Connor & Davidson, 2003; Southwick
& Charney, 2018; Verdolini et al., 2021). According to MPMHT, these independent components are
together responsible for the mental health of the individual.
Although various psychological constructs exist, the Mental Health Test could be the first test to have
a five-dimensional complex structure (Global Well-being, Savoring, Creative and Executive
Efficiency, Self-regulation, and Resilience), with the aim of covering the wide spectrum of mental
health. For these reasons, the present study aimed to operationalize the MPMHT by preparing the
validation of the five-scale Mental Health Test on a Hungarian population.
2. Overview of the present studies
Two studies were carried out to prepare and validate the final version of the MHT. The aim of Study
I was to finalize with exploratory factor analysis a set of items for which the five-dimensional
statistical model of the MHT yields appropriate fit indices. The main aim of Study II was to confirm
the model on a new, independent sample. After this verification of structural validity, both studies
were used to check the substantive validity of the MHT.
3. Study I Exploratory Factor Analysis
3.1. Method
3.1.1. Participants and procedure
Participants completed a 64-item online questionnaire posted from mid-January 2020 for two months
[1]
in Facebook groups that are frequently visited by adults of different ages and with different
occupations and interests. Ethical approval for the study was granted by the Research Ethics
Committee of the local university (permission number: 2019/61). Participation was voluntary and
anonymous. Informed consent was obtained but no compensation was given. The valid study sample
consisted of 1,736 adult persons (448 males and 1,288 females). Among them 1,540 persons were
residents of Hungary, and 196 persons were residents of other countries who filled in the Hungarian-
[2]
language online questionnaire . The sociodemographic characteristics of the sample are
heterogeneous for us to draw valid conclusions about the MHT from the sample. Although the
majority of participants in the sample were women (74.2%), the number of men (448) was also
sufficiently large to ensure representative results.
In terms of age, the majority of the participants (38.9%) were middle-aged (36–50 years), although
the number of people over 65 (198) was also substantial. There was a strikingly low proportion of
young people aged between 18 and 25 (1.9%, 33 people). The sample was also balanced according to
the type of city where participants lived, since the number of respondents in all categories was over
300. More than 98% of the participants had a high-school certificate. Regarding marital status, 50.1%
of the participants were married, while a small proportion (5.0%) were widowed. The majority of the
participants (57.8%) were employed, although there was also a significant proportion of retired
Running Title
participants (20.7%) and entrepreneurs (14.5%). The vast majority of participants in the sample
(74.6%) considered their financial situation to be average, although there was also a non-negligible
proportion of wealthy people (17.5%). Only a small proportion of respondents declared themselves to
be poor (2.0%) or rich (0.6%).
3.1.2. Measures
Nine of the questions in the questionnaire referred to sociodemographic data (gender, age, place of
respondent’s recent positive experiences (1 = 10% positive experiences and 90% negative
experiences … 9 = 90% positive experiences and 10% negative experiences). Four special questions,
scored using a six-point Likert scale, assessed the physical and mental condition of the respondent:
(1) Physical condition (My physical state is: 1 = very bad, 2 = bad, 3 = acceptable, 4 = good, 5 =
very good, 6 = excellent); (2) General mental state (My general mental state is: 1 = very bad, 2 = bad,
3 = acceptable, 4 = good, 5 = very good, 6 = excellent); (3) General health condition (I am satisfied
with my general health: 1 = strongly disagree, 2 = moderately disagree, 3 = slightly disagree, 4 =
slightly agree, 5 = moderately agree, 6 = strongly agree); and (4) Physical strength (I feel strong and
physically robust: 1 = strongly disagree, 2 = moderately disagree, 3 = slightly disagree, 4 = slightly
agree, 5 = moderately agree, 6 = strongly agree).
Mental Health Test (MHT). The basic concept was to develop a mental health test (MHT) in the form
of a short questionnaire comprising no more than 20 items to obtain a comprehensive picture of
mental health according to MPMHT. The items on the five scales were selected based on the
following arguments, considering that the item that most strongly represents the given measuring
instrument should be selected (Oláh et al., 2018):
1. Well-being. This scale is based on the following three areas of subjective well-being: (i) the
ratio of positive and negative experiences (Fredrickson, 2009; Appendix, item 1); (ii) the
subjective quality of the state of mental health and well-being (Lyubomirsky, 2010;
Appendix, item 14); and (iii) the global level of happiness (Huppert & So, 2013; Appendix,
item 18).
2. Savoring. For this scale, three items were selected from the short Hungarian version of the
Savoring Beliefs Inventory (Nagy et al., 2021) based on the criteria that they be
comprehensive, simple, and highly representative of the total score of the questionnaire. The
three items selected for the MHT according to these principles (Appendix, items 3, 10, and
12) explained the total score of the 10-item short Hungarian form of the Savoring Beliefs
Inventory with a variance ratio of R = .81 based on annual data from the Happiness Map of
[3]
Hungary between 2015 and 2019, with a sample size of 8,035 .
3. Creative and Executive Efficiency. This scale consists of four items (Appendix, items 5, 7,
15, and 17) taken from the 16-item short version of the Psychological Immune Competence
Inventory (PICI; see Oláh, 2005), using the same names. A fifth item, which was also
considered an important component of creative and executive efficiency, was added from the
80-item version of the PICI (Oláh, 2005) (Appendix, item 9).
4. Self-regulation. For this scale, three items were selected from the self-regulation subscale of
the 16-item short version of the PICI (Oláh, 2005).
5. Resilience. Items for this scale in the first version of the MHT (Oláh et al., 2018) were
selected from the Resilience subscale of the 16-item short version of the PICI (Oláh, 2005).
Taking into account the many different scales of resilience (Block & Kremen, 1996; Connor
& Davidson, 2003; Smith et al., 2008; Windle et al., 2011), we were looking for one that is
internationally recognized and that has already been translated into several languages.
Applying linear regression analysis, four items (Appendix, items 4, 6, 11, and 13) of the six-
item Brief Resilience Scale (Smith et al., 2008) explained the total score of the six-item test
with a variance ratio of R = .95 on a sub-sample (n = 8,035) of the above-mentioned
Happiness Map of Hungary.
Based on the above considerations, the MHT questionnaire comprises 18 items (see Appendix)
divided into five scales of three, three, five, three, and four items respectively. The items are scored
according to six-point Likert scales (1 = does not agree at all, 6 = agrees completely). The Well-
being, Savoring, and Creative and Executive Efficiency subscales include positive items only. The
Self-regulation subscale contains negative items only. The Resilience subscale consists of two
positive and two negative items. The final scores are obtained by averaging the scores obtained for
the items in each of the five scales.
Flow. The key element of Csíkszentmihályi’s flow construct (immersion in activity, constant interest)
was examined based on Magyaródi et al. (2013, 2014), using the following item: “If something really
interests me, I am able to do it with pleasure and in depth, even in difficult situations.”
PERMA Questionnaire (PERMA-Profiler). The PERMA model was developed by Seligman (2018),
building on his further developed earlier concept of authentic happiness. The components of the five-
pillar model reinforce one another in creating and maintaining a state of well-being. The 23-item
PERMA-Profiler (Butler & Kern, 2016) measures Seligman’s model using a 10-point Likert scale (0
= never / not at all / terrible; 10 = always / completely / excellent). In the case of 15 items, the five
basic pillars are measured using three questions each; eight items, comprising three questions each,
are used to assess negative emotions (e.g., “How often do you feel anxious?”) and health (e.g., “How
would you rate your health?”). Among the 23 items one item is used to measure happiness (“All in
all, how happy would you say you are?”) and one item is used to measure loneliness (“How lonely do
you feel in your daily life?”). In terms of the scales that represent the five basic pillars, the Positive
Emotion scale focuses on the frequency of experiencing positive emotions (e.g., “How often do you
feel joyful?”). The Engagement scale refers to the frequency of experiencing flow and the absorption
of cognitive and emotional resources (e. g., “How often do you become absorbed in what you are
doing?”). The Meaning scale examines the tendency to set meaningful goals, seek meaning, and
serve meaningful goals that transcend the self (e.g., “In general, to what extent do you lead a
purposeful and meaningful life?”). The Accomplishment scale provides information about the extent
to which one’s own successful performance and the joy of experiencing competence contribute to
increasing well-being in an individual’s life (e.g., “How often do you achieve the important goals you
have set for yourself?”). The Relationships scale measures the extent to which it is true for an
individual’s life that happiness, love, and good relationships with others are the sine qua non of well-
being (e.g., “To what extent do you feel loved?”). All the scales in the Hungarian version of the
PERMA-Profiler (Oláh, 2016) showed reliable Cronbach’s alpha values: Positive Emotions: .88;
Engagement: .57; Relationships: .79; Meaning: .76; Accomplishment: .74; Health: .88; and Negative
Emotions: .77.
Flourishing Scale (Diener et al., 2009). This eight-item scale operationalizes an improved version of
Diener’s concept of subjective well-being, in which, in addition to life satisfaction and the dominance
of positive emotions, the necessity of competence, optimism, contributing to the well-being of others,
life purpose, self-esteem, and positive relationships are highlighted. Cronbach’s alpha: .94.
Running Title
To summarize, with one exception (the Engagement subscale of the PERMA-Profiler), the scales in
the above tests all had excellent reliability, with Cronbach’s alpha values of above .74.
3.2. Results
The internal consistency of all the scales in the MHT was computed with ROPstat (Vargha et al.,
.80 (DeVellis, 2016; Barbera et al., 2020) were adequate for all scales. One possible way to improve
the internal consistency would be to drop one item from the Resilience subscale (item 6: “Stressful
of the scales have a moderate positive relationship with Pearson’s r of between .35 and .62 with two
exceptions. This is consistent with the theory that different components of mental health are
positively related to one another (Ryff & Marshall, 1999).
In the next step we performed a five-factor exploratory factor analysis (EFA) using Mplus (Muthén
& Muthén, 1998–2011) to verify that the 18 items of the MHT form five factors according to the
constructed subscales. Due to the strongly non-normal distribution of the scales (see the last two
applied with Geomin oblique rotation, allowing correlating factors (Hattori et al., 2017). The rotated
the item indices in the Appendix, supplemented by the abbreviation of their scale (i1W, i2SR, etc.).
Executive Efficiency and Self-regulation scales forms a separate factor with loadings above .60, with
two exceptions (i12S: .40; i9C: .41). In the case of the Resilience scale, one of the 4 items loaded to
Self-regulation scale (i6R: .50) and another item (i13R) loaded to the Self-regulation scale as well
4. Study II Confirmatory Factor Analysis
4.1. Method
4.1.1. Participants and procedure
Participants completed a 179-item online questionnaire. The questionnaire was published in various
groups on Facebook, as the most commonly used social platform. The responses were obtained from
the widest possible variations of the groups according to place of residence (e.g., people living in the
2nd district of Budapest, “What I heard in Debrecen,” “What I saw in Sopron”); topic (e.g., nature
conservationists, vegetarians); sports (e.g., kayak-canoeists, training plans and experiences, novice
runners); profession (e.g., job seekers, social workers); spirituality (e.g., atheist–Christian discussion
group, daily spiritual quotes, Christian youth); higher education (e.g., law students, teachers); and
others (e.g., mathematics for everyone, motivation for everyday life) in order to reach participants
from as many social strata as possible.
Ethical approval for the study was granted by the Research Ethics Committee of the local university
(permission number: 70/2019/P/ET/2). Participation was voluntary and anonymous. Informed
consent was obtained but no compensation was given. The sample, selected by random sampling,
consisted of 1,083 individuals (233 males, 847 females, and three individuals who did not disclose
their gender) who completed the 179-item questionnaire online between December 2019 and March
heterogeneous and of slightly different composition than the Study I sample. The majority of the
participants in the sample were female (78.2%). On the other hand, there were significantly more
young people below the age of 25 (33.1% vs. 2%), while the proportion of those over the age of 50
(1.2% vs. 52.7%) was substantially lower. There were more university students (22.2%) and fewer
retired participants (1.4%, as part of the “other” category). As in Study I, the vast majority of
participants in Study II (67.1%) also considered their financial status to be average. In terms of
religiosity, 68.9% declared themselves to be religious in their own way and 31.1% declared
themselves to be atheists, while 3.4% said that religiosity was important (or very important) to them.
4.1.2. Measures
Eight of the questions from among all the items were related to sociodemographic data (gender, age,
being: (1) Subjective health status (“Overall, how would you rate your health status?” with response
options: 1 = very bad, 2 = bad, 3 = average, 4 = good, 5 = excellent); (2) Subjective satisfaction with
life (“Overall, how satisfied are you with your daily life?” with endpoints for response options: 1 =
completely dissatisfied and 10 = completely satisfied); and (3) Subjective happiness (“All in all, how
happy would you say you are?” with endpoints for response options: 1 = completely unhappy and 10
= completely happy).
Mental Health Test (MHT). A detailed description of the measure can be found above and in the
Appendix.
Shortened Aspiration Index. The original questionnaire (Kasser & Ryan, 1996) was designed to
measure attitudes toward general life goals representing intrinsic (growth, affiliation, and community
contribution), extrinsic (wealth, fame, and physical appearance), and health-related motivations. The
shortened, 14-item Hungarian version, which contains no reversed items, measures life goals on a
seven-point Likert scale (Martos et al., 2006). The Cronbach’s alpha values obtained were .80
(Extrinsic Aspiration scale); .74 (Intrinsic Aspiration scale); and .55 (Health Aspiration scale).
Short form of the Beck Depression Inventory (Beck et al., 1997; Rózsa et al., 2001). This inventory is
used to measure the inverse symptoms of mental health. The nine items measure the following
symptoms of depression using a four-point Likert scale: social withdrawal, indecisiveness, sleep
disorder (parasomnia), fatigue, excessive anxiety about physical symptoms, incapacity, pessimism,
lack of satisfaction and joy, and self-blame. For example, the item “I am very worried about physical
problems and it’s hard to think of much else” assesses excessive anxiety about physical symptoms.
Higher scores obtained by averaging the scales indicate more depressive symptoms. Cronbach’s
alpha: .86.
WHO Well-Being Index (Bech et al., 1996; Susánszky et al., 2006). This five-item scale provides
information about the respondent’s general well-being based on the previous two-week period using
a four-point Likert scale. Higher scores indicate more positive well-being. Cronbach’s alpha: .87.
Satisfaction with Life Scale (Diener et al., 1985; Martos et al., 2014). This scale measures global
satisfaction with life using a seven-point Likert scale for five items such as: “If I could live my life
Running Title
over, I would change almost nothing.” A higher score on the scale indicates a higher degree of life
satisfaction. Cronbach’s alpha: .87.
Purpose in Life Test (Crumbaugh & Maholick, 1964; Konkolÿ Thege & Martos, 2006). Even though
the name of the questionnaire emphasizes life goals only, this 20-item measure assesses life meaning
according to Viktor Frankl’s concept, using a seven-point Likert scale. The higher the score, the more
the respondent experiences their life as meaningful. Cronbach’s alpha: .87.
Schema Questionnaire–Short Form (Welburn et al., 2002; Unoka et al., 2004). Early maladaptive
schemas are thought to be important in connection with mental health as they indicate factors such as
Failure to Achieve (“Most people are more talented than I am”) and Emotional Inhibition (“I don’t
want people to know about my emotional inhibition personal flaws”). The 95-item questionnaire
assesses Young’s schemas on six-point Likert scales. The 19 subscales, comprising five items each,
are organized into five schema domains: (1) Disconnection / Rejection; (2) Impaired Autonomy /
Performance; (3) Other-directedness; (4) Impaired Limits; and (5) Over-vigilance / Inhibition.
Subscale scores are obtained by averaging the scale scores. The Cronbach’s alpha values for the
subscales were between .76 and .94.
To summarize, with one exception (the two-item Health subscale of the Shortened Aspiration Index),
the scales used in the above tests all had excellent reliability, with Cronbach’s alpha values of above
.74.
4.2. Results
Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was performed with several settings with Mplus (Muthén &
shows the adequacy measures of the EFA model of the MHT. The root mean square error of
approximation (RMSEA) (Steiger & Lind, 1980) and standardized root mean square residual
(SRMR) (Hu & Bentler, 1999) are absolute fit indices which indicate acceptable fit if their values are
less than .06 and .05 respectively (Maydeu-Olivares et al., 2019). The model has an acceptable fit
since the values of the two indicators do not exceed .06 (except in one case (RMSEA of Model 1:
optimally not exceed 0.05 (Steiger & Lind, 1980). A 90% interval estimate is included in the
CI (RMSEA) column. This is good if the value 0.05 is included in it (Browne & Cudeck, 1993). The
p-value of the test that the theoretical value is not greater than 0.05 can be found in the pClose
column. This is good if it is greater than .05, or, in other words, if it is not significant. Adequacy
indicators also include two relative fit indicators, the comparative fit index (CFI) and the Tucker-
Lewis Index (TLI). A good fit is indicated when the CFI value reaches 0.95 and the TLI value is not
much lower, but definitely higher than 0.90 (Hu & Bentler, 1999). The AIC and BIC are measures of
comparative fit and their lower values are favorable (Kenny, 2015).
In CFA we chose a robust method for model fitting (maximum likelihood mean variance, MLMV),
which, in the case of CFA, provides a good alternative to the traditional ML method requiring
multidimensional normality (Gao et al., 2020). The CFA results testing Model 2 indicated a high
modification index (79) for the residual correlation between i3S and i10S, and also a high
modification index (102) for the correlation between i9C and latent factor 1 (Well-being). The latter
5). In order to improve model fit, we built these correlations in the subsequent CFA models. The
improvement is justified by the more favorable fit values in the Model 3 row (RMSEA, SRMR <
0.05; pClose, CFI, TLI > 0.95), having also decreasing AIC and BIC values.
A very important result is that testing our five-factor model on an independent Study II sample, the
values obtained indicated good fit for all indicators. Furthermore, when we built in the model a
second order factor of the five scales (see row 4), we still had good fit values. To summarize, the
five-factor model of the 17-item MHT with the original five scales was confirmed by good fit
indices. This result was achieved by allowing one within factor correlation of the residuals (between
i3S and i10S), and one cross-loading (between i9C and the latent factor of Well-being) in the final
ours, this often occurs even when the postulated model is only trivially false (Shi et al, 2019).
The internal consistency of all the scales in the MHT was computed with ROPstat (Vargha et al.,
above .71 (DeVellis, 2016; Barbera et al., 2020) were adequate for all scales.
5. Substantive Validity
5.1. Discriminant validity
In order to check the discriminant validity of the MHT scales, we computed for each scale the
proportion of variance explained by the other four scales using multivariate linear regression
(Lehmann, 1988) on the pooled sample of the two studies (n = 2,819). The explained proportions of
2 2
variance were measured by the appropriate R values. The obtained R values for the Well-being,
Savoring, Creative and Executive Efficiency, Self-regulation, and Resilience scales were .55, .44,
.41, .17, and .44 respectively. The unexplained proportions of variance of the five scales were
therefore 44.6%, 56.4%, 58.8%, 82.7%, and 55.6%, the smallest (44.6%) belonging to Well-being
and the largest (82.7%) belonging to Self-regulation. This result, which confirms the discriminant
validity of all five scales, shows that each scale has a unique part of at least 44% that is not covered
by the other four. Well-being is the only scale where the unexplained proportion of variance is less
than 50%, indicating that this scale plays a central role within the five-pillar construct of mental
health.
5.2. External and content validity of the mental health test
The content validity of the MHT and the characteristics of the five scales were analyzed with
Pearson’s correlations, using different mental health measurement variables from the two studies.
Pearson’s correlations, we followed Cohen’s convention (1988, pp. 79–80). According to this, a
correlation is said to be weak if the absolute value of r does not reach .1, and to be medium, strong,
or very strong if the absolute value of r reaches .3, .5, or .7 respectively.
Well-being scale measures something very similar as other, traditional tests of well-being such as
Diener’s Flourishing Scale, the PERMA-Profiler, the WHO Well-Being Index, and the Satisfaction
with Life Scale. The Positive Emotions subscale of the PERMA-Profiler explains the biggest
proportion of variance among the subscales. In accordance with the construct content of the Well-
being scale, strong correlations were found with the meaning in life variable (Purpose in Life Test)
Running Title
and the Meaning subscale of the PERMA-Profiler, which confirms the significant role of
experiencing the meaning of life in terms of well-being. All these results provide ample evidence of
the criterion validity of the MHT’s Well-being scale. Convergent validity is indicated by negative
emotional states (the Negative Emotions subscale of the PERMA-Profiler, and the “nervous” and
“tense” questionnaire items), symptoms of depression (the short form of the Beck Depression
Inventory), and maladaptive schemas (Young’s Schema Questionnaire). The significant explanatory
power of flow and physical well-being, as well as general health, can also be interpreted as
strengthening convergent validity (Carlson & Herdman, 2012).
Regarding the Savoring scale, convergent validity is evidenced by correlations above .50 with
variables from other mental health tests (Diener’s Flourishing Scale, the PERMA-Profiler, Flow, the
Satisfaction with Life Scale, the Purpose in Life Test). Convergent validity is further enhanced by
moderate, negative correlations with negative emotional states (Beck Depression Inventory and the
Negative Emotions subscale of the PERMA-Profiler).
The strong correlation results for the Creative and Executive Efficiency scale with other tests and
special questionnaire items of mental health (Diener’s Flourishing Scale, the PERMA-Profiler, the
flow items, and the Purpose in Life Test) indicate the fulfillment of convergent validity.
In the case of the convergent validity of the Self-regulation scale, we refer to the mostly medium-
level significant correlations with the subscales of the PERMA-Profiler and with general mental
state. In line with the meaning of the Self-regulation scale in terms of emotionality and mood control,
we can interpret the medium to strong significant correlations with the Negative Emotions scale of
the PERMA-Profiler, Young’s Schema Questionnaire, and the “nervous” and the “tense”
questionnaire items as contributing to the criterion validity.
As fulfillment of the convergent validity of the Resilience scale, we refer here to its strong
correlations with the Diener’s Flourishing Scale, the general mental state questionnaire item, the
Purpose in Life Test, and the scales of the PERMA-Profiler, especially with the Positive Emotions
and Happiness subscales. Convergent validity is indicated by strong and medium-level negative
correlations with negative emotional states (the Negative Emotions subscale of the PERMA-Profiler,
and the “nervous” and “tense” questionnaire items), symptoms of depression (Beck Depression
Inventory), and maladaptive schemas (Young’s Schema Questionnaire), indicating that a high level
of resilience provides some kind of protection against negative emotions and attitudes. This is also
confirmed by the medium to strong correlations with scales indicating mental well-being (the
Meaning and Accomplishment scales of the PERMA-Profiler, the WHO Well-Being Questionnaire,
the flow items, and the Satisfaction with Life Scale). Further evidence is provided by the medium to
strong correlation with flow, since certain behavioral competencies are essential for flow, which can
be considered as an investment in the individual’s coping system.
5.3. Results with sociodemographic indicators
An examination of the relationship between the five scales of the MHT discussed in our study and
the sociodemographic indicators yields many significant results, although these relationships are
typically rather weak. For example, for 92% of the correlations examined, Spearman’s r is < |.20|. A
detailed description of these results is beyond the scope of the present paper; thus, we refer to the
most striking results only.
The effect of gender and age was analyzed in the pooled sample of the two studies for individuals
with valid gender values (n = 2,817). Gender means differed significantly in the case of the Savoring
scale (males: M = 4.33; females: M = 4.66), with standard deviations around 1. The gender difference
(females giving higher values) was significant in the two-sample t-test (t(2814) = 6.90; p < .001), in
the Mann-Whitney U test (Z = 6.50; p < .001), and in the robust Brunner-Munzel rank test
(BM(1128) = 6.58; p < .001). Although the Cohen’s d (d = 0.30, 95% CI [0.216, 0.391]) and eta-
squared (η = .017) effect size measures were rather weak, they were already at an interpretable level.
1) and Resilience. Using a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), the main effect of age was
significant for both scales: Self-regulation: F(4; 2806) = 53.24; p < .001; Resilience: F(4; 2806) =
32.91; p < .001, with partial eta-squared effect size values of .07 for the former and .05 for the latter,
apparently stronger than the effect of gender. In the case of self-regulation, the gender × age
due to the fact that the level of self-regulation increased linearly with women’s age, while in the case
of men it showed an increasing trend only in the 26–50 age range. This was also confirmed by the
fact that Spearman’s r between self-regulation and age was significantly lower in case of men (r =
.27, p < .001) than in case of women (r = .38, p < .001). The curvilinear effect of Age on Self-
Regulation in the male subsample (n = 681) was examined also with polynomial regression analysis,
where powers of standardized age were entered consecutively into the regression model up to power
5. The last power that significantly increased the R-square value was the cubic term (R = 0.08;
R _increase = 0.01; F (1, 677) = 9.13, p = .003). This cubic curvilinear effect of Age on Self-
increase
Regulation in the male subsample is, however, negligible relative to the substantially stronger linear
relationship that can be seen in the female subsample (n = 2,135), where no power increased
significantly the linear effect of age (R = 0.14).
The effects of the other sociodemographic variables were assessed separately in the two studies.
Regarding level of education, the strongest positive correlation was with the Creative and Executive
Efficiency scale (r = .16 in sample I, r = .13 in sample II, p < .001). Subjective financial status
showed a stronger relationship in both samples. In Sample I, subjective financial status was
positively related to Well-being, with r = .21, and to Creative and Executive Efficiency, with r = .12
(both significant at p < .001 level). However, in Sample II subjective financial status also had a
significant positive relationship with Well-being (r = .23), Resilience (r = .20), and Creative and
Executive Efficiency (r = .17), all at p < .001 level. A slightly stronger but similar pattern was
obtained in this sample for correlations with monthly income (Well-being: r = .17, Resilience: r =
.27, Creative and Executive Efficiency: r = .25). Financial status therefore is positively related to
well-being, resilience, and coping with difficult situations. Finally, the importance of religion in
Sample II had a weak but significant (p < .001) positive relationship with the Well-being (r = .14)
and Savoring (r = .13) scales.
5.4. Temporal stability of the mental health test
In Study I, participants could voluntarily provide their email addresses for a possible replication of
the online investigation. Participants who provided this information were asked to fill in the same
questionnaire two weeks (Time 2) and 11 months (Time 3) after the first investigation (Time 1). This
enabled us to compute test–retest correlations to measure the temporal stability of the MHT scales. In
major categories of financial status (below average, average, above average) the differences among
Time 1, Time 2, and Time 3 percentages were never greater than 2 percentage points. Regarding age
the Time 1 mean of Time 2 retention sample (52.3 years) differed only slightly from that of Time 1
sample (51.3 years). Those Ss filling in the questionnaires both at Time 1 and at Time 3 were slightly
Running Title
older at Time 1 than those who filled in the questionnaires only at Time 1 (54.4 vs. 50.6 years;
t(1734) = 5.18, p < .001; Cohen’s d = 0.33, 95% CI [0.203, 0.451]).
At Time 2, we had 648 usable cases and Cronbach’s alpha values varied between .79 and .87,
whereas at Time 3 we had 304 usable cases and Cronbach’s alpha values varied between .79 and .90.
It can therefore be concluded that the internal consistency of the MHT scales shows excellent
temporal stability for all scales at Time 2 and Time 3. The test–retest correlations between the Time 1
reflect an excellent level of temporal stability for all scales at Time 2, and a good level of temporal
stability at Time 3, almost one year after the initial investigation.
6. Discussion
The objective of this paper was to conceptualize Maintainable Positive Mental Health Theory and to
develop and validate the Mental Health Test that operationalizes this model. The theoretical basis of
the MPMHT is a mental health construct in line with the mental health definition of the WHO
(Galderisi et al., 2015). MPMHT emphasizes that the measurement of mental health must go beyond
operationalizations that define the concept in terms of observable characteristics of well-being (e.g.,
Butler & Kern, 2016; Lukat et al., 2016), or characteristics that are listed as mirror opposites of
mental disorders (e.g., Huppert & So, 2013; Caprara et al., 2019; Oláh, 2019).
Our results support the conceptual definition of MPMHT that refers to a degree of global well-being
that goes hand in hand with good emotional, psychological, social, and spiritual functioning,
resilience, coping, and savoring capacity, as well as mental health sustainability on an ongoing basis,
with development and flexible adaptation to changing conditions guaranteed by competencies and
personality factors.
Although various psychological tests exist, with different positive psychological constructs (see
Section 1., 3.1.2., and 4.1.2.), the Mental Health Test (MHT) is the first test to have a five-
dimensional complex structure (Well-being, Savoring, Creative and Executive Efficiency, Self-
regulation, and Resilience), with the aim of covering the wide spectrum of mental health.
The most important finding in our online cross-sectional studies is that the five-dimensional
structural validity of the 17-item MHT was verified by EFA using a large sample (Study I, n =
1,736). In turn, using CFA, the five-factor MHT model with the original five scales was confirmed
by excellent fit indices in another large and independent sample (Study II, n = 1,083). In addition, the
internal consistency and temporal stability of the scales was proven. By analyzing the discriminant
validity using multivariate linear regression, we were able to conclude that all five scales have a
significant individual part of at least 44% that is not covered by the other four scales. The scale with
the highest unique variance of 82.7% is Self-regulation, although the unique variances of the
Savoring and Creative and Executive Efficiency scales also exceed 55%. The Well-being scale is the
only one for which the unexplained proportion of variance is less than 50%. This suggests that,
among the five components of mental health, well-being plays a central role. To expand and confirm
the individual meaning of the scales, several tests and individual questionnaire items were used in
correlation analyses, and sociodemographic variables in ANOVAs.
The results support that the Well-being scale confidently measures subjective well-being, which itself
comprises several components (biological, psychological, social, and spiritual). The Well-being scale
correlates at a high level with related tests such as Diener’s Flourishing Scale, the PERMA-Profiler,
the WHO Well-Being Questionnaire, the Satisfaction with Life Scale, and the Purpose in Life Test,
thus it can be considered as a very similar test. An important result is that the existence of meaningful
goals and the absence of depressive symptoms and maladaptive schemas are an integral part of the
subjective financial status, although this relationship is weak. Well-being has the strongest
relationship with the other components of mental health.
The Savoring scale measures how individuals are able to mentally mobilize their previous positive,
joyful memories and experiences to generate mental well-being, reliving them in the present and,
furthermore, extending them to future events. This ability appears to be more prevalent among
scale is closely related to the main indicators of all the mental health tests involved: Diener’s
Flourishing Scale, the PERMA-Profiler, Flow, the WHO Well-Being Questionnaire, the Satisfaction
of its construct. The Creative and Executive Efficiency scale measures how individuals are able to
cope with the difficulties they encounter by mobilizing their various competencies in the difficult,
stressful, and challenging situations of life. Furthermore, it measures how individuals are able to
provide successful individual and social problem-solving behavior. The Creative and Executive
Efficiency scale shows strong correlations with other tests of mental health (the Flourishing Scale,
the PERMA-Profiler, the Purpose in Life Test), which indicates the fulfillment of convergent validity
9). Further results of the validity studies show that the Creative and Executive Efficiency scale is a
negative predictor of negative emotions, symptoms of depression, and maladaptive schemas.
The Self-regulation scale provides information about a person’s ability to regulate and control
emotions, temperament, and negative states. Positive correlations between the Self-regulation scale
and general mental state, and negative correlations with negative emotional states were consistently
construct measured by the Self-regulation scale correlates weakly with age. Self-regulation is
sometimes more successful in the case of older people, and this positive age effect is more dominant
The Resilience scale measures the level of mental capacities and resources that can be mobilized
when a person faces unexpected, stressful, and difficult situations. The higher the level of resilience,
the more quickly the individual is able to recover from a sudden, unexpected stressful situation. Our
results confirm that a good capacity to experience flow, meaningful life goals, lack of negative
emotional states, satisfaction with life, and the absence of depressive symptoms and maladaptive
resilience has a positive but weak relationship with age.
One of the key findings of our study is that there are competencies behind the different components
of mental health. This result implies that these competences could be trained, improved, and
strengthened by their nature. This is most obvious in the case of creative and executive efficiency,
although, based on the positive correlation with age, it must also be true of self-regulation and
resilience. Savoring also implies mental ability that can be improved with cognitive techniques. As a
result, the level of experienced subjective well-being, satisfaction with life, and, in ordinary terms,
Running Title
happiness can be significantly increased. Although, this positive prognosis can be confirmed by
subsequent research which aim to demonstrate how these competencies can be developed.
One limitation of our studies is the online recruitment of participants: despite the large size of the
samples, they cannot be considered representative. The recruitment technique may greatly influence
data from verbal questionnaires, while the MHT scales are based, among other things, on specific
behaviors, mental operations, attitudes, and so on. For this reason, to confirm empirical validity it
would also be very important to verify the validity of the scales with other types of psychological
variables (e.g., rating scales, direct observations, clinical symptoms, specific data measuring physical
condition, sociometric ranking, etc.). By way of example, it would be useful to compare mental
health as measured by the MHT with the variables of 360-degree studies (Mahar & Strobert, 2010).
The meaning of the scales should also be confirmed by examining various clinical cases with
identified psychiatric diagnoses.
7. Conclusion
In sum, we believe our findings show in its present, 17-item form, designed for adults, the MHT can
provide a comprehensive picture of mental health in terms of MPMHT. The MHT has a number of
advantages over existing measures of well-being and mental health, making it a preferable
measurement device for use in future research. Applying the MPMHT approach in consultations, in
skill-improvement sessions, in relationship training, in group sessions, and in behavioral therapy
could help to improve the level of mental health in psychologically healthy people. Future research
should examine the MHT in the clinical population and apply MPMHT in positive clinical
psychology.