ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Path and Direction Discovery in Individual Dynamic Factor Models:
A Regularized Hybrid Unified Structural Equation Modeling with
Latent Variable
a b
Ai Ye and Kenneth A. Bollen
Lehrstuhl fu¨r Psychologische Methodenlehre & Diagnostik, Department Psychologie,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at Mu¨nchen, Germany; Department of Psychology and
Neuroscience, Department of Sociology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
ABSTRACT
There has been an increasing call to model multivariate time series data with mea-
surement error. The combination of latent factors with a vector autoregressive (VAR)
model leads to the dynamic factor model (DFM), in which dynamic relations are
derived within factor series, among factors and observed time series, or both. How-
ever, a few limitations exist in the DFM representatives and estimation: 1) the dy-
namic component of DFM contains either directed or undirected contemporaneous
relations, but not both, 2) selecting the optimal model in exploratory DFM is a chal-
lenge, 3) the consequences of structural misspecifications on estimation and model
selection is barely studied. Our paper serves to advance DFM with a hybrid VAR
representations and the utilization of LASSO regularization to select the dynamnic
relations in a data-driven manner. A simulation study is presented to investigate the
sensitivity of finding the true hybird dynamic relations in the structural model and
the specificity of excluding the false relations using LASSO-regularization versus
pseudo-ML. We also examine the robustness of parameter estimates in the selected
model using LASSO-regularization, pseudo-ML, and model-implied instrumental
variable two-stage least squares estimation. We aim to offer researchers guidance
on model selection and estimation in person-centered dynamic assessments.
KEYWORDS
Time Series Data; Hybrid Unified SEM; Regularized SEM, Dynamic Factor Model,
Model-Implied Instrumental Variable Two-Stage Least Square
CONTACT Ai Ye. Email: ai.ye@lmu.de
1. Introduction
With the development of technology to collect intensive longitudinal or time series
data (TSD) in a fast and economical pace, recent decades have been witnessing a
surge of psychological and neurological research at the individual level. Studies focused
on person-specific dynamic assessment emphasize individual differences in individual
characteristics and development. Along with the shift of research interest is the need
for advancing the statistical methods to facilitate person-specific dynamic assessments
using TSD. Within the psychometric field, researchers have developed psychometric
modeling frameworks to fit traditional time series models, such as the Vector Autore-
gressive (VAR) models, that have deep roots in statistics and econometrics (Hamilton,
1994; Lu¨tkepohl, 2005). The psychometric literature on modeling individual dynamic
models for time series data on a manifest level (TSD; Epskamp, Waldorp, M˜ottus, &
Borsboom, 2018; Gates, Fisher, & Bollen, 2019; Ye, Gates, Henry, & Luo, 2021) has
grown. These models estimate the dynamic relations (e.g., temporal and contempora-
neous) unpacked in a multivariate TSD. For instance, two representative approaches
are the unified Structural Equation Model (uSEM; Gates, Molenaar, Hillary, Ram, &
Rovine, 2010; Kim, Zhu, Chang, Bentler, & Ernst, 2007), as a time series extension
of the SEM, and the graphical VAR (gVAR; Epskamp et al., 2018) model, as a time
series extension of the network psychometric model. Recently, researchers have ex-
tended the VAR model into a hybrid representation (called ‘hybrid VAR’ by Molenaar
& Lo., 2016, or ‘hybrid uSEM’ by Ye et al., 2021) that can handle both the direct
causal effects and undirected contemporaneous associations (Molenaar & Lo, 2016; Ye
et al., 2021). These approaches differ in the variant of VAR representation and in the
estimation framework to select and identify the optimal model. For instance, uSEM
is usually identified by step-wise model search algorithms (Gates & Molenaar, 2012),
while gVAR (Epskamp et al., 2018) or hybrid uSEM (Ye et al., 2021) adopt some
variants of machine learning method (e.g., regularization) to select and estimate the
identifiable optimal sparse model.
However, so far these have focused on models with only a small number of manifest
variables without accounting for measurement error. In practice, it is common that
more than one, sometimes many, indicators measure the same underlying dynamic la-
tent variable. When multiple indicators are available, latent time series variables could
be formed to adjust for measurement error and to reduce the dimensions of the ob-
served variables. The combination of the factor model and the time series model results
in what we call the dynamic factor model (DFM; Browne & Nesselroade, 2005; Mole-
naar, 1985). In DFM, dynamic relations (e.g., lagged and contemporaneous relations)
are allowed either within the factor series or amongst the factor and the observed time
series. In fact, current dynamic modeling approaches include a factor model within
their restricted VAR version to estimate a DFM. For example, the uSEM model in the
GIMME framework (Gates & Molenaar, 2012) has been extended to the uSEM with
latent variables (i.e., LV-uSEM), for which they call the Latent Variable GIMME (or
LV-GIMME; Gates et al., 2019). LV-GIMME estimates a DFM as a LV-uSEM using
the stepwise model building algorithm, and an option to estimate parameters by use
of either the pseudo-maximum likelihood (i.e., pseudo-ML ; Molenaar & Nesselroade,
1998) or the model-implied instrumental variables with two-stage least squares (MIIV-
2SLS; Fisher, Bollen, & Gates, 2019). In addition, the graphical VAR (gVAR) model
has been combined with a factor model to form what is called the latent variable
gVAR (or LV-gVAR; Epskamp, 2020) model under the general Gaussian Graphical
Model framework.
However, the estimation of the more flexible VAR representation of DFM remains
to be developed. Therefore, the primary purpose of our paper is to extend the hybrid
uSEM with regularization (Ye et al., 2021) to the regularized hybrid uSEM with latent
variables, so that we can estimate a sparse DFM that allows for hybrid contempora-
neous dynamic relations between the latent factors themselves. Three steps address
this overarching goal: the first is to reform the structural model of the latent variable
uSEM (LV-uSEM) to its hybrid uSEM version, which the authors refer to as the latent
variable hybrid uSEM (or LV-huSEM); the second is to perform model selection us-
ing the LASSO regularization in the search for the optimal sparse LV-huSEM; lastly,
the final model, i.e., a sparse LV-huSEM, will be estimated via either the regulariza-
The term “pseudo-ML” in the current work specifically refers to the application of using maximum likelihood estimation for
time series data where the independence assumption is violated due to temporal dependence between repeated observations, as
used in time series literature such as Molenaar & Nesselroade (1998).
tion, pseudo-ML, or an equation-by-equation least square estimator (i.e., MIIV-2SLS)
to obtain final parameter estimates. To evaluate the proposed method with existing
ones, a simulation study will be conducted to compare 1) model recovery performance
(sensitivity and specificity) of the LASSO regularization versus the pseudo-ML based
stepwise model build when they are applied under the LV-huSEM context; and 2)
biasedness and robustness of parameter estimates obtained by LASSO regularization,
pseudo-ML, as well as the MIIV-2SLS estimation.
Below, we first introduce the basic concepts and specification of DFM, followed by
a review of the LV-GIMME framework to estimate an individual DFM as the LV-
uSEM. Next, we point out the issues and limitations of the current approach, and how
the proposed method addresses these issues. This leads to the design and conduct of
a simulation study to evaluate and compare the proposed method with the existing
ones. Finally, conclusions and discussion are drawn from the results of the simulation
study.
1.1. Dynamic Factor Models
Dynamic Factor Models (DFMs) represent a class of models that includes lagged re-
lations within the latent variable approach (Browne & Nesselroade, 2005; Molenaar,
1985). It can also be seen as a factor analysis extension to the family of VAR models in
the sense that latent variables (or, factor series) are defined in a measurement model
and that permits lagged relations either in the measurement model, in the structural
(i.e., latent variable) model, or both (Molenaar, 1985). Indeed, DFM is a synthesis
of factor analysis and VAR. Such a synthesis is ideal for many psychological studies
that aim to unravel hybrid relations in unobserved dynamic processes. A substantive
question that can be investigated by a DFM approach is to what extent an increase in
a latent dynamic construct (e.g., anxiety) predicts changes in another latent dynamic
construct (e.g., depression) as well as changes in the indicators of the other latent
construct. As another example, neuroscientists often aim to study functional connec-
tivity in human brains. The latent constructs in this context could be some unknown
“brain networks” formed by a cluster of disparate brain regions that tend to interact
across time when performing a task (Gates et al., 2019). Integrating a factor model
component in the dynamic model opens up the possibility to explore dynamics among
latent constructs underlying what we could observe.
A general DFM for a single multivariate TSD is defined by two components, the mea-
surement model and the structural or latent variable model (Molenaar, 1985; Zhang,
Hamaker, & Nesselroade, 2008). Let Y = [y , y , ..., y ] denote a vector of a p-
t 1t 2t pt
variate time series at a given time point t, with t = 1, ..., T . Assuming Y represents a
weakly stationary linear time series (i.e., with a constant mean, variance and covari-
ance function). To ease the presentation, it is assumed that all the time series have
zero mean function (i.e., no intercept term):
(cid:88)
Y = Λ(u)η(t − u) + ϵ , ϵ ∼ N (0, Θ). (1)
t t t
u=0
(cid:88)
η = Φ(u)η(t − u) + ζ , ζ ∼ N (0, Ψ). (2)
t t t
u=1
In the measurement model, the η(t − u) is a q-variant set of latent factor series,
with the (p, q)-dimensional time-invariant factor loading matrix Λ(u), u = 0, 1, ..., l
that denotes the linear relations between the original p-variant time series Y and the
q-variant factor series η at the lag order of u. The ϵ is a p-variate measurement
t t
error process for the p-variate observed variables in Y . We assume that the unique
factors (“errors”) are independent over time and no cross-loadings. The structural
(latent variable) equation in the DFM is a dynamic process of VARMA(m, n), i.e.,
a VAR of order n with a MA of order m. The Φ(u), u = 1, 2, ..., n is a sequence of
(q, q)-dimensional matrices of AR and cross-lagged effect of the latent factors at the lag
order of u. In Model (2), the parameters are time invariant. In addition, we assume that
the errors ϵ and ζ are uncorrelated with their respective latent variables η(t − u),
t t
the errors are uncorrelated over time, i.e., cov(ζ , ζ ) = 0. Here, moving average
t t−1
(MA) coefficient matrices (i.e., current latent variable values predicted by errors from
the prediction of previous latent variable values) are not not considered (m = 0). In
this way, the structural (latent variable) equation in the DFM is a dynamic process
of VAR(n), i.e., a VAR of order n. Taken together with the measurement model, this
returns a DFM (p, q, m, n, l). The general DFM implies that lagged values of the latent
variable can have loadings on future values of the indicators beyond the indirect effect
via the factor at that concurrent time point.
For model identification and substantive purposes, however, analysts often impose
restrictions to allow only one type of the lagged relations. For example, a general DFM
is reduced to a simpler, more restrictive version containing only lag relations among the
factors, i.e., DFM(p,q,0,1,0), called the first-order lag-1 process factor analysis or direct
autoregressive factor models (DAFM; Browne & Nesselroade, 2005); alternatively, it
reduces to what is called the shock factor analysis or white noise factor model when
lagged relations are only in the measurement model, i.e., DFM(p,q,0,0,1); McArdle,
1982; Zhang & Browne, 2007).
1.2. Latent Variable Group Iterative Multiple Model Estimation
Latent Variable Group Iterative Multiple Model Estimation (LV-GIMME; Gates et
al., 2019) adopts the DAFM model or the DFM(p,q,0,1,0) with lagged relations only
between latent factors in the structural or latent variable model. The DAFM makes
the interpretation and the implementation of LV-uSEM simpler, because the dynamic
relations are between factors, which can be separate from the measurement model
where factors are extracted from indicators at the same time. The dynamic relations
between the latent variables in the LV-uSEM are comparable to those among the
observed variables in the uSEM model, with the exception that these dynamic relations
take account of measurement errors in the observed variables. Because our aim is to
compare approaches of individual dynamic models with hybrid relations, we focus on
individual case time series, that is, no group-level modeling or aggregation of individual
models will be performed. In the remaining part of this paper, we refer to this model as
LV-uSEM instead of the LV-GIMME from the paper that applies to multiple subjects
TSD.
In the measurement model, LV-uSEM adopts the general form of DAFM, that is, a
first-order processing factor series, or DFM(p,q,0,1,0). This part adopts a confirmatory
factor approach to obtain latent variables with the same qualitative meaning. For each
individual:
Y = Λη + ϵ , ϵ ∼ N (0, Θ). (3)
t t t t
In the structural (latent variable) model, LV-uSEM inherits a uSEM structure
(Gates, Molenaar, Hillary, & Slobounov, 2011; Kim et al., 2007) that “unifies” tempo-
ral ordering dependency and contemporaneous associations among the latent factors.
The following model specification and matrix notations follow Gates et al. (2017) and
Ye et al. (2021):
η = Bη + ζ, ζ ∼ N (0, Ψ). (4)
where η = [η , η ] is a 2q×T matrix. That is, the factor variables are time-embedded
t−1 t
by appending the data at t − 1 to the data at t. The data are thus expanded to two
consecutive time points t − 1 and t, so time series vector of lagged (exogenous) factor
variables and those of contemporaneous (endogenous) factor variables are appended
horizontally. This requires that the error vector ζ also be extended, as well as each of
the corresponding matrices.
The contemporaneous and lagged regression coefficients collapse into a single 2p×2p
B regression coefficient matrix:
 
0 · · · · · · · · · 0 0 · · · · · · · · · 0
 
. . . . . .
 . . . . . . 
. . . . . .
 
 
 . . . . . . 
. . . . . .
 . . . . . . 
 
 . . . . . . 
. . . . . .
 . . . . . . 
 
 
 
0 · · · · · · · · · 0 0 · · · · · · · · · 0
 
B =
 
 
ϕ · · · · · · · · · ϕ 0 a · · · · · · a
 
11 1p 12 1p
 
. . . . . .
 
. . . . . .
. . . a . . .
 
 
 . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . 
 
 . . . . . . 
. . . . . .
 
. . . . . . a
 (p−1)p
 
ϕ · · · · · · · · · ϕ a · · · · · · a 0
p1 pp p1 p(p−1)
2p×2p
in which the upper left p × p and the upper right p × p matrix block coefficients are
set to zero for lagged (exogenous) factor variables. That is, no factor variable at time
t directly predicts a factor variable at time t − 1, and factor variables at time t − 1
cannot predict each other. The lower left and right blocks are Φ parameters for lag-1
relations and A for contemporaneous factor variables at time, respectively.
The error covariance Ψ is a diagonal matrix representing an independent white
noises:
 
 
 . 
ψ .
 
 
. . .
 
. . .
 . . . 
 
 . . . 
. . .
 . . . 
 
 
 
ψ · · · · · · ψ .
 p1 p(p−1) 
Ψ =
 
 . 
0 · · · · · · · · · 0 .
 
 
. . . .
 
. . . .
 . . . 0 . 
 
 . . . . . . 
. . . . . .
 . . . . . . 
 
 
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
 
. . . . . .
 
 
0 · · · · · · · · · 0 0 · · · · · · 0 ψ
(2p)(2p)
2p×2p
where the upper left triangle contains freely estimated variance and covariances among
the lagged (exogenous) factor variables, and the lower right triangle is the variance and
covariance matrix of factor residuals. Note that the covariances among factor residuals
are set to zero as in the traditional uSEM framework. These matrices provide the
foundation from which the expansion to latent variable hybrid uSEM is developed.
A note on the level of heterogeneity across individuals. It is possible that individu-
als vary both in the measurement of constructs as well as the relations among latent
factors. But the interpretation of the dynamic relations is hard to generalize across
people if the latent factors stand for completely different constructs. For this rea-
son, a typical practice in GIMME framework is to have a qualitatively homogeneous
and quantitatively heterogeneous measurement models (i.e., same nonzero pattern yet
individual-specific estimates in Λ matrix) to ensure the same substantive meaning of
the latent factor with some levels of individual variability (Gates et al., 2019). To
maximize heterogeneity in the dynamic patterns, the structural models represent en-
tirely idiographic dynamic models (i.e., person-specific patterns and estimates). Note
that this setting is opposite to the practice in idiographic filter DFM (Molenaar, 1985;
Nesselroade, Gerstorf, Hardy, & Ram, 2007), where the measurement model structure
and factor loading are allowed to vary across individuals on the condition that the
structural relations among the latent variables remain invariant across people. This
is critical since previous literature has pointed to great variability across individuals
both in how constructs are measured and how they relate to each other (Epskamp
et al., 2018; Gates et al., 2019; Hamaker, Dolan, & Molenaar, 2005). GIMME rep-
resents a very flexible approach that maximizes heterogeneity in dynamic patterns
across individual DFMs.
The pseudo-ML model selection and the MIIV-2SLS estimation. The LV-uSEM
operates under the SEM framework for DFM that uses a pseudo-ML based model
building algorithm and the model-implied instrumental variables with two-stage least
squares (MIIV-2SLS; Bollen, 1996) for parameter estimation. Ideally, the specification
for the structural (latent variable) model 3 should be guided by a priori theory. Un-
fortunately, very little is known about the individual dynamic pattern, besides that
research has shown that the patterns vary across people (Nichols, Gates, Molenaar,
& Wilson, 2014; Wright, Beltz, Gates, Molenaar, & Simms, 2015, e.g.,). GIMME uses
a data-driven forward selection algorithm where for every individual, it starts with a
null model, and one path with the highest and significant modification indices is added
iteratively until the model arrives at an acceptable fit (Gates et al., 2010). This model
building procedure is automatic in the free open-source R package gimme (Lane et al.,
2019).
The recommended estimation approach is a sequential, three-step procedure: in the
first stage, the measurement model is estimated with MIIV-2SLS (default), or pseudo-
ML, or PCA, and latent scores of factor series are derived through the regression
method; the second stage is consistent with the general GIMME approach which in-
volves a pseudo-ML based stepwise search to identify the sparse individual structural
models (i.e., uSEMs) with individualized patterns of dynamic relations amongst the
latent factor series obtained from the previous step; finally, parameter estimates of
the measurement and the sparse structural model are obtained via MIIV-2SLS. MIIV-
2SLS has been shown to be more robust to model misspecification than the system
wise ML estimations for traditional SEM (Bollen, Kirby, Curran, Paxton, & Chen,
2007) and particularly for SEM under DFM (Fisher et al., 2019).
The use of equation-by-equation estimation in MIIV-2SLS is particularly advanta-
geous because it separates the estimation of the measurement model from the struc-
tural (latent variable) model so that the measurement model parameter estimates re-
main unaffected by heterogeneous structures in the latent variable model (Gates et al.,
2019). Enabling individual variability in the pattern of contemporaneous or dynamic
relations among latent constructs allows for a better understanding of individual-
centered processes as they unfold over time. However, MIIV-2SLS is not a model
selection tool, hence we apply the MIIV-2SLS estimation of the final sparse LV-uSEM
after the stepwise model selection procedure.
Technical details of the MIIV-2SLS are available in Bollen (1996); Bollen et al.
(2021, 2007) and elsewhere. Here we give a brief description of MIIV-2SLS. Unlike
system-wise full-information estimators such as maximum likelihood that estimates
all parameters simultaneously, the MIIV-2SLS estimates one equation at a time. To
start, the MIIV-2SLS transforms the latent variable model into one that contains only
the observed variables (i.e., L2O) by substituting each latent variable with its scaling
indicator minus its error as specified in the measurement model (Bollen et al., 2021).
One assumption for the OLS estimator is that the composite error cannot correlate
with any covariates of that equation, which is typically violated after the L2O trans-
formation. A common way to solve the correlated error issue is to use instrumental
variables, i.e., variables that are uncorrelated with the composite error but correlate
with the covariates that are associated with these errors. The special advantage of the
MIIV-2SLS is that qualified instruments were drawn from other equation(s) within
the system itself based on the model structure, hence it is called model-implied in-
strumental variables (or MIIVs; Bollen et al., 2021). Finding qualified MIIVs is done
automatically using the algorithm from Bollen (1996) and is implemented in the R
package MIIVsem (Fisher, Bollen, Gates, & R¨onkk¨o, 2020). Another advantage of the
equation-by-equation MIIV-2SLS estimation is that, besides the χ tests of goodness-
of-fit for the whole model, equation-wise overidentification test (e.g., Sargan’s χ test;
Sargan, 1958) is available when the equation has more than the minimum number of
MIIVs. A rejection to the null hypothesis of the overidentification test suggests that
at least one of the MIIVs fail to meet the conditions based on the current model spec-
ification, which is an evidence that some specifications of the model is in error (Bollen
et al., 2021).
To estimate a LV-uSEM using MIIV-2SLS estimator under the GIMME approach,
one convenience is that the latent factor variables are obtained prior to the estimation
of the structural (latent variable) model and are treated as observed variables in the
model selection and estimation for structural relations. In addition, the lagged latent
factor variables are predetermined (exogenous) variables because no backward predic-
tions from factor scores at time T to those at the previous time are allowed (recall
the zero elements in the B matrix in Equation 4). This setting of the lagged factor
variables guaranteed a minimum set of qualified MIIVs for the parameter estimates in
the structural model.
2. The Current Study
The uSEM framework is used to estimate individual dynamic models with latent
factors such as the DAFM. However, there are a couple of areas that we propose to
extend the individual modeling under the GIMME framework. First, it is imperative to
move from the restrictive VAR representation in the DAFM from a uSEM to the more
flexible hybrid uSEM. That is, directed regressions and undirected error covariances
among contemporaneous latent factor variables should be incorporated simultaneously.
Because not only can they co-exist, they can carry different causal interpretations as
well as practical implications. Therefore, the first goal is to extend the structural model
in LV-uSEM to the hybrid representation, i.e., LV-huSEM, by altering the residual
covariance matrix Ψ in Equation 4 to Ψ :
 
 
 . 
ψ .
 
 
. . .
 
. . .
 . . . 
 
 . . . 
. . .
 . . . 
 
 
 
ψ · · · · · · ψ .
 p1 p(p−1) 
Ψ =
 
 . 
0 · · · · · · · · · 0 .
 
 
. . .
 
. . .
 . . . ψ 
(p+1)(p)
 
 . . . . . . 
. . . . . .
 . . . . . . 
 
 
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
 
. . . . . .
 
 
0 · · · · · · · · · 0 ψ · · · · · · ψ ψ
(2p)(p) (2p)(2p−1) (2p)(2p)
2p×2p
Note that the lower-right matrix block of Ψ is now a symmetric matrix with con-
temporaneous variances ψ , i = p + 1. . . 2p of the factor residuals on the diagonal as
seen in Ψ. By substituting the off-diagonal 0’s in Ψ with parameters of contemporane-
∗ ∗
ous residual covariance ψ , i, j = p + 1. . . 2p, i ̸= j, Ψ is turned to Ψ . Each element in
ij
the lower right hand corner are now candidates in a model search procedure. By doing
so, we relax the conditional independence assumption on the contemporaneous errors
of uSEM, and allow the errors to be correlated. Additionally, the regression coefficient
matrix B in Equation 4 is turned to B as the relations and estimates may change
from what they were previously, and the model-implied covariance matrix is now Σ
derived by:
∗ ∗ −1 ∗ ∗ −1′
Σ = (I − B ) Ψ (I − B ) (5)
Second, the forward selection method of model building is highly dependent on the
starting model and the intermediate steps, and can arrive at an arbitrary final model.
Results from the simulation study in Ye et al. (2021) also showed that this approach
tends to miss relations with moderate to medium strengths even with the correct
starting model and a large sample size. Another critical downside unique to the current
LV-GIMME is the sequential analysis. That is, factor scores of latent variable series
are obtained through the traditional Bartlett method (Bartlett, 2011) or regression
methods (Thurstone, 1935) in a separate step prior to the model building and are
treated as observed variables in the estimation of the structural model. However, it has
been shown analytically and numerically that a na¨ıve use of factor scores as observed
variables without correction leads to inconsistent and biased parameter estimates in
the context of linear regressions (Skrondal & Laake, 2001) or simultaneous equations
(Croon, 2002). In addition, there is a lack of knowledge about the impact of the
measurement errors and random errors from the factor scores, regardless of the method
of calculation, on model selection and estimation in simultaneous equations.
Regularization, in contrast, is a global, continuous model selection and a simultane-
ous estimation method. Regularization introduces sparsity by imposing a penalty term,
the level of which is gauged by searching across a prespecified range of λ values until
the optimal λ (hence the sparsity level) is reached such that the model has the least
mean square error or the lowest BIC (Jacobucci, 2017; Ye et al., 2021). When using
the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO, aka the L1-norm penalty;
Tibshirani, 1996), the sum of the absolute values of the parameters are shrunken to-
wards zero as λ increases, and they can eventually reach exactly zero. Hence, the
LASSO penalty is often used in favor of a sparse model or to perform model and
variable selection. Previous simulation study (Ye et al., 2021) demonstrated success in
adopting the LASSO regularization to identify a sparse huSEM with a high sensitivity
(identify true paths) regardless of the magnitude as well as a high specificity (elimi-
nating zero relations). However, to the authors’ knowledge, LASSO regularization has
not been implemented under the LV-uSEM context. Therefore, the current method
seeks to replace the pseudo-ML stepwise searching and sequential estimation with the
LASSO regularization for a simultaneous identification and estimation of the extended
LV-huSEM.
To obtain the solution, a ML regularized cost function is derived by adding the
user-defined penalty function to the unregularized ML cost function:
F (θ) = F (θ) + λP (θ ) (6)
Reg ML
in which F (θ) is the unregularized cost function computed from the model implied
ML
covariance Σ given in Equation 5. The set θ includes all the parameters estimated in
the model, while θ is the subset containing user-specified parameters under penaliza-
tion.
Lastly, there is a lack of evaluation and comparison of these methods for the parame-
ter estimation under data-driven model building procedures. Previous researchers have
found that pseudo-ML estimates of individual DFMs obtained by the SEM approach
showed higher biases and a tendency for inaccurate statistical conclusions compared
with true ML estimates obtained from methods such as the state-space modeling ap-
proach with Kalman Filter estimator (Chow, ho R. Ho, Hamaker, & Dolan, 2010). But
such evaluation was done on the correctly specified model, without potential biases
associated with the model selection procedure. In addition, as an alternative model
selection and estimation method, the property of LASSO regularized estimates in
the LV-uSEM context has not been studied. In theory, regularization methods have
sacrificed some level of unbiasedness for efficiency, because all the parameters under
penalty (including the unknown true ones) are shrunk at the same time. But this
does not mean that the LASSO estimates are always more biased than unregularized
pseudo-ML estimates, because penalization eliminates unnecessary variables and false
relations that can also bias the estimates of the correct parameters.
Importantly, both the pseudo-ML and the LASSO regularization are system-wide
estimator that are not robust to structural misspecifications because errors in one
place can spread out to other parts of the model including those that are correctly
specified (Bollen et al., 2021). Using a non-robust estimator to select the structural
(latent variable) model would potentially impact final estimates in both the mea-
surement model and the structural model. In contrast, the MIIV-2SLS is a limited-
information equation-by-equation estimator that is more robust to structural mis-
specifications (Bollen et al., 2007). Indeed, the MIIV-2SLS has been shown to be more
robust than the pseudo-ML for the estimation of a DFM when estimated under the
LV-uSEM framework (Fisher et al., 2019; Gates et al., 2019). Further, Bollen et al.
(2018) has illustrated the analytic robustness conditions of the MIIV-2SLS estima-
tor in SEM. Specifically, they found that misspecification errors from the structural
(latent variable) model should not contaminate MIIV-2SLS estimates in the measure-
ment model, whereas the impact of misspecifications in the measurement model on
& Fisher, 2018). This robustness property makes MIIV-2SLS an excellent choice for
the estimation of sparse LV-huSEM when the heterogeneous, exploratory individual
structural models are conditioned on a common, confirmatory measurement model.
Because under the assumption of the correctly specified measurement model, the only
source of misspecification comes from the structural model (as a result of model se-
lection), which according to the robustness condition, will not bias the MIIV-2SLS
estimates of the measurement model. This property, however, will not be guaranteed
when system-wide estimators were used. That is, even though the measurement model
is correctly specified, the errors from the misspecified structural model will likely bias
pseudo-ML and LASSO regularization estimates of both the structural as well as the
measurement model. Hence, the LV-GIMME research group adopted the MIIV-2SLS
approach for the final parameter estimation post to the pseudo-ML based stepwise
model search.
Therefore, to investigate consistent and robust estimation under possible hetero-
geneous misspecified structural models, we included the MIIV-2SLS as a post model
selection estimation approach as well (i.e., parameter estimation after the optimal
sparse LV-huSEM model is selected). Besides model recovery property, we also seek to
compare unbiasedness and robustness behaviors of the pseudo-ML, the LASSO reg-
ularized, and the MIIV-2SLS estimators under the context of data-driven dynamic
modeling. The current investigation will include the evaluations of these properties
under the LV-huSEM with entirely idiographic structural models conditioning on a
unified, confirmatory measurement model. Having an identical factor structure in the
final LV-huSEM models across these methods ensures that the comparison of model
recovery and parameter estimation for the dynamic relations are not contaminated by
differences in the structure of latent factors.
In sum, the primary goal of the current study is to evaluate the different model
building methods (pseudo-ML vs. regularization) with respect to model recovery as
well as estimation approaches (e.g., pseudo-ML, regularization, and MIIV-2SLS) for
unbiased and robust parameter estimations for a DAFM with a hybrid VAR rep-
resentations (i.e., LV-huSEM). First, we extend the model specification for DAFM
implemented in methods such as GIMME. That is, the LV-uSEM is extended to the
LV-huSEM in the same way that uSEM is extended to huSEM in Ye et al. (2021), with
the distinction that the huSEM is now constructed on the factor series instead of the
observed time series variables. Second, the LV-GIMME approach used a pseudo-ML
based stepwise model search on the factor scores. Instead, the proposed method adopts
the LASSO regularization for model search and estimation in the extended LV-huSEM.
One advantage of using LASSO regularization in this LV-huSEM context is that we
can estimate the measurement model and structural model simultaneously rather than
separately. The simultaneous estimation avoids potential biases introduced by the er-
rors in the factor scores. Finally, neither the unbiasedness or robustness of parameter
estimates obtained by regularization has yet been evaluated under the current con-
text. Indeed, the focus of existing literature is primarily on the recovery of true path
presence and path direction (e.g., Epskamp et al., 2018; Gates et al., 2019; Ye et al.,
2021). However, it is vital to compare regularization with pseudo-ML and MIIV-2SLS
for parameter estimates in the LV-huSEM. Therefore, in addition to model recovery,
we seek to evaluate properties of parameter estimates using the current three esti-
mation approaches (i.e., pseudo-ML, regularization, and MIIV-2SLS), especially with
misspecifications in the structural model recovered through model building procedures.
Particularly, the authors are interested in comparing the model search and estimation
method using the proposed LASSO regularized LV-huSEM approach as well as a com-
bination of LASSO regularization and MIIV-2SLS for LV-huSEM, versus the existing
LV-GIMME approach, with the pseudo-ML and MIIV-2SLS estimation. The authors
hypothesize that LASSO regularization will be a more efficient and reliable method
than the pseudo-ML based forward selection in the search for the optimal sparse model;
and for parameter estimates, MIIV-2SLS is the most unbiased and robust estimator
(under model structural misspecifications).
2.1. The Simulation Design
We designed a Monte Carlo simulation study to evaluate LASSO regularization and
pseudo-ML approach with respect to model recovery as well as their properties for
parameter estimation compared to those of MIIV-2SLS under the LV-huSEM context.
The goal is to investigate the extent to which building LV-huSEM models with LASSO
regularization and MIIV-2SLS estimation is superior to the LV-GIMME approach in
terms of 1) sensitivity of finding the true dynamic relations in the structural model,
2) the specificity of excluding the false dynamic relations, and 3) the robustness of
parameter estimates to structural misspecifications.
The Data Generating Model (DGM). The DGM is a five-factor DFAS with lag-1
effects as well as hybrid types of contemporaneous relations among the latent factors.
In the measurement model, each factor has three indicators with no cross loadings
or lagged relations. The factor loading of the scaling indicator of each factor equals
1 with the other two loadings set to 0.7 and 0.9. We include paths of different types
and magnitudes to investigate the path recovery for hybrid dynamic relations. This
includes a lag-1 autoregressive process within each factor (0.5), a cross-lagged effect
from lagged factor three to contemporary factor four (0.7). For the contemporaneous
relations amongst factors, we included a direct path from factor one to two (-0.25),
from factor one to four (-0.7), a covariance between factors one and three (0.25), and a
covariance between factors three and five (0.7). We varied the magnitude of coefficients
and covariances to see whether these impact the recovery of the true DGM. We do not
claim that the combination of these parameter values returns a common LV-huSEM
model in practice. In fact, we suspect that this model is overly simplified with sparse
relations compared to what would be found in empirical data. We will return to this
point in the limitation section.
To investigate the influence of sample size on the performance, data is generated
from the same DGM using time lengths varying from 60, 200, to 1,000, representing
a range from small to large in practice. This is to be consistent with the simulation
design in a previous evaluation on regularized huSEM (Ye et al., 2021). That is, the
choice of these design factors are decided such that they represent data structure and
characteristics of time series data in psychological and psychophysiological research.
For example, although 60 might appear small in panel or cross-sectional data, it would
be moderately large in time series such as daily dairy. Note that only the number
of timepoints is crossed design, the other factors are investigated within one model.
All the DGMs will be replicated 1,000 times, resulting in 3,000 datasets. The weak
stationary test will be performed in the data generating process, i.e., we will test that
all eigenvalues of Φ have modulus less than one (Lu¨tkepohl, 2005). All analyses will be
performed in R, codes will be released and made publicly available on Open Science
Framework (OSF).
2.2. Analytic Procedure
For the pseudo-ML approach, confirmatory five-factor measurement models are esti-
mated by pseudo-ML in lavaan or by MIIV-2SLS in MIIVsem, and factor scores are
obtained by the default regression method of the ’lavPredict’ function in lavaan. These
factor score series will enter the subsequent structural model for model selection using
pseudo-ML forward search in the GIMME package, function indSEM. The difference
from the original setting in LV-GIMME is that here the starting structural model is
a huSEM (with the covariance matrix ψ ) instead of the more restricted uSEM (with
ψ). Additionally, we focus on individual models only, i.e., no group level model is
involved. For this reason, we refer to this method “pseudoML-FS-huSEM” to indicate
it uses modification indexes for the search of sparse huSEM model using the factor
scores.
For the proposed method, the LV-huSEM under LASSO regularization (i.e., LASSO-
LV-huSEM) will be implemented under the regularized SEM framework. After the LV-
huSEM model structure is specified in lavvan, regsem can import the lavvan output,
i.e., the unregularized ML cost function F (θ) derived from 6, and perform LASSO
ML
regularization with the user-defined list of parameters in the penalty function λP (θ ).
Note that in LASSO-LV-huSEM the model selection and estimation are performed
simultaneously on both the measurement and the structural (latent variable) model.
To ensure that factor series represent latent constructs that are consistent with those of
“pseudoML-FS-huSEM”, the same confirmatory factor structure is estimated without
penalty. Parameters in the measurement model (e.g., factor loadings) belong to the
∗ ∗
freely estimated set in θ but not in set θ . Parameters in the set θ are regression
coefficients for cross-lagged effects and contemporaneous effects (coefficients in the
B matrix except the diagonal elements of the lower left block matrix Φ to free up
AR coefficients) as well as the error covariance among contemporaneous latent factors
(i.e., off-diagonal elements in the lower right block matrix Ψ . Ideally, the optimal λ
(with the lowest BIC) penalizes all unnecessary parameter(s) to zero and estimates the
remaining parameter(s), unraveling the true type of relation between any two latent
factors from five possibilities: two cross-lagged effects, two directed contemporaneous
regression coefficients, and one undirected contemporaneous error covariance.
Two additional methods were included in the analysis to account for the confound-
ing factor from the use of factor scores in the “pseudoML-FS-huSEM” method. The
first one is to repeat the huSEM model search and estimation using factor scores
obtained from the DGM (i.e., LV-huSEM) which we call “pseudoML-DGM-FS”. By
using the population parameters from the DGM, it could reduce the biases because the
population parameters remove sampling error of the parameter estimates that are part
of generating the factor scores. But note that factor score estimates would still differ
from the latent variables - the problem is the measurement errors that are part of the
indicators that form the factor scores. In reality, however, the true model is unknown
and so it is impossible to implement this method without error. It is included in the
simulation to determine if the use of factor scores improves when population parame-
ters are part of their calculations. Another confounding factor lies in the comparison
of “pseudoML-FS-huSEM” (i.e., using pseudo-ML) and “LASSO-LV-huSEM” in their
ability to select and estimate true relations and eliminate false ones in the structural
model is the fact that the pseudo-ML is subject to measurement errors and random
errors in the factor scores, while LASSO regularization simultaneously estimates the
measurement and structural (latent variable) models without calculating factor scores.
To account for that difference which confounds the comparison between pseudo-ML
and LASSO regularization, we included an additional analysis to apply LASSO regu-
larization on a huSEM using the same factor scores from the five-factor measurement
model as we did in the pseudo-ML approach, i.e., “LASSO-FS-huSEM”. In that case,
“LASSO-FS-huSEM” and “pseudoML-FS-huSEM” only differ in their model selection
and estimation methods but not how the measurement model and starting structural
model are constructed. While the difference between “LASSO-FS-huSEM” and the
generic proposed method “LASSO-LV-huSEM” informs the impact of measurement
errors from factor scores instead of latent variables.
Finally, recall that both pseudo-ML and LASSO regularization are for both model
selection and estimation. But given the potential biases introduced by the model se-
lection procedure and the robustness property of the MIIV-2SLS, the latter is also in-
cluded as a post model selection estimation. That is, after the final sparse LV-huSEM
is selected, it will be estimated again using the MIIV-2SLS to obtain the final parame-
ter estimates of both the measurement and the structural (latent variable) models. In
terms of the selection of MIIVs for each equation when the number of MIIVs exceed
the minimum number required for model identification, previous simulations studies
(e.g.,; Bollen et al., 2007) found that using one additional MIIV than the minimum
Modeling Framework LASSO Regularization pseudo-ML
Method Name LASSO-LV-huSEM LASSO-FS-huSEM pseudoML-FS-huSEM pseudoML-DGM-FS
Analysis Procedure Simultaneous Sequential Sequential Sequential
Measurement Model confirmatory factor scores factor scores factor scores (DGM)
VAR Model Build LASSO penalty LASSO penalty Forward stepwise Forward stepwise
Parameter Estimate LASSO/MIIV-2SLS n/a Pseudo-ML/MIIV-2SLS n/a
number produces the least biased estimation at small sample size conditions, but
matters less in large samples. We chose to adopt this approach for the MIIV-2SLS
estimation in the current simulation, given that the examination includes small to
moderate sample sizes. We refer to this approach MIIV-2SLS-DF1 to indicate the one
degree of freedom in the overidentification Sargan’s test. With these investigations,
we could examine which combination of model selection and estimation regime is the
overall optimal practice, accounting for the treatment of the measurement model. The
2.3. Evaluation Measures
We use sensitivity and specificity to evaluate the accuracy of recovering relations with
the correct direction. Sensitivity and specificity are common outcome measures in net-
work research (e.g., abegaz2013sparse; epskamp2016primer). Sensitivity is calculated
by the ratio of the true positive count discovered in the search over the sum of all true
relations in the DGM (i.e., true positives and false negatives). Sensitivity represents
the power to detect true relationships. In this paper, because the starting model is
the more flexible LV-huSEM with all the free parameters in the extended Ψ and
B , we do not distinguish path sensitivity from direction sensitivity. That is, only the
relations that are recovered with the correct direction are recorded. Essentially, the
sensitivity concept here is equivalent to the direction sensitivity in Ye et al. (2021).
Specificity, in comparison, is calculated by the ratio of true negative count over the
sum of negatives in the DGM (i.e., the sum of true negative count and false positive
count). This represents the percentage of non-existing paths in the DGM that the
search procedure accurately omitted in the final model. These measures allow for a
global evaluation of a model’s ability to detect true recovery and to reject false ones.
In both sensitivity and specificity measures, higher values indicate better performance
in the selection of true data-generating relations.
However, from previous observations, sometimes a relation between two variables
will still be recovered with a misspecified direction. For example, at the presence
of a directed relation between two contemporaneous factors (e.g., Y →− Y ), an
t,1 t,2
alternative relation such as a reversed sign (Y ←− Y ) or as lagged ( Y →− Y
t,1 t,2 t−1,1 t,2
or Y →− Y ) or as undirected covariance (Y ↔ Y ) might be selected by the
t−1,2 t,1 t,1 t,2
model. In some scenarios, it is better to have another form of relation from the true
form than completely missing the relations, but not always. For example, if a direct
path between two variables is missed, having a covariance or a lagged path with the
correct direction in the selected model is more informative than having no relation;
however, if the directed path with the reversed sign is recovered, the information is
misleading (i.e., a wrong causal implication). Sometimes, a relation with one or two
wrong directions could be selected instead when the sample size is too small and the
sampling error is large, but other times one or more could also be selected in addition
to the true direction when the sample size is large. To investigate this behavior in
relation to model selection methods and across sample sizes, we calculate relation-
specific “direction false positive”: the percentage of time where there are at least one
(out of four possible) misspecified directions in relation to a given true relation being
selected in the final model. Accordingly, we distinguish the overall model specificity
with the one that eliminate the “direction false positive” related to true relations,
the authors refer to them as direction specificity (more stringent) and path specificity
(more lenient), respectively.
To examine unbiasedness and robustness, we will exam the relative bias measure. We
calculate the mean relative bias (RB) for each parameter as the difference of the actual
estimate and the true value divided by the true value, averaged across the cases when
the path is recovered by the model (i.e., nonzero). Hence, this is a RB rate conditional
on the path recovery. When using MIIV-2SLS, the equation level over-identification
2 2
test (i.e., Sargan’s χ test) is available. The Sargan’s χ test informs whether the
MIIVs are uncorrelated with the error term of the corresponding equation. Rejection
of the null hypothesis suggests that one or more of the MIIVs are inappropriate. This
could occur if the equation is misspecified or if another part of the model is misspecified
and this leads to one or more incorrect MIIVs for the estimated equation. A significant
Sargan test cannot definitely tell which of these is true, but it does alert the researcher
to the potential of inconsistent coefficients estimators. Following previous literature
(Fisher et al., 2019), we are interested in two properites: 1) what is the statistical
power of the Sargan’s χ test when at least one of the MIIVs for an equation is
wrong, and 2) Is the Type I error rate of the Sargan’s χ test accurate when all MIIVs
are valid. Consistent with literature, we will use an α of .05 for both circumstances.
The aim is to evaluate the RB and robustness behaviors under different misspecified
structural models as recovered by pseudo-ML, regularization, versus MIIV-2SLS. From
a practical point of view, the convergence behaviors for each method will be recorded
and compared.
3. Result
3.1. Model Convergence
Some datasets caused nonconvergence when the LASSO regularization or the pseudo-
ML approach estimates a LV-huSEM. These datasets were dropped from the analysis
of the outcome measures below. It was observed that out of the 1000 datasets, there
were 10.9 %, 7.3%, and 7.1% that did not converge for the one-step LASSO-LV-huSEM
method at sample sizes N = 60, 200, 1000, respectively. These rates were increased
to 21.9%, 14.5%, 8.3% (respectively) when we used the two-step LASSO-FS-huSEM
method. The pseudo-ML method using factor scores from a five-factor measurement
model did not converge for 2% datasets at N = 60. All the other conditions were
converged. It is clear that the model using LASSO regularization using a starting
model of a full LV-huSEM (with all the parameters included) has a higher chance of
model nonconvergence compared to those using the pseudo-ML method that starts
with a null model and a much small model specification (as the estimation of the
measurement model is separate from that of the structural model).
3.2. Sensitivity and Specificity
Note: Small.Dir = small directed path, Large.Dir = large directed path, Small.Cov = small covariance relation,
Large.Cov = large covariance relation, CL = cross-lag effect, Lag-1 = lag-1 effect, Large.FL refers to factor
loadings of .9, Med.FL refers to factor loadings of .7.
Let us first turn to the sensitivity for recovering true relations of the DGM from
the starting LV-huSEM (i.e., confirmatory measurement model and an exploratory
structural model with all the free parameters denoted in B and ψ ). All the methods
showed an excellent sensitivity for lag-1 effects regardless of the sample size. Besides
lag-1 relations, the probability to recover another true path by any method depends
largely on the sample size: the recovery rates were low when the sample size was small
(N = 60), overall acceptable at a medium sample size (N = 200) and satisfactory
given a large sample size (N = 1000). Specifically, between the two generic methods of
our interest, i.e., the pseudo-ML using factor scores (pseudoML-FS-huSEM) and the
proposed LV-huSEM under LASSO regularization (LASSO-LV-huSEM), the perfor-
mance of recovering a moderate directed path or a covariance relation were similar;
however, LASSO-LV-huSEM showed an overall higher sensitivity to strong relations
(i.e., directed, covariance, and cross-lagged relations) when given a medium or large
sample size. Surprisingly, pseudoML-FS-huSEM performed poorly in recovering the
strong directed path even with a large sample size. A closer examination revealed that
the majority of time the model tended to recover a true strong directed path as a co-
variance relation and sometimes as a reversed sign directed path (hence a high rate of
that counted as a “path presence recovery” but not as a “direction recovery” in the
simulation of Ye et al. (2021). Note that the distinction was emphasized there because
the investigation involved more restricted starting models such that some types of
relation were misspecified one way or another, their presence can only be recovered
by an alternative form between the two variables. It is not the case here where both
methods used the true starting structural model (i.e., huSEM) for the search.
Turning to the impact of the type of factor score, it seemed that when a true DGM
model (i.e., LV-huSEM) was used to obtain the factor scores for the subsequent pseudo-
ML analysis (i.e., pseudoML-DGM-FS), the overall model recovery performance of the
strong relations was much better than those from using the factor scores of a confir-
matory measurement model alone. This suggests using estimated parameter values for
the factor scores affect the recovery of the structural relations amongst the factors.
Overall, LASSO-FS-huSEM had the best sensitivity performance of all the methods
(latent variable) model using factor scores as observed actually increased the chance
of recovering the structural relations amongst the latent factors.
Next, we examined the path-specific “direction false positive rate”, defined as the
chance of recovering a true association yet with a wrong direction (refer to the Eval-
uation Measures section for the more detailed description). Not surprisingly, it was
observed that some relations were recovered with a wrong direction when the sample
size was small. However, even when the sample size was sufficient and in many cases
the true path was recovered, sometimes additional paths might still be selected when
there existed a strong correlation between the two variables. Hence, direction false
positive rates did not necessary go down with the increase of sample size. Overall,
Note: Small.Dir = small directed path, Large.Dir = large directed path, Small.Cov = small covariance relation,
Large.Cov = large covariance relation, CL = cross-lag effect, Lag-1 = lag-1 effect, Large.FL refers to factor
loadings of .9, Med.FL refers to factor loadings of .7.
except for cross-lagged relations, pseudo-ML methods had higher direction false pos-
itive rates in relation to the true paths in the DGM than did LASSO methods. This
is partly the reason that pseudoML-FS-huSEM had very poor sensitivity under some
conditions. That is, some relations were recovered only with a wrong direction or type
of relation. For instance, at sample size of 200 and 1000, both the LASSO-LV-huSEM
(around 12-17%) and pseudoML-FS-huSEM (around 20-34%) methods had some ten-
dency to recover a directed path at the presence of a true covariance relations between
two contemporaneous factors. More problematically, pseudo-ML showed a high chance
(67% at N = 200 or 96% at N = 1000) of recovering a reversed signed directed path or
a covariance when there existing a strong directed path. Using the factor scores from
the DGM (i.e., pseudoML-DGM-FS) did not decrease the chance of false positive di-
rections,. In fact, using LASSO on the factors scores to select the structural model
seemed to also introduce more direction false positive than the one-step LASSO-LV-
huSEM model. These consistent observations that all methods using the factor scores
showed a higher rate of direction false positive than their counterparts suggested that
the issue of a wrong direction recovery of true relations is very likely tied to the use
of factor scores in place of the latent variables.
Both generic methods reached a path specificity above 90%, suggesting they are
reliable in rejecting false paths that were unrelated with those pairs of variables that
have a true relation of another form or direction. However, the direction specificity
(i.e., the odds of ruling out any path when it is truly false) dropped quite a bit for
pseudoML-FS-huSEM (to around 72-77%) or any method that used factor scores. This
is again because there was quite an amount of direction false positive paths in relation
to true paths.
3.3. Conditional Relative Bias
Overall, the post model selection MIIV-2SLS estimation was the least biased for pa-
rameter estimates of contemporaneous relations in the structural model, even though
the estimates of moderate relations from any method were highly biased at a sample
size of 60. In comparison, the LASSO penalized LV-huSEM methods produced the
Note: Small.Dir = small directed path, Large.Dir = large directed path, Small.Cov = small covariance relation,
Large.Cov = large covariance relation, CL = cross-lag effect, Lag-1 = lag-1 effect, Large.FL refers to factor
loadings of .9, Med.FL refers to factor loadings of .7.
most unbiased estimates for freely estimated parameters, i.e., lag-1 autoregressive ef-
fects within each latent factor as well as factor loading in the measurement model,
even at a small sample size as low as 60. Two methods produced similar results for
cross-lagged effect among latent factors. Particularly, at a sample size of 200 and 1000,
the conditional mean relative biases of lag-1 from LASSO-LV-huSEM were only 4.6%
and 1.6%, respectively. The mean RBs of factor loading estimates were as low as under
1.8% at N = 200 or under 0.4% at N = 1000. When sample size was large, MIIV-2SLS-
DF1 also produced estimates with small biases on average for factor loading estimates
(under 5%), but the mean RBs were higher than those from LASSO-LV-huSEM at
a small to moderate sample size (e.g., around 20% for MIIV-2SLS-DF1 compared
to around 10% for LASSO-LV-huSEM at N = 60, or 12% versus 2% at N = 200,
respectively). However, for the parameters under penalty in LASSO-LV-huSEM or
LASSO-FS-huSEM (i.e., contemporaneous effects in the structural model), estimates
were on average more biased (e.g., ranged from 20% to 40% at N = 1000) than those
from MIIV-2SLS-DF1 (e.g., ranged from 5% to 18% at N = 1000), which was as ex-
pected given they were under penalty in LASSO methods while being freely estimated
by the MIIV-2SLS after the model selection.
The comparisons between LASSO methods and pseudo-ML methods were mixed
across different types and strengths of relations. For example, for lag-1 and cross-
lagged estimates, pseudoML-FS-huSEM estimates produced larger biases (e.g., mean
RBs was between 50 to 60% even at N = 200 or 1000) than did LASSO estimates
(e.g., mean RBs ranged from 2% to 13% at N = 200 or 1000). Evidence that some of
the biases come from errors in factor scores is that pseudoML-DGM-FS using factors
scores from the DGM produced much less biased estimates than did pseudoML-FS-
huSEM (using factor scores from a five-factor measurement model). The true DGM
is not known so the pseudoML-DGM-FS is never available, but we include it here
to illustrate the impact of forming factor scores from estimated rather than true pa-
rameter values. However, this pattern did not apply to all types of parameters. For
instance, the two pseudoML methods produced similar and slightly less biased esti-
mates than did the two LASSO for moderate directed and large covariance relations
at each sample size level, although all of them were still more biased than those from
MIIV-2SLS. This suggests that errors in factor scores could introduce additional biases
in some (e.g., lagged relations) but not all types of relations. However, all the pseu-
doML and LASSO estimates were largely biased for moderate covariance relations
even with a large sample size (mean RBs ranged from 40% to 70%). The RBs of these
estimates were also associated with a large variability across replications, indicating a
substantial amount of influence from the sampling error. Therefore, MIIV-2SLS-DF1
is particularly useful to obtain less biased estimates for moderate or small structural
relations.
One interesting observation is that mean RBs of pseudo-ML estimates did not show
the same asymptotic trend as did LASSO estimates or the MIIV-2SLS estimates.
Increased sample size was associated with a decrease in the mean RBs in LASSO
estimates and the MIIV-2SLS estimates across all parameters, but the mean RBs of
pseudo-ML estimates were not so consistent. For example, the mean RBs of lag-1
and cross-lagged even went up as sample size increased. This suggests that the source
of biases in pseudo-ML estimators do not just come from sampling error. This is
more evidence of impact of systematic errors in the factor scores. As another way to
investigate the shortcoming of using the factor scores instead of latent variables, we
need to examine results between the two LASSO methods in which the only difference
is that one uses factor scores (LASSO-FS-huSEM) while the other estimates a latent
variable model simultaneously with a measurement model (LASSO-LV-huSEM). It
seemed that the use of factor scores did not necessarily affect biases in the parameter
estimates, as the overall mean RBs were similar between the two LASSO methods;
however, in some cases the variability of RBs was larger in LASSO-FS-huSEM than
that from LASSO-LV-huSEM, particularly when sample size was small. This seems
to suggest that sampling errors and measurement errors in factor scores might not
affect the average accuracy of the parameter estimates of the structural model in
a systematic way, but it affects the consistency of the estimates such that they are
even less consistent at an increasing sampling fluctuation than methods using latent
variables.
3.4. The Overidentification Test
We evaluated the finite sample properties of Sargan’s χ overidentification test of
MIIVs. The current examination involves the specificity (i.e., true negative) as well as
sensitivity to wrong MIIVs (i.e., the statistical power of the Sargan’s χ test when at
least one of the MIIVs for an equation is wrong). We investigated the case where a
wrong MIIV was included due to an omitted true relation in the model. For instance,
the omission of the directed contemporaneous relation from factor one to factor four
will render a wrong inclusion of the scale indicator of factor one in the structural
equation of factor four. Even though a significant Sargan’s Test does not suggest the
equation per se is incorrect, it offers evidence that one or more MIIVs of that equation
are incorrect. This in turn indicates errors in the model specification that led to these
MIIVs. In contrast, passing the Sargan test is consistent with a correctly specified
equation and valid MIIVs for that equation. We found that the specificity was around
95-97%. In other words, as expected there was less than 5% of rejection rate in which
Sargan’s χ test incorrectly identified a wrong selection of MIIVs when in reality the
model was correctly specified and all MIIVs were correct. This suggests accurate Type
I error across the sample sizes considered here. For the test sensitivity, i.e., when a true
relation was omitted from the model and hence a wrong MIIV set would be included
in the corresponding equation, the Sargan’s test rejected the problematic equation at
the rates of 59% at N = 60, 66% at N = 200, and 92% at N = 1000, respectively. This
suggests that the test has a moderate power to detect a wrong MIIV at a small to
medium sample size, but can do so at a very high rate when the sample size is large.
4. Discussion
The current study serves to advance and investigate the model search and estima-
tion for a DFM with a hybrid VAR representations. Three goals were achieved in the
proposed framework. First, we extended the structural model of the latent variable
uSEM (LV-uSEM) to its hybrid uSEM version, i.e., the latent variable hybrid uSEM
(or LV-huSEM). In this way, the extended LV-huSEM estimates a dynamic factor
model with a hybrid VAR representation in the structural model. When restrictions
on the contemporaneous relations between the latent factors are relaxed, structural
and covariance relations can be simultaneously estimated. Second, LASSO regulariza-
tion is used to perform both model selection for the optimal sparse latent variable
hybrid uSEM, and a simultaneous estimation for a freely estimated confirmatory mea-
surement model and an exploratory structural model (with LASSO penalty on the
structural paths and covariances between the contemporaneous latent factors). Com-
pared to the current approaches, where measurement model and structural model are
estimated sequentially with a stepwise model search procedure using factor scores ob-
tained prior to the model selection (e.g., LV-GIMME ; Gates et al., 2019), the current
method provides a model search on a continuum and a simultaneous estimation with-
out calculating factor scores. Finally, to obtain final parameter estimates, the selected
sparse LV-huSEM is estimated via a limited-information estimator, the model-implied
Since the current focus is on individual models without using the group level modeling in the LV-GIMME
framework (Gates et al., 2019), the authors referred to the compared method as pseudo-ML method.
instrumental variables with two-stage least squares (MIIV-2SLS; Bollen, 1996; Fisher
et al., 2019). The post model selection MIIV-2SLS estimation is chosen for its robust-
ness property under model structural misspecification (Bollen et al., 2007), which is
particularly advantageous for the estimation of sparse LV-huSEM selected in a data-
driven manner. The source of biases in the parameter estimates under the current
context includes 1) model structural misspecifications result from model selection, 2)
the LASSO penalty in the regularized LV-huSEM, or 3) errors of factor scores (if under
the uSEM framewrork). The goal is to obtain less biased final parameter estimates of
the selected sparse latent variable hybrid uSEM. A simulation study was conducted
to investigate to what extent the novel estimation method for the LV-huSEM models,
i.e., with a LASSO regularization model build and post model selection MIIV-2SLS
estimation, is superior to the pseudo-ML approach similar to the individual model in
the LV-GIMME framework with respect to 1) model recovery performance (sensitiv-
ity and specificity) of the LASSO regularization versus the pseudo-ML based stepwise
model build when they are applied under the LV-huSEM context; and 2) biasedness of
parameter estimates in sparse LV-huSEM obtained by LASSO regularization, pseudo-
ML, versus the post model selection MIIV-2SLS estimation.
For model recovery, the simulation results revealed that the two approaches have
comparable recovery rates for some relations such as lagged effects and moderate
contemporaneous effects among factors, and they both are reliable in recovering a
close-to-true structural model when the sample size is medium to large. The impact
of factor scores on model selection under the SEM context was largely unknown. Even
though that the LV-GIMME study (Gates et al., 2019) found that the path recovery
performance does not seem to be related to what approach was used to derive the factor
scores, there is no comparison with a simultaneous estimation method without the use
of factor scores. In addition, the evaluation was on a restricted DFM, i.e., LV-uSEM
with only directed contemporaneous relations among factors, which might not apply
to the recovery of the more complicated model, LV-huSEM in which the recovery of a
true relation between two variables involves a selection among five possible parameters.
Indeed, we found that the pseudo-ML methods using factor scores have a higher chance
to commit a direction false positive on strong directed relations, that is, a tendency
to recover a strong directed as one with a reversed direction or as an undirected
covariance relation. This low direction specificity seems tied to the estimation of the
factor scores. And it is shown that the performance is improved when with factor
scores from the DGM, although the use of such factor scores is still different from
the latent variables (due to the measurement errors from the part of the indicators
that form the factor scores). Further, in the additional analysis of applying LASSO
regularized hybrid uSEM on factor scores, the likelihood to commit a direction false
positive is also higher than that of the simultaneous LASSO regularization hybrid
uSEM with latent variables. The result suggests that the use of factor scores instead
of latent variable approach is more likely to select a model with a higher false positive
rate.
This tendency of recovering a relation with a wrong direction undermines the pur-
pose of adopting the more flexible VAR representation, i.e., to accurately represent
the hybrid forms of contemporaneous relations that might coexist in practice. Causal
implications represented by a model with only directed paths or only undirected co-
variance could be very different. However, if we choose to use a more flexible model
representation, but the chance of selecting false positive relations with a wrong direc-
tion is high by the model selection method, we still end up with misleading causal
interpretations. In this sense, when there might exist some strong contemporaneous
relations, LASSO regularization seems to have a higher tendency to eliminate false
positive relations and avoid misleading causal interpretations than does the pseudo-
ML method using factor scores. To our knowledge, this is the first evaluation on the
impact of using factor scores for model selection under the uSEM context.
In terms of parameter estimation, as expected, the post model selection MIIV-
2SLS estimator is the least biased for parameters in the exploratory structural model.
But slightly surprisingly, the proposed LASSO regularized hybrid uSEM with latent
variable approach produced the least biased estimates for free parameters including
factor loading coefficients in the confirmatory measurement model and the lag-1 au-
toregressive effect between factors. This suggests that the biases for other regularized
parameters are mainly from the LASSO penalty. In practice, if we are using regular-
ized SEM method, we should only penalize the uncertain (i.e., exploratory) part of the
model. However, both the pseudo-ML estimator and the LASSO regularized estimator
introduce quite some biases in the parameter estimates of the structural model, espe-
cially for moderate relations. Hence, post model selection estimation might indeed be
a more practical choice to obtain final estimates.
We also observe at least two major downsides of using factor scores in parameter
estimation, besides its impact on model selection (i.e., the tendency to select a directed
path with a wrong direction). First, the estimation of the lagged effects seem to be
particularly largely biased, regardless of sample size. This is not surprising because no
matter what estimation method is used to obtain the factor scores, the sample variance
matrix of estimated factor scores is an inconsistent and biased estimate of the true
variance matrix of factors (Croon, 2002; Skrondal & Laake, 2001). In addition, the
time embedding process of the data to obtain lagged factor variables introduces more
random error on top of the measurement error within the contemporaneous factors
variables themselves, thus causing additional biases in the estimates of relations be-
tween the lagged factor variables and the contemporaneous factors variables. Second,
besides a high average level of biases in estimates of moderate contemporaneous rela-
tions regardless of which factor score methods are used, methods using factor scores
also tend to produce less consistent estimates that is more subject to sampling fluc-
tuations. The substantial amount of variability in the biases across samples especially
with a small to medium sample size is very likely a consequence of the sampling error
in the sample variance matrix of estimated factor scores.
4.1. Limitations and Future Directions
Limitation in the two approaches under investigation. The simultaneous analysis using
LASSO regularization under the LV-huSEM is easy to implement and can avoid biases
from the use of factor scores, but it might be more limited in the size and complexity of
the model (e.g., number of variables, factors, density of the structural paths, etc.) than
is sequential analysis like the GIMME approach. This is because use of factor scores
reduces the dimension of the parameter space - the number of parameters is higher in
the simultaneous model as it includes estimates for the measurement model besides
the structural model. Optimizing the covariance matrix of observed variables with a
higher dimension is more difficult than that of the latent factors. Another advantage
of a sequential analysis is that it is at a better chance to avoid improper solutions
or nonconvergence issues that is not uncommon in simultaneous estimation methods.
Nevertheless, the issue with a high direction of false positives using factor scores makes
it a less appealing choice for model selection.
Although the use of MIIV-2SLS estimation reduces biases from model misspecifica-
tion and model selection, the na¨ıve post model selection statistical inference is subject
to another source of bias due to the duplicate use of the data, that is, the same
dataset is used for model selection and model estimation. Since statistical inference
is established under the assumption that the fitted model is known in advance, which
is clearly violated here, the na¨ıve inference of a regularized LV-huSEM after the data
driven selection process for variables and relations is no longer valid. Because both
the randomness introduced by the selection process and the sample space restriction
implied by the chosen model influence the sampling distribution of the estimator and
need to be accounted for (Huang, 2020). Indeed, it has been found that the na¨ıve
method after model selection using regularized SEM tends to obtain significant results
for selected zero parameters, resulting in numerous false positive findings in psychol-
ogy (Huang, 2020). However, post model selection inference methods are extremely
difficult to perform, and few has been developed for regularized SEM or been imple-
mented in the regsem package at the time of this work. This is probably because the
primary goal of statistical learning method such as LASSO regularization is to achieve
the least biased prediction, while the aim of traditional psychology and of the current
study is to identify the optimal model from which to obtain statistical inference for
individual parameters. This is one of the biggest gap yet to be filled in the future
development of statistical learning under SEM framework. It would be useful to make
these methods available in the software and packages for regularized SEM, so that
future studies could be conducted to evaluate and validate their properties under the
regularized hybrid uSEM with latent variables.
Another aspect that is out of the scope of the current study is DFMs for multiple
subject time series. The focus of the study is on individual dynamic models, for which
there is no consideration of between-person effects nor attempt to aggregate individual
models. However, the use of group-level or between-person information (i.e., similar-
ities and variances across individuals) has been shown as an effective way to extract
true effects from noise information so that it avoids the risk of over-fitting individual
dynamic models (Asparouhov, Hamaker, & Muth´en, 2018; Gates et al., 2019). In fact,
one of the strengths in the GIMME algorithm is to construct a group-level model
with the most shared information that forms the starting model for each individual
model. Such an approach might address to some extent the high direction false posi-
tive rates. Besides, one recent method called “multi-VAR” is proposed (Fisher, Kim,
Fredrickson, & Pipiras, 2022) that used LASSO penalization on multiple subjects mul-
tivariate TSD for the forecast of dynamic processes at the individual level. The goal
of multi-VAR is to identify an optimal sparse VAR that achieves the best prediction,
rather than recovering the true model or statistical inferences of the selected model.
Another framework is to aggregate individual dynamic results using a multilevel struc-
ture, such as the Dynamic Structural Equation Modeling (DSEM; Asparouhov et al.,
2018), where multiple subjects time series are modeled simultaneously to estimate
population mean and individual differences (deviations from the mean) in the param-
eters governing a dynamic process. In future studies, the current LASSO regularized
hybrid uSEM with latent variable can be extended to multiple subject cases either in
the form of the group-level model or the multilevel structure. When that is done, we
can compare these methods under LASSO regularization, GIMME, as well as DSEM
in modeling multiple subject DFM with hybrid VAR representations.
Limitation in the simulation design Like all simulations, the simulation factors do
not represent a comprehensive list of empirical situations. To keep the scope man-
ageable, we did not adopt a cross design of factors such as path strength, model size
(i.e., number of variables), level of measurement error in the latent factors, etc. The
DGM might also represent an over-simplified, over-sparse DFM, with a very standard
measurement structure without cross-loadings or local dependency structures. In prac-
tice, the latent variable relations in a DFM could be much denser with many weak to
moderate relations. In addition, the measurement model could also be extended both
in the sense of containing some error correlations as well as to include lagged effects
between the observed indicators and latent factors, i.e., a white noise factor model
or a hybrid of WNFM and DAFM. These added complexities pose a bigger challenge
for the model selection and parameter estimation, because a denser model means that
the model search and optimization for solution are performed at a larger parameter
space with higher dimensions. This might require a harsher penalty term, which in
turn might lead to larger biases in the estimates of correct parameters, although the
current proposal to use the post model selection MIIV-2SLS estimation could par-
tially compensate for the biases. Future development in the optimization algorithm
for regularized SEM in general is the key to estimate a LV-huSEM with more complex
structures and higher dimensions.
Our results of the LASSO regularized hybrid uSEM with latent variables highlights
the flexibility of the LASSO regularized SEM in estimating individual DFMs. The
data-driven LASSO penalty opens up a variety of possibilities in the development and
appraisal of individual dynamic theories. The penalization structure relies on which
part of the model is more supported by theory, and which part is more uncertain and
needs to be explored by the data. For instance, when the latent factor structure among
the candidate indicators is not fully determined by the theory, partially exploratory
model selection could be implemented on the measurement model. Specifically, if some
indicators of a factor are confirmed by the theory, but the rest of the indicators are
not, we can adopt the “semi-confirmatory” factor model from Huang (2020) in the way
such that the factor loadings from the uncertain indicators are included as parame-
ters under penalization while the factor loadings of the confirmed indicators are free
parameters. This way, only the uncertain part of the measurement model is under the
data-driven LASSO selection. This idea could also be used to explore the hybrid form
of WNFM and DAFM when the theory is not enough to determine which DFM is more
appropriate. That is, in the case where the measurement model may contain either
the lagged factor loading, or the contemporaneous factor loading, or some combination
thereof. One way is to penalize the lagged factor loading and the contemporaneous
factor loading simultaneously, as an automatic search between a WNFM and a DAFM
with respect to the factor loading structure across time. Alternatively, we can retain
the confirmed structure of the contemporaneous factor loading and only penalize the
lagged factor loading if the latter is optional. Depending on the knowledge of the
theory available to us, we can choose which relations we feel confident enough to be
included as free estimates, and which we are less so and thus allow the data to decide
by imposing a LASSO penalty on the corresponding parameters. Therefore, the flex-
ibility of regularization with user-defined estimation and penalization structure lifts
the dichotomous boundary between the exploratory approach and the confirmatory
one and allows for an expansion and refining of theory on a continuum.