Protocol paper for examining mental health profiles in clinical and non-clinical samples
in the light of Maintainable Positive Mental Health Theory
1, 2, 3 4 1, 2 5, 6 7
Virág Zábó , György Purebl , Attila Oláh , Xénia Gonda , Judit Harangozó , Szabolcs
8, 9 2, 8 7, 8 10 11
Kéri , Ágnes Vincze , Dömötör Patkó , Judit Bognár , András Vargha
1 Positive Psychology Research Group, Institute of Psychology, Faculty of Education and Psychology, Eötvös
Loránd University, Budapest
2 Doctoral School of Psychology, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest
3 Institution of Research on Adult Education and Knowledge Management, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University,
Budapest
4Institute of Behavioural Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest
5 Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Semmelweis University, Budapest
6 NAP-2-SE New Antidepressant Research Group, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Semmelweis University,
Budapest
7 Community Psychiatry Center, Semmelweis University - Awakenings Foundation, Budapest
8 National Institute of Mental Health, Neurology, and Neurosurgery, Nyírő Gyula Hospital, Budapest
9 Department of Cognitive Science, Budapest University of Technology and Economics
10 Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University
11 Person- and Family-oriented Health Science Research Group, Institute of Psychology, Faculty of Humanities
and Social Sciences, Károli Gáspár University of the Reformed Church in Hungary, Budapest
Corresponding author:
Virág Zábó
Institute of Psychology, Faculty of Education and Psychology, Eötvös Loránd University,
Budapest, 46 Izabella Street, Budapest, 1064
Abstract
Positive psychology has been studying the flourishing among healthy people but neglected to
understand how “optimal human functioning” can apply to the life experiences of a vulnerable
person. We aim to verify the two-continuum mental health model on a clinical and a non-
clinical sample in the light of the Maintainable Positive Mental Health Theory (MPMHT).
Then, we aim to investigate the interrelation between positive mental health and mental disorder
in various groups of mental disorder at different severity level. In addition, we would examine
the prevalence of the diagnostic categories of the Complete Mental Health Model. Furthermore,
we aim to discover mental health profiles and their correlates. Here we present the protocol of
the ongoing research. A cross-sectional, case-control design is employed to investigate the two-
continuum model of mental health. The clinical sample (n = 400) is recruited from 4 Hungarian
hospitals. The non-clinical sample (n = 400) is collected by online self-report survey-based
research design. The two-continuum model of mental health will be tested with EFA and CFA
analysis with the outcome variables of the symptoms of mental disorders and mental health.
Then we will separate groups of mental disorders according to the leading symptoms. ANOVA
will be used to examine mental health as dependent variable at a certain severity level in
different mental disorder groups. ANCOVA will be used to identify the effect of different
sociodemographic indicators. The prevalence of the diagnostic categories of the Complete
Mental Health Model will be calculated and compared by chi-square tests. Finally, mental
health profiles will be identified by latent profile analysis. The opportunity exists for
psychiatrists and psychologists to embrace disability as part of the continuum of human
experiences and by showing how people with vulnerabilities can be supported to recover.
Keywords: mental health, mental disorder, Maintainable Positive Mental Health Theory,
Mental Health Test, personality functioning, positive psychology, assessment
Introduction
The study fits into the research line that seeks to identify the preventive and protective
factors of personality which strengthen the person in the fight against stress and play a decisive
role in health maintenance. The focus of the study is set on the intersection of positive
psychology, clinical psychology, psychopathology, and individual differences.
Several challenges hinder the progress of applying positive psychology in disability
contexts (Wehmeyer, 2021; Zábó et al., 2022). Hungarian clinical psychology also has
shortcoming in treating patient with an integrated and equally weighted focus on both positive
and negative functioning (Zábó et al., 2022). To the best of our knowledge, no previous study
has focused on the application of positive clinical psychology in Hungary.
In addition, we argue that previous measurement tools of positive mental health (Bech et
al., 1996; Diener et al., 2009; Lamers et al., 2011; Huppert & So, 2013; Butler & Kern, 2016;
Lukat et al., 2016; Oláh et al., 2020) have been focusing primarily on the components of well-
being. In consequence, we aim to use the new, capacity and competency based mental health
model, the Maintainable Positive Mental Health Theory (MPMHT) and its operationalization,
the five-scale Mental Health Test (MHT).
However, numerous studies have examined the relationship between mental disorders and
mental health as a dependent variable, no results have been produced on a Hungarian clinical
sample, neither in the two-continuum design (Keyes, 2007), nor in the light of the MPMHT.
3 /2022/EKU) is 1) to examine the interrelation between positive mental health and mental
disorder in various groups of mental disorders at different severity level in the framework of
MPMHT; 2) to verify the two-continuum mental health model on a clinical and a non-clinical
sample in the light of the MPMHT; 3) to examine the prevalence of the diagnostic categories
of the Complete Mental Health Model (Keyes, 2007) in the light of MPMHT; 4) to discover
mental health profiles and their correlates on a Hungarian adult clinical- and non-clinical
sample; 5) to contribute to the further validation of the MHT.
By the identification of competencies and capacities that are responsible for maintaining
positive mental health, our research may contribute to more effective treatment of people living
with mental disorders. Adaptive intervention methods based on these findings are
recommended to be applied in clinical settings. The study contributes to the reduction of
stigmatization and of the controlling approach of the patient in an incompetent status.
Ultimately, this study aims to raise the understanding of notions of mental vulnerability in
society in general and to increase equal opportunities.
Materials and Equipment
Participants
Clinical (min. n = 400) and non-clinical (min. n = 400) samples are involved in the study.
The inclusion criteria are:
- Age: 18-80 years
- Voluntary participation
- For clinical sample: people diagnosed with mental disorder(s)
- For non-clinical sample: negative psychiatric anamnesis based on self-report in control
persons and absence of symptoms indicating psychiatric illness
The exclusion criteria are:
- A condition that impairs cognitive functions and makes it impossible to fill out the
questionnaire.
Measures
The clinical sample receives a paper format 226-item self-reported questionnaire. Fourteen
questions refer to sociodemographic data. Twenty-eight questions measure general mental state
and physical condition and symptoms. Participants report 1) if they think they have mental
disorder, 2) what and how intense they experience the symptoms, and 3) whether they have
ever received a mental disorder diagnosis from a psychiatrist.
Measures:
• Mental Health Test (Zábó, Oláh, & Vargha, 2022)
• Global Well-being Scale (Oláh et al., 2020)
• PERMA-profiler (Oláh, 2016; Varga, Oláh, & Vargha, 2022)
• Psychological Immune Competence Inventory short form (Oláh, 2005)
• Flourishing scale (Diener et al., 2009)
• Satisfaction with Life Scale (Martos, Sallay, Désfalvi, Szabó, & Ittzés, 2014)
• Positivity Scale (Oláh, 2019)
• Symptom Check List 90 Revised (Unoka et al., 2004)
In case of clinical sample, the respondents’ psychiatrists or clinical psychologist are asked
to give a paper format report about the patient on the following aspects: 1) the name of the
mental disorder(s) the patient has according to DSM-5 or ICD depending on the institutional
protocol, 2) the severity of the symptoms, and 3) the patient’s pharmacotherapy. The non-
clinical sample receives the same questionnaire through electronic surveys.
Methods
A cross-sectional, case-control design is employed for measuring mental health and mental
disorders. The non-clinical sample has been collected by online convenient sampling method
during which they read the information statement, accept the consent form, and fill out the
questionnaire. Data for clinical sample has been gathered from four health care facilities under
the following conditions. In the Department of Acute Psychiatry, Semmelweis University,
Psychiatry and Psychotherapy Clinic data collection takes place with inpatients after the
medication has been adjusted (1.5 - 2 weeks after admission). Patients of Awakenings
Foundation - Semmelweis University Community Psychiatric Center fill out the self-
administered questionnaire during the first medical examination. Outpatients of the
Semmelweis University, Institute of Behavioral Sciences, Psychosomatic Clinic are collected
during the third therapy session. In the wards of National Institute of Mental, Neurological and
Neurosurgery Nyírő Gyula Hospital data is collected for inpatients after medication adjustment
(1.5 - 2 weeks after admission) and for outpatients at the third therapy session. Clinical sample
receives information statement, consent form and the same questionnaire on paper format. In a
separate document, the patient's psychiatrist or clinical psychologist declares the diagnosis of
the patient's mental disorder(s), the severity of the presenting symptoms, and about the patient's
pharmacotherapy.
Anticipated results
First, the psychometric properties of the MHT on clinical sample will be tested with
exploratory factor analyses (EFAs), confirmatory factor analyses (CFAs), and regressions.
Second, the two-continuum model of mental health will be tested with EFA and CFA analysis
with the outcome variables of the symptoms of mental disorders and mental health. Third, based
on mental disorder diagnoses reported by clinical psychologists and psychiatrists, groups of
mental disorders will be set up according to the leading symptoms and severity levels.
ANOVAs will be used to examine the mental health state (according to the five pillars of
MPMHT and the general indicator too) as dependent variables at a certain severity level in
different mental disorder groups. ANCOVA will be used to identify the influence of different
sociodemographic indicators. Fourth, the prevalence of the diagnostic categories of the
Complete Mental Health Model will be calculated and compared by chi-square tests. Fifth, the
mental health profiles will be discovered by LPA in which we will examine the symptoms of
mental health based on the MHT and the symptoms of mental disorders based on the SCL-90-
R in one model.
Our study is a cross-sectional study therefore the direction of causal relationships will be
uncertain. This study is based mostly on self-report measures, which might be prone to memory
and response biases. Furthermore, the symptoms hinder examination of people with severe
mental disorders.
Discussion
The conclusion of our review is that the opportunity exists for psychiatrists and
psychologists to embrace disability as part of the continuum of human experiences and to show
how people with vulnerabilities can be supported to recover.
Supported by the ÚNKP-22-3 New National Excellence Program of the Ministry for Innovation
and Technology from the source of the National Research, Development and Innovation Fund.