CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 1
Compulsive Sexual Behavior Disorder in 42 Countries: Insights from the International Sex
Survey and Introduction of Standardized Assessment Tools
1,2† 3,4 3,4 5 4,6
Beáta Bőthe , Mónika Koós , Léna Nagy , Shane W. Kraus , Zsolt Demetrovics , Marc N.
7,8,9 2 10 11
Potenza , Aurélie Michaud , Rafael Ballester-Arnal , Dominik Batthyány , Sophie
12 13,14 15 16 17
Bergeron , Joël Billieux , Peer Briken , Julius Burkauskas , Georgina Cárdenas-López ,
18,19 20 21 22 23,24
Joana Carvalho , Jesús Castro-Calvo , Lijun Chen , Giacomo Ciocca , Ornella Corazza ,
25 26 27 13
Rita Csako , David P. Fernandez , Elaine F. Fernandez , Loïs Fournier , Hironobu
28,29,30 31 32,33 34
Fujiwara , Johannes Fuss , Roman Gabrhelík , Ateret Gewirtz-Meydan , Biljana
35 36,37 38 39 40,41
Gjoneska , Mateusz Gola , Joshua B. Grubbs , Hashim T. Hashim , Md. Saiful Islam ,
39 42,43 44 45
Mustafa Ismail , Martha C. Jiménez-Martínez , Tanja Jurin , Ondrej Kalina , Verena
46 47 48 49,50 51
Klein , András Költő , Chih-Ting Lee , Sang-Kyu Lee , Karol Lewczuk , Chung-Ying
52,53 54* 55
Lin , Liverpool John Moores University's research team , Christine Lochner , Silvia López-
56 32,57 58 59 60
Alvarado , Kateřina Lukavská , Percy Mayta-Tristán , Ionut Milea , Dan J. Miller , Oľga
61 62 63** 64
Orosová , Gábor Orosz , Sungkyunkwan University's research team , Fernando P. Ponce ,
65 66,67 68 62
Gonzalo R. Quintana , Gabriel C. Quintero Garzola , Jano Ramos-Diaz , Kévin Rigaud ,
69 70,71,72 73 74
Ann Rousseau , Marco De Tubino Scanavino , Marion K. Schulmeyer , Pratap Sharan ,
28 75 13,76 77
Mami Shibata , Sheikh Shoib , Vera L. Sigre Leirós , Luke Sniewski , Ognen
78,79 80 81 82 83
Spasovski , Vesta Steibliene , Dan J. Stein , Julian Strizek , Aleksandar Štulhofer , Berk
3,4 1
C. Ünsal , Marie-Pier Vaillancourt-Morel
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 2
Département de Psychologie, Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières, Trois-Rivières, Canada
Département de Psychologie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada
Doctoral School of Psychology, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary
Institute of Psychology, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary
Department of Psychology, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV, USA
Centre of Excellence in Responsible Gaming, University of Gibraltar, Gibraltar, Gibraltar
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
Connecticut Council on Problem Gambling, Wethersfield, CT, USA
Connecticut Mental Health Center, New Haven, CT, USA
Departmento de Psicología Básica, Clínica y Psicobiología, University Jaume I of Castellón,
Spain
Institute for Behavioural Addictions, Sigmund Freud University Vienna, Austria
Département de psychologie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada
Institute of Psychology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
Center for Excessive Gambling, Addiction Medicine, Lausanne University Hospitals (CHUV),
Lausanne, Switzerland
Institute for Sex Research, Sexual Medicine, and Forensic Psychiatry; University Medical
Centre Hamburg-Eppendorf; Hamburg, Germany
Laboratory of Behavioral Medicine, Neuroscience Institute, Lithuanian University of Health
Sciences, Lithuania
Virtual Teaching and Cyberpsychology Laboratory, School of Psychology, National
Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 3
William James Center for Research, Departamento de Educação e Psicologia, Universidade de
Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal
CPUP: Center for Psychology at University of Porto, Portugal
Department of Personality, Assessment, and Psychological Treatments, University of Valencia,
Spain
Department of Psychology, College of Humanity and Social Science, Fuzhou University, China
Section of Sexual Psychopathology, Department of Dynamic and Clinical Psychology, and
Health Studies, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
Department of Clinical, Pharmaceutical and Biological Sciences, University of Hertfordshire,
United Kingdom
Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science, University of Trento, Italy
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Auckland University of Technology, Auckland,
New Zealand
Nottingham Trent University, United Kingdom
HELP University, Malaysia
Department of Neuropsychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
Decentralized Big Data Team, RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan
The General Research Division, Osaka University Research Center on Ethical, Legal and
Social Issues, Osaka, Japan
Institute of Forensic Psychiatry and Sex Research, Center for Translational Neuro- and
Behavioral Sciences, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany
Charles University, First Faculty of Medicine, Department of Addictology, Prague, Czech
Republic
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 4
General University Hospital in Prague, Department of Addictology, Czech Republic
School of Social Work, Faculty of Social Welfare and Health Sciences, University of Haifa,
Israel
Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Republic of North Macedonia
Institute of Psychology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland
Institute for Neural Computations, University of California San Diego, USA
Bowling Green State University, USA
University of Baghdad, College of Medicine, Iraq
Department of Public Health and Informatics, Jahangirnagar University, Savar, Dhaka-1342,
Bangladesh
Centre for Advanced Research Excellence in Public Health, Dhaka-1342, Bangladesh
Universidad Pedagógca y Tecnológica de Colombia, Colombia
Grupo de Investigación Biomédica y de Patología, Colombia
Department of Psychology, Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Zagreb, Croatia
Department of Educational Psychology and Psychology of Health, Pavol Jozef Safarik
University in Kosice, Slovakia
School of Psychology, University of Southampton, United Kingdom,
Health Promotion Research Centre, University of Galway, Northern Ireland
Department of Family Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan
Department of Psychiatry, Hallym University Chuncheon Sacred Heart Hospital, South Korea
Chuncheon Addiction Management Center, South Korea
Institute of Psychology, Cardinal Stefan Wyszynski University, Warsaw, Poland
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 5
Institute of Allied Health Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan
Biostatistics Consulting Center, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan
Public Health Institute, Faculty of Health, Liverpool John Moores University, United Kingdom
SAMRC Unit on Risk & Resilience in Mental Disorders, Stellenbosch University, South Africa
Faculty of Psychology, University of Cuenca, Ecuador
Charles University, Faculty of Education, Department of Psychology, Prague, Czech Republic
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Científica del Sur, Lima, Perú
Babeș-Bolyai University, Romania
James Cook University, Australia
Pavol Jozef Safarik University in Kosice, Department of Educational Psychology and
Psychology of Health, Slovakia
Artois University, France
Department of Psychology, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
Escuela de Psicología, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Chile
Departamento de Psicología y Filosofía, Facultad de Ciencias Sociales, Universidad de
Tarapacá, Arica, Arica y Parinacota, Chile
Florida State University, Republic of Panama
Sistema Nacional de Investigación (SNI), SENACYT, Panama
Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Privada del Norte, Lima, Perú
Leuven School for Mass Communication, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Department of Psychiatry, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 6
Experimental Pathophisiology Post Graduation Program, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade
de São Paulo, Brazil
Excessive Sexual Drive and Prevention of Negative Outcomes associated to Sexual Behavior
Outpatient Unit (AISEP), Institute of Psychiatry, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil
Universidad Privada de Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Bolivia
Department of Psychiatry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi -110029, India,
Department of Psychology, Shardha University, India
Institute of Legal Psychiatry, Lausanne University Hospitals (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland,
Auckland University of Technology, New Zealand
Faculty of Philosophy, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Republic of North
Macedonia
Faculty of Philosophy, University of Ss. Cyril and Methodius in Trnava, Slovak Republic
Laboratory of Behavioral Medicine, Neuroscience Institute, Lithuanian University of Health
Sciences, Lithuania
SAMRC Unit on Risk & Resilience in Mental Disorders, Department of Psychiatry &
Neuroscience Institute, University of Cape Town, South Africa
Austrian Public Health Institute, Austria
Department of Sociology, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Zagreb,
Croatia
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 7
Corresponding author:
Beáta Bőthe, Ph.D., Department of Psychology, Université de Montréal, C.P. 6128, Succursale
Centre-Ville, Montréal, QC, H3C 3J7, Canada
E-mail: beata.bothe@umontreal.ca; beabothe@gmail.com
Tel.: + 514-343-6111 ext. 37428
* The Liverpool John Moores University's research team includes Dr. S. Kewley and Dr. M. C.
Van Hout.
**The Sungkyunkwan University's research team includes Dr. H. Chang and Mr. K. Park.
Word count: 3371
Funding sources: BB was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the SCOUP Team –
Sexuality and Couples – Fonds de recherche du Québec, Société et Culture and the by the
Banting Postdoctoral Fellowship (Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, SSHRC).
MK and LN were supported by the ÚNKP-22-3 New National Excellence Program of the
Ministry for Culture and Innovation from the source of the National Research, Development and
Innovation Fund. SWK was supported by the Kindbridge Research Institute. ZD was supported
by the Hungarian National Research, Development, and Innovation Office (Grant number:
KKP126835). SB was supported by a Tier 1 Canada Research Chair. LJC was supported by the
National Social Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 19BSH117). RC was supported by
Auckland University of technology, 2021 Faculty Research Development Fund. LF was
supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) under a “Doc.CH” Doctoral
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 8
Fellowship [Grant ID: P000PS_211887]. The SNSF had no role in the study design, collection,
analysis, or interpretation of the data, writing the manuscript, or the decision to submit the paper
for publication. HF was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Transformative Research Areas (A)
(Japan Society for The Promotion of Science, JP21H05173), Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (B) (Japan Society for The Promotion of Science, 21H02849), and the smoking
research foundation. RG was supported by Charles University institutional support programme
Progress No. Q06/LF1. MG was supported by National Science Centre of Poland grant nb.
2021/40/Q/HS6/00219. KL was supported by Sonatina grant awarded by National Science
Centre, Poland, grant number: 2020/36/C/HS6/00005. C-YL was supported by the WUN
Research Development Fund (RDF) 2021 and the Higher Education Sprout Project, the Ministry
of Education at the Headquarters of University Advancement at the National Cheng Kung
University (NCKU). CL received support from the WUN Research Development Fund (RDF)
2021. GO was supported by the ANR grant of the Chaire Professeur Junior of Artois University
and by the Strategic Dialogue and Management Scholarship (Phase 1 and 2). KP was supported
by Brain Korea 21 (BK21) program of National Research Foundation of Korea. GQG was
supported by the SNI #073–2022 (SENACYT, Rep. of Panama). GRQ was supported by the
UTA Mayor project #3779-22. KR was supported by a funding from the Hauts-de-France region
(France) called "Dialogue Stratégique de Gestion 2 (DSG2)".
Author contributions:
Conceptualization: BB, MK, LN, SWK, ZD, and MNP
Data curation: BB, MK, LN, SWK, ZD, MNP, AM, RB-A, DB, SB, JBi, PB, JBu, GC-L, JC, JC-
C, LC, GC, OC, RC, DPF, EFF, HF, JF, RG, AG-M, BG, MG, JBG, HTH, MSI, MI, MCJ-M,
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 9
TJ, OK, VK, AK, C-TL, S-KL, KLe, C-YL, CL, SL-A, KLu, PM-T, IM, DJM, OO, GO, FPP,
GRQ, GCQG, JR-D, KR, AR, MDTS, MKS, PS, MS, SS, VLSL, LS, OS, VS, DJS, JS, AŠ,
BCÜ, M-PV-M, LJMU’s research team, and SU’s research team
Formal analysis: BB
Funding acquisition: BB, MK, LN, SWK, ZD, SB, HF, RG, MG, KLe, C-YL, CL, KP, KR, and
DJS
Investigation: BB, MK, LN, SWK, ZD, MNP, AM, RB-A, DB, SB, JBi, PB, JBu, GC-L, JC, JC-
C, LC, GC, OC, RC, DPF, EFF, HF, JF, RG, AG-M, BG, MG, JBG, HTH, MSI, MI, MCJ-M,
TJ, OK, VK, AK, C-TL, S-KL, KLe, C-YL, CL, SL-A, KLu, PM-T, IM, DJM, OO, GO, GRQ,
GCQG, JR-D, KR, AR, MDTS, MKS, PS, MS, SS, VLSL, LS, OS, VS, DJS, JS, AŠ, BCÜ, M-
PV-M, LJMU’s research team, and SU’s research team
Methodology: BB, MK, LN, SWK, ZD, and MNP
Project administration: BB, MK, LN, SWK, ZD, and AM
Resources: BB, MK, LN, SWK, ZD, RB-A, SB, PB, JBu, GC-L, JC, JC-C, JF, RG, AG-M, BG,
MG, JBG, HTH, MSI, MI, MCJ-M, OK, VK, S-KL, KLe, C-YL, KLu, PM-T, OO, GCQG, JR-
D, AR, VS, BCÜ, M-PV-M, LJMU’s research team, and SU’s research team
Software: BB
Supervision: BB, SWK, ZD, MNP, GC, OC, BG, MG, MSI, MCJ-M, and GCQG
Validation: BB, MK, LN, SWK, ZD, MNP, AM, RB-A, JC-C, GC, OC, HTH, MSI, MI, MCJ-
M, C-TL, C-YL, and PS
Visualization: BB and AM
Writing - original draft: BB
Writing - review & editing: BB, MK, LN, SWK, ZD, MNP, AM, RB-A, DB, SB, JBi, PB, JBu,
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 10
GC-L, JC, JC-C, LC, GC, OC, RC, DPF, EFF, LF, HF, JF, RG, AG-M, BG, MG, JBG, HTH,
MSI, MI, MCJ-M, TJ, OK, VK, AK, C-TL, S-KL, KLe, C-YL, CL, SL-A, KLu, PM-T, IM,
DJM, OO, GO, FPP, GRQ, GCQG, JR-D, KR, AR, MDTS, MKS, PS, MS, SS, VLSL, LS, OS,
VS, DJS, JS, AŠ, BCÜ, M-PV-M, LJMU’s research team, and SU’s research team
Conflict of interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest with the content of this
manuscript. SWK discloses that he has received funding from the International Center for
Responsible Gaming, MGM Resorts International, Center for the Application of Substance
Abuse Technologies, Taylor Francis, Springer Nature, The Nevada Problem Gambling Project,
Sports Betting Alliance, and Kindbridge Research Institute. Dr. Potenza discloses that he has
consulted for and advised Game Day Data, Addiction Policy Forum, AXA, Idorsia, Baria-Tek,
and Opiant Therapeutics; been involved in a patent application involving Novartis and Yale;
received research support from the Mohegan Sun Casino and the Connecticut Council on
Problem Gambling; consulted for or advised legal and gambling entities on issues related to
impulse control and addictive behaviours; provided clinical care related to impulse-control and
addictive behaviours; performed grant reviews; edited journals/journal sections; given academic
lectures in grand rounds, CME events and other clinical/scientific venues; and generated books
or chapters for publishers of mental health texts. ELTE Eötvös Loránd University receives
funding from the Szerencsejáték Ltd to maintain a telephone helpline service for problematic
gambling. ZD has also been involved in research on responsible gambling funded by
Szerencsejáték Ltd and the Gambling Supervision Board and provided educational materials for
the Szerencsejáték Ltd’s responsible gambling program. The University of Gibraltar receives
funding from the Gibraltar Gambling Care Foundation. However, this funding is not related to
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 11
this study, and the funding institution had no role in the study design or the collection, analysis,
and interpretation of the data, the writing of the manuscript, or the decision to submit the paper
for publication. RG is the shareholder of Adiquit Ltd. which is currently developing apps for
addictions recovery. VS discloses that she received funding from Lithuanian Health Promotion
Fund for providing educational materials and lectures on Problematic Internet use.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Anastasia Lucic for her help with project
administration and data collection, and Natasha Zippan, Abu Bakkar Siddique, Anne-Marie
Menard, Clara Marincowitz, Club Sexu, Critica, Digital Ethics Center (Skaitmeninės etikos
centras), Día a Día, Ed Carty, El Siglo, Jakia Akter, Jayma Jannat Juma, Kamrun Nahar Momo,
Kevin Zavaleta, Laraine Murray, L’Avenir de l’Artois, La Estrella de Panamá, La Voix du Nord,
Le Parisien, Lithuanian National Radio and Television (Lietuvos nacionalinis radijas ir
televizija), Mahfuzul Islam, Marjia Khan Trisha, Md. Rabiul Islam, Md. Shahariar Emon,
Miriam Goodridge, Most. Mariam Jamila, Nahida Bintee Mostofa, Nargees Akter, Niamh
Connolly, Rafael Goyoneche, Raiyaan Tabassum Imita, Raquel Savage, Ricardo Mendoza,
Saima Fariha, SOS Orienta and Colegio de Psicólogos del Perú, Stephanie Kewley, Sumaiya
Hassan, Susanne Bründl, Tamim Ikram, Telex.hu, Trisha Mallick, Tushar Ahmed Emon, Wéo,
Yasmin Benoit for their help with recruitment and data collection.
Ethics: The authors assert that all procedures contributing to this work comply with the relevant
national and institutional committees’ ethical standards on human experimentation and the
Helsinki Declaration. The study was approved by all collaborating countries’
national/institutional ethics review boards or the local ethics committees considered the study
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 12
exempt and did not further assess the study as it had already been approved by the ethics
committees of the principal investigators’ institutions:
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 13
Compulsive Sexual Behavior Disorder in 42 Countries: Insights from the International Sex
Survey and Introduction of Standardized Assessment Tools
Abstract
th
Background and aims: Despite its inclusion in the 11 revision of the International
Classification of Diseases, there is a virtual paucity of high-quality scientific evidence about
compulsive sexual behavior disorder (CSBD), especially in underrepresented and underserved
populations. Therefore, we comprehensively examined CSBD across 42 countries, genders, and
sexual orientations, and validated the original (CSBD-19) and short (CSBD-7) versions of the
Compulsive Sexual Behavior Disorder Scale to provide standardized, state-of-the-art screening
tools for research and clinical practice.
Method: Using data from the International Sex Survey (N=82,243; M =32.39 years,
age
SD=12.52), we evaluated the psychometric properties of the CSBD-19 and CSBD-7 and
compared CSBD across 42 countries, three genders, eight sexual orientations, and individuals
with low vs. high risk of experiencing CSBD.
Results: A total of 4.8% of the participants were at high risk of experiencing CSBD. Country
and gender-based differences were observed, while no sexual orientation-based differences were
present in CSBD levels. Only 14% of individuals with CSBD have ever sought treatment for this
disorder, with an additional 33% not having sought treatment because of various reasons. Both
versions of the scale demonstrated excellent validity and reliability.
Discussion and Conclusions: This study contributes to a better understanding of CSBD in
underrepresented and underserved populations and facilitates its identification in diverse
populations by providing freely accessible ICD-11-based screening tools in 26 languages. The
findings may also serve as a crucial building block to stimulate research into evidence-based,
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 14
culturally sensitive prevention and intervention strategies for CSBD that are currently missing
from the literature.
Keywords: addictive behavior; assessment; compulsive sexual behavior; cross-cultural;
International Sex Survey (ISS); validation
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 15
Introduction
Compulsive sexual behavior disorder (CSBD; also referred to as sex addiction,
hypersexual disorder/hypersexuality, sexual compulsivity, sexual impulsivity, or out-of-control
th
sexual behaviors) is included in the 11 revision of the International Classification of Diseases
(ICD-11) (World Health Organization, 2022). According to the new diagnostic guidelines
(Kraus et al., 2018; World Health Organization, 2022), CSBD is characterized by repetitive,
poorly controlled engagement in sexual impulses, urges, and behaviors (e.g., pornography use).
For a diagnosis of CSBD, these sexual behaviors should result in clinically significant distress,
neglect of responsibilities, interests, and health, and cause significant impairment in critical areas
of functioning. Notably, people with CSBD derive little or no satisfaction from their sexual
activities and often make unsuccessful efforts to reduce or stop their behavior. However, this
diagnosis is still new with several theoretical and methodological limitations and essential
questions that have yet to be addressed (Bőthe et al., 2022; Grubbs et al., 2020). Fundamental
concerns involve the lack of data about CSBD outside Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich,
and Democratic (WEIRD) countries, among women and gender diverse individuals, and sexually
diverse individuals as well (Grubbs et al., 2020; Klein et al., 2021).
Until now, only a few studies examined the prevalence of CSBD among nationally
representative samples and all were conducted in Western countries (i.e., the United States,
Germany, Hungary, and Poland), limiting the generalizability of their results. Based on these
studies’ findings, 3 to 10% of men and 2 to 7% of women might experience CSBD (Bőthe et al.,
2020; Briken et al., 2022; Dickenson et al., 2018; Grubbs et al., 2023; Lewczuk et al., 2022).
Thus, CSBD might be as prevalent as other psychiatric disorders (e.g., mood or substance use
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 16
disorders) (Steel et al., 2014). Yet, it has received significantly less scientific attention than the
aforementioned disorders (Grubbs et al., 2020) .
Although most studies investigating CSBD focus predominantly on cisgender (i.e., an
individual whose sex assigned at birth aligns with their gender identity (Perzanowski et al.,
2020)) men (Grubbs et al., 2020), CSBD is likely to be present in women and gender-diverse
individuals as well. Women and gender-diverse individuals can experience similar adverse
consequences from CSBD (Bőthe et al., 2018, 2020; Koós et al., 2021; Kowalewska et al.,
2020), though gender-diverse individuals are often excluded from studies due to insufficient
sample sizes (Jennings et al., 2022). Regarding sexual orientation, most CSBD studies either did
not report participants’ sexual orientation, reported a blend of sexual orientations, or focused
solely on heterosexual or gay men (Grubbs et al., 2020; Jennings et al., 2022). This approach is
problematic since individuals with different sexual orientations may experience sexuality and
CSBD in different ways and be diagnosed and treated differently (Jennings et al., 2022). In
previous CSBD studies focusing on sexual orientation (Bőthe et al., 2018; Koós et al., 2021), all
individuals with diverse sexual identities (e.g., bisexual individuals) were merged into one sexual
minority group. Such an approach may lead to biased results as crucial differences and
disparities have been documented between individuals with different sexual orientations. There
is ample evidence that bisexual or both-gender attracted individuals are facing more mental
health challenges than lesbian/gay or exclusively same-gender attracted individuals (Költő et al.,
2019; Persson & Pfaus, 2015). These findings highlight the importance of considering
individuals with different sexual orientations as unique groups in research and clinical settings as
well.
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 17
Apart from the general focus on WEIRD countries and heterosexual, cisgender men in
psychiatric, psychological, and sex research (Baxter et al., 2013; Cheon et al., 2020; Klein et al.,
2021), another potential explanation for the relative lack of studies focusing on the prevalence
and other aspects of CSBD in diverse populations is the absence of a valid, inclusive, and
standardized assessment tool for CSBD. To date, the only comprehensive scale assessing all
criteria of the ICD-11-based CSBD diagnosis is the Compulsive Sexual Behavior Disorder Scale
(CSBD-19) (Bőthe et al., 2020; Grubbs et al., 2023). The CSBD-19 was developed via
international collaboration and validated in four independent samples with more than 9000
participants, including one nationally representative sample. The scale includes five factors
representing each diagnostic criterion: control, salience, relapse, dissatisfaction, and negative
consequences. It demonstrated strong psychometric properties and has a reliable cut-off score
that can identify individuals likely to experience CSBD. Still, the CSBD-19’s psychometric
properties have almost exclusively been tested in WEIRD countries, warranting critical
investigation (Bőthe et al., 2020). Although no previous large-scale, cross-cultural studies
focused on comparing CSBD across countries, differences may be hypothesized given different
levels of religiosity, attitudes, and cultural norms regarding sexuality in different countries
(Lewczuk et al., 2021; Mestre-Bach et al., 2021). For example, in cultures that are more
conservative in their approach to sexual matters, individuals may experience higher levels of
self-perceived CSBD due to stricter values or other factors (L. Chen et al., 2022; Islam et al.,
2022; Lewczuk et al., 2020; Vaillancourt-Morel & Bergeron, 2019), warranting further research.
Therefore, to provide an overview of CSBD across 42 countries from five continents and
fill these gaps in the literature, first, we comprehensively validated the CSBD-19 and the newly
developed, short version of it (CSBD-7). It is essential to validate and examine a scale’s
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 18
psychometric equivalence across groups before conducting any comparisons to reduce the
possibility of biases, invalid conclusions, and potentially misleading implications (Jeong & Lee,
2019). Then, we compared CSBD across country, gender, and sexual orientation-based groups,
and examined differences in a variety of sexual behaviors between individuals at low vs. high
risk of experiencing CSBD. As no prior large-scale, cross-cultural study was conducted on
CSBD, we could not set formal hypotheses. However, based on previous findings, we
hypothesized that men would report higher CSBD scores than women (Bőthe et al., 2020;
Kingston et al., 2020). All other research questions of this study were examined in an exploratory
manner.
Method
The supplemental materials include a detailed description of the method and results, and
present complementary tables as well.
Procedure
We used data from the International Sex Survey (ISS), which is a large, collaborative,
6e4f96b748be42d99363d58e32d511b8) methods across 42 countries in 26 languages (Bőthe et
al., 2021). Data were collected between October 2021 and May 2022. As described in detail in
the study protocol (Bőthe et al., 2021), collaborators used standardized materials (e.g., templates
of emails, advertisement texts, and posters) and contacted large, nationwide popular news
websites in their country to advertise the study. Collaborators offered exclusive results to
advertising partners in exchange for the study advertisement (i.e., a one- or two-paragraph-long
description of basic descriptive information about the sample collected in their country). This
recruitment strategy worked well in some countries (e.g., Hungary), while it was not fruitful in
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 19
others (e.g., Canada). Therefore, in these latter countries, collaborators used additional
recruitment strategies (e.g., targeted social media advertisements, advertisements on sexuality-
related forums, and survey panels) to reach the target sample size. Participants who responded to
the study advertisements completed an anonymous survey on the Qualtrics Research Suite
(Qualtrics, 2022), which took approximately 25 to 45 minutes. The list of all collaborating
countries, the detailed description of the translation and data collection procedures, data cleaning
procedures, and the eligibility criteria are described in the study protocol (Bőthe et al., 2021). All
participants provided informed consent. The study was approved or deemed exempt by all
collaborating countries’ national/institutional ethics review boards and was conducted following
the Helsinki Declaration. Although the ISS follows open-science practices, as it includes data on
sensitive topics; therefore, the dataset is not publicly available. However, the corresponding
author may provide data upon reasonable request.
Participants
A total of 82,243 participants (M 32.39 years, SD = 12.52) were included in the final
age =
dataset. Most participants were women (n = 46,874; 57.0%), followed by men (n = 32,549;
39.6%), and gender-diverse individuals (n = 2,783; 3.4%). Most participants were heterosexual
(n = 56,125; 68.2%), while 31.5% (n = 25,777) of the participants were sexually diverse (i.e.,
used other terms than heterosexual to describe their sexual orientation). Most participants
completed tertiary education (e.g., university) (n = 60,896; 74.0%) and worked full-time (n =
Measures
Compulsive Sexual Behavior Disorder Scale (CSBD-19)
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 20
The CSBD-19 (Bőthe et al., 2020) is the only scale assessing compulsive sexual urges,
thoughts, and behaviors and their consequences in the past six months along five factors
corresponding to the ICD-11 diagnostic guidelines (World Health Organization, 2022): control
(three items, e.g., “I could not control my sexual cravings and desires.”); salience (three items,
e.g., “I would rather have had sex than to have done anything else.”); relapse (three items, e.g.,
“Trying to reduce the amount of sex I had almost never worked.”); dissatisfaction (three items,
e.g., “Although sex was not as satisfying for me as before, I engaged in it.”); and negative
consequences (seven items, e.g., “I did not accomplish important tasks because of my sexual
behavior.”). Participants indicate their levels of agreement with each item on a four-point scale
(1 = “totally disagree”; 4 = “totally agree”), with total scores ranging from 19 to 76 points.
Scoring 50 points or more indicates being at high risk of experiencing CSBD. The scale
demonstrated excellent psychometric properties in previous studies (Bőthe et al., 2020; Park &
Chang, 2021). Participants read a pre-established definition of sex , before completing the
CSBD-19. The translation of the CSBD-19 in all available languages can be found at
Sociodemographic and Sexuality-Related Questions
Several sociodemographic (e.g., level of education) and sexuality-related questions (e.g.,
past-year sexual frequency) were included in the survey battery (Bőthe et al., 2021). Participants
were provided with a definition of sexual experience before answering these questions. The
a Definition of sex used for the CSBD-19: “For the purpose of this questionnaire, sex is defined as any activity or
behavior that stimulates or arouses a person with the intent to produce an orgasm or sexual pleasure (e.g., self-
masturbation or solo sex, using pornography, intercourse with a partner, oral sex, anal sex, etc.). Sexual behaviors
may or may not involve a partner.”
b Definition of sexual experiences with a partner: “Sexual experience with a partner is defined as any activity or
behavior (excluding childhood sexual games or possible sexual abuse) that stimulates or arouses a person with the
intent to produce an orgasm or sexual pleasure. Think about any kind of sexual experience with a partner.”
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 21
view_only=9af0068dde81488db54638a01c8ae118.
Statistical Analyses
examine the CSBD-19’s and CSBD-7’s psychometric properties and compare country, gender,
and sexual orientation, and CSBD status-based groups. Mplus 8.7 (Muthén & Muthén, 2022)
was used for multivariate analyses. Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was conducted to
examine the structural validity and dimensionality of the CSBD-19. The model was evaluated
using common goodness-of-fit indices (Marsh et al., 2005): Comparative Fit Index (CFI),
Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI), and Root-Mean-Square Error of Approximation with its 90%
confidence interval (RMSEA). The weighted least squares mean- and variance-adjusted
estimator was used for the CFA and measurement invariance tests. To ensure that comparisons
are meaningful and reduce the possibility of measurement biases and invalid comparisons
between groups (Millsap, 2011), tests of measurement invariance were conducted using
participants’ language, country, gender identity (i.e., men, women, gender-diverse individuals),
and sexual orientation (i.e., heterosexual, gay or lesbian, bisexual, queer or pansexual, homo- and
heteroflexible identities, asexual, questioning, and other sexual orientations) as grouping
variables. In each measurement invariance test, we tested and compared six levels of invariance
with increasingly constrained parameters. Cronbach’s alpha and McDonald’s omega values were
calculated to assess the reliability of the CSBD-19 (McNeish, 2018).
The CSDB-19’s association with theoretically relevant correlates was assessed to
examine its validity. A cut-off score is already available for the CSBD-19 (having a total score of
≥50 out of 76 suggests being at high risk of having CSBD) (Bőthe et al., 2020). We examined its
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 22
applicability to the current sample by comparing those participants who scored below (i.e., low-
risk group) and above (i.e., high-risk group) the cut-off score along the aforementioned correlates
(e.g., past-year frequency of masturbation).
To develop the CSBD-7, the items of the CSBD-19 were examined to select the best ones
representing each factor with one item, and three items from the negative consequences factor to
represent personal, interpersonal, and general adverse consequences. The same analytical steps
were followed as in the case of the CSBD-19. A cut-off score was also developed for the CSBD-
7 using the previously established high-risk group as a reference group.
Ethics
The authors assert that all procedures contributing to this work comply with the relevant
national and institutional committees’ ethical standards on human experimentation and the
Helsinki Declaration. The study was approved by all collaborating countries’
national/institutional ethics review boards or the local ethics committees considered the study
exempt and did not further assess the study as it had already been approved by the ethics
838146f6027c4e6bb68371d9d14220b5
Results
Psychometric Properties of the Compulsive Sexual Behavior Disorder Scale (CSBD-19) and
the Short Compulsive Sexual Behavior Disorder Scale (CSBD-7)
The pre-established five-factor model (Bőthe et al., 2020) had a good fit to the data (CFI
= .956, TLI = .947, RMSEA = .066 [90%CI = .066-.067]). The inter-factor correlations were
positive and moderate-to-strong. The CSBD-19 and its factors demonstrated acceptable
reliability (α = .68-.90, ω = .68-.90). Concerning the CSBD-7, one item from each factor and
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 23
three items from the negative consequences factor were selected. We tested a one-factor, first-
order model, which had a good fit to the data (CFI = .972, TLI = .957, RMSEA = .088 [90%CI =
.086-.089]). The CSBD-7 had adequate reliability (α = .80, ω = .80) and a strong, positive
correlation with the CSBD-19 (Tables S1-S2).
A cut-off score is already available for the CSBD-19 (Bőthe et al., 2020). Potential cut-
off scores were calculated for the CSBD-7 based on membership in the high-risk group. A score
of 18 points was suggested as an optimal cut-off (i.e., having a score of ≥ 18 out of 28 suggests a
At this cut-off score, a positive predictive value of 66.56%, a negative predictive value of
that 2.23% of the negative cases were falsely considered high-risk, while 12.62% of the true
led to more false negative cases (i.e., mistakenly identifying high-risk individuals as low-risk
individuals), while decreasing the cut-off score would have resulted in more false positive cases
(i.e., mistakenly classifying low-risk individuals as high-risk individuals). Therefore, the cut-off
score of 18 points was deemed the most optimal one.
Associations between CSBD and Sexual Behaviors
Regarding associations with theoretically relevant correlates, CSBD had weak-to-
moderate, positive associations with the past-year frequency of pornography use, masturbation,
sex with casual partners, and the number of casual sexual partners. It also had weak, positive
associations with the number of lifetime sexual partners, past-year frequency of having sex in
and out of the relationship, and past-year frequency of having sex with one’s partner. The results
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 24
orientation-based groups as well (Tables S5-S14).
Country, Gender, and Sexual Orientation-Based Differences in CSBD
Before group comparisons, we conducted language , country, gender, and sexual
orientation-based measurement invariance tests on the CSBD-19 and the CSBD-7 as well to
reduce the possibility of measurement biases (Tables S15-S22). Findings suggest the lack of
potential measurement biases, while group-based differences in the means may be present.
The highest CSBD scores were observed in Turkey, followed by China and Peru. All pairwise
comparisons between countries had small-to-moderate effect sizes and can be seen in Tables
S23-25. Men had the highest scores on the CSBD-19, followed by gender-diverse individuals,
and women, with a moderate effect size (Tables S17 and S21). No sexual-orientation-based
differences were observed in the levels of CSBD when the eight sexual-orientation-based groups
were compared (Tables S18 and S22). The results were similar with the CSBD-19 and the
CSBD-7 as well.
Occurrence of CSBD and Comparison of Individuals with Low vs. High Risk of CSBD
A total of 4.84% of the participants scored above the pre-established cut-off score of the
CSBD-19 (i.e., ≥ 50 points out of 76; high-risk group) (Bőthe et al., 2020). Detailed information
on the country-, gender-, and sexual-orientation-based proportions of participants belonging to
The high-risk group reported significantly higher levels of all theoretically relevant
correlates, including solo (e.g., masturbation) and partnered sexual activities (sexual activities
c Language is a methodological variable and potentially reflects country-based differences. Therefore, we did not
examine language-based mean differences in detail.
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 25
4). A sizable portion, 13.7% of the high-risk group had previously sought treatment for CSBD,
with an additional 32.8% not having sought treatment for various reasons (e.g., unaffordability).
Only 1.6% of the low-risk group had ever sought treatment for CSBD, with an additional 3.3%
current treatment-seeking behavior in the two groups as well.
Discussion
th
With the inclusion of CSBD in the 11 revision of the ICD-11, there have been calls for
the inclusion of underrepresented and underserved populations in this field of research as well as
for improved assessment and rigorous methodological designs (Griffin et al., 2021; Grubbs et al.,
2020; Klein et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2022). We believe that the present study is a first step in this
direction by providing data on CSBD across 42 countries, including gender and sexually diverse
individuals as well. Moreover, we provide psychometrically sound and cross-culturally
acceptable measures for assessing CSBD according to the ICD-11 guidelines. We made the
CSBD-19 and CSBD-7 freely accessible to provide standardized screening tools for future
research and practice, contributing to the unification efforts of CSBD assessment (Grubbs et al.,
2020; Reed et al., 2022).
Almost 5% of participants were at high risk of CSBD in the present study, though
estimates varied between 1.6% to 16.7% across countries, genders, and sexual orientations.
These estimates are similar to, or slightly higher than in some cases, those reported in previous
nationally representative samples in the US, Germany, Hungary, and Poland (Bőthe et al., 2020;
Briken et al., 2022; Dickenson et al., 2018; Grubbs et al., 2023; Lewczuk et al., 2022). This
variability in prevalence estimates highlights the importance of and the need to support the
examination of CSBD and other sexual, psychological, or psychiatric issues in diverse
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 26
populations outside the realm of WEIRD countries, as sexuality and related values might be
rooted in one’s cultural background and norms, warranting further research (Baxter et al., 2013;
Cheon et al., 2020; Klein et al., 2021).
From a public health perspective, only 13.7% of the high-risk group sought treatment for
CSBD, while more than 30% did not do so due to various reasons (e.g., unaffordability of
treatment, stigma). Thus, there is a need to raise awareness of CSBD, including affordable,
accessible, evidence-based treatment options for CSBD in a culturally sensitive manner, given its
adverse biopsychosocial correlates (e.g., increased risk of experiencing sexually transmitted
infections) (Miner & Coleman, 2013; World Health Organization, 2022).
Both the CSBD-19 and CSBD-7 demonstrated excellent psychometric properties, work
well with various populations in terms of culture, gender, and sexual orientation, and they
distinguish well between individuals being at low risk and high risk of CSBD. Yet, the CSBD-7
is recommended when limited resources are available (e.g., limited space in surveys) and for
quick screening purposes in prevention, clinical, and research settings, as its administration takes
approximately two minutes. When the aim is to assess different criteria of CSBD or more
detailed information is needed about individuals’ CSBD (e.g., detailed information on adverse
consequences), the CSBD-19 should be used as the multidimensional nature of the CSBD-19
was sacrificed for the CSBD-7’s brevity. Both scales should be used as a first step (e.g.,
screening) in the diagnostic process, and a formal clinical examination is needed to diagnose
CSBD. In brief, the use of established, psychometrically sound measures with international
reference data, such as the CSBD-19 and CSBD-7, provide a basis for further, high-quality
studies and greater inclusivity of underrepresented and underserved groups often missing from
the literature (Grubbs et al., 2020; Reed et al., 2022).
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 27
Despite the strengths of this study (e.g., rigorous methodology, following open-science
practices), some general limitations of the ISS as a whole should be considered (e.g., limitations
relating to the cross-sectional, self-report study design). These general limitations are discussed
d9d1 4220b5). Besides these general limitations, some study-specific limitations should be
considered. Although the model fit indices for the CSBD-7’s language-based CFA models can be
considered adequate (see details in the Supplemental Materials) (F. Chen et al., 2008; Kenny et
al., 2015), it should be noted that the RMSEA values exceeded the commonly used cut-off values
(Browne & Cudeck, 1993; Schermelleh-Engel et al., 2003). Further studies are recommended to
test the factor structure and other psychometric properties of the CSBD-7 in different languages
and cultures as well. Future studies are also warranted to further examine both the CSBD-19 and
CSBD-7 in other populations, including nationally representative, longitudinal, and clinical
samples. The potential role of the intersectionality of sex, gender, and sexual orientation in
relation to CSBD is also an area that warrants further investigation (Bőthe et al., 2018; Grubbs et
al., 2020; Klein et al., 2021). Future studies are also necessary to clarify the complex roles
religiosity and moral incongruence may play in the diagnosis of CSBD as distress entirely related
to moral judgments about sexual behaviors is an exclusion criterion in the diagnosis of CSBD
(Briken et al., 2022; Grubbs et al., 2019).
Conclusions
In conclusion, with a worldwide occurrence rate of almost 5%, CSBD seems to be as
prevalent as other, more extensively studied psychiatric disorders (Grubbs et al., 2020). Yet, a
wide range of estimates were observed across countries, genders, and sexual orientations. In line
with recent expert recommendations and the World Health Organization’s policies (Grubbs et al.,
CSBD ACROSS CULTURES, GENDERS, AND SEXUAL ORIENTATIONS 28
2020; Reed et al., 2022), these differences in CSBD estimates provide empirical evidence for the
need for more inclusive studies in this field of research. We recommend the use of the freely
available ICD-11-based CSBD-19 and CSBD-7 in further research and clinical work as they
demonstrated their applicability across 42 countries, including underrepresented and underserved
populations as well. A high-quality, internationally standardized assessment of CSBD will
facilitate the identification of individuals with CSBD in diverse populations and can eventually
stimulate research into scientifically based and culturally sensitive prevention and intervention
strategies (Grubbs et al., 2020; Reed et al., 2022).