Alone and in the dark:
Sensemaking through online platforms during the COVID-19 pandemic
Zach Bastick
“In lockdown... alone.
A COVID host to be a ghost?
Surfing endlessly from home.
Not me. I’ll get free.”
19 words on COVID-19 (Bastick, this essay)
Keywords: Algorithmic governance, content moderation, sensemaking, COVID-19, filter
bubbles, misinformation, online platforms
Introduction
In the years leading up to 1920, the French surrealists devised a method of collectively compiling
works of poetry and drawing. Typically sitting in a Parisian café, artists took turns to contribute a
few words to a poem, or a few strokes to an illustration. The final product would incrementally
take form as it moved from person to person. This method of communally producing creative
works – known as exquisite corpse – has as an attribute that it isolates the individual in a collective
process. It is suggestive of systems: To the engineer who revels in the predictability of Boolean
logic, it highlights the mechanics of information systems, with their sequential inputs, processes,
and outputs. To the philosopher who revels in stories of unpredictability, such as of hurricanes
being caused by the flap of a butterfly wing on the other side of the globe, it highlights how
seemingly small and naïve contributions can produce large and surprising effects. It also highlights
how individuals have come together online to make sense of the COVID-19 pandemic - with one
person’s posts and retweets informing another person’s posts and retweets, and so on, until a
communal but often temporary sense of reality emerges.
The poem at the beginning of this chapter was the initial input to an exquisite corpse – a first flap
of a wing. I wrote it while in lockdown in Paris, sitting at a computer at home (instead of a café),
in an environment replicated by dozens of other first world cities around the world: connected
through the internet, guarded by the confines of a small apartment, and threatened by logistical
and physical structures that breached those walls. It was prompted by a prompt of the
Massive/Micro experiment to produce a 19-word script on sense-making between humans,
machines, and the planet during the COVID-19 pandemic. Lynnette Widder at Columbia
University, also while in lockdown (but on the other side of the Atlantic), produced a series of
illustrations of this poem, shown below. Elizabeth Whitney from the City University of New York
This is a preprint of the following chapter:
Bastick, Z. (2022). Alone and in the Dark: Sensemaking Through Online Platforms During the COVID-19 Pandemic.
In: Harris, D.X., Luka, M.E., Markham, A.N. (eds). Massive/Micro Autoethnography: Creative Learning in COVID
Times. Studies in Arts-Based Educational Research, vol 4. Springer, Singapore. Reproduced with the permission of
and Heidi A. Campbell from Texas A&M University also contributed. This produced a moving
image that sought to reflect our experiences of the pandemic as individual social scientists and
media scholars. This was a minute in lockdown: largely inconsequential to the outside world, but
a snapshot of a shared journey. It was also a deliberate manifestation of the massive sensemaking
process that concurrently occurred organically and digitally all over the world.
Fig 1: Line-by-line illustration of the poem by Lynette Widder (with permission from Lynette Widder)
In reality, of course, the processes of sensemaking in society are more complex than can be
described by the exquisite corpse: they involve individuals but also communities, who interpret
the world through very different lenses, both simultaneously and over time, and produce a
multitude of worldviews, which translate to parallel and often competing realities. In addition,
while lockdowns encouraged a migration to digital spaces (Bao et al., 2020; Nabity-Grover et al.,
2020), praise of the internet as a ‘pandemic safe’ information source is tempered by concerns about
authenticity and trust. The extent of COVID-19 misinformation has been described as an
‘infodemic’ by public health experts and combating this has become a priority for transnational
organizations and national governments (Radu, 2020). The politicization of the pandemic has
incentivized disinformation, especially within the context of the 2020 US presidential election
(Faris et al., 2020; Mian & Khan, 2020). In parallel, there is increasing discussion about platform
governance, filter bubbles, echo chambers, and the effects of algorithms – all of which artificially
mediate the information that we access online (Gorwa, 2019; O’Neil, 2016).
During lockdown and times of social distancing, online spaces provided various answers to the
questions raised by COVID-19: How did the virus come to be? How is it spreading? What is the
true extent of the pandemic? Will the pandemic die down naturally? What are the symptoms and
fatality rate? How can one protect oneself from infection? Conflicting answers to those questions
in turn raise auxiliary questions, including some of the most fundamental of our epistemological
struggles: ‘What is real?’ and ‘What is true?’. Our dependence on the internet in a moment of crisis
raises the issue of how we use the internet to make sense of COVID-19. More specifically, it raises
the question of how we experience sensemaking online, and how we individually balance the
digital affordances and pitfalls of the modern digital environment. In this chapter, I
autoethnographically draw on my online experience during the early stages of COVID-19. I ask
you, dear reader, to consider the following question: How does your awareness of the dynamics of
online spaces affect your journey to make sense of the world?
Sensemaking as an experience
Sensemaking is the purposeful process by which one moves from not understanding something to
understanding it. A long history of psychology literature proposes that we group together facts,
attributes, and events. These groups feed mental models that help us to understand the world. In
exploring how intelligence develops in children, for example, Jean Piaget purported that children
are born with innate cognitive schemata that they use to interpret the world. Piaget understood a
schema to mean a "cohesive, repeatable action sequence possessing component actions that are
tightly interconnected and governed by a core meaning" (Piaget 1952, p. 7). By observing the
behavior of his three young children, he concluded that these schemata develop organically
through a process of assimilation and accommodation. That is, according to Piaget, we use
schemata to interpret the information that we encounter. We then assimilate this information into
our schemata, which we then apply to bolster our interpretation of future information; or, if the
information does not fit the schemata, we modify our schemata.
This notion of schemata – or more generally, of knowledge structures – has been rearticulated in
different contexts as stories, rules, images, common attributes, scripts, and templates. The need to
operationalize sensemaking, such in the design of Artificial Intelligence, has led these various
notions to be aggregated to the concept of a frame (Klein et al., 2007). Karl E. Weick (1995), who
introduced the notion of sensemaking to organizational studies, referred to frames as the ‘structure
of context’. He viewed frames as compartments into which people place and organize the data they
encounter in the world. A decade later, the relationship between frames and data was
conceptualized more procedurally by Klein et al (2006) in the data-frame model. They viewed this
relationship between frame and data as symbiotic and cyclical: frames help us to interpret data,
but data also modifies frames. New data might enable us to draw new connections within a frame,
or we might encounter data that does not fit the frame and necessitates the frame to be refined or
replaced. From this, various processes of sensemaking can be described.
A linear conception of sensemaking is easy to understand: One encounters a Twitter post, YouTube
video, or online news article, and interprets it according to a frame, which is in turn modified by
the new information. As noted in the introduction, however, neither sensemaking nor
autoethnography is necessarily linear nor encapsulated; and the experience of sensemaking is
richer than that which a procedural and positivist approach alone can encapsulate. Weick (1995)
himself has stressed additional aspects of sensemaking: that it is grounded in identity, that it is
enactive of social environments, and that it is driven by plausibility rather than accuracy. The
influential theory of sensemaking proposed by Brenda Dervin (1992; 2015), while originally
focusing on cognitive and procedural information behaviors, such as seeking and processing
information, has gradually evolved to emphasize verbing and structural powers or ‘energies’ which
mediate sensemaking (Savolainen, 2006).
In line with this expanded notion of sensemaking, Annette Markham has argued that understanding
the digital world requires that we become cognizant of our frames beyond what is traditionally
expected in scientific culture. She criticizes academia for presenting knowledge as a final, often
publishable product (rather than a continual exchange), and data as an object isolated from inquiry
(rather than a source that shifts through the experience of inquiry, the latter of which produces data
in itself). Markham recommends emphasizing “meaning versus method; engagement versus
objectivity; interpretation versus findings; argument versus explanation” (Markham, 2013, section
4.2, para. 9) as a more realistic and ethical means of making sense of the world.
Autoethnography, similarly, highlights the salience of the researcher (their experience, identity,
and perspective) in sensemaking, and brings to the forefront the limitations and affordances of
personal experience (Holman Jones & Harris 2018; Adams et al., 2015). The complexity of
sensemaking – the interrelatedness between and within the macro and micro of data and
interpretation – became a challenge during the coronavirus pandemic. Epidemiologists remarked
on the short time that the virus took to spread from its first identified source in Wuhan, China to
every continent on earth (Chinazzi et al., 2020; Khachfe et al., 2020). While epidemiological
models highlight the interconnectedness of human beings, they fail to capture many of the nuances
of the pandemic (Enserink & Kupferschmidt, 2020). Indeed, the data produced during the
pandemic is vast, and transcends the disciplinary confines of medicine, sociology, and political
science. Perspective, too, is important, and Angeli and Montefusco (2020) stress that the
interpretation of data depends in part on the political context, public health, and the time during
which it is collected. To find sense in this agglomeration, they advocate a complex systems
approach to pandemic sensemaking. As Joachim Sturmberg and Carmel Martin note in advocating
a similar perspective, the “pandemic reveals that everything is connected to everything else” and
this requires us to re-analyze our systems of sensemaking (Sturmberg & Martin 2020, p.1).
Despite the need for tangible policy proposals and empirical evidence, it should be remembered
that sensemaking is a profoundly human activity. Sensemaking occurs at the collective,
civilizational, and global levels, but also at the personal level. It involves the processing of
information and frames, but also the externalities of this process: our hesitancies, social bonds,
dialogue with others, anxieties, and behaviors, to name but a few. Personal context mediates the
process of sensemaking, but also situates it within our lives. That is, we must remember that
sensemaking is an experience as well as a narrower process. This enables us to shed light not only
on inquiry, but also on our relationship with inquiry and our relationship with the objects of our
inquiry. Hence, with people increasingly relying heavily on the internet to make sense of the
pandemic, it is important to examine our experiences of online sensemaking.
Autonomy and shared space
My first recollection of experiencing sensemaking through online environments came from
building a website in 1997 which hosted dancing baby videos. These videos were “all the rage on
the net” (McNamara 1997, p. 39), as Network World magazine reported at the time, with internet
users delighted at the sight of an animated baby dancing. These videos also illustrated that digital
technology reconfigured reality (where else could you see a baby dancing like an adult?). A piece
of Software called 3D Studio Max enabled anyone with basic animation skills to create a new
dancing baby. As a result, a delightfully haphazard series of videos emerged online, becoming
what might be regarded as the first graphical internet.
There was a certain thrill to watching the numbers going up on my website’s traffic counter. I
recall trying to imagine all these people in a room – first to grasp the sheer quantity of real people
behind the hit counter, and then to imagine what those people might look like and how they might
interact. In this vein, I placed a guestbook on the website, which attracted comments that ranged
from praise to threats. Perhaps the ability to comment anonymously unleashed facets of the human
experience that society repressed. Indeed, it felt as though on this early web, individuals could
disembody their offline personalities and explore new facets of the psyche - as The New Yorker
had phrased it four years earlier, “on the internet, nobody knows you’re a dog” (Steiner, 1993).
This enabled a liberal and almost anarchic space in which everyone could be a ruler of themselves,
precisely because their modems had set them free.
Decades later, a threat posted on this guestbook still sticks with me. It spared no detail in the
vitriolic, gruesome, and vivid description of torture that would be performed on me. Being 11 years
old, I recognized their words by their purely literal meaning, but had never experienced their
forging into forceful language. I was left with a concatenation of questions that my current frames
could not answer: To what extent were these threats contemplated, and to what extent were they
instinctive lashes at a keyboard? What place did they have on my amateur dancing baby website
(and should I delete them)? Who was the author of these threats and what circumstances motivate
them to bring such darkness into my world? Would they have typed the same sentences knowing
that I was only a young boy? I wondered how their experience of the world differed from mine,
and how the contexts in which they lived could feel so alien to me. That is, I wondered about their
frames and the limitations of my own frames.
This was a visceral, animalistic, and unforgiving experience in online sensemaking. It made me
recognize that the internet empowers sensemaking by placing the heterogeneous experiences of
humanity in a shared online space. It showed me, and made me feel, that the internet affords
autonomy: autonomy to break offline boundaries, autonomy to explore the contexts of others,
autonomy to be creator and participant, and autonomy to be yourself. The online world has now
changed – as have the ways that we understand ‘autonomy’ and ‘shared space’ online - but
reflecting on our online experiences can highlight that the experience of online sensemaking is
richer than the process of online sensemaking.
The evisceration of online sensemaking during COVID-19
Today, it might seem quaint to associate ‘autonomy’ and ‘shared space’ with online sensemaking.
It suggests the outmoded optimism of early digital communities, and hints at the romanticism of
John Perry Barlow’s Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace (“property, expression,
identity, movement, and context do not apply to us. They are all based on matter, and there is no
matter here” [Barlow 1996, para. 9)]. For many, the 2018 Cambridge Analytica Scandal was a
wakeup call to changes in our online environments. Media scholars now decry the many emerging
dangers of online spaces, which need not be repeated here to make the point that we are becoming
increasingly reflective of our online environments. Given this, it is pertinent to ask how this
reflexivity affects the ways in which we make sense of the world through online spaces.
In spite of the dampening optimism of media scholars, the internet was an important source of
information on the pandemic. Social media relayed the initial attempts of the Chinese government
to suppress news of the COVID-19 outbreak, including the government admonishing Li Wenliang,
the physician who first alerted the world to the COVID outbreak on WeChat (Green, 2020). Amid
fears of a government cover-up, researchers around the world dissected carefully worded
statements by the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission and used the web to speculate on the
appearance of a new coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2 (Gralinski & Menachery, 2020). Social media
enables researchers to share emergent findings and healthcare whistleblowers to expose
overburdened healthcare facilities. I came to fully realize the urgency of social distancing; not
from a government campaign or epidemiological study, but from a post on the social journalism
platform Medium that had been shared on Twitter. Within nine days of its publication on March
20, 2020, the post had gained over 40 million views and been translated to over 40 languages
(Pueyo, 2020). Just as public authorities strived to grasp the rapidly unfolding situation, social
media allowed millions around the world to collaboratively make sense of COVID-19. Likewise,
I relied on the internet to make sense of the early days of the pandemic. The internet also provided
me with a ‘digital’ form of stability amid the ‘biological’ turmoil of the pandemic. I recount the
experience below:
I am in Paris, France, on the eve of the first national lockdown. On March 16,
2020, at 8pm, I turn on the television to watch French president Emmanuel
Macron announce the lockdown, beginning at noon the next day. The French
lockdown entails downloading an authorization form or writing out a sworn
testimony to leave one’s home, under penalty of being fined by police. It feels
like the world is moving; yet from one day to the next, the city turns silent as
the streets empty of their traffic. At this moment, smartphones, tablets, and
computers, offer an obvious way to remain connected to the world while being
separated from it. For my part, I make sense of the pandemic through online
news, social media, and COVID-19 data portals. Online news is my primary
source of authoritative information on the pandemic, and I use social media to
gain more granularity on public discourse. I also find myself reloading,
multiple times a day, the Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Dashboard (Dong et al.,
2020). For the next months, that dashboard is often the first website that I check
in the morning and the last that I check at night.
It has long been noted that the algorithms that curate newsfeeds and online news aim to not only
return relevant data but to determine the criteria of what is relevant (Das et al., 2007). Evidence of
news aggregators producing filter bubbles or reinforcing political stances is mixed (Bruns, 2019;
Haim et al., 2018; Le et al., 2019). However, the politicization of the pandemic increased
incentives to control public information – and that elevated the role of trust in using algorithmically
mediated spaces for information provision. This becomes particularly real when considering the
‘algorithm’ as a metonym that hides complex power structures. These power structures involve
real people making real decisions, and so reflect the values and interests of those who own, control,
and exploit these algorithms. They also involve the machine uncertainty of artificial intelligence
outcomes. The question that arises here, then, is not how the limitations of the internet affect online
sensemaking (although this is a much asked and important question). Rather, the question that
arises is how acknowledging these influences over online spaces affects the experience of online
sensemaking.
Perhaps like yours, my online sensemaking journey began with the desire to answer immediate
questions (such as ‘How did the virus come to be?’ and ‘What is the true extent of the pandemic?’).
You may have experienced moments of insight while seeking out answers to these questions. For
example, my social media feeds emphasized the benefits of national lockdowns, the importance of
personal protective equipment, and the failed responses of national governments worldwide – but
I came to realize that social media was isolating me from alternative narratives:
One day, I click on a YouTube video on a topic outside of my typical interests;
then I click on a recommended video; and then I break the filter bubble. The
comments on the video universally oppose lockdowns, decry the use of
personal protective equipment, and praise the Trump administration’s handling
of the pandemic. It feels as if I have entered a parallel universe – a feeling
cemented by one comment noting that the clear agreement in the comment
section was evidence of establishment media silencing ‘real people’. Have I
escaped my filter bubble to view reality? Or have I entered a new filter bubble,
with its alternative mirage of reality? It strikes me like a bat over the head at
that moment, that I have no obvious way of determining the effects of the
invisible decisions of platforms on my frames, and no obvious way of situating
these frames in relation to anyone else’s. In moments like these, you feel alone
and subjugated, rather than connected and free; and you have no clearer
understanding of the world than when you began.
Reflexively analyzing our personal experiences in online sensemaking can shift our questions. For
me, my immediate questions were supplanted by deeper epistemological and ontological
questions, such as: How can you feel so isolated on the internet, a network that connects you to
millions? How do you determine the extent to which your freedoms are limited by obscure digital
influences? If you have no sense of shared space or objectivity, how can you determine the
extremity of your own views? More fundamentally: To what extent can reality be shared? What
does it mean to exist in a virtual world where your frames, and consequently thoughts and
behaviors, are shaped by a relatively small group of people who govern online platforms? These
were raised by an awareness that I no longer experienced a sense of shared space and autonomy
online. It illustrates how becoming aware of experience of online sensemaking can modify our
lines of inquiry and change the assumptions of our online sensemaking processes.
Conclusion
It is paradoxical to feel isolated in lockdown while connected to millions online; and, in turn, to
be connected to masses of information but disconnected from reality. These incongruities evidence
the complexity of online sensemaking. In this chapter, I applied a critical autoethnography (Harris
& Holman Jones 2019) to explore online sensemaking during the pandemic. This aimed to
highlight that while we are increasingly aware that we use online platforms to make sense of the
world, and of the dynamics of these platforms, a further step is to recognize that our awareness of
these platforms also affects our sensemaking experiences.
More generally, being reflexive – in focusing on the full human experience of sensemaking rather
than the narrower process of sensemaking – can encourage us to explore fundamental questions
about sensemaking in the digital world. These questions can seem daunting at first (‘if I don’t
know what is real, where do I go from here?’), but they can also be liberating. They highlight that
sensemaking is more than a process – it is the experience of life.
As Daniel Harris, Mary Elizabeth Luka, and Annette Markham encouraged me to write about how
we make sense of ourselves, others, and the world, and asked how the pandemic helped to make
sense of the relationship between humans, machines, and the planet, I struggled with the
contradiction being connected to the internet while also feeling alone and in the dark. This struggle
is displayed in the poem at the beginning of the chapter and in the experience of online
sensemaking.
You, too, might find that your awareness of digital platforms impacts the ways you make sense of
the world. So, I invite you to reflect about your own experience of sensemaking online, especially
during moments of heightened uncertainty: First, how does the internet affect your sensemaking
processes? Then, how does being aware of this affect your sensemaking experience? Finally, what
does this tell you about yourself, others, technology, and the world? If this inquiry raises new
questions that appear destabilizing, you may find the act of reflection itself liberating. Hence, I
encourage you to consider grappling with these questions – as reflexivity can manifest your role
not only as a ‘user of the internet’, but also as an active and conscious participant of the digital
world.