FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 1
***Please note that this article has been accepted for publication at Assessment. This file
version does not represent the final published version of the article.***
Negative Mood Dysregulation Loads Strongly onto Common Factors with Many Forms of
Psychopathology: Considerations for Assessing Nonspecific Symptoms
Kasey Stanton
University of Wyoming
Kennedy M. Balzen
University of Houston
Christine DeFluri
Walter Reed National Military Medical Center
Peyton Brock
San Diego State University
Holly F. Levin-Aspenson
University of North Texas
Mark Zimmerman
Brown University Warren Alpert Medical School, Rhode Island Hospital
Correspondence concerning this paper should be addressed to Kasey Stanton, University of
Wyoming, Department of Psychology, 1000 E. University Avenue, Laramie, Wyoming 82071.
Email: kaseyjstanton@gmail.com. Please note that the ideas appearing in this manuscript have
not been disseminated previously.
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 2
Abstract
There have been proposals to expand definitions for categorical disorders and dimensionally-
conceptualized syndromes (e.g., psychopathy) to include negative mood lability and
dysregulation (NMD). Factor analytic results are often presented in support of these proposals,
and we provide factor analytic demonstrations across clinically-oriented samples showing that
NMD indicators load strongly onto factors with a range of psychopathology. This is unsurprising
from a transdiagnostic perspective but shows that factor analysis could potentially be used to
justify expanding definitions for specific constructs even though NMD indicators show strong,
nonspecific loadings on psychopathology factors ranging widely in nature. Expanding construct
definitions and assessment approaches to emphasize NMD also may negatively impact
discriminant validity. We agree that targeting NMD is essential for comprehensive assessment,
but our demonstrative analyses highlight a need for using factor analysis and other statistical
methods in a careful, theoretically-driven manner when evaluating psychopathology structure
and developing measures.
KEYWORDS: transdiagnostic; emotion dysregulation; discriminant validity; factor analysis;
neuroticism; mood
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 3
Negative Mood Dysregulation Loads Strongly onto Common Factors with Many Forms of
Psychopathology: Considerations for Assessing Nonspecific Symptoms
Negative mood lability and negative emotional dysregulation are listed as criteria for many
th
disorders described in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (currently 5
ed., text rev.; DSM–5-TR; American Psychiatric Association [APA], 2022), and both are linked
strongly to many other disorders as well (Aldao et al., 2016; Brandes et al., 2019; Carver et al.,
2017). Recognizing different viewpoints on definitions of constructs such as emotion
dysregulation and the extent of its overlap with affective lability and negative mood symptoms
(Carpenter & Trull, 2013; Thompson, 2019), we collectively refer to these interrelated constructs
as negative mood lability and dysregulation (NMD) for the sake of convenience. In addition to
NMD’s pervasive psychopathology associations, NMD dimensions are key treatment targets and
associate robustly with relationship satisfaction, general functioning, and other factors relevant to
treatment planning (Bodalski et al., 2019; Weiss et al., 2015).
In addition to NMD already being described as a feature of many disorders, researchers
have proposed expanding the criteria for various DSM disorders to include or greater emphasize
NMD features to ensure comprehensive assessment and treatment planning. This includes
different research groups proposing that emotion dysregulation facets are core aspects of
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) across childhood and adulthood (e.g., Hirsch et
al., 2018; Vidal et al., 2014; Yue et al., 2022). Other examples include irritability and NMD
being identified as core features of autism, and assessment measures have been refined and
developed for assessing NMD in the context of ADHD and autism specifically (e.g., Mazefsky et
al., 2018; Ward et al., 1993; Weibel et al., 2022). In the personality disorders (PD) literature,
there is ongoing debate regarding the lack of representation of NMD features such as affective
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 4
lability and irritability in the narcissistic PD criteria (Dimaggio, 2021). Vulnerable narcissistic
dimensions representing different NMD elements already are widely studied across the clinical,
personality, and social literatures, even though they do not feature prominently within the DSM
NPD criteria (Miller et al., 2021). Related to narcissism research, research conducted outside of a
DSM-based framework on dimensional externalizing syndromes suggests a need to better
integrate NMD assessment in psychopathy research (Garofalo et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2021).
Factor Analysis: Applications in Negative Mood Lability and Dysregulation Research
Factor analytic results provide a significant portion of the basis for proposals focused on
expanding disorder and syndrome definitions to capture NMD (e.g., Hirsch et al., 2018; Retz et
al., 2012). Factor analytic methods also feature prominently in research on psychopathology
classification, measure development, and assessment more broadly (Sellbom & Tellegen, 2019).
In studies providing support for expanding construct definitions, items assessing NMD are often
factor analyzed concurrently with items traditionally used to assess a domain. Both NMD and
traditional item ratings often load strongly onto a common factor or load onto factors that are
differentiable but still strongly correlated (Stanton & Zimmerman, 2018).
From a transdiagnostic perspective (Aldao et al., 2016; Carver et al., 2017), it is
unsurprising that NMD indicators correlate and load strongly onto common factors with
indicators of many different symptoms and traits. For instance, transdiagnostic studies from the
perspective of the Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology (HiTOP; Kotov et al., 2017)
consistently indicate that NMD overlaps strongly with other psychopathology spanning HiTOP
spectra ranging from detachment, to externalizing, to thought disorder, to internalizing, the last
of which is unsurprising due to content overlap across NMD and other internalizing measures
(Kotov et al., 2017). At the broadest level of analysis, general psychopathology factors modeled
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 5
in studies often are heavily saturated with NMD-related variance (Southward et al., 2022), and
one possible substantive interpretation is that a general psychopathology or “p-factor” represents
tendencies toward responding impulsively to negative emotional experiences (Carver et al.,
2017; also see Levin-Aspenson et al., 2021 for discussion of p-factor interpretation).
Description of Study Goals and Demonstrative Analyses
In this study, we demonstrate that NMD items load strongly onto common factors with a
range of psychopathology to illustrate how factor analytic results potentially could be used to
provide a rationale for broadening definitions of many different clinical constructs. Factor
analysis is useful for identifying shared variance and for mapping psychopathology structure to
be clear. However, interpretating the results of factor analyses of NMD and other individual
constructs in isolation could lead to an increasing number of proposals focused on adding NMD
to construct definitions. As reviewed, proposals to expand definitions already span DSM chapters
and the clinical and non-clinical literatures. Expanding construct definitions may be warranted in
some cases, as broadened disorder definitions may be helpful for increasing assessment
comprehensiveness (e.g., adding NMD criteria to ADHD could be used to explicitly account for
ADHD-borderline PD overlap; Hirsch et al., 2018; Retz et al., 2012). However, significant
research indicates that boundaries between various clinical disorders and syndromes are already
blurred, and adding non-specific, transdiagnostic NMD features to different disorders may
further complicate differential diagnosis. It also may result in discriminant validity issues more
generally if measures used to assess different clinical constructs share similar, overlapping NMD
item content (Evans et al., 2017; Stanton, 2020).
Acknowledging the complexities related to expanding construct definitions, we present a
series of straightforward factor analytic demonstrations using data spanning sample types and
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 6
assessment methods. This includes (a) interview ratings from adult outpatients (N = 2,149), and
(b) self-ratings from adults (N = 429) recruited online who self-identified as having significant
mental health histories. We refer to these samples going forward as Sample 1 (adult outpatients)
and Sample 2 (adults recruited online), respectively.
We show that NMD indicators load strongly onto common factors with ratings relevant to
domains already proposed to be expanded (e.g., various externalizing psychopathology). We also
conduct factor analyses showing that NMD indicators load strongly onto common factors with
other psychopathology in addition to those reviewed. Collectively, joint factor analyses of NMD
with other symptoms across samples include commonly studied forms of psychopathology
spanning ADHD, externalizing, thought disorder, and detachment. Although NMD has not been
proposed as a key feature of some specific domains that we examine per se, these analyses
provide the basis for discussing the importance of studying a range of psychopathology
concurrently to permit strong examinations of specificity and discriminant validity. We also
provide recommendations for using factor analysis in a theoretically-driven manner when
evaluating psychopathology structure and developing measures.
Additionally, we present a second series of analyses reinforcing these recommendations.
These analyses focus on examining external correlates for what we refer to as “standard” and
“expanded” factors from our factor analyses with other forms of psychopathology already
described as having NMD as a core feature (e.g., borderline PD, mania). Standard factors are
based on factor analyses of traditional rating sets not including NMD indicators, and expanded
factors are based on models including both traditional indicators and NMD ratings. These
correlational analyses show that expanded factors correlate robustly with other external
psychopathology measures in many cases. Such associations with these external measures
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 7
assessing NMD-based forms of psychopathology are not surprising given content overlap across
measures (e.g., both expanded factor and mania measures including NMD content). Still, they
provide another demonstration of NMD’s lack of specificity and show how expanding construct
definitions could negatively impact discriminant validity.
Method
Adherence to Ethical Standards and Data Availability for Study Samples
Procedures for data collection for both samples received Institutional Ethics Board
approval, and all participants across samples provided their informed consent. Ethics board
permission was not obtained to share the Sample 1 data on open-source forums, but these data
are available upon request. Permission was obtained to share data from Sample 2, which are
Sample 1: Adult Outpatient Sample
Sample 1 Procedure and Description
Interview data were drawn from a sample of 2,149 adult participants from the Rhode Island
Methods to Improve Diagnostic and Assessment Services (MIDAS) Project (Zimmerman, 2016).
These participants were seeking treatment at an outpatient psychiatry practice affiliated with an
academic medical center, and interviews were administered at treatment intake. Mean participant
age was 38.5 years (SD = 12.8). Most participants were women (61.0%; 39% men). The majority
were White or European American (90.7%; 4.4% Black or African American; 1% Asian
American; very small percentages of other identities endorsed), and 2.7% were Hispanic or
Latino/x. Sample breakdown for highest level of education was: 40.5% associate’s degree or
some college; 21.9% high school degree or equivalent; 15.1% 4-year undergraduate degree;
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 8
14.2% advanced degree (e.g., master’s, PhD) or some graduate-level coursework; and 8.3% with
less than a high school education.
Item Sets Used for Factor Analyses Based on the Sample 1 Interview Data
All items used in our factor analyses were item-level interview ratings of PD criteria from
the Structured Interview for DSM-IV Personality (SIDP-IV; Pfohl et al., 1997). Interviewers
rated participants on each criterion using a scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 3 (strongly
PD ratings of affective instability (criterion 6) and intense anger/difficulty controlling anger
(criterion 8) were included as NMD markers. We included the anger rating in addition to
affective instability because it captures both experiencing and difficulties regulating a specific
form of negative affect. These two items were jointly analyzed with criterion-level ratings of (a)
paranoid PD (7 items), (b) histrionic PD (8 items), and antisocial PD (7 items representing
criterion A ratings). We focused on ratings of these three disorders to efficiently demonstrate that
NMD ratings load strongly onto common factors with disorders differing in their nature and
primary features (e.g., suspiciousness/mistrust versus disinhibition and antagonism).
Other Measures Used for Examining External Factor Correlates in Sample 1
We examined factor correlations with current diagnostic ratings from the Structured
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders (SCID-IV; First et al., 1995). These SCID
ratings were not included in our factor analyses because they were coded as present or not
present at the diagnostic level, whereas the SIDP ratings represent item-level data (one exception
was that SCID item-level data were collected for major depression, which we do not examine
here because NMD already is a central major depression feature).
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 9
Diagnostic ratings from the SCID used as external variables included (sample prevalence
rates in parentheses): Major depression (43.0%), persistent depression (8.3%), social anxiety
(26.8%), generalized anxiety (19.3%), panic disorder (17.7%), obsessive-compulsive disorder
(6.4%), any bipolar spectrum disorder (6.1%), and intermittent explosive disorder (3.4%). We
also included diagnostic ratings of borderline PD (9.5%) based on SIDP-IV scores. The MIDAS
dataset includes many other ratings that would have been difficult to integrate, and we focused
on the disorders listed that are defined by NMD or linked strongly to it. All study interviews
were conducted by PhD-level psychologists or research assistants with at least a bachelor’s level
of education in psychology or a related field. Other publications using the MIDAS dataset
provide detailed information about the training process for interviewers and for interrater
reliability, which was strong across a range of interview ratings (see Zimmerman, 2016).
Sample 2: Adults with a Self-Identified History of Mental Health Issues
Sample 2 Procedure and Description
Demonstrative analyses using self-ratings were based on data from 429 adults recruited
online using the Prolific platform. Prolific provides screening filters for participant selection, and
only participants who responded “yes” to the screening question “Do you have—or have you
had—a diagnosed, on-going mental health/illness/condition?” were eligible to participate. With
use of this recruitment approach, over three-fifths (62.2%) of the sample reported currently
accessing psychiatric treatment (52.9% current medication; 32.4% current psychotherapy). Mean
participant age was 32.8 years (SD = 11.7). Most participants were cisgender women (63.9%;
32.6% cisgender men; 3.5% nonbinary; 0.7% transgender women, 1.2% transgender men). Most
participants identified as White or European American 82.8% (9.8% Black or African American;
7.2% Asian American; small percentage of other racial identities also were endorsed); 6.5% were
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 10
Hispanic or Latino/x. The modal response for highest education level was having some college,
an associate’s, or vocational degree (39.9%; 29.8% bachelor’s degree; 15.4% high school
diploma or less; 14.5% post-bachelor’s level education; 2 missing responses).
Item Sets Used for Factor Analyses Based on the Self-Report Data from Sample 2
Features of NMD were assessed using the Affective Lability scale (6 items) from the
Comprehensive Assessment of Traits Relevant to Personality Disorder (CAT-PD; Wright &
Simms, 2014). Item scores from this scale capture tendencies toward having (a) frequent mood
swings and (b) behavioral disinhibition related to experiencing negative affect (e.g., “lose control
when emotional”), which have been proposed as features to be added to various psychopathology
domains. Items from these CAT-PD scales and others described subsequently were administered
using a 0 (very untrue of me) to 4 (very true of me) response format.
The CAT-PD Affective Lability items were jointly analyzed with ratings of (a) ADHD
symptoms and (b) behavioral rigidity. Symptoms of ADHD were assessed using the 18-item
Adult ADHD Self-Report Scale (ASRS; Kessler et al., 2005), and participants rated their
symptom experiences over the past year using a 5-point scale ranging 0 (never) to 4 (very often).
Next, we assessed rigidity with the 12-item Rigidity scale (e.g., “others get frustrated by my
inflexibility”) of the Broad Autism Phenotype Questionnaire (BAPQ; Hurley et al., 2007). The
BAPQ is a widely used measure for assessing dimensions relevant to autism, and participants
responded to BAPQ items using a 6-point scale ranging from 1 (very rarely) to 6 (very often).
Finally, we conducted joint analyses of NMD ratings with ratings from the CAT-PD (a) Unusual
Experiences (7 items: e.g., “feel outside of my body at times”), (b) Manipulativeness (6 items),
and (c) Social Withdrawal (6 items) scales. Analyses based on these additional CAT-PD item
sets demonstrate that NMD indicators show strong, non-discriminant factor loadings onto
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 11
common factors with indicators of other psychopathology differing in nature, in addition to
loading strongly onto common factors with ADHD and rigidity as reviewed.
Additional Measures Used for Analyses Examining External Factor Correlates in Sample 2
Participants also completed other questionnaires assessing NMD and related dimensions
(e.g., distress, fear). These measures were expected to correlate strongly with expanded factors as
discussed, and we examined their correlates with factors to show potential negative impacts on
discriminant validity if construct definitions are broadened to include NMD. Most of these
measures assessed current symptoms rather than trait ratings, which was another reason for using
them as external variables rather than including items from these measures in factor analyses.
These additional measures included the Social Anxiety (6 items), Mania (5 items; “thoughts
raced rapidly”), and Dysphoria (10 items; e.g., “felt depressed”) scales from Expanded Version
of the Inventory of Depression and Anxiety Symptoms (IDAS-II; Watson et al., 2012).
Participants responded to IDAS-II items on a 1 (not at all) to 5 (extremely) scale in reference to
the past 2 weeks. We used dimensional scores for each scale representing the sum of their
respective item scores. Total Dysphoria scores exceeding a cutoff of a 28 indicate an increased
likelihood of meeting criteria for an internalizing disorder (e.g., major depression; Stasik-
O’Brien et al., 2019), and we also integrated this categorical variable. Roughly half of the sample
participants (50.8%) exceeded this cutoff.
Analyses also included two other CAT-PD scales assessing internalizing psychopathology:
Anxiousness (7 items) and Depressiveness (6 items). Lastly, participants were administered the
13-item Mood Disorder Questionnaire (MDQ; Hirschfeld et al., 2000) to assess their lifetime
histories of experiencing hypomania symptoms. Participants responded to the MDQ symptom
items using a “yes” or “no” response format, and we summed all 13 MDQ item scores to create a
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 12
dimensional score. Furthermore, endorsement of 7 or more MDQ symptoms plus participants
reporting that (a) several or more symptoms co-occurred and (b) symptoms caused at least
moderate impairment indicates a positive hypomania screening history. Analyses also included
this categorical variable, and 19.8% of participants had a positive MDQ screen. Means, standard
deviations, and coefficient omega values (which all exceeded .85) for all study scales are
Results
Mood Lability and Dysregulation Ratings Lack Specificity in Their Factor Loadings
Overview of Factor Analytic Approach
All factor analyses presented are exploratory factor analyses (EFAs) conducted using
principal axis factoring. These EFAs were based on polychoric correlation matrices to account
for using categorical item-level data. We focused on single-factor models in all instances to
evaluate the extent to which NMD ratings loaded strongly onto common factors with other
psychopathology, and use of confirmatory factor analysis would have yielded isomorphic results
given our focus on single-factor models. For example, in Sample 2, we examined a single-factor
model of NMD and ADHD ratings, a single-factor model of NMD and Rigidity ratings, and so
on. We recognize that we could have examined multifactor models based on item sets spanning
different measures and then adjudicated amongst different structural configurations (e.g., jointly
analyzing NMD, ADHD, rigidity, and other ratings from Sample 2). However, examination of
multifactor models spanning all forms of psychopathology assessed here may be better suited to
address questions concerning NMD’s optimal classification within broader structural
frameworks such as the HiTOP, which was not our study goal (for examples of studies
addressing this research question, see Forbes et al., 2021; Stanton et al., 2021). Examination of
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 13
multifactor structures spanning different forms of psychopathology also would have been
complicated and unwieldy. For example, in Sample 2, this would have involved factor analyzing
over 50 item ratings providing coverage of some psychopathology domains much more so than
others (i.e., 18 ADHD items, 12 assessing Rigidity, over 20 CAT-PD items). In addition to being
straightforward, our analyses focused on single-factor models parallel cases where factor analytic
results are used as evidence for expanding a specific psychopathology domain, an approach we
review critically following presentation of our demonstrative analyses.
Factor Analytic Results in Sample 1
Prior to examining joint factor models, we examined initial models using only the ratings
traditionally used to score each PD as discussed (e.g., examining a one-factor model of the seven
antisocial PD ratings). These standard models based on ratings of paranoid, antisocial, and
histrionic PDs performed as expected: All items loaded > .50 on their respective factors, with the
exception of the criterion 7 rating (suggestibility) for histrionic PD loading .38 on its respective
factor. When examining expanded factor models, affective lability and anger ratings had strong
Factor Analytic Results in Sample 2
Initial standard factor models conducted without NMD ratings also conformed to
expectations in the Sample 2 self-report data. All ADHD items and all CAT-PD items (Unusual
Experiences, Manipulativeness, Social Withdrawal) had strong loadings on their respective
factors (all loadings ≥ .55). All 12 BAPQ Rigidity items loaded ≥ .48 on a common factor.
results presented in Tables 2 and 3, the NMD items “unpredictable moods,” “frequent mood
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 14
swings,” “lose control when emotional,” and “overreact to everything” loaded > .50 on all
factors. Factor loadings were substantially stronger in many cases, as items assessing
unpredictable moods and having frequent mood swings loaded .74 and .73, respectively on a
common with the CAT-PD Unusual Experiences items for example.
It is worth acknowledging that reverse-keyed NMD items including “know how to cope”
and “remain calm when stressed out” that index positive coping skills tended to have weaker
loadings across analyses than did other NMD items. Consistent with this, reverse-keyed items
from other scales also showed weaker loading patterns. For example, reverse-keyed BAPQ
Rigidity items such as “am comfortable with unexpected changes” also had comparatively
concerning reverse-keyed items, these analyses provide strong evidence overall that NMD items
load strongly on joint factors spanning a wide range of psychopathology.
External Factor Associations: Reduced Specificity for Expanded Factors
External Factor Correlates in the Sample 1 Interview Data
All standard and expanded factors were modeled using regression-based factor scores in
subsequent analyses examining their external correlates across samples. First, we examined
Sample 1 standard and expanded factor associations with diagnostic ratings, which are provided
cases (e.g., correlations with depressive disorder diagnoses). Examples of stronger expanded
factor correlations included the expanded Histrionic PD factor correlating .55 with borderline
PD, whereas the traditional Histrionic PD factor correlated only .37 with borderline PD. Similar
1 We do not present formal statistical comparisons of correlation magnitudes (e.g., using Fisher’s r-to-z
transformations for comparing correlations) because the sample size was very large for Sample 1 and was relatively
large for Sample 2. As a result, relatively small differences in correlation magnitudes were significantly different
even when using adjusted, stringent p-value cutoffs.
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 15
increases in correlation magnitude were observed for the expanded Paranoid PD and Antisocial
PD factors compared to their corresponding standard factors. These increases in correlation
magnitude with borderline PD are not surprising because the borderline PD affective lability and
anger ratings were included in expanded factor models. Still, this pattern of results illustrates
how adding nonspecific features to different disorders potentially could increase disorder overlap
and have an adverse impact on discriminant validity. Other examples not involving borderline
PD included the correlation for expanded Paranoid PD with intermittent explosive disorder being
.10 greater in magnitude than the correlation for standard Paranoid PD and intermittent explosive
External Factor Correlates in the Sample 2 Self-Report Data
Sample 2 correlations for both standard and expanded factors with other study variables are
These results indicated that standard factors generally showed weak to moderate external
correlations, although some exceptions involved standard ADHD correlating strongly with
IDAS-II Dysphoria, IDAS-II Mania, and MDQ scores. In contrast, expanded factors showed
strong correlates in many cases, demonstrating how inclusion of NMD inflates the magnitude—
and thereby the nonspecificity—of external correlations.
ADHD were notable in some cases (e.g., .10 difference with CAT-PD Anxiousness). Differences
for expanded versus standard ADHD were minor in other instances, however, which may have
been due in part to the standard ADHD factor already correlating strongly with a number of
external variables as reviewed. The differences for expanded versus standard Rigidity (also
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 16
several strong correlates (e.g., .61 with CAT-PD Anxiousness), and seven of the eight external
correlates for expanded Rigidity were ≥ .15 stronger in magnitude than corresponding
correlations for standard Rigidity.
factors were even more drastic in many cases. Salient examples include standard Social
Withdrawal correlating .39 with CAT-PD Anxiousness but expanded Social Withdrawal
correlating .63 (.24 increase). More generally, expanded Social Withdrawal showed strong,
IDAS-II Dysphoria). In contrast, standard Social Withdrawal showed relative specificity in a
theoretically consistent manner via its strong associations with IDAS-II Social Anxiety and
CAT-PD Depressiveness (rs = .50 and .47, respectively), but very weak associations with other
variables such as IDAS-II Mania (r = .11). Another prominent example included expanded
Manipulativeness correlating .49 with categorical IDAS-II Dysphoria screening scores, which
nearly doubled the correlation for standard Manipulativeness (r = .25).
Discussion
Review of Study Goals and Demonstration Results
Our demonstrative analyses showed that ratings of NMD features loaded strongly onto
common factors with items used to assess an array of other clinical constructs across samples
and assessment methods. Acknowledging that some expanded factor correlates in the Sample 1
data were quite weak in magnitude, expanded factors including NMD correlated moderately to
strongly with other external study measures in many cases. Specific examples that may be
problematic theoretically and indicative of discriminant validity issues included expanded
Manipulativeness correlating robustly with dysphoric mood and anxiousness. Examples such as
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 17
this from our correlational analyses demonstrate how expanded assessment approaches targeting
NMD may result in a loss of specificity, with these results complementing our factor analyses
showing that NMD loads strongly onto common factors with ratings spanning externalizing
traits, paranoia, thought disorder, rigidity, ADHD symptoms, and detachment.
As discussed, these findings are not surprising given systematic evidence showing that
NMD features correlate strongly with many symptoms and disorders (Aldao et al., 2016; Carver
et al., 2017). Expanding construct definitions and emphasizing NMD in assessment may result in
different forms of psychopathology being challenging to differentiate, which could exacerbate
longstanding difficulties concerning diagnostic comorbidity and differential diagnosis. However,
we recognize differing viewpoints on the costs and benefits of expanding construct definitions to
include NMD, as doing so may be necessary for ensuring NMD is adequately addressed in
assessment and treatment. Next, we provide recommendations for interpreting factor analytic
results, designing studies, and clinical assessment intended to be useful to researchers from
different backgrounds and with differing viewpoints on NMD proposal expansions.
Although our recommendations focus on NMD, many of the recommendations shared
subsequently would also potentially apply to studying other nonspecific features. For example,
relationship difficulties and low levels of conscientiousness, which might represent having
difficulty navigating daily goals, also are linked to many psychological disorders to varying
degrees (Carver et al., 2017; Watts et al., 2021). Therefore, we hope that our recommendations
will be useful for drawing attention to discriminant validity issues that are often neglected more
generally across substantive clinical research areas (Stanton, 2020; Watts et al., 2021).
Considerations When Using Factor Analysis in Studies of Negative Mood Dysregulation
Interpreting Factor Analytic Results in Context
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 18
Before providing recommendations about interpreting factor analytic results carefully, we
would like to note that our goal is not at all to suggest that factor analysis is not useful for
informing assessment and advancing understanding of psychopathology structure. We commonly
apply factor analysis in our own work and agree with perspectives that measurement problems
often arise due to neglecting to explicate domain and measure structure prior to using new
assessment tools (Flake et al., 2017). Rather, we build from other recent reviews describing the
need to use factor analysis in a thoughtful, theoretically-driven manner (e.g., Fried, 2020; Watts
et al., 2020) to offer ideas when using factor analysis to study NMD specifically.
First, one primary consideration centers on the interpretation of NMD items loading
strongly onto common factors with other psychopathology, especially because NMD shows such
nonspecific factor loadings as demonstrated. Keeping this lack of specificity in mind raises the
question of how clearly and compellingly a latent variable representing a single disorder entity
accounts for shared variance across NMD and other items (also see Fried, 2020; Watts et al.,
2021 for discussion on distinctions between theoretical and statistical models). Furthermore,
items may load strongly onto common factors and/or a model may fit reasonably well even in the
absence of having a clear psychological explanation for why those specific patterns of results
occurred (Fried, 2020; Sellbom & Tellegen, 2019; Watts et al., 2021). This was the case in some
of our analyses. Although plausible interpretations could be generated, we examined joint factor
models of NMD and some other forms of psychopathology such as detachment even when we
did not specify clear theoretical reasons for doing so; despite this, factor loadings for all items
generally were quite strong in magnitude. Therefore, we encourage researchers to connect data
analysis and theory by clearly describing upfront how specific analytic techniques will be used to
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 19
test predictions about NMD’s placement with domain structures (see Fried et al., 2020; Greene et
al., 2022 for more detailed recommendations).
To be clear, some proposals already provide theoretical explanations for why NMD is
important to study in relation to specific disorders or syndromes (e.g., some proposals on
narcissism, ADHD). For example, some proposals focused on expanding narcissistic PD
definitions describe that intense negative emotional experiences may occur due to interpersonal
sensitivity and when unrealistic expectations of others are not met, among other factors (Caligor
et al., 2015; Dimaggio, 2021). Researchers from different backgrounds (e.g., psychiatry versus
personality psychology) still disagree on narcissism definitions in some ways, but theoretically-
driven narcissism research has facilitated meaningful dialogue (Ackerman et al., 2019).
The Value in Studying a Range of Psychopathology Concurrently
Even if researchers have clear theoretical reasons for studying NMD features in relation to
a specific disorder or set of symptoms, we still believe it is beneficial to examine NMD’s overlap
with a range of psychopathology concurrently when possible. For example, even if researchers
predict that NMD aligns particularly strongly with symptoms of one disorder theoretically, it
may be possible that the NMD features in question still show moderate to strong loadings on
common factors with other symptoms based on our demonstrations and the extensive NMD
literature to date (Carver et al., 2017). When designing studies from a dimensional perspective,
this could include jointly analyzing NMD with a specific construct of interest along with
internalizing and disinhibition ratings. Most NMD features are described as internalizing in
nature within models such as the HiTOP, and disinhibition also is strongly linked to some
aspects of NMD (Forbes et al., 2021; Stanton et al., 2021); therefore, including measures of these
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 20
psychopathology within analyses permits strong tests of specificity (e.g., do proposed NMD
features overlap more strongly with a targeted construct of interest or with internalizing).
From a DSM-focused lens, assessing a range of symptoms spanning multiple disorders, and
preferably multiple diagnostic chapters, provides data analytic opportunities not otherwise
possible. For instance, if symptoms spanning ADHD, PDs, major depression, and bipolar
spectrum disorders are assessed concurrently, the comparative degree of overlap for specific
NMD features across disorders can be determined as reviewed. This allows researchers to
potentially draw clearer conclusions regarding the extent to which specific NMD features are
important characteristics of some disorders more than others (e.g., a specific NMD manifestation
may be more characteristic of ADHD than internalizing disorders). In contrast, studying NMD in
relation to other individual disorders or narrow sets of symptoms makes it challenging to
determine the extent to which NMD is a core feature of one type of psychopathology more so
than another. These concepts presented are not new (e.g., Gros et al., 2011; Forbes et al., 2021),
but they are worth emphasizing given that transdiagnostic features such as NMD continue to be
the target of proposals focused on expanding the boundaries of individual syndromes.
Implications for Using Factor Analysis to Inform Measurement Approaches
Possible Impacts of Expanding Assessment Measure Content
Given that factor analytic results commonly are used inform measure development, our
next series of considerations focus on how increasing an emphasis on NMD content within
measures may affect assessment in research and practice. First, if disorder or syndrome
definitions are expanded to include NMD, a key consideration focuses on how much NMD will
be emphasized within specific disorder definitions and measures used to assess expanded
constructs. For example, correlations for the expanded Social Withdrawal factor were much
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 21
stronger than the correlations for standard Social Withdrawal, whereas differences for expanded
versus standard ADHD were less pronounced. Items assessing NMD constituted six of 12 items
used for the joint factor analysis with standard Social Withdrawal items, but only six of 24 total
items in the joint analysis with ADHD.
Thus, the addition of NMD to the expanded model for ADHD may have had less of an
impact due at least in part to NMD items representing a much smaller portion of the overall item
set than in the case of expanded Social Withdrawal. Evidence supporting this interpretation
includes the standard ADHD factor already having moderate to strong correlations with many
other psychopathology variables as reviewed (e.g., correlations > .50 and .60 with MDQ and
IDAS-II Dysphoria scores, respectively). In contrast, other standard factors based on smaller
item sets in Sample 2 generally had weak correlates with external variables, allowing more range
for correlations to inflate when adding NMD content to expanded factors. Still, these patterns of
findings could be interpreted as providing more support for adding NMD-based features to
ADHD more so than other domains. There may be a stronger empirical basis for adding NMD to
some construct definitions than others, and testing different methods for expanding disorder
conceptualizations would be helpful for informing possible criteria changes (e.g., adding a single
versus multiple NMD symptoms to diagnostic criteria).
Related to these points, the degree to which NMD additions impact differential diagnosis
and discriminant validity also could depend meaningfully on the sequencing of assessment
approaches. For example, if NMD was described as a core feature or “gateway” criterion of a
disorder, that may have significantly more impact than if NMD features were added as symptom
criteria but were not required to be present for diagnostic criteria to be met. Expanded factors
from Sample 1 included only two NMD ratings, and correlations for expanded factors in this
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 22
sample with internalizing diagnoses were weak in many cases. Therefore, relatively minor NMD
additions may not necessarily have a substantial impact on diagnosis.
Unfortunately, analyses focused on evaluating different symptom scoring configurations
for making diagnoses and determining clinical cutoff scores were not possible to conduct here.
Sample 2 participants only completed self-report measures, precluding examination of how
different self-report cutoff scores were linked to diagnoses made by clinicians. In regard to the
Sample 1 procedures, clinicians did not have access to alternative disorder descriptions when
assigning diagnoses, such that we could not examine how use of expanded disorder descriptions
including NMD would influence clinician perceptions (e.g., if affective lability was described as
core to antisocial PD, this could influence how clinicians scored antisocial PD interview ratings).
Assessment Approaches Recognizing Both Specific and Nonspecific Features
One possible method for accounting for NMD in assessment would be to guide
measurement approaches using “hybrid” diagnostic models balancing comprehensiveness and
specificity (Gros et al., 2011). Our use of the term “hybrid” here differs from its use in PD
research on the Alternative Model for Personality Disorders; in this case, “hybrid” here refers to
identifying both disorder-specific and general, nonspecific features when assessing a specific
syndrome (Gros et al., 2011; Allsop et al., 2019). For example, from this hybrid perspective,
affective lability could be added as a criterion to antisocial PD but recognized as a non-specific,
transdiagnostic criterion or specifier that is not sufficient in and of itself for diagnosis. Thus,
antagonism and disinhibition would remain primary to antisocial PD, but NMD could still be
recognized if comprehensiveness was the goal.
Frameworks such as the HiTOP are intended to address these issues concerning disorder
overlap and poor interrater reliability for many diagnoses (Kotov et al., 2017), and NMD features
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 23
are classified primarily within the internalizing spectrum of the HiTOP as discussed. When using
the HiTOP, diagnosticians would determine the extent to which scores on subscales assessing
NMD dimensions such as affective lability are elevated, rather than assessing NMD as a
characteristic of different disorders. However, evidence directly showing that dimensional
models improve clinical outcome to a sufficient degree to warrant a paradigm shift remains
limited (Zimmerman, 2021), and HiTOP-based research approaches continue to be criticized by
some for being atheoretical in nature, among other reasons (Haeffel et al., 2022; see DeYoung et
al., 2022 in response).
Limitations, Future Directions, and Conclusion
Several limitations and related future directions in addition to those already discussed are
important to consider. First, although NMD features consistently show non-specific, robust
associations with many other forms of psychopathology in child and adolescent samples
(Brandes et al., 2019), our demonstrative analyses focused on adult samples. It would have been
interesting to address these issues in other sample types, as there has been significant controversy
around the creation of NMD-based disorders such as disruptive mood dysregulation disorder that
are diagnosed in childhood (Evans et al., 2017).
Longitudinal research would be useful for understanding how NMD influences other
symptoms (and vice versa) and for testing different interpretations of spectra dimensions
possibly accounting for NMD’s overlaps with other forms of psychopathology (e.g., the p-factor
at the broadest level; the internalizing spectrum as a “liability” for experiencing negative mood
symptoms). Relatedly, longitudinal methods also could inform understanding of the extent to
which NMD trajectories are similar over time and across contexts for individuals with different
diagnoses. For example, some studies indicate potential differences on measures of dispositional
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 24
affective intensity and lability across diagnostic groups, such that expanding construct definitions
to emphasize specific NMD features may actually be useful for disorder differentiation (e.g.,
elevated emotional lability observed in the context of ADHD could help to distinguish ADHD
from other disorders; Vidal et al., 2014). In constrast, other research using ecological momentary
assessment methods indicates that mood experiences and regulation are similar overall across
ADHD and other disorders (Moukhtarian et al., 2021). Regarding other study design limitations,
all factor and external measure associations were monomethod (i.e., only self-ratings were used
in Sample 1; only interview ratings in Sample 2). Self-report assessment may have advantages
for assessing internal negative emotional experiences, and observational and informant methods
offer incremental information complementary to self-report, particularly when assessing outward
expressions of NMD (e.g., expressions of anger and frustration; Ali et al., 2022). Therefore,
integrating multiple assessment methods in addition to incorporating longitudinal designs would
be optimal for informing NMD conceptualizations and examining NMD’s specificity.
Acknowledging these future directions, our factor analytic and correlational demonstrations
highlight a need to be mindful of the non-specific nature of NMD when designing studies and
interpreting results. Assessing NMD in treatment planning and research studies provides key
information that would be costly to ignore. However, focusing heavily on NMD when assessing
different disorders and syndromes could negatively impact differential diagnosis and
discriminant validity, and study designs continue to vary substantially in the extent to which
NMD and related dimensions are studied as disorder-specific versus transdiagnostic. We hope
that our recommendations will be useful for guiding research design and data analysis when
studying NMD and other nonspecific psychopathology features.
FACTOR ANALYSIS AND NEGATIVE MOOD NONSPECIFICITY 25