Running head: EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION1
An efficient Bayesian observer model of attractive and repulsive temporal context effects when
perceiving multistable dot lattices
†,1 †,1 1
Eline Van Geert , Tina Ivancˇir , & Johan Wagemans
KU Leuven, Belgium Version 2.1, 20/02/2024. Please do not copy or cite without author’s
permission.
Author Note
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 2
Eline Van Geert (ORCID: 0000-0002-7848-5998), Laboratory of Experimental Psychology,
Department of Brain and Cognition, KU Leuven, Belgium; Tina Ivancˇir (ORCID:
0000-0001-9040-9130), Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Department of Brain and
Cognition, KU Leuven, Belgium; Johan Wagemans (ORCID: 0000-0002-7970-1541), Laboratory of
Experimental Psychology, Department of Brain and Cognition, KU Leuven, Belgium.
This work has been supported by a PhD fellowship from the Research Foundation -
Flanders (FWO) awarded to Eline Van Geert (Grant 11D3619N and 11D3621N) and by long-term
structural funding from the Flemish Government awarded to Johan Wagemans (METH/14/02
and METH/21/02).
The authors made the following contributions. Eline Van Geert: Conceptualization, Data
curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project
administration, Resources, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing -
review & editing; Tina Ivancˇir: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology,
Software, Visualization, Writing - review & editing; Johan Wagemans: Conceptualization,
Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing - review & editing. Eline Van Geert and Tina Ivancˇir
contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Eline Van Geert,
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, KU Leuven, Tiensestraat 102 - box 3711, 3000 Leuven.
Telephone: +32 16 37 34 80. E-mail: eline.vangeert@kuleuven.be
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 3
Abstract
In multistable dot lattices, the orientation we perceive is attracted towards the orientation we
perceived in the immediately preceding stimulus and repelled from the orientation for which
most evidence was present previously (Van Geert, Moors, Haaf, & Wagemans, 2022).
Theoretically-inspired models have been proposed to explain the co-occurrence of attractive
and repulsive context effects in multistable dot lattice tasks, but these models artificially
induced an influence of the previous trial on the current one without detailing the process
underlying such an influence (Gepshtein & Kubovy, 2005; Schwiedrzik et al., 2014). We
conducted a simulation study to test whether the observed attractive and repulsive context
effects could be explained with an efficient Bayesian observer model (Wei & Stocker, 2015). This
model assumes variable encoding precision of orientations in line with their frequency of
occurrence (i.e., efficient encoding) and takes the dissimilarity between stimulus space and
sensory space into account. An efficient Bayesian observer model including both a stimulus and
a perceptual level was needed to explain the co-occurrence of both attractive and repulsive
temporal context effects. Furthermore, this model could reproduce the empirically observed
strong positive correlation between individuals’ attractive and repulsive effects (Van Geert et al.,
2022), by assuming a positive correlation between temporal integration constants at the
stimulus and the perceptual level. To conclude, the study brings evidence that efficient encoding
and likelihood repulsion on the stimulus level can explain the repulsive context effect, whereas
perceptual prior attraction can explain the attractive temporal context effect when perceiving
multistable dot lattices.
Precis: An efficient Bayesian observer model including both a stimulus and a perceptual
level can explain repulsive temporal context effects in multistable dot lattice perception via
efficient encoding and likelihood repulsion, and attractive effects via perceptual prior attraction.
Keywords: efficient coding, hysteresis, adaptation, individual differences, perceptual
organization, multistable perception, serial dependencies, context effects, attraction, repulsion
Word count: 11971 words
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 4
An efficient Bayesian observer model of attractive and repulsive temporal context effects when
perceiving multistable dot lattices
What we perceive is not only influenced by the current stimulus we have in front of our
eyes, but also by the recent stimulus and perceptual history. Many recent studies have
confirmed the existence of both attractive and repulsive effects of immediate temporal context
on perception (Bosch, Fritsche, Ehinger, & de Lange, 2020; Fritsche, Spaak, & de Lange, 2020;
Pascucci et al., 2019; Sadil, Cowell, & Huber, 2021; Snyder, Schwiedrzik, Vitela, & Melloni, 2015;
Van Geert et al., 2022). Also in the perception of multistable dot lattices, both attractive and
repulsive context effects are at play (Gepshtein & Kubovy, 2005; Schwiedrzik et al., 2014; Van
Geert et al., 2022). On the one hand, the perceived orientation in these lattices is attracted
towards the orientation perceived in the immediately preceding lattice (i.e., hysteresis, attractive
effect of previous percept). On the other hand, the perceived orientation is repelled from the
orientation for which most evidence was present in the previous lattice (i.e., adaptation,
repulsive effect of previous stimulus evidence, Gepshtein & Kubovy, 2005; Schwiedrzik et al.,
2014; Van Geert et al., 2022).
Several theoretically-inspired models have been proposed to explain the co-occurrence of
these context effects when perceiving multistable stimuli (Gepshtein & Kubovy, 2005;
Schwiedrzik et al., 2014), but these models either artificially induce a direct influence of the
previous stimulus evidence on the likelihood distribution for the current stimulus (Schwiedrzik
et al., 2014) or induce a randomly determined shift in prior bias from the previous to the current
percept (Gepshtein & Kubovy, 2005). From these models, it is not clear why such a direct
influence would occur, or which underlying process would determine a random shift in bias. In
this simulation study, we investigate whether an efficient Bayesian observer model based on Wei
and Stocker (2015) can explain the co-occurrence of both attractive and repulsive temporal
context effects in multistable dot lattice perception. Earlier variants of the efficient Bayesian
observer model have successfully been used to model effects in different tasks involving
non-ambiguous stimuli (Fritsche et al., 2020; Langlois, Jacoby, Suchow, & Griffiths, 2021; Wei &
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 5
Stocker, 2015). In this study, we assess the viability of explaining temporal context effects on
multistable dot lattice perception using an efficient Bayesian observer model. As part of this
investigation, we test whether the model can not only successfully account for the average
temporal context effects observed in Van Geert et al. (2022), but also for the observed range and
strong positive correlation of interindividual variation in both effects.
Attractive and repulsive temporal context effects: separate but related mechanisms?
Whereas repulsive temporal context effects are often seen as resulting from the previous
stimulus evidence, attractive temporal context effects are seen as resulting from the previous
percept, response, and/or decision (Bosch et al., 2020; Sadil et al., 2021; Schwiedrzik et al., 2014;
Van Geert et al., 2022). This is often related to repulsion being a more ‘low-level’ phenomenon,
showing larger spatial and featural specificity than the ‘higher-level’ attraction (Fritsche et al.,
2020; Gepshtein & Kubovy, 2005; Schwiedrzik et al., 2014). Schwiedrzik et al. (2014) also found
both effects to map into distinct cortical networks. Although many researchers thus state that
attractive and repulsive effects result from separate processes (Brascamp et al., 2008; Fritsche et
al., 2020; Pascucci et al., 2019; Schwiedrzik et al., 2014), others argue that both effects share a
common underlying mechanism (Gepshtein & Kubovy, 2005; Mattar, Kahn, Thompson-Schill, &
Aguirre, 2016; Maus, Chaney, Liberman, & Whitney, 2013). As Van Geert et al. (2022) found a
strong positive correlation between the size of individuals’ hysteresis (i.e., attractive effect of
previous percept) and adaptation effects (i.e., repulsive effect of previous stimulus evidence),
there needs to be at least some common factor influencing both effects. On the other hand, the
results of Van Geert et al. (2022) did not bring evidence for a completely unified process
underlying both effects, as the correlation estimate (already corrected for attenuation) was only
from separate but related mechanisms, and in this simulation study an efficient Bayesian
observer model is put forward to model the processes underlying both context effects in a
theoretically coherent way.
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 6
Attractive and repulsive temporal context effects in multistable dot lattice perception
Gepshtein and Kubovy (2005) proposed a paradigm to distinguish between attractive and
repulsive context effects on perception. They investigated the influence of (a) the perceived
organization of the preceding stimulus (i.e., which organization was reported) and (b) the
stimulus support for a certain organization in the preceding stimulus (dependent on the
stimulus’ aspect ratio) on the perception of a second, current stimulus, using multistable dot
lattices as stimuli.
Multistable dot lattices are aligned dot arrays in which multiple orientations can be
perceived. In rectangular dot lattices, four different orientations can be perceived (cf. left part of
three equally plausible orientations are most prominent. According to the Gestalt law of
proximity (Kubovy, Holcombe, & Wagemans, 1998), the closer the dots are together along a
particular orientation, the more likely they will be grouped together, and consequently, the more
likely that orientation will be perceived. Relative grouping strength has been shown to decrease
exponentially in accordance with the relative inter-dot distance (Kubovy et al., 1998). For two
orientations a and b, the aspect ratio of a dot lattice (AR = |a|/|b|) expresses the a orientation’s
distance in the a and b orientations is equal. For a lattice with AR < 1, the inter-dot distance is
smaller in the a than in the b orientation. For a lattice with AR > 1, the inter-dot distance is
smaller in the b than in the a orientation. In both rectangular and hexagonal dot lattices, we
define the axis orientation of the dot lattice as a whole by the a orientation, which we will refer to
as the 0° orientation. In the rectangular dot lattices, we will refer to the b orientation as the 90°
orientation.
The multistable dot lattice paradigm introduced by Gepshtein and Kubovy (2005) to
concurrently assess attractive and repulsive immediate temporal context effects on perception
with randomly varying absolute lattice orientation as context stimuli (presented for 800 ms) and
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 7
of a multistable rectangular dot lattice. In rectangular dot lattices, four different orientations can be perceived, of which two are more prevalent
(as the dots are closer together along these orientations). The relative dominance of the a orientation relative to the b orientation is expressed
in the aspect ratio of the dot lattice (AR = |a| / |b|). (c) Illustration of attractive and repulsive context effects in dot lattices. Left side: attraction
effect (hysteresis). When the first lattice (L1) is perceived as orientation a (indicated by “a”), the probability that the second lattice (L2) will be
perceived as orientation a is higher than when L1 was interpreted as orientation b (indicated by “b”). Right side: repulsion effect (adaptation).
When strong support for orientation a is present in L1, the probability that L2 will be perceived as a orientation a is lower than when L1 had less
white background. The actual experiment had white dots on a grey background. (e) Mean empirical logit probability of perceiving the relative 0°
orientation in the first and the second lattice dependent on aspect ratio. The probability of responding 0° to the first lattice decreases with aspect
ratio (|a|/|b|). The value of aspect ratio increases with increasing distance in the 0°-orientation, leading to more 90° responses. The probability of
responding 0° to the second lattice increases with aspect ratio (|a|/|b|; i.e., adaptation effect), and increases when the first stimulus was perceived
as 0° rather than 90° (i.e., hysteresis effect). Reprinted and adapted from Van Geert et al. (2022).
more ambiguous hexagonal dot lattices with the same random absolute lattice orientation as
test stimuli (presented for 300 ms). Participants indicated which orientation they perceived in
each lattice using a four-alternative forced-choice task (always including the most dominant
orientations). To manipulate the stimulus support for the 0° orientation, the aspect ratio of the
rectangular dot lattice was varied. They then assessed how (a) perceived orientation and (b)
aspect ratio in the first, rectangular lattice affected perceived orientation in the second,
hexagonal lattice. An attractive (i.e., hysteresis) effect of the previous percept was present, as
well as a repulsive (i.e., adaptation) effect of the previous stimulus evidence: the probability of
perceiving a particular orientation in the second lattice increased when the same orientation
was perceived in the first lattice, and the stronger the evidence for a specific orientation in the
first lattice, the lower the probability to perceive that orientation in the second lattice
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 8
(2005) and Schwiedrzik et al. (2014) mainly explored the existence of these effects on the group
level, Van Geert et al. (2022) tested whether individual differences existed in the size of these
effects, and whether every individual participant showed both effects in the expected direction.
The results confirmed the presence of large, consistent differences in the size of attractive and
repulsive context effects across individuals , and these differences stayed stable across one to
two weeks time. Furthermore, almost every participant showed both effects in the expected
direction, although not every single participant did. As indicated above, the results of Van Geert
et al. (2022) provided evidence for at least some common factor underlying both effects, as
individual differences in attractive and repulsive context effects were highly positively correlated
partially percept-related and a partially decision-related effect, nuancing earlier debates on the
origin of this effect (Bosch et al., 2020; Cicchini, Mikellidou, & Burr, 2017; Fritsche, Mostert, & de
Lange, 2017; Manassi, Liberman, Kosovicheva, Zhang, & Whitney, 2018; Pascucci et al., 2019;
Schwiedrzik et al., 2018).
Now that the existence of both temporal context effects on multistable dot lattice
perception has been firmly established, including consistent variation in the size of the effects
across individuals, one way forward is to further our understanding of the processes underlying
these effects by developing models and verifying whether they can reproduce and explain the
range of variability in effect size and direction across individuals. Importantly, a good process
model should not only be able to predict a mean response, but also plausible variation in the
effect size and direction (Van Geert et al., 2022).
Models of temporal context effects on multistable dot lattice perception
Two earlier models of the multistable dot lattice paradigm for hysteresis and adaptation
exist (Gepshtein & Kubovy, 2005; Schwiedrzik et al., 2014). In the model of Gepshtein and
Kubovy (2005), combinations of attraction strengths (related to inter-dot distances in the first,
rectangular lattice and sensitivity to the inter-dot distance) and a randomly determined
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 9
persistent intrinsic bias (i.e., a higher probability to perceive some orientation more than others,
which stays similar but not identical from first to second lattice) determine the perceived
orientation in the second, hexagonal lattice. When the intrinsic bias exceeds the stimulus
support (i.e., attraction strength), the multistable lattice is perceived inconsistently with the
stimulus support. In this model, the direction of the intrinsic bias is determined randomly, and
it is not clear where the bias comes from or which process determines the direction of the bias.
Schwiedrzik et al. (2014) developed a Bayesian model to account for the co-occurrence of
hysteresis and adaptation in multistable dot lattice perception. They model both effects
independently, with the perceived orientation in the first lattice directly impacting the prior
distribution of possible perceived orientations for the second lattice, and the reduction in
stimulus support due to neuronal adaptation to the aspect ratio of the first lattice directly
impacting the likelihood distribution for the second lattice. In this model, the process behind
the direct change in the likelihood is not included and its size is determined arbitrarily.
Based on the model by Wei and Stocker (2015), we propose an alternative Bayesian model
that can explain the co-occurrence of hysteresis and adaptation as separate but related
processes influencing multistable dot lattice perception. A similar model has been applied by
Fritsche et al. (2020) to explain attractive and repulsive stimulus history effects in orientation
perception. They did look at the influence of previous stimuli and went more than one stimulus
back, but did not distinguish between effects of previous percepts and previous stimulus
evidence, and only used non-ambiguous Gabor stimuli.
Efficient Bayesian observer models of perception
A key assumption of an efficient Bayesian observer model is that available coding
resources are limited, and that those feature values that occur more frequently will be more
accurately encoded or represented (i.e., the principle of efficient coding, Wei & Stocker, 2015). In
case of orientation perception, this variable encoding precision will thus lead to frequent
orientations being encoded more accurately than less frequent orientations. A second key
feature of the model is that it takes the dissimilarity between stimulus space and sensory space
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 10
into account (as in psychophysics). This leads to differential predictions of adding external
stimulus noise, that is, noise related to uncertainty in a specific stimulus feature (e.g., variance in
orientation) or internal sensory noise, that is, noise related to uncertainty in encoding and
processing (e.g., due to presentation duration, stimulus size, or luminance contrast). Whereas
external stimulus noise will only widen the likelihood distribution and increase the overall
influence of the prior (leading to stronger prior attraction, ‘Bayesian’ percepts), internal sensory
noise symmetric around the stimulus value in sensory space will make the likelihood
distribution asymmetric in stimulus space and hence create the possibility for biases away from
the peak of the prior distribution (i.e., likelihood repulsion, ‘anti-Bayesian’ percepts, Wei &
Stocker, 2015). The relative amount of stimulus versus sensory noise will determine which effect
will show behaviorally (i.e., attraction or repulsion).
More concretely, frequency of occurrence will jointly influence prior and likelihood in the
model. It influences the prior distribution directly: more frequently occurring orientations are
also expected to occur more often. However, frequency of occurrence also influences the
mapping between stimulus and sensory space: it influences the accuracy with which different
orientations will be encoded, and consequently also the width and form with which different
orientations will be represented in the likelihood. In other words, the frequency of occurrence
will determine the prior distribution as well as how the currently encountered stimulus will be
encoded. The stimulus-to-sensory mapping is given by the cumulative density function of the
encoding accuracy distribution, and the sensory-to-stimulus mapping is given by the inverse of
that cumulative density function.
In the original model, frequency of occurrence was seen on the long term. For example, in
most daily environments, cardinal orientations are more prevalent than oblique ones (Coppola,
Purves, McCoy, & Purves, 1998; Girshick, Landy, & Simoncelli, 2011). In later versions of the
model, however, it has been shown that frequency of occurrence can also be defined on the
short term, e.g., with the frequency of occurrence changing during the experiment (Fritsche et
al., 2020; Ni & Stocker, 2023; Noel, Zhang, Stocker, & Angelaki, 2021). For example, Ni and
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 11
Stocker (2023) demonstrated that robust averaging (i.e., the non-uniform weighting of items in a
stimulus ensemble) emerged naturally from an optimal integration process when sensory
encoding (and thus the stimulus-to-sensory mapping) was efficiently adapted to the ensemble
statistics in the experiment. Their model accurately predicted the dependence of subjects’
decision accuracy and non-uniform weighting profile on the specific stimulus distribution in the
experiments. Furthermore, Noel et al. (2021) showed that neurotypical participants adapted
their sensory encoding to the changing stimulus statistics when they were exposed to an
artificial uniform orientation distribution coupled with performance feedback in a visual
orientation estimation task. Changes in the frequency of occurrence on the short term may thus
be used to model short-term temporal context effects on perception.
Fritsche et al. (2020) modeled attractive and repulsive biases of stimulus history using an
efficient Bayesian observer model. In this model, they did not disentangle effects of previous
stimuli and previous percepts, but treated all effects as related to the previous stimulus evidence.
In the empirical study they conducted, they found evidence for short-term attraction and
long-term repulsion. When fitting different models to the empirically collected data, a model
with distinct transition distributions and different integration time constants for prior and
likelihood performed better than a model that used the same parameters for prior and
likelihood. In the prior distribution, only the most recently presented stimuli mattered, and
updating was fast. In the likelihood distribution, information was integrated over longer
timescales, and updates happened more slowly.
In a recent extension of the original model proposed by Wei and Stocker (2015), Mao and
Stocker (2022) described perception as a holistic inference process, where the percept of a
stimulus is jointly represented at different levels of a representational hierarchy. To adequately
model the (variation in) behavioral data of an earlier study (Tomassini, Morgan, & Solomon,
2010), it was necessary to take the higher-level representation into account (i.e., categorization
of orientation in this case).
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 12
An efficient Bayesian observer model for temporal context effects on multistable dot lattice
perception
In this study, we develop an efficient Bayesian observer model for the multistable dot
lattices paradigm used by Gepshtein and Kubovy (2005), Schwiedrzik et al. (2014), and Van Geert
the proposed model). In addition, we investigate how several versions of the model compare to
the empirical results obtained by Van Geert et al. (2022). More specifically, we test whether
model implementations can explain co-occurring attractive and repulsive context effects, as well
as a range of plausible variation in effect size and direction across ‘individuals’ (in this case
across simulations with different parameter values). Furthermore, we test whether the model
can reproduce a positive correlation between the size of both effects, as was empirically
observed in Van Geert et al. (2022).
Different from the original Wei and Stocker (2015) model, we will not only implement a
long-term orientation prior (at least in some variants of the model), but also take the short-term
context into account: the prior and stimulus-to-sensory mapping for the second lattice will be
updated based on the stimulus evidence present for and the percept of the first lattice. In line
with the earlier efficient Bayesian observer models that take short-term context into account, we
assume an influence of the stimulus history (i.e., the frequency of occurrence of different
stimulus orientations) on the stimulus-to-sensory mapping and consequently the likelihood
distribution. In contrast to earlier efficient Bayesian observer models, however, we will argue
that it is the perceptual history (i.e., the frequency of occurrence of different perceived
orientations) rather than the stimulus history that determines the prior distribution. Different
from the implementation by Fritsche et al. (2020), the model will distinguish attractive
influences of the previous percept and repulsive influences of the previous stimulus evidence.
Given that a mask was present in the dot lattice paradigm to avoid longer-term context effects,
we only take the previous lattice into account and do not model longer-term context influences
(different from what was the case in Fritsche et al., 2020). Furthermore, the dot lattice paradigm
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 13
concerns multistable stimuli resulting in multi-peaked likelihood distributions, whereas
previous implementations of the efficient Bayesian observer model focused on non-ambiguous
stimuli (e.g., Fritsche et al., 2020; Wei & Stocker, 2015). In sum, our model builds on earlier
models but makes at least three innovative contributions.
κ κ κ κ κ
uniform prior for the first lattice and the following parameter values: c = 5, = 20, = 20, = 20, = 18, = 10,
stim stimL1 sensL1 stimL2 sensL2 percL1
w = 0.60, and w = 0.50.
stimL1 percL1
Methods
Efficient Bayesian observer model
In this study, we model the perception of two consecutive dot lattices within one trial of
the paradigm. All model simulations were performed in R [Version 4.0.4; R Core Team (2021)].
All code related to this paper is openly available on the Open Science Framework:
code for the models is already publicly shared at this point, further analysis and manuscript
code is currently available on request but will be shared publicly once reaching a finalized
version of the manuscript after peer review.]
The first lattice is a rectangular dot lattice with varying aspect ratio across trials, the second
a hexagonal dot lattice with three equally dominant orientations. First, we develop the model for
For an overview of all R packages used, see the Appendix.
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 14
the percept of the first lattice. Then, we update the prior and stimulus-to-sensory mapping to
predict hysteresis and adaptation effects in the perception of the second lattice. Different from
earlier efficient Bayesian observer models, which assume the actual frequency of occurrence of
different stimulus values (i.e., the stimulus history) to influence both the prior and the likelihood
in the model, we assume the stimulus history to influence the stimulus-to-sensory mapping and
the likelihood, but the perceptual history (i.e., the history of how earlier presented stimuli were
actually perceived) to influence the prior distribution (i.e., the belief of the observer). When the
history contains only non-ambiguous stimuli, stimulus history and perceptual history will
approximately align, and ignoring this distinction remains without consequences. We will, for
example, assume stimulus history and perceptual history to be similar when we determine the
percept of the first lattice in each trial. However, when the history contains multistable stimuli,
for example, when determining the percept of the second lattice, this distinction between
stimulus history and perceptual history becomes evident and consequential. As will be shown
below, a version of the model that used the stimulus history to influence both prior and
likelihood could explain the occurrence of adaptation, but not the occurrence of the hysteresis
effect. In contrast, the current version of the model, which assumes the stimulus history to
influence the likelihood and the perceptual history to influence the prior, is able to predict both
co-occurring temporal context effects. The adaptation effect will be due to efficient encoding
and likelihood repulsion on the stimulus level, the hysteresis effect will be due to prior attraction
on the perceptual level. Therefore, we will describe this model as hierarchical. The size of the
adaptation effect will depend on the relative amount of stimulus noise and sensory noise
present, but the size of both context effects will depend mostly on the weights given to the
stimulus evidence and percept in the previous trial compared to the long-term context.
Perception of the first lattice. We first model how an observer comes to perceive either
the relative 0° or the relative 90° orientation in the first lattice. Over trials, both the aspect ratio
and the absolute orientation of the lattice are varied. The distribution of absolute lattice
orientations in the experiment is uniform, but the long-term natural stimulus distribution of
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 15
orientations has peaks at both cardinal orientations. As in earlier Bayesian encoding models, we
assume encoding resources to be allocated according to the stimulus distribution (uniform in
the experiment or with peaks at the cardinals in the long term) so that stimulus values that occur
more frequently are more accurately represented. Two types of noise are assumed: external
stimulus noise and internal sensory noise. The external stimulus noise (symmetric in stimulus
space) is assumed to follow a von Mises (i.e., circular normal) distribution on the 180° (i.e.,
halfcircular) orientation space with its mean at the actual stimulus orientation value in question
and its precision being equal to . The internal sensory noise (symmetric in sensory space)
328 stimL1
is expected to follow a von Mises (i.e., circular normal) distribution on the 180° (i.e., halfcircular)
orientation space with its mean at the sensory measurement for the actual stimulus orientation
in question (based on the stimulus-to-sensory mapping, derived from the cumulative density
function for the prior distribution) and its precision being equal to . The described
332 sensL1
stimulus and sensory noise are jointly reflected in the noise of the observer’s representation of
the stimulus orientation. The observer’s representation of the stimulus orientation (subject to
the stimulus noise and sensory noise described above) is expected to be bimodal, with peaks at
the relative 0° and the relative 90° orientation. The relative height of the peaks at the relative 0°
and the relative 90° orientation will depend on the aspect ratio of the stimulus and the observer’s
sensitivity for aspect ratio. This bimodal distribution represents the likelihood, and is combined
with the prior distribution (either uniform in stimulus space or with peaks at the cardinal
orientations) to compute the posterior distribution for the first lattice. From the posterior
distribution, either a relative 0° or a relative 90° percept can be sampled with the probabilities
depending on the relative probability of perceiving one versus the other orientation.
Prior distribution for the first lattice. In the prior distribution for the first lattice, the
long-term perceptual distribution for orientation is represented. For this first lattice, we assume
In most figures we show the results based on internal sensory noise distributions with their means at the expected
sensory measurements (i.e., the relative 0° and relative 90° orientations). However, we also simulated a model with
sensory measurements sampled from the probability distribution of sensory measurements given the actual
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 16
the long-term perceptual distribution for orientation to be equal to the long-term stimulus
distribution for orientation. We try two variants of the prior. In a first variant, we use the same
natural stimulus distribution as in Wei and Stocker (2015):
θ = − | θ |
p( ) c (2 si n(2 ) ) , (1)
θ ∈ π
348 0
distribution reflects the fact that horizontal and vertical orientations are more common in the
natural environment than oblique orientations. On the other hand, within the dot lattice
paradigm the long-term stimulus distribution is uniform: every absolute lattice orientation
occurs equally frequently. Therefore, we implemented a second variant of the model, with a
uniform prior distribution for the first lattice:
θ =
p( ) (2)
stimulus-to-sensory mapping that is used in the calculation of the likelihood distribution for the
first lattice.
Likelihood function for the first lattice. Given that the first dot lattice is rectangular, it
has two dominant orientations, of which the relative dominance is dependent on the aspect
ratio (AR) of the lattice and the observer’s sensitivity to aspect ratio. Here we assume the
observer’s representation of the first lattice to be a weighted combination of the expected
sensory measurement for the 0° orientation and the expected sensory measurement for the 90°
orientation. In case AR = 1, we expect the stimulus support to be equal for both orientations,
̸=
which will be represented by an equal weight for both likelihood functions. In case AR 1, one
of the two sensory measurements will have a stronger representation in the combined likelihood
likelihoods for both sensory measurements (i.e., the expected sensory measurements for the
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 17
relative 0° and the relative 90° orientation) in a weighted fashion:
1 w
AR
|θ ∝ |θ · + |θ ·
p(m ) p(m ) p(m ) , (3)
L1 0 90
+ +
1 w 1 w
AR AR
|θ
with p(m ) being the single-peaked likelihood of the sensory measurement for the relative 0°
368 0
|θ
orientation, p(m ) being the single-peaked likelihood of the sensory measurement for the
369 90
c_stim
relative 90° orientation, and w being equal to AR . The size of the aspect ratio effect on
370 AR
the relative height of the 0° and 90° peaks is thus determined by a constant (i.e., c ),
371 stim
representing the observer’s sensitivity to aspect ratio. Each sensory measurement m is modeled
as
= θ + δ + δ
m F ( ) , (4)
stim sens
δ δ
with representing the stimulus noise (added in stimulus space), the sensory noise
374 stim sens
(added in sensory space), being the absolute orientation of the stimulus, and the
transformation F being the cumulative distribution of the prior p( ), which determines the
θ |θ
stimulus-to-sensory mapping (Wei & Stocker, 2015). For each stimulus orientation , p(m )
377 i i
can be computed according to (4) and the specific noise distributions. Both single-peaked
|θ |θ
likelihood functions, i.e., p(m ) for m and p(m ) for m , are generated with the same
379 0 0 90 90
level of stimulus noise (inversely represented in the model as stimulus precision: ) and
380 stimL1
the same level of sensory noise (included in the model as sensory precision: ). As
381 sensL1
described above, the external stimulus noise (symmetric in stimulus space) is assumed to follow
a von Mises (i.e., circular normal) distribution on the 180° (i.e., halfcircular) orientation space
with its mean at the actual stimulus orientation value in question and its precision being equal
to . The internal sensory noise (symmetric in sensory space) is expected to follow a von
385 stimL1
Mises (i.e., circular normal) distribution on the 180° (i.e., halfcircular) orientation space with its
mean at the expected sensory measurement for the actual stimulus orientation value in
question (based on the stimulus-to-sensory mapping, derived from the cumulative density
function for the prior distribution) and its precision being equal to . For
389 sensL1
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 18
implementational details on the computation of the likelihood, we refer the interested reader to
the model code, which is publicly available on OSF.
Posterior distribution and percept for the first lattice. To arrive at the posterior
likelihood are combined:
θ| ∝ θ · |θ
p( m ) p( ) p(m ) . (5)
L1 L1
From this posterior distribution, the probability of perceiving the relative 0° or 90° orientation
can directly be deduced, e.g., for the relative 0° orientation:
θ = |
p( 0 m )
◦ L1
θˆ = =
p( 0 ) . (6)
L1
θ = ◦| + θ = ◦|
p( 0 m ) p( 90 m )
L1 L1
In case one wants to derive perceptual responses, one of the two dominant orientations can be
sampled with the relative posterior probability at these orientations.
.04 absolute absolute
0° 90°
.03
.02
.01
.00
−45° 0° 45° 90° 135°
relative orientation in stimulus space
ytilibaborp
a PRIOR 1
.04 absolute absolute
0° 90°
.03
.02
.01
.00
−45° 0° 45° 90° 135°
relative orientation in stimulus space
ytilibaborp
b LIKELIHOOD 1
.04 absolute absolute
0° 90°
.03
.02
.00
−45° 0° 45° 90° 135°
relative orientation in stimulus space
ytilibaborp
c POSTERIOR 1
absolute lattice orientation of 23° and AR = 1.3ˆ-1, which favors the relative 0° orientation. (c) Posterior distribution for the first lattice. Based on
the difference in height of the peaks for the relative 0° and 90° orientation, i.e., p(0°) and p(90°), the probability of a 0° or 90° response can be
determined. Note. The red vertical lines in the graph are placed at the two dominant relative 0° and 90° orientations in the lattice. The black
vertical lines label the absolute 0° and 90° orientations.
Perception of the second lattice. We model how an observer comes to perceive either
the relative 0° , the relative 60° or the relative 120° orientation in the second lattice. Over trials,
both the aspect ratio of the preceding first lattice and the absolute orientation of the lattices
(same for first and second lattice) are varied. The distribution of absolute lattice orientations in
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 19
the experiment is uniform, but the long-term natural stimulus distribution of orientations has
peaks at both cardinal orientations. As in earlier Bayesian encoding models, we assume
encoding resources to be allocated according to the stimulus distribution (uniform in the
experiment or with peaks at the cardinals in the long term) so that stimulus values that occur
more frequently are more accurately represented. Two types of noise are assumed: external
stimulus noise and internal sensory noise. The external stimulus noise (symmetric in stimulus
space) is assumed to follow a von Mises (i.e., circular normal) distribution on the 180° (i.e.,
halfcircular) orientation space with its mean at the actual stimulus orientation value in question
and its precision being equal to . The internal sensory noise (symmetric in sensory space)
411 stimL1
is expected to follow a von Mises (i.e., circular normal) distribution on the 180° (i.e., halfcircular)
orientation space with its mean at the expected sensory measurement for the actual stimulus
orientation value in question (based on the stimulus-to-sensory mapping, derived from the
cumulative density function for the prior distribution) and its precision being equal to .
415 sensL1
The described stimulus and sensory noise are jointly reflected in the noise of the observer’s
representation of the stimulus orientation. The observer’s representation of the stimulus
orientation (subject to the stimulus noise and sensory noise described above) is expected to be
multimodal, with peaks at the relative 0° , relative 60° and relative 120° orientation. This
multimodal distribution (with equal weighting for each of the three distributions) represents the
likelihood, and is combined with a prior distribution to compute the posterior distribution for
the second lattice. The prior distribution for the second lattice is a perceptual prior distribution,
defined as a weighted combination of the prior distribution for the first lattice, indicating the
long-term frequency of occurrence (i.e., uniform distribution or with peaks at the cardinals), and
the recent perceptual history (i.e., a von Mises distribution with a precision of and its
425 percL1
mean at the perceived orientation for the first lattice). From the posterior distribution, either a
relative 0°, relative 60°, or relative 120° percept can be sampled with the probabilities depending
on the relative probability of perceiving each of the three orientations.
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 20
Prior distribution for the second lattice. In the current version of the model, we assume
two different frequency distributions: a stimulus frequency distribution affecting the
stimulus-to-sensory mapping and a perceptual frequency distribution used in combination with
the likelihood to form the posterior distribution. A version of the model that used the stimulus
frequency distribution for both the stimulus-to-sensory mapping and the prior distribution
could explain the occurrence of adaptation, but not the occurrence of the hysteresis effect.
The stimulus frequency distribution determines the stimulus-to-sensory mapping for the
defined as a weighted mixture between the posterior for the first lattice (representing short-term
context influences based on the stimulus evidence present) and the prior for the first lattice
(representing longer-term context influences of the natural stimulus distribution; both a prior
peaking at the cardinals and a uniform prior are tested, cf. above). If the weight of the posterior
compared to that of the prior is increased (i.e., higher w ), the stimulus prior will update
441 stimL1
more heavily based on the immediate stimulus history.
θ ∝ θ · − + θ| ·
p( ) p( ) (1 w ) p( m ) w (7)
L2stim L1 stimL1 L1 stimL1
The perceptual frequency distribution determines the prior for the second lattice. The
mixture between the prior for the first lattice (representing longer-term perceptual context; both
a prior peaking at the cardinals and a uniform prior are tested, cf. above) and a single-peaked
von Mises distribution around the perceived orientation of the first lattice. If the weight of the
single-peaked von Mises distribution compared to that of the long-term perceptual frequency
distribution is increased (i.e., higher w ), the perceptual prior will update more heavily
449 percL1
based on the immediate perceptual history. Different from the stimulus frequency distribution,
the perceptual prior thus includes direct information about the percept/decision/response
concerning the first lattice. We assume the precision of the single-peaked von Mises distribution
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 21
part of the perceptual prior (i.e., ) to be smaller than the stimulus or sensory precision for
453 percL1
the second lattice (given that the percept for the first lattice is not visually present, this creates
the possibility for more noise than for the second lattice which is visually present).
θ ∝ θ · − + θˆ κ ·
p( ) p( ) (1 w ) semi ci r cul ar von M i se s( , ) w (8)
L2per c L1 per cL1 L1 per cL1 per cL1
Likelihood distribution for the second lattice. Given that the second dot lattice is
hexagonal, it has three equally dominant orientations. Therefore, we assume the observer’s
representation of the second lattice to be a combination of the sensory measurements for the 0°,
60°, and 120° orientations, with equal weight for all three sensory measurements. To arrive at a
measurements (i.e., the sensory measurements for the relative 0°, 60°, and 120° orientation) with
equal weights:
1 1 1
|θ ∝ |θ · + |θ · + |θ ·
p(m ) p(m ) p(m ) p(m ) , (9)
L2 0 60 120
3 3 3
|θ |θ |θ
with p(m ), p(m ), and p(m ) being the single-peaked likelihoods of the sensory
463 0 60 120
measurements for the relative 0°, 60°, and 120° orientation. As for the first lattice, each sensory
measurement m is modeled as in (4), using the cumulative distribution of the stimulus prior (7)
θ |θ
to determine the stimulus-to-sensory mapping. For each stimulus orientation , p(m ) can
466 i i
be computed according to (4) and the specific noise distributions. Each single-peaked likelihood
function is generated with the same level of stimulus noise (inversely represented in the model
as stimulus precision: ) and the same level of sensory noise (included in the model as
469 stimL2
sensory precision: ). As described above, the external stimulus noise (symmetric in
470 sensL2
stimulus space) is assumed to follow a von Mises (i.e., circular normal) distribution on the 180°
(i.e., halfcircular) orientation space with its mean at the actual stimulus orientation value in
question and its precision being equal to . The internal sensory noise (symmetric in
473 stimL2
sensory space) is expected to follow a von Mises (i.e., circular normal) distribution on the 180°
(i.e., halfcircular) orientation space with its mean at the expected sensory measurement for the
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 22
actual stimulus orientation value in question (based on the stimulus-to-sensory mapping,
derived from the cumulative density function for the prior distribution) and its precision being
equal to . Given that the second lattice was presented more briefly than the first lattice
478 sensL2
(300 ms vs 800 ms), we assume the sensory precision for the second lattice to be lower than the
precision for the first lattice. For implementational details on the computation of the likelihood,
we refer the reader to the model code, which is publicly available on OSF.
Posterior distribution and percept for the second lattice. To arrive at the posterior
perceptual prior distribution and the likelihood distribution are combined:
θ| ∝ θ · |θ
p( m ) p( ) p(m ) . (10)
L2 L2per c L2
From this posterior distribution, the probability of perceiving the relative 0°, 60°, or 120°
orientations can directly be deduced, e.g., for the relative 0° orientation:
θ = |
p( 0 m )
◦ L2
θˆ = =
p( 0 ) . (11)
L2
θ = ◦| + θ = ◦| + θ = ◦|
p( 0 m ) p( 60 m ) p( 120 m )
L2 L2 L2
In case one wants to derive perceptual responses, one of the three dominant orientations can be
sampled with the relative posterior probability at these orientations.
.03 absolute absolute
0° 90°
.02
.01
.00
−45° 0° 45° 90° 135°
relative orientation in stimulus space
ytilibaborp
a STIMULUS PRIOR 2
.03 absolute absolute
0° 90°
.02
.01
.00
−45° 0° 45° 90° 135°
relative orientation in stimulus space
ytilibaborp
b PERCEPTUAL PRIOR 2
.03 absolute absolute
0° 90°
.02
.01
.00
−45° 0° 45° 90° 135°
relative orientation in stimulus space
ytilibaborp
c LIKELIHOOD 2
.03 absolute absolute
0° 90°
.02
.01
.00
−45° 0° 45° 90° 135°
relative orientation in stimulus space
ytilibaborp
d POSTERIOR 2
for the second lattice, given the relative 0° orientation was perceived in the first lattice. (c) Likelihood distribution defined in the stimulus space
for the second lattice. This distribution is influenced by the stimulus prior for the second lattice (and hence the aspect ratio of the first lattice) via
the stimulus-to-sensory mapping. (d) Posterior distribution for the second lattice, combining perceptual prior and likelihood for the second
lattice. Based on the difference in height of the peaks for the relative 0°, 60°, and 120° orientation, the probability of a 0°, 60°, or 120° response can
be determined. Note. The red vertical lines in the graph are placed at the three dominant relative 0°, 60°, and 120° orientations in the lattice. The
black vertical lines label the absolute 0° and 90° orientations.
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 23
Free parameters in efficient Bayesian observer model
c influences the strength of the effect of aspect ratio on the relative difference in height
490 stim
between the 0° and 90° peaks in the likelihood distribution for the first lattice. When c is
491 stim
increased, aspect ratio more heavily influences the difference in height for the 0° and the 90°
peak in the likelihood distribution for the first lattice.
κ κ
(i.e., stimulus precision for the first rectangular lattice) and (i.e., stimulus
494 stimL1 stimL2
precision for the second hexagonal lattice) influence the general precision of the likelihood
peaks for the first and the second lattice, respectively. Stimulus precision does not alter the
asymmetry of the likelihood distributions in stimulus space. When is decreased, lower
497 stim
stimulus precision or, in other words, more external stimulus noise is present.
κ κ
(i.e., sensory precision for the first lattice) and (i.e., sensory precision for the
499 sensL1 sensL2
second lattice) influence the asymmetry of the likelihood distributions for the first and the
second lattice (in stimulus space), respectively. When is decreased, lower sensory precision
501 sens
or thus more internal sensory noise is present. Given the difference in presentation time (i.e., 800
κ κ
ms for the first and 300 ms for the second lattice), we assume to be higher than .
503 sensL1 sensL2
w (i.e., the weight of the posterior of the first lattice on the stimulus prior for the
504 stimL1
second lattice) determines the relative influence of the short-term effect of the first lattice on the
stimulus prior for the second lattice compared to the influence of the long-term natural
stimulus distribution.
w (i.e., the weight of the percept of the first lattice on the perceptual prior for the
508 percL1
second lattice) determines the relative influence of the percept of the first lattice on the
perceptual prior for the second lattice compared to a uniform distribution.
(i.e., the precision of the peak for the percept of the first lattice) reflects the
511 percL1
precision of the von Mises distribution used in determining the perceptual prior for the second
lattice.
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 24
Model calculations and analyses
To investigate the effect of different model choices and parameters, we calculated the
probabilities of perceiving the relative 0° orientation in the first and the second lattice for
different versions of the general model described above. For each version of the model that we
investigated, we calculated the probabilities for each possible trial, with the trial defined by a
combination of the aspect ratio of the first lattice (i.e., 1.3ˆ-1, 1.2ˆ-1, 1.1ˆ-1, 1.0, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3), and
the percept of the first lattice (i.e., relative 0° or relative 90° orientation). When using a
non-uniform natural stimulus distribution in the prior for the first lattice, we also calculated the
probabilities for each absolute lattice orientation (i.e., from 1° to 180° in steps of 1°).
Our first aim was to find a model and parameter combination that matched well with the
average behavioral results found in Van Geert et al. (2022). Once this model version and
parameter values was found, we manipulated each of the model parameters separately to
investigate their effect on the expected probabilities of perceiving the relative 0° orientation in
the first and the second lattice.
Our second aim was to introduce variation in some of the parameter values, to
approximate the interindividual variation in effect size and direction found in the behavioral
data for the dot lattices paradigm (Van Geert et al., 2022). We varied (a) the constant influencing
the relation between aspect ratio and differential height of the 0° and 90° peak in the likelihood
for the first lattice (c ), (b) the weight of the posterior of the first lattice on the stimulus prior
532 stim
for the second lattice (w ), and (c) the weight of the percept of the first lattice on the
533 stimL1
perceptual prior for the second lattice (w ). To investigate whether we could reproduce the
534 percL1
strong positive correlation between individuals’ hysteresis and adaptation effects found in Van
Geert et al. (2022), we drew 75 individual parameter combinations for c , w , and w
536 stim stimL1 percL1
from a truncated multivariate normal distribution with means 5, 6.5, 5, a lower boundary of zero
for all three parameters, an upper boundary of 10 for w and w , and the following
538 stimL1 percL1
When using a uniform prior distribution for the first lattice, the absolute lattice orientation does not influence the
posterior probabilities for the first or the second lattice.
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 25
 
25 0 0
 
 
 
variance-covariance matrix: . The w and w parameters were then
0 9 8.95
539   stimL1 percL1
 
 
0 8.95 9
rescaled with a maximum of one instead of ten to match the zero-to-one range. We then
calculated the probabilities of perceiving the relative 0° orientation in the first and the second
lattice for all 75 parameter combinations and calculated the expected frequencies of each
response given those probabilities.
To compare the variation in hysteresis and adaptation effects in the models to the
variation in the behavioral results from Van Geert et al. (2022), and also to compare the observed
correlation between individual hysteresis and adaptation effects, we conducted similar Bayesian
analyses as in Van Geert et al. (2022) to the simulated data. More specifically, we estimated
individual hysteresis and adaptation effects using a Bayesian multilevel binomial regression
model predicting the percept of the second lattice, with aspect ratio of the first lattice (AR) and
the percept of the first lattice (R10) as fixed and random effects. To estimate the direct proximity
effect, we used a Bayesian multilevel binomial regression model predicting the percept of the
first lattice, with aspect ratio of the first lattice (AR) as fixed and random effect. For more details
on these Bayesian analyses, please consult the Appendix as well as Van Geert et al. (2022).
Results
Approximation of average attractive and repulsive temporal context effects
After exploration of several parameter combinations, we were able to approximate the
κ κ κ κ κ
values: c = 5, = 20, = 20, = 20, = 18, = 10, w = 0.60,
559 stim stimL1 sensL1 stimL2 sensL2 percL1 stimL1
and w = 0.50. Whether a uniform prior distribution or a natural stimulus distribution was
560 percL1
used as prior for the first lattice did not visibly influence the results. Given the considerable
number of parameters, other parameter combinations could give results similar to the one
proposed here. Therefore, we provide an online Shiny application in which the user can play
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 26
with the different parameter values to test their effects, both on the trial and on the experiment
−1
−2
- - -
1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
])°0
1r(
[tigol
Full model
−1
−2
−3
- - -
1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
−1
−2
- - -
1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
r1 = 0°
r1 = 90°
])°0
1r(
[tigol
No perceptual prior
−1
−2
−3
- - -
1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
−1
−2
- - -
1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
r1 = 0°
r1 = 90°
])°0
1r(
[tigol
No efficient coding
−1
−2
−3
- - -
1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
r1 = 0°
r1 = 90°
κ κ
efficient Bayesian observer model with a flat prior distribution for the first lattice and the following parameters: c = 5, = 20, =
stim stimL1 sensL1
κ κ κ
20, = 20, = 18, = 10, w = 0.60, and w = 0.50, (b) the same model as in (a) but using a stimulus prior rather
stimL2 sensL2 percL1 stimL1 percL1
than a perceptual prior for the second lattice and with w = 0.60, and w = 0, and (c) the same model as in (a) but without efficient
stimL1 percL1
encoding. The yellow dots indicate the expected probabilities based on the model. In (b), the dark and light yellow dots lay on top of each other.
The behavioral results and the estimated effects based on the behavioral results of Van Geert et al. (2022), averaged across participants, are
indicated in dark grey for r1 = 0° and light grey for r1 = 90°.
A version of the model using the stimulus prior in combination with the likelihood for the
second lattice instead of the perceptual prior was able to predict a repulsive context effect of the
the same distribution is used in the prior (resulting in prior attraction) and in the likelihood
(resulting in likelihood repulsion), and w and w are almost equal, attractive and
572 stimL1 percL1
repulsive effects largely cancel each other out. If w is increased and w is decreased, a
573 stimL1 percL1
Is efficient encoding necessary to reproduce the behavioral results? A version of the model
without efficient encoding was able to predict an attractive context effect of the previous
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 27
percept (as the perceptual prior was still combined with the likelihood for the second lattice),
but not the repulsive effect of the previous stimulus evidence, as that effect depends on the
impact of the first lattice on the stimulus-to-sensory mapping and the likelihood of the second
Effects of free parameters on attractive and repulsive temporal context effects
Here we start from the final efficient Bayesian observer model with a uniform prior for the
first lattice and the parameters specified above and explore the effect of each parameter
separately on the expected probabilities of perceiving the relative 0° orientation in the first and
the second lattice. Under these settings, c is the only parameter influencing the size of the
585 stim
direct proximity effect (i.e., the effect of aspect ratio on the percept of the first lattice;
587 stim
influences the size of the repulsive context effect of aspect ratio on the second lattice
−1
−2
−3
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
])°0
1r(
[tigol
stim 1
9 −1
−2
−3
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
])°0
1r(
[tigol
stimL1 1
30 −1
−2
−3
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
])°0
1r(
[tigol
sensL1
κ κ
observer model with a uniform prior for the first lattice and baseline parameter values: c = 5, = 20, and = 20. Under these
stim stimL1 sensL1
κ κ
settings, and do not influence the size of the direct proximity effect (i.e., the effect of aspect ratio on the percept of the first
stimL1 sensL1
lattice).
As only lowers overall precision of the likelihood distribution for the first lattice
590 stimL1
(which increases the influence of the prior on the posterior) and a uniform prior distribution is
used, a change in does not have an influence on the relative posterior probabilities for
592 stimL1
the 0° and 90° orientation in the first lattice. Therefore, does not influence the size of the
593 stimL1
When the participant perceived the 90° orientation in the first lattice, no attractive context effect can be present as
the 90° orientation of the first lattice is never close to one of the three orientations present in the second lattice (0°,
60°, 120°). Therefore, hysteresis, i.e., an attractive context effect or having the same percept in both lattices, can only
occur when the previous percept was the 0° orientation and the probability of perceiving the 0° orientation in the
second lattice is at chance level when the previous percept was the 90° orientation.
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 28
probabilities for the second lattice, a higher stimulus precision for the first lattice (i.e., )
595 stimL1
results in slightly lower probabilities of perceiving the relative 0° orientation in the second lattice,
especially for lower aspect ratios (i.e.., in favor of the relative 0° orientation). In other words, a
higher thus results in a slightly stronger repulsive effect of the previous stimulus evidence
598 stimL1
Given a uniform prior distribution, also does not influence the relative posterior
600 sensL1
probabilities for the 0° and 90° orientation in the first lattice. In other words, does not
601 sensL1
influence the size of the proximity effect in case a uniform prior is used for the first lattice
the first lattice (i.e., ) results in a slightly stronger repulsive effect of the previous stimulus
604 stimL1
−1
−2
−3
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
perceptL1
0°
90°
stim
−1 1
−2
−3
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
perceptL1
0°
90°
k 0
stimL1
10 −1
−2
−3
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
perceptL1
0°
90°
sensL1
−1
−2
−3
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
perceptL1
0°
1 90°
k 0
stimL2
10 −1
−2
−3
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
perceptL1
0°
1 90°
k 0
sensL2
9 −1
−2
−3
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
perceptL1
0°
90°
percL1
−1
−2
−3
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
perceptL1
0°
1 90°
0 w
stimL1
0.3 −1
0.6
−2
0.9
−3
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
perceptL1
0°
90°
percL1
0.2
0.5
0.8
κ κ κ
Bayesian observer model with a uniform prior for the first lattice and baseline parameter values: c = 5, = 20, = 20, =
stim stimL1 sensL1 stimL2
κ κ
20, = 18, = 10, w = 0.60, and w = 0.50.
sensL2 percL1 stimL1 percL1
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 29
606 stimL2
for perceiving the 0° orientation in the second lattice overall, but more so for lower aspect ratios.
Hence, a higher results in a slightly shallower adaptation effect (i.e., repulsive effect of the
608 stimL2
609 sensL2
higher the sensory precision for the second lattice, the stronger the adaptation effect.
The more precise the peak in the perceptual prior for the second lattice, the higher the
overall probability of perceiving the relative 0° orientation in the second lattice. Although the
effect of is present regardless of the percept for the first lattice being the relative 0° or the
613 percL1
relative 90° orientation, the effect of is larger for conditions in which the relative 0°
614 percL1
Increasing the weight of the previous stimulus evidence compared to the long-term
uniform stimulus distribution (i.e., w ) increases the size of the adaptation effect
617 stimL1
619 percL1
The effects of different parameter combinations can be further explored in the online
application, the user can play with the different parameter values and combinations to test their
effects, both on the trial and on the experiment level.
Interindividual variation in proximity, hysteresis, and adaptation
When introducing interindividual variation in the parameter values for c , w , and
625 stim stimL1
w , interindividual variation in proximity, hysteresis, and adaptation effects results. With
626 percL1
the currently used parameter combinations, the size of the hysteresis and adaptation effects
varied less in the simulation data than in the empirical data, but the simulated variation is
simulation results). Furthermore, the same relation between hysteresis and adaptation effects is
visible as in the empirical data: By generating w and w in a positively correlated
631 stimL1 percL1
manner, we were able to reproduce the empirically found positive correlation between
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 30
empirical results in Van Geert et al. (2022), the adaptation effect showed a strong negative
correlation with the direct proximity effect in the simulation results and the hysteresis effect
n=75
−1
−2
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
1r(
[tigol
Empirical results
−1
−2
−3
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
n=75
−1
−2
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
r1 = 0°
r1 = 90°
])°0
1r(
[tigol
Simulation results
−1
−2
−3
- 1 - 1 - 1 1 1 1 1
1.3 1.2 1.1 1 1.1 1.2 1.3
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
r1 = 0°
r1 = 90°
The probability of responding 0° to the first lattice decreases with aspect ratio (|a|/|b|). The value of aspect ratio increases with increasing distance
in the 0°-orientation, leading to more 90° responses. The probability of responding 0° to the second lattice increases with aspect ratio (|a|/|b|; i.e.,
adaptation effect), and increases when the first stimulus was perceived as 0° rather than 90° (i.e., hysteresis effect). (b) Mean simulated logit
probability of perceiving the relative 0° orientation in the first and the second lattice dependent on aspect ratio. Note. Dots indicate mean values.
In addition, mean posterior predictions and their 95% highest density continuous intervals are shown.
Discussion and conclusions
We tested whether the observed attractive and repulsive temporal context effects could be
explained by an efficient Bayesian observer model (Wei & Stocker, 2015), which has previously
been successfully applied to many different study designs involving non-ambiguous stimulus
perception (e.g., Fritsche et al., 2020; Langlois et al., 2021; Wei & Stocker, 2015). The efficient
Bayesian observer model assumes variable encoding precision of orientations in line with their
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 31
0.1−0.7−0.55 0.2−0.41−0.22 0.32−0.54−0.42 0.54−0.72−0.54 0.56−0.61−0.46 0.92−0.15−0.05 1.05−0.63−0.51 1.14−0.38−0.22 1.43−0.55−0.42 1.47−0.59−0.43 1.84−0.48−0.36 1.87−0.66−0.48 2.3−0.23−0.08 2.48−0.49−0.34 2.93−0.56−0.4
−1
−3
−5
3.03−0.32−0.14 3.12−0.78−0.62 3.2−0.17−0.01 3.28−0.39−0.22 3.92−0.44−0.27 4.32−0.53−0.41 4.41−0.44−0.32 4.42−0.29−0.16 4.58−0.82−0.64 4.65−0.99−0.86 4.66−0.6−0.42 4.85−0.58−0.47 5.15−0.75−0.58 5.47−0.44−0.32 5.47−0.93−0.77
−1
−3
−5
5.53−0.47−0.32 5.61−0.47−0.34 5.63−0.63−0.5 5.65−0.84−0.67 5.7−0.49−0.32 5.79−0.54−0.38 5.92−0.73−0.59 5.98−0.52−0.39 5.99−0.75−0.62 6.14−0.67−0.49 6.49−0.82−0.71 6.51−0.77−0.66 6.53−0.82−0.69 6.59−0.34−0.18 6.66−0.46−0.27
−1
−3
−5
6.71−0.18−0.04 6.88−0.62−0.44 6.97−0.16−0.03 6.99−0.74−0.56 7.01−0.59−0.43 7.03−0.38−0.2 7.15−0.9−0.84 7.28−0.61−0.51 7.35−0.43−0.26 7.37−0.52−0.31 7.41−0.35−0.26 7.6−0.68−0.55 7.66−0.71−0.54 7.67−0.64−0.49 7.82−0.71−0.58
−1
−3
−5
8.26−0.99−0.79 8.66−0.95−0.78 9.21−0.43−0.22 9.83−0.74−0.56 10.58−0.72−0.57 10.71−0.53−0.41 11.03−0.55−0.37 11.67−0.53−0.33 11.83−0.47−0.34 12.48−0.52−0.41 13.22−0.77−0.59 14.05−0.35−0.22 14.3−0.53−0.41 14.98−0.23−0.09 15.1−0.58−0.43
−1
−3
−5
1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
1r(
[tigol
0.1−0.7−0.55 0.2−0.41−0.22 0.32−0.54−0.42 0.54−0.72−0.54 0.56−0.61−0.46 0.92−0.15−0.05 1.05−0.63−0.51 1.14−0.38−0.22 1.43−0.55−0.42 1.47−0.59−0.43 1.84−0.48−0.36 1.87−0.66−0.48 2.3−0.23−0.08 2.48−0.49−0.34 2.93−0.56−0.4
−2
−4
−6
3.03−0.32−0.14 3.12−0.78−0.62 3.2−0.17−0.01 3.28−0.39−0.22 3.92−0.44−0.27 4.32−0.53−0.41 4.41−0.44−0.32 4.42−0.29−0.16 4.58−0.82−0.64 4.65−0.99−0.86 4.66−0.6−0.42 4.85−0.58−0.47 5.15−0.75−0.58 5.47−0.44−0.32 5.47−0.93−0.77
−2
−4
−6
5.53−0.47−0.32 5.61−0.47−0.34 5.63−0.63−0.5 5.65−0.84−0.67 5.7−0.49−0.32 5.79−0.54−0.38 5.92−0.73−0.59 5.98−0.52−0.39 5.99−0.75−0.62 6.14−0.67−0.49 6.49−0.82−0.71 6.51−0.77−0.66 6.53−0.82−0.69 6.59−0.34−0.18 6.66−0.46−0.27
−2
−4
−6
6.71−0.18−0.04 6.88−0.62−0.44 6.97−0.16−0.03 6.99−0.74−0.56 7.01−0.59−0.43 7.03−0.38−0.2 7.15−0.9−0.84 7.28−0.61−0.51 7.35−0.43−0.26 7.37−0.52−0.31 7.41−0.35−0.26 7.6−0.68−0.55 7.66−0.71−0.54 7.67−0.64−0.49 7.82−0.71−0.58
−2
−4
−6
8.26−0.99−0.79 8.66−0.95−0.78 9.21−0.43−0.22 9.83−0.74−0.56 10.58−0.72−0.57 10.71−0.53−0.41 11.03−0.55−0.37 11.67−0.53−0.33 11.83−0.47−0.34 12.48−0.52−0.41 13.22−0.77−0.59 14.05−0.35−0.22 14.3−0.53−0.41 14.98−0.23−0.09 15.1−0.58−0.43
−2
−4
−6
1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31 1.-31 1.-21 1.-11 11 1.11 1.21 1.31
aspect ratio of stimulus 1
])°0
2r(
[tigol
first stimulus decreases with aspect ratio (|a|/|b|). The value of aspect ratio increases with increasing distance in the 0 -orientation, leading to
more 90 responses. Dots indicate observed values. In addition, mean posterior predictions and their 95% highest density continuous intervals
are shown. (b) Mean simulated individual responses to the second stimulus dependent on aspect ratio (logit). The probability of responding 0
to the second stimulus increases with aspect ratio (|a|/|b|; i.e., adaptation effect), and increases when the first stimulus was perceived as 0 rather
than 90 (i.e., hysteresis effect). Dots indicate observed values. In addition, mean posterior predictions and their 95% highest density continuous
intervals are shown. Note. Labels indicate parameter values for c , w , and w per simulated participant, respectively.
stim stimL1 percL1
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 32
r = 0.68
95% HDCI [0.54, 0.79]
−2 0 2 4 6 8
individual adaptation effect
tceffe
siseretsyh
laudividni
Correlation between empirical hysteresis and adaptation effects
r = 0.59
95% HDCI [0.42, 0.74]
−2 0 2 4 6 8
individual adaptation effect
tceffe
siseretsyh
laudividni
Correlation between simulated hysteresis and adaptation effects
for (a) the empirical data collected in Van Geert et al. (2022) and (b) the simulated data. Mean and 80% highest density continuous intervals are
shown. The dashed lines indicate a slope of zero. The black and yellow lines give examples of plausible correlation estimates.
frequency of occurrence (i.e., efficient encoding) and takes the dissimilarity between stimulus
space and sensory space into account, which leads to asymmetric likelihood distributions as a
result of uncertainty induced by internal sensory noise, and consequently the possibility for
‘anti-Bayesian’ percepts biased away from the observer’s prior beliefs.
A hierarchical efficient Bayesian observer model including both a stimulus and a
perceptual level was needed to explain the co-occurrence of both attractive and repulsive
temporal context effects. The aspect ratio of the first lattice (i.e., the previous stimulus evidence)
affected the percept of the second lattice via the stimulus-to-sensory mapping (i.e., efficient
encoding) and the likelihood (i.e., likelihood repulsion) of the second lattice. The previous
percept affected the perceptual prior for the second lattice and as a consequence the posterior
probability of perceiving the relative 0° orientation in the second lattice (i.e., prior attraction). In
other words, efficient encoding and likelihood repulsion on the stimulus level could explain the
repulsive context effect, whereas perceptual prior attraction could explain the attractive
temporal context effect when perceiving multistable dot lattices. This reasoning was confirmed
based on simulations from model variants without efficient coding (showing only hysteresis)
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 33
and without a perceptual prior (showing only adaptation). The conclusion that a hierarchical
model including both a stimulus and a perceptual level is needed, is in line with Mao and
Stocker (2022), who suggested the need to take higher-level representations into account to
adequately model human subjects’ orientation percepts.
Not only the mean attractive and repulsive temporal context effects present in Van Geert et
al. (2022) could be reproduced using a hierarchical efficient Bayesian observer model, also
plausible variation in effect size and direction could be derived by varying (a) the constant
influencing the relation between aspect ratio and differential height of the 0° and 90° peak in the
likelihood for the first lattice (c ), (b) the weight of the posterior of the first lattice on the
666 stim
stimulus prior for the second lattice (w ), and (c) the weight of the percept of the first lattice
667 stimL1
on the perceptual prior for the second lattice (w ). Furthermore, the hierarchical efficient
668 percL1
Bayesian observer model could reproduce the empirically observed strong positive correlation
between individuals’ attractive and repulsive effects (Van Geert et al., 2022), by assuming a
positive correlation between temporal integration constants at the stimulus and the perceptual
level. That is, individuals who weight the previous stimulus evidence more highly in relation to
the long-term stimulus context will also weight the previous percept more highly in relation to
the long-term perceptual context than individuals who weight the previous stimulus evidence
less highly. Assuming separate but correlated temporal integration constants at the stimulus and
the perceptual level is not implausible in our opinion. For instance, Fritsche et al. (2020) found
better performance for a model with different integration time constants for prior and likelihood
than for a model that used the same parameters for both. Different from the successful
reproduction of the high positive correlation between attractive and repulsive temporal context
effects, the correlations between the temporal context effects and the direct proximity effect did
not match those observed in the empirical data. Follow-up research may aim to find parameter
combinations that provide a closer match to those aspects of the empirical data.
Whereas earlier models induced a direct effect of the previous stimulus evidence on the
likelihood distribution for the second lattice (Schwiedrzik et al., 2014), or posited a persistent
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 34
bias for an absolute orientation but did not model the origin of the bias (Gepshtein & Kubovy,
2005), the current efficient Bayesian observer model provides a more complete process model of
how previous percept and stimulus evidence can influence multistable dot lattice perception.
We consider changes in the frequency of occurrence (in this case on the short term) and
consequently in the prior distribution and the stimulus-to-sensory mapping a conceptually
plausible explanation for the co-occurrence of separate but related short-term attractive and
repulsive temporal context effects. The currently proposed model thus integrates explanations
for both mechanisms in one coherent (hierarchical) theory, which was not the case in the earlier
models of the dot lattice paradigm (Gepshtein & Kubovy, 2005; Schwiedrzik et al., 2014).
Assuming separate but related processes underlying both context effects present at multiple
hierarchical levels (i.e., likelihood repulsion on the stimulus level and prior attraction on the
perceptual level, related through their dependence on the posterior for the first lattice), provides
an intermediate position, in between researchers positing one single mechanism underlying
both effects and researchers confirming differences in the characteristics of both effects.
Furthermore, the idea of separate but related processes inherent in the efficient Bayesian
observer model is highly compatible with the empirically observed high correlation between
individuals’ attractive and repulsive temporal context effects as observed in Van Geert et al.
(2022).
It is highly likely that our visual system takes more previous stimulus evidence or percepts
into account than only one stimulus back. Another possible follow-up is therefore to take
changes throughout the entire experiment into account when modeling the behavioral data
resulting from the multistable dot lattice paradigm. However, the presence of a mask in between
trials makes modeling this process conceptually more complex. Furthermore, when modeling
the results for the current paradigm, going only one trial back, was enough to replicate the
behavioral effects. It was thus not necessary to go more than one trial back to successfully
account for the co-occurrence of both effects.
The current computational model can serve to inspire new experimentation. The model
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 35
can generate quantitative predictions that can be tested in new experiments: for example,
sensory noise can be manipulated using exposure time or stimulus contrast, the alignment of
the dots in the lattice can be decreased to lower stimulus precision, or a longer inter-stimulus
interval could be introduced to weaken the influence of the first lattice. Also, the same modeling
approach can be adapted to other tasks measuring temporal context effects with different
multistable stimuli.
To conclude, a hierarchical efficient Bayesian observer model including both a stimulus
and a perceptual level can explain repulsive temporal context effects in multistable dot lattice
perception via efficient encoding and likelihood repulsion, and attractive effects via perceptual
prior attraction. This conclusion is in line the conclusion of Mao and Stocker (2022), who
suggested the need for considering the complex hierarchical structure of the brain, by also
taking the higher-level representation into account to adequately model human subjects’
response behavior.
Open and Reproducible Practices Statement
This manuscript was written in R Markdown using the papaja package (Aust & Barth, 2020)
with code for data analysis integrated into the text. The data, materials, and analysis and
[NOTE TO REVIEWERS/PREPRINT READERS: the code for the models is already publicly shared
at this point, further analysis and manuscript code are currently available on request but will be
shared publicly once reaching a finalized version of the manuscript after peer review.]
EFFICIENT BAYESIAN OBSERVER MODEL OF HYSTERESIS AND ADAPTATION 36