Language evolution in a context of increased socialization: the self-domestication
approach
Antonio Benítez-Burraco
Department of Spanish, Linguistics, and Theory of Literature (Linguistics), Faculty of
Philology, University of Seville, Seville, Spain
abenitez8@us.es
Abstract
Because language does not fossilize, and because scripts only appeared very recently, the
sort of languages spoken in Prehistory has been mostly a speculative issue. In this chapter,
we rely on the human self-domestication hypothesis (i.e. the claim that our species
experienced an evolutionary process similar to domesticated animals, that was triggered
by, and resulted in, increased prosocial behaviour) for clarifying this unsolved question.
We will argue that this trend towards increased socialization would have favoured
selected behavioural changes, but perhaps cognitive and physical changes too, that
enabled the sophistication of languages through a cultural mechanism. This would have
ultimately resulted in the emergence of the two types of languages found in present-day
human societies: esoteric and exoteric, which are optimized, respectively, for
communicating with close people, or for interacting with strangers within complex
societies.
Keywords: prehistoric languages; prosocial behavior; human self-domestication; cultural
evolution; esoteric vs exoteric communication
1. Introduction
Language evolution is a favourite topic for many disciplines, not only for linguistics, but
also for archaeology, palaeoanthropology, or genetics, to name just a few. The same can
be said of the dynamics followed by languages in our remote past, including the putative
type of languages spoken by prehistoric societies, or the patterns of language diversity
during prehistory. Explaining language evolution is a formidable task, as language does
not fossilize. But it is a doable task now that we have adopted a truly multidisciplinary
approach (Gong et al., 2018; Nölle et al., 2020). Explaining the dynamics of languages
during prehistory is also a great challenge. But it is likewise a doable task now that we
have better tools for studying human evolution, and particularly, the changes in the
physical environment and in social dynamics in the past, as we will discuss in the
following section. Many different factors (environmental, cognitive, behavioural,
cultural, linguistic) can be indeed expected to trigger, promote, modulate, and even reduce
language complexity and diversity. In this chapter, we will focus on the effects of
increased prosocial behaviour and increased social complexity, as observed during
prehistory, on the structural and functional features of the languages spoken during that
period. In the first part of the chapter, we will discuss the links between language variation
and sociological diversity. In the second part, we will present a model of language
evolution in the past that could account for the observed (and inferred) changes in human
socialization and language(s), and that builds on the recent evolutionary hypothesis of
human-self domestication (Hare, 2017).
2. Language evolution in a context of increased socialization
For many years, the mainstream view, particularly in the field of linguistics, has been that
language can (and should) be construed as a human-specific cognitive faculty that
resulted from biological changes mostly, and that emerged along with our species. In this
chapter, we will refer to this faculty as our human linguisticality, following Haspelmath
(2020). In brief, this faculty can be characterized as our ability to learn and use languages.
Languages, on their part, are codes that humans use for communicating, socializing, and
many other functions. The consensus among linguists has been that all languages are
roughly equal in terms of their basic components, fundamental structure, overall
complexity, and main functions (Dixon 1997; Fromkin et al. 2011: 375-374). This is the
equi-complexity hypothesis, which is commonly construed as involving a trade-off
principle too, so that, if e.g., a language’s syntax is more complex, its morphology will
be simpler. Recent statistical analyses using extensive language databases have given
support to the equi-complexity principle (Bentz et al., 2022). A common explanation for
this is that core features of languages mostly depend on how our brain is configured and
works, which is quite similar in all human beings. A second consensus among linguists
has been that the principles and processes accounting for how present-day languages are
were also valid in the past. This is the uniformitarian principle (Christy, 1983).
Accordingly, under this view, once our species emerged, our distinctive brain also
emerged, and ultimately, present-day like languages emerged too, which have remained
unmodified since then, at least with regards to their core properties, because of the
immutability of the principles governing language change. The approach to language
evolution by Noam Chomsky nicely exemplifies this view. According to him, language
appeared suddenly as a result of one single gene mutation, that caused a brain rewiring
that brought about recursion, the distinctive feature of all human languages (and of our
cognition). Recursion enables to create an unbounded number of sentences (and thoughts)
relying on a finite number of compositional rules, like those comprising the grammar,
thus accounting for the creativity of the human language (and mind). This novel brain
configuration, Chomsky’s argument follows, has not changed since our inception,
therefore it is shared by all human beings, pathological instances aside; hence also, the
prediction that prehistoric languages were not different to present-day languages, at least
during the last 100.000 years, and also the claim that the “languages” used by other
species were different to human languages (Bolhuis et al., 2014; Berwick and Chomsky,
2016; Chomsky, 2017).
Over the years, however, this view has attracted quite a harsh criticism. To begin with,
language features can impact on our cognition. For instance, people speaking languages
with an object-verb word order, like Japanese, are better at recalling initial items from a
list, whereas speakers of final-object languages, like English, are better at recalling the
last items from a list (Amici et al., 2019). A reason is that objects are usually a focus of
attention and usually, the most informative part of a sentence. Overall, the language we
speak conditions, even if subtly, the way in which we process and storage information.
More generally, planning to talk bias our perception and the way in which we process
data with the aim of accommodating the structural features of the language we are using
(Hunt, 2001). Still, this effect can be more profound, if the habitual encoding and use of
such specific language features results in non-linguistic representational and even
behavioural effects. Ultimately, aspects of languages that are more costly to process and
learn might favour the creation of “cognitive gadgets” through the modification of
learning and data-acquisition mechanisms (Heyes, 2018).
Likewise, ample research suggests that languages are sensitive to the environment in
which they are used. For instance, tonal languages, like Chinese or Thai, are usually found
in tropical and subtropical regions. This uneven distribution is seemingly explained by
the perturbations of phonation caused by desiccated ambient air, as typically found in
drier and colder regions, which make tonality less efficient for conveying linguistic
information (Everett et al., 2015; 2016). The impact of the social environment on
language features are indeed stronger. We are familiar with the effects of different social
factors on linguistic diversity within a particular language. Accordingly, structural and
functional differences can be found between the variants of a language spoken by children
vs adults, by men vs women, and the like. It is also clear that the context of a conversation
(who speak to whom, what they speak about, what they speak for, and the like) also affects
the structure and the pattern of usage of a language. Nonetheless, the effect of these
factors on language features of interest from a typological perspective is more
controversial. Most linguists would agree that the vocabularies of the world languages
diverge because vocabularies are reservoirs of relevant cultural features, and what is
culturally important differs from one society to another. Also, languages tend to
grammaticalize, in different ways and to different degrees, basic aspects of the
environment in which they are spoken, as observed with noun classes or noun classifiers
(Aikhenvald, 2006). Lightfoot (2011) has discussed the similarities, differences, and
interactions between these two phenomena, namely, lexicalization and
grammaticalization of the environment by the world languages. Interestingly, recent
typological surveys suggest that most grammatical features can be impacted by social
factors (Trudgill, 2011; Nettle, 2012; Atkinson et al., 2019). Familiar examples are the
positive correlation found between socio-political complexity and tense–aspect–mood
(TAM) marking (Gil, 2021), or the negative correlation observed between the index of
agglutination (that is, how complex a word is) and population size (Lupyan and Dale,
2010).
When one considers all the social factors with an impact on language structure together
with the language features subject to variation, an interesting pattern emerges. On the one
side, the languages spoken by isolated human groups living in small, close-knit
communities with high proportions of native speakers usually exhibit larger sound
inventories and complex phonotactics, opaque morphologies (with more irregularities and
morpho-phonological constraints), limited semantic transparency (with abundance of
idioms and idiosyncratic speech), reduced compositional structure, and less sophisticated
syntactic devices. By contrast, large and complex social networks, involving greater rates
of inter-group contacts and cultural exchanges, seemingly favour languages with
expanded vocabularies and increased syntactic complexity (including greater reliance on
recursion). These languages also exhibit greater compositionality and enhanced semantic
transparency, as well as simpler sound combinations and more regular morphologies
(Bolender, 2007; Wray and Grace, 2007; Trudgill, 2011; Nettle, 2012; Lupyan and Dale,
2016). Overall, the difference between these two types of languages seems to result from
their differential context-dependency, with increased compositionality being selected as
it favours communication with out-group people (Wray and Grace, 2007). In fact, the
same pattern can be expected for varieties of the same language, as with the standard vs
the vernacular. Needless to say, this difference can be expected to be a matter of degree.
The poles of this continuum have been characterized, respectively, as esoteric and
exoteric languages, varieties, or even types of communication (after the seminal paper by
Wray and Grace, 2007). Hence, esoteric communication takes place between people
sharing considerable amounts of knowledge, whereas in exoteric communication
language use is usually decontextualized. Being esoteric communication the common
type of human interaction in the past, the necessity of interacting with outsiders and
discussing about novel, non-shared topics can be expected to have exerted a pressure
towards exoteric communication (and exoteric languages or varieties of a language).
Computational simulations support this view, as well as the hypothesized differences in
learnability of both types of languages, with esoteric languages being easy to learn by
children, and with exoteric languages being more learnable by adults (Lupyan and Dale,
2008). It has been suggested that it is this differential pattern of acquisition what
ultimately explains their structural and functional differences (Wray and Grace, 2007;
Lupyan and Dale, 2010; Benítez-Burraco and Kempe, 2018)
Research on other domains of linguistics beyond language typology and sociolinguistics
have converged onto this important idea that language structure is sensitive to the
environment (and particularly, the social environment), to the extent that even core
language features can emerge, under general cognitive constraints, from language
learning and use, instead of being imposed by the brain hardware for language. To begin
with, this is a robust conclusion of studies using artificial grammars and involving iterated
learning (Cornish et al., 2010; Beckner et al., 2017; Smith, 2018). For instance, word
morphology has been shown to arise from a trade-off between pressures for
compressibility and expressivity. Compressibility is the tendency to capture systematic
regularities in the form of abstract rules, as when languages use the same prefix for all
the words with a negative meaning (e.g. impossible, improbable, etc.). Expressivity is the
capacity of providing a unique and unambiguous signal for every meaning, as with a list
of proper nouns. Less compressible languages (like dictionaries) are more expressive, but
more costly to learn. Conversely, compressible languages (like languages with a
grammar) are easier to learn but can incur ambiguity. Accordingly, speakers prefer
compressible languages, whereas receivers favour expressive languages. As the relative
strength of these two pressures can change from one social context to another, different
social contexts can result in different language types endowed with different design
properties (see Kirby et al., 2015 for details). Likewise, studies dealing with recently
emerged sign languages reinforce the view that language structure, and even some key
design features of human language, can be sensitive to the social environment, and
ultimately result from cultural evolution. In a language like Al-Sayyid Bedouin Sign
Language (ABSL), core language features like phonology, word order, or even recursion,
develop with time in response to environmental triggers, like the kind and amount of
input, the size of the community, or the degree of interaction among speakers (Sandler et
al., 2005; 2011a; 2011b). Interestingly, this parallels what we can find in some oral
languages. The Pirahã language could be a good example. According to the description
of the language by Everett (2005; 2012), Pirahã lacks recursion in the domain of complex
sentence. Thus, it could be viewed as a present-day instance of a language not exhibiting
one core aspect of grammar as a result of cultural constraints. These findings open the
door to use our current knowledge about the social dynamics in the past, which has
exponentially increased with the advent of ancient DNA technologies (e.g. Sikora et al.,
2017; Koptekin et al., 2022), for inferring basic aspects of the grammars of the languages
spoken during prehistory, that are far beyond the limits of linguistic reconstructions as
achieved by the traditional methods in historical linguistics (Benítez-Burraco, 2017).
Additionally, changes in the social environment can impact on language structure in a
more indirect way, through their impact on our cognition, mostly on our social cognition
(but not only), in the line, for instance, of the famous social brain hypothesis by Robin
Dunbar. According to this view, increasingly complex social systems would have resulted
in larger brains endowed with enhanced domain-general capacities, which are needed to
maintain a growing number of bounded links, which are cognitively demanding (Dunbar,
2009; Shultz and Dunbar, 2022). Likewise, social changes resulting in increased joint
attention or shared intentionality can be expected to have improved our communicative
abilities, favouring the learning of more sophisticated constructions (i.e., form- meaning
pairings, with different degrees of abstractness and schematicity), as well as the
potentiation of pragmatic and conversational abilities, which, in turn, would have made
grammar more sophisticated (Gong and Zhang, 2014; Pleyer and Lindner, 2014).
Finally, one could even hypothesize an indirect effect of social dynamics on cognition
through their impact on language structure and use. For instance, as noted above, small,
close-knit communities tend to rely more on esoteric communication, and ultimately on
the shared knowledge, the context, and the here-and-now, with this circumstance
accounting for some of the distinctive typological features of the languages they speak.
By this reason, one could expect that these peoples exhibit a potentiated declarative
memory compared to their procedural memory abilities (Benítez-Burraco et al., 2022), as
the former is typically implicated in vocabulary learning and irregular phenomena across
domains, most commonly associated with memorized, opaque, formulaic chunks of
language (as idioms or proverbs), whereas the latter is typically (but not exclusively)
implicated in compositional, automated, rule-governed aspects of language (Ullman,
2004, 2015).
In summary, a more nuanced view of language evolution (and of the evolution of
architecture and our behaviour, in response to socioecological factors also accounting for
broader aspects of the human phenotype, certainly improved the structural and functional
properties of human languages. This includes the potentiation of capacities like recursion,
episodic memory, joint attention, theory of mind, and the like. But at the same time, our
languages were shaped, in more direct ways, by changes in our environment broadly
construed, this encompassing our physical environment, but particularly, the type of
societies in which we lived, and the cultural niches we created. And to some important
extent, these changes in language also impacted on our cognition and behaviour, as
language modulates our perception, categorization abilities, and information processing
capacities. As a consequence, human cognition, behaviour, linguisticality, and languages
can be expected to have evolved progressively as part of a mutually reinforcing feedback
loop.
our ability to learn and use them (aka linguisticality), our cognition, and our behavior. As
discussed in more detail in the text, our linguisticality partially determines the structural
and functional properties of languages. Under certain conditions, the changes experienced
by languages (often in response to external factors) give rise to permanent modifications
of our linguisticality and/or the cognitive devices encompassing it and/or the cognitives
devices needed for acquiring and processing language. At the same time, languages are
essential tools for human interaction. Different social and cultural changes impact on their
structure and patterns of use. And vice versa, so that changes in language structure and
use can modify, even if subtly, our behavior and our socialization patterns, as well as our
cognition, as noted above. What one can indeed expect is that a complex interrelationship
exists between languages, linguisticality, cognition and behaviour. Evolutionarily, this
would explain the mismatches between the emergence of biological/genetic modernity,
cognitive modernity, behavioral modernity, and present-day languages in the human
species.
For cognitive archaeology, the take-home message is that the better we know how modern
human behaviour evolved and how social dynamics were in the past, the clearer picture
we will have of the type of languages spoken by humans during prehistory. Nonetheless,
for succeeding in this, we need to learn more about the relationships between the
typological diversity of the world languages and the socio-political factors defining the
world cultures, of the sort sketched previously. We also need to implement better models
of the effects of social dynamics on language dynamics, including language change and
language diversity. That said, these new approaches should enable to advance a variety
of more specific and more testable hypotheses about the nature of prehistoric languages,
considering that, as noted, sociological and demographic information about prehistoric
societies is increasingly available. In particular, we could expect that esoteric languages
became less frequent and/or that strongly esoteric language features were negatively
selected as socio-political complexity increased with time. Ultimately, what is still
pending is a model of language evolution that integrates not only the social changes
experienced by our species since its inception, but also the cognitive and behavioral
innovations featuring modern humans. In the next section, we will outline one
evolutionary model of this sort that builds on the self-domestication hypothesis of human
evolution.
3. The self-domestication approach
In brief, the human self-domestication (henceforth, HSD) hypothesis refers to a recent
proposal of how our species emerged. It claims that the human phenotype is, to a large
extent, the outcome of an evolutionary process similar to animal domestication (Hare,
2017; Hare and Woods, 2020). In mammals, domestication is usually triggered by
selection for tameness, and in most cases, results in a set of distinctive traits that are
physical, cognitive, and behavioural by nature (Wilkins et al., 2014; see Sánchez-
Villagra, 2016 for the claim that these features actually present in a variable, sometimes
modelur fashion in different domesticates). The hypothesis of HSD builds on the finding
in humans of many of the traits commonly observed in domesticated varieties of
mammals, as reduced skulls/brains; childish facial features; changes in pigmentation and
hair; a prolonged childhood; increased playing behavior, and particularly, a reduced
levels of reactive (i.e. automatic) aggression. Among the factors commonly suggested
that might have triggered our self-domestication, one finds the rise of community living
and the advent of co-parenting (Hare et al., 2012); changes in our foraging ecology, in
response to temporal and spatial fluctuations in food availability (Pisor and Surbeck,
2019); or climate deterioration, as happened during the Last Glaciation (Spikins et al.,
2021). All these factors are hypothesized to have promoted a selection toward less
emotionally reactive individuals and toward tolerance for out-group individuals. In turn,
the hypothesis follows, the physical, behavioral, and even cognitive changes resulting
from this reduction in reactive aggression would have favored the emergence of many
human-specific distinctive features, including our enhanced social cognition, increased
cooperation and extended social networks, and ultimately, our sophisticated technology
and complex culture (see Hare, 2017 for details).
In some birds, domestication results in more complex communicative signals (Okanoya,
2017). This has led to hypothesize that (self-)domestication could also account for some
aspects of language evolution (Okanoya, 2015), specifically, those that are thought to
emerge through a cultural mechanism, of the sort highlighted in the previous section
(Thomas and Kirby, 2018; Raviv and Kirby, 2022). Accordingly, one could expect that
HSD impacted significantly on socially-driven language complexity because of its
promotion of increased and more diverse socialization patterns. Nonetheless, other
changes brought about by HSD could have contributed to modify language structure and
use too, including physical, cognitive and behavioural changes. Consider, for instance,
the changes in the human skull/brain and face. One could expect that changes in the
orofacial region affected sound articulation, pretty much the changes in this region
resulting from dietary changes have been shown to account for the evolutionary
emergence of specific sound types (Blasi et al., 2019). Likewise, it has been suggested
that the pigmentation changes that are typically associated to domestication (and to HSD)
could have favoured the emergence of our distinctive white sclerae, which, as recently
shown, promotes perceived traits that foster trust (see e.g. the discussion in Pérez-García
et al., 2022).
the past) under the effects of HSD, as developed by Benítez-Burraco and Progovac
(Progovac and Benítez-Burraco, 2019; Benítez-Burraco and Progovac, 2020; Benítez-
Burraco et al., 2021). The model encompasses four stages. Stage One corresponds to the
beginnings of HSD, roughly 300 thousand years ago (kya). Because reactive aggression
was still high, communication through language could not have proceeded through and
cooperative turn-taking and long utterances, as in modern languages, but merely through
single-word commands, threats, and exclamations, mostly aimed to convey emotions
(Progovac and Locke, 2009; Progovac, 2015).
As features of HSD increased, the cultural transmission process that makes languages
more complex would have become enhanced as well. The main reason is that reduced
reactive aggression seemingly favoured the creation of stronger in-group networks,
involving more diverse, frequent, and sustained contacts between people. All these are
factors that make language structure and language use more sophisticated, as noted in the
previous section. However, because, as also noted, domestication impacts on the brain as
well, the potentiation of our language abilities might have resulted from brain changes
brought about by HSD. The ultimate reason is that the brain regions involved in the
control of aggression are functionally connected to, or even are partially overlapping with,
the areas that are responsible for language (see Benítez-Burraco and Progovac, 2022 for
a detailed discussion). Evidence of this is that abnormal processing of language cues can
result, among other things, in misperceptions of emotional contents that trigger reactive
aggression responses; conversely, the activation of aggression responses can inactivate
selected language areas, impacting negatively on language production and
comprehension (Miller et al., 2008). Now, controlling aggression demands an increased
connectivity of the circuit of aggression, which consists of several subcortical regions, to
selected cortical areas. Controlled aggression responses (as in learned aggressive actions)
result, specifically, from an increased regulation of the hypothalamus (part of the ‘core
aggression circuit’) and the striatum (part of the ‘learned aggression circuit) by the
prefrontal cortex (Cupaioli et al., 2020). However, the striatum is also a core component
of the procedural memory system, and more generally, of the cortico-subcortical
networks involved in grammar processing (Lieberman, 2000; Teichmann et al., 2005;
Ullman, 2006; Murphy et al., 2022). Consequently, augmented self-domestication would
have resulted in increased cortical control of aggressive responses, but also in potentiated
language processing abilities, particularly, more sophisticated grammar capacities, as all
these aspects demand more connections between cortical and subcortical areas (see
Benítez-Burraco and Progovac, 2021 for a detailed discussion, with a focus on cognitive
conditions featuring both increased aggression and problems with grammar).
Overall, this sort of changes would have favoured the transition to Stage Two, which
might have spread between 200-100 kya, when the Last Glaciation began. For this stage,
single word utterances can be hypothesized to have started to be combined in a pair-wise
fashion, leading to primitive two-slot grammars that would have used nouns and verbs to
express predications. These early grammars might have been primarily used for creating
particularly colourful derogatory expressions (Progovac, 2015), and ultimately, for
replacing physical (reactive) aggression by verbal aggression. This can be expected to
have resulted in an accelerated feedback loop between these early forms of grammar and
self-domestication (see Progovac and Benítez-Burraco, 2019 for details), because of the
common underlying neurobiological mechanism supporting aggression and language
processing, as described above.
Around 100 kya, climate deteriorated notably, and HSD increased even more, reaching
its peak around 50 kya, as suggested by paleoanthropological evidence (Cieri et al., 2014).
This is Stage 3 in the model. The extremely low levels of reactive aggression can be
expected to have facilitated more frequent and more assorted contacts between children
and adults, this in turn resulting in enhanced opportunities for learning and teaching
(Benítez-Burraco and Kempe, 2018). Increased HSD would have also boosted neotenic
features in our species, resulting in longer learning periods and particularly and
augmented play behavior, which is known to promote language acquisition (Levy 1984;
Quinn et al., 2018; Langley et al. 2020). All these changes would have facilitated the
advent of more sophisticated forms of grammar, specifically, the first hierarchical
grammars expressing transitivity (i.e. who does what (to whom)). The most confident
proxy of the languages spoken during Stage 3 are the languages of present-day hunter-
gatherer societies, and more generally, what in the previous section we called esoteric
languages.
As population size increased in response to environmental changes (mostly the advent of
warmer periods), but also to cultural innovations (like the advent of agriculture), inter-
group contacts became more frequent, and extensive social networks started to emerge,
aimed for mating and trading (Bar-Yosef, 1998; Stiner et al., 1999; Brunel et al., 2020).
Consequently, the necessity of exchanging information and know-hows with strangers
increased too. This might have favoured the advent of the second type of complex
languages we mentioned in the preceding section, the so-called exoteric languages. This
is the Stage 4 in the model, whose starting point can be tentatively situated 10 kya, during
the transition from Paleolithic to Neolithic. The spread of exoteric-like languages can be
linked as well to the emergence of new forms of aggression, specifically, proactive (i.e.,
premeditated) aggression, which is also a hallmark of the modern human condition
(Wrangham, 2018), and that became generalised during this period, resulting in
widespread escalated conflicts worldwide (Kissel and Kim, 2019). Increased proactive
aggression has been claimed to result from group selection in favour of risk-prone
altruism (Choi and Bowles, 2007). An intriguing possibility is that it was facilitated by
the advent of exoteric-like languages, which are especially fit for conscious planning and
ultimately, for supporting the cultural institutions around war and peace in complex
societies underlying large-scale hostilities. Neurobiologically, being a form of conscious
aggression, proactive aggression demands even more control of the circuits of aggression
by the cortex, with the consequences for grammar and language processing we mentioned
above.
Overall, this model of language change in prehistory under the effects of HSD ties the
gradual sophistication of language with the changes in the management of aggression,
either reactive or proactive, and ultimately with the gradual emergence of the behavioural
and cognitive modernity in response, at least particularly, to HSD forces, with both
aspects, namely, language features and HSD, being engaged in a mutually reinforcing
feedback loop, as both depend on, and impact on a common neurobiological substrate.
according to Progovac and Benítez-Burraco.
To finish, we expect this evolutionary model to also explain the advent of modern uses
of language, that is, modern pragmatics. The behavioral, but also the cognitive changes
brought about by our increased HSD can be hypothesized to have facilitated the
emergence of sophisticated turn-takings, as well as complex inferential abilities, which
are key aspects of our pragmatic abilities. As discussed in detail by Benítez-Burraco and
colleagues (2021), among the behavioral changes, two of them stand out: prolonged face-
to-face interactions, and more cooperation and increased sensitivity to the needs of one’s
interlocutors. Both are at the heart of fine-tuned turn-taking. With regards to the cognitive
changes promoted by HSD with an impact on pragmatics, perhaps the most important one
was the full emergence of our social brain. As a result of these modifications, face-to-face
interactions seemingly became more frequent and richer. Nonetheless, the parallel
emergence of more elaborated grammatical resources, of the sort sketched in the four-
stage model, would have contributed as well to improve our pragmatic abilities, making
communicative exchanges more effective. For instance, a more sophisticated grammar
enables to articulate and express one’s thoughts in more precise ways, and thus to defend
in better ways one's beliefs from the beliefs of the others, thus contributing to optimize
persuasive reciprocity, which is a typical feature of human conversation (Ferretti and
Adornetti, 2021).
4. Conclusions
In summary, as humans became increasingly social during Upper Paleolithic, human
communication also improved. Increased prosocial behavior seemingly triggered and
potentiated the cultural mechanisms that make language structure and use more complex,
facilitating the advent of modern-like languages optimized for esoteric communication.
As population increased and social networks diversified, new forms of socialization
resulted, and this seemingly favored the advent of modern-like languages better designed
for exoteric communication. In this chapter, we have modeled all these changes in human
communication within the framework of the HSD hypothesis. This evolutionary model
grants a stronger continuity than others between language and the cognitive abilities and
behaviors exhibited by other species. But at the same time, it grants cultural niche
construction, cultural evolution, and gene-culture co-evolution, impacting on selected
brain circuits and physiological mechanisms, a more central role in language evolution
than other alternative views. In other words, this HSD model of language evolution might
provide a robust bridge between biological and cultural accounts of language evolution.
That said, the same could be expected for any other evolutionary model that grants
increased socialization a more central role in the evolution of human communication. The
reason is that increased contacts between individuals can be safely expected to trigger the
sort of behavioural and cognitive changes, and the consequences for language, that we
have discussed in the chapter.