Threat memory 1
THREAT MEMORY IN THE SENSORY CORTEX: INSIGHTS FROM OLFACTION
1 2,3
Wen Li and Donald A. Wilson
Department of Psychology, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida
Department of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, New York University School of Medicine
Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, New York
Running title: Threat memory
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Wen Li (wenli@psy.fsu.edu),
Department of Psychology, Florida State University, B342 PDB, 1107 W. Call St., Tallahassee, FL 32306.
Acknowledgements: We give tribute to the late Drs. Norman Weinberger and Gordon Shepherd for their
indelible influence and inspirational scholarship. We also thank Joshua Brown for his thoughtful
comments. W.L. received funding from NIMH R21MH126479 and R01MH132209. D.A.W. received funding
from NIDCD R01-DC03906.
Threat memory 2
Abstract
The amygdala has long held the center seat in the neural basis of threat conditioning. However, a rapidly
growing literature has elucidated extra-amygdala circuits in this process, highlighting the sensory cortex
for its critical role in the mnemonic aspect of the process. While this literature is largely focused on the
auditory system, substantial human and rodent findings on the olfactory system have emerged. The
unique nature of the olfactory neuroanatomy and its intimate association with emotion compels a review
of this recent literature to illuminate its special contribution to threat memory. Here, integrating recent
evidence in humans and animal models, we posit that the olfactory (piriform) cortex is a primary and
necessary component of the distributed threat memory network, supporting mnemonic ensemble coding
of acquired threat. We further highlight the basic circuit architecture of piriform cortex characterized by
distributed, auto-associative connections, which is prime for highly efficient content addressable memory
computing to support threat memory. Given the primordial role of piriform cortex in cortical evolution
and its simple, well-defined circuits, we propose that olfaction can be a model system for understanding
(trans-modal) sensory cortical mechanisms underlying threat memory.
Keywords: Distributed memory; engram; fear; olfactory conditioning; pattern recognition; sensory
encoding; sensory mechanisms; threat encoding
Threat memory 3
Introduction
One of the most influential tenets in affective neuroscience is that the amygdala complex plays a central
role in threat processing (with the subjective feeling “fear” involving other higher order circuits (LeDoux
2022)). However, while support for this idea is overwhelming, dissents have been opined from time to
time (Paré 2002; Weinberger 2004). Lately, meta- and mega-analyses of human amygdala responses to
threat conditioning have questioned the extent of its role in humans ((Fullana and others 2016; Fullana
and others 2018; Visser and others 2021), but also see (Wen and others 2022)). It is thus still debatable
whether evidence of amygdala’s essential role reflects its sufficient, central role in all aspects of threat
processing and across humans and mammalian animal models. At the heart of this debate stands the
controversy of whether the amygdala is the root of threat memory (i.e., the locus of threat engram).
Interestingly, from early on, pioneers of amygdala research have asserted a view of a distributed, complex
network of threat memory (Fanselow and LeDoux 1999). In fact, at the conclusion of the high-profile end-
of-the-century debate ((Fanselow and LeDoux 1999) vs. (Cahill and others 1999) published back-to-back),
the amygdala camp (Fanselow and LeDoux 1999) had recognized the possibility that cortical areas
participate in threat memory: “It seems possible that the ABL [amygdala-basolateral], while essential, is
also part of a distributed network that encodes the fear memory… [C]ortical areas that are both afferent
and efferent to the ABL (e.g., perirhinal cortex, the hippocampal formation, and sensory cortex) may
participate with the ABL in the long-term encoding of fear.” However, in the ensuing decades of the new
millennium, research into the amygdala has exploded and pushed the amygdala to the center of not only
threat conditioning but threat processing in general. By contrast, other regions have receded to the
periphery.
In fact, a large body of evidence implicating extra-amygdala substrates of threat conditioning (in the
sensory cortex and hippocampus) had existed long before the amygdala ascended into the limelight (Cahill
and others 1999; Galambos and others 1955). In the past decade, this literature, particularly concerning
the sensory cortex, has experienced a resurgence powered by the rapid advancement in technology. As
described below, evidence for a role of the sensory cortex in threat conditioning (especially long-term
threat memory) in both humans and animal models is growing. While the auditory cortex is the most
studied in this literature, substantial evidence from the olfactory cortex has also accrued. The olfactory
cortex has a simple and well-studied circuit architecture, which epitomizes a content-addressable-
memory (CAM) computing system known for highly efficient memory storage and retrieval. Therefore,
Threat memory 4
the olfactory cortex may provide particularly useful insights as a model system for the study of threat
memory.
Sensory cortex and the threat engram
Threat conditioning generates associative plasticity in the sensory cortex
The sensory cortex builds its own record of threat conditioning by revising neuronal ensemble coding of
the conditioned stimulus (CS) via a distinct set of plastic changes, including altered neuronal
excitation/inhibition balance, receptive field sharpening/expansion, tuning shifts, and pattern separation
manner. The plasticity in the sensory cortex shows a strong time dependence. While emerging within a
few trials, associative plasticity in the sensory cortex persists (in contrast to amygdala changes known to
reset after several trials; (Fanselow and LeDoux 1999)) and, moreover, becomes stronger and more stable
Threat conditioning involves bidirectional sensory-cortex-amygdala interaction
This sensory cortical plasticity is associated with strong bidirectional interaction between the sensory
cortex and the basolateral amygdala. The amygdala can project to the sensory cortex to promote sensory
cortical plasticity (Armony and others 1998). Importantly, this amygdala projection strengthens over days
to support the development of threat memory (Yang and others 2016). Conversely, threat conditioning
induces cortical input synaptic plasticity (i.e., long-term potentiation of sensory cortical synaptic
projections to the amygdala), and selective inhibition of this synaptic plasticity impairs long-term threat
memory (Fourcaudot and others 2009; Huang and Kandel 1998). Recent evidence has further emphasized
that this sensory cortical input to the amygdala plays a key role in the formation and storage of threat
memory (Cambiaghi and others 2016; Dalmay and others 2019; East and others 2021). These findings thus
confirm the common origin of associative plasticity in the basolateral amygdala and sensory cortex and
emphasizes their interactive participation in threat memory.
Sensory cortex is essential for long-term threat memory
The sensory cortical participation is highly time-dependent. Early work demonstrated that lesions in the
amygdala but not the sensory pathway (including the sensory midbrain, thalamus, and cortex) impaired
threat conditioning (Fanselow and LeDoux 1999). These findings were very influential in establishing the
essential role of the amygdala (over the sensory cortex). However, early lesion studies in the sensory
cortex examined primarily the early phase of threat conditioning (i.e., conditioning acquisition and
Threat memory 5
consolidation but not long-term memory, e.g., > 24 hrs or days). More recently, a large study in rodents
studied long-term, remote memory and demonstrated that lesions in the (secondary) sensory cortex
across auditory, visual, and olfactory modalities impaired expression of threat conditioning acquired one
month earlier while leaving conditioning acquisition and consolidation intact (Sacco and Sacchetti 2010).
Subsequent work from the Sacchetti group and others has corroborated these findings using both lesion
and experimental manipulations (see (Concina and others 2019) for an excellent review on the auditory
cortex). This necessary role of sensory cortical plasticity in long-term threat memory, combined with its
time-dependent plasticity, highlights the sensory cortex as a crucial locus of the permanent repository of
threat conditioning (Concina and others 2019; Weinberger 2004).
Threat memory is stored in a distributed network
The research has thus established a system of threat conditioning in the sensory cortex, in parallel to the
amygdala. Very recently, a network conceptualization of threat conditioning has gained traction.
Specifically, threat memory is represented by a constellation of representations (i.e., individual engram
components) stored in a distributed network, including the amygdala, sensory cortex, hippocampus,
insula, and the prefrontal cortex, each substantiating a specialized aspect of threat memory (Headley and
others 2019; Josselyn and Tonegawa 2020). It stands to reason that in this network, the sensory cortex
stores the sensory aspect of threat memory (i.e., the sensory threat engram) via modified neuronal
Empirical, computational, and theoretic neuroscience models of memory have converged on the idea that
engrams exist as distributed, auto-associative ensembles of neurons formed and shaped through
associative experiences (Gerstner and others 2012; Josselyn and Tonegawa 2020). Accordingly, the
mystery of engrams would lie in the associative circuitry of such neuronal ensembles. The participation of
olfactory cortex (primarily, the piriform cortex) in olfactory threat conditioning has been clearly evinced.
Moreover, the circuitry of the piriform cortex has been well defined, and importantly, has been likened
to a CAM system and thus a good model for studying memory engrams (Haberly and Bower 1989).
Therefore, research into the olfactory cortex would hold promise for understanding the sensory threat
engram specifically and the entire threat engram in general.
Olfactory cortex—A model system for study of the sensory threat engram
Threat engram in the olfactory cortex
There is abundant evidence from rodents to humans to support associative plasticity in the piriform cortex
following olfactory threat conditioning (Chen and others 2011; Li 2014; Wilson and Sullivan 2011). Similar
Threat memory 6
to other sensory modalities, associative plasticity in the piriform cortex takes the form of ensemble
pattern modification, tuning shifts, receptive field adaptation, and changes in cortical oscillations
putatively due to changes in neuronal excitation/inhibition balance (Barnes and others 2011; Chapuis and
Wilson 2012; Chen and others 2011; Li and others 2008; Motanis and others 2014; You and others 2022)
of enhanced connectivity and bidirectional information flow between the amygdala and piriform cortex
following threat conditioning and aversive experience (East and others 2021; Krusemark and others 2013).
The necessary role of the piriform cortex is evinced by the fact that lesions of the piriform cortex (without
impairing basic olfactory processing) can block the expression of threat conditioning tested a day (East
and others 2021) or a month later (Sacco and Sacchetti 2010), and blockade of NMDA receptors in the
piriform cortex can impair long-term (but not recent) memory of threat conditioning (Hegoburu and
others 2014). In addition, chemogenetic silencing or reactivation of piriform neuron ensembles active
during olfactory threat conditioning can impair or evoke threat memory, respectively, causally elucidating
this piriform engram (Choi and others 2011; Meissner-Bernard and others 2019).
Moreover, this plasticity also exhibits time-dependent properties, more prominent in long-term threat
applying neuroimaging methods (fMRI and PET) for large-scale, whole-brain analysis combined with
temporal profiling of associative plasticity over a long delay, two new studies (in rodents and humans)
demonstrated that the piriform cortex exhibits associative plasticity both soon and long after threat
conditioning, in contrast to transitory (or no) plasticity in the amygdala and frontal cortices (Mouly and
others 2022; You and others 2022). These effects are consistent with findings from human fMRI and
electrophysiological studies in the visual and auditory cortices, which indicated lasting associative
plasticity in the sensory cortex in contrast to transitory plasticity in the amygdala and inferotemporal and
orbitofrontal cortices (Apergis-Schoute and others 2014; You and others 2021). Interestingly, in a manner
that can be likened to the hippocampus, piriform cortex in rodents shows sleep-dependent memory
replay that is important for accurate threat memory consolidation (Barnes and Wilson 2014), further
emphasizing the long-term nature of olfactory cortical memory engrams.
Olfactory cortex holds basic circuit architecture for threat memory
The olfactory piriform cortex is evolutionarily the oldest laminated cortex, emerging in the ancestral
amniote brain and long predating the advent of amygdala. That threat conditioning is widely observed in
amniotes (e.g., reptiles) implies that this ancient cortex is not only necessary but largely sufficient for
Threat memory 7
threat conditioning (at least, in simple forms). Notably, the basic structure of the piriform cortex is highly
conserved through evolution and shows minimal differences across mammals (including humans), in
fitting with the convergence of results in threat memory studies across species. The proficiency of piriform
cortex in threat memory is likely to arise from its combination of local circuit architecture and its privileged
connectivity within the broader threat network (as reviewed below).
Circuit architecture optimal for CAM of threat engram The piriform cortex is characterized by a three-
layered cortical circuit organization comprising basic circuit units each centered on a pyramidal neuron
receiving auto- and inter-associative feedforward and feedback excitation and inhibition; moreover, these
circuit units are widely distributed throughout Layers II and III of piriform cortex (Shepherd and Rowe
highly efficient memory storage and retrieval, particularly for associative memory (Haberly and Bower
1989). Through this circuit architecture, olfactory pyramidal neurons would form distributed,
Importantly, this engram is adaptable as the neuronal ensemble pattern is modified by adding or deleting
constituent circuit units and strengthening and weakening synaptic connectivity between the circuit units.
In addition, this engram is efficient given that the CAM processor permits incomplete or degraded odor
information (received within a single sniff) to activate the entire neuronal ensemble (Pashkovski and
ensures strong ecological advantage of the threat engram: it adapts quickly with the environment and
context and performs accurate pattern recognition for a fleeting threat odor at a high speed.
Strategic location of piriform cortex in the threat network The piriform cortex is further characterized by
strong associations with key structures in the threat network. In both rodents and primates including
humans, the anatomical network and functional (intrinsic as well as odor-evoked) network of olfaction
the piriform cortex can be divided into anterior and posterior regions based on circuit structure, with
the anterior dominated by input from the olfactory bulb and the posterior being much more associative
and receiving extensive input from diverse non-olfactory regions (Wilson and Sullivan 2011). Specifically,
the (posterior) piriform neurons are connected with a wide web of telencephalic structures, including
the amygdala, entorhinal cortex, insula, and prefrontal cortex, strongly implicated in the threat engrams
(Josselyn and Tonegawa 2020; Shepherd and Rowe 2017). The bi-directional connection between the
piriform cortex and multiple amygdala nuclei is far more robust than that described for other sensory
Threat memory 8
systems (Aggleton and Saunders 2000), with exception of the insular cortex and taste (Fontanini and
Katz 2009), suggesting relatively privileged access to threat processing in the chemical senses relative to
other sensory cortices. Furthermore, multisensory convergence occurs in the piriform, especially
posterior piriform, allowing formation of association between the CS and unconditioned stimulus (US) in
situ (Sadrian and Wilson 2015) and potentially even with spatial context to support threat
contextualization (Poo and others 2022). Therefore, evolution appears to have strategically positioned
the (posterior) piriform cortex in the connectome such that it can integrate the sensory threat engram
with the distributed network of threat engram.
Olfactory threat engram—the source code for neocortical sensory threat engram
As the primordial cortical structure, the piriform cortex contains the primary motif of cortical circuits,
which was extended to the dorsal cortex (later evolving into the neocortex) and hippocampus (Shepherd
and Rowe 2017). Therefore, the powerful circuit architecture of the piriform cortex could have been co-
opted in the formation of the neocortical sensory cortices. The six layers in the neocortex are considered
as duplicated three-layer piriform cortex with its primary neurons occupying all layers from Layers II to VI
and the neocortical innovations—pyramidal tract (PT) and corticothalamic (CT) neurons—confined to
Layers V/VI (Shepherd and Rowe 2017). Importantly, associative plasticity related to long-term memory
of threat conditioning (e.g., protein synthesis) largely appears in Layers II-IV of the neocortex (Gdalyahu
and others 2012; Sacco and Sacchetti 2010). Therefore, the basic circuit in the piriform cortex appears to
dominate in the neocortical sensory cortex, particularly the circuitry for threat memory. As such, the CAM
architecture and adaptive autoassociative ensemble threat representation in the piriform cortex may
have been universally adopted across modalities. In this sense, the ancient olfactory cortex may hold the
source code for the sensory threat engram in general, while properties of individual (e.g., auditory, visual)
sensory cortices and their connectivity within the threat network would complete their respective
engrams with modality-specific characteristics.
Conclusion
Threat conditioning remains an important problem in affective neuroscience. Pendulum swings and
controversies notwithstanding, intense research on this topic has brought the field to a distributed view
of threat memory. In this distributed network, the amygdala is indeed essential, but so is the sensory
cortex (and potentially other structures), albeit in distinct ways. Establishing the sensory cortical
representation of threat memory would have important implications in the conceptualization of threat
processing and fear-related disorders. In confronting danger in the environment, an organism needs to
Threat memory 9
maintain an accurate memory of acquired signals of threat. The sensory cortex is on the frontline, enacting
threat evaluation in the initial sensory feedforward sweep and subsequently alerting and triggering the
other systems into action. Abnormal functioning of sensory threat memory (e.g., hyperfunctioning, de-
contextualization) could underlie the pathophysiology of fear-related disorders (such as posttraumatic
stress disorder), accounting for the extreme fear of trauma-related sensory cues and intrusive memories
laden with vivid sensory fragments of the traumatic event (Brewin and others 2010; Li 2019). As such,
unlocking the sensory threat engram would enable the modification and erasure of threat memory,
revolutionizing clinical intervention of such disorders. The olfactory cortex, equipped with a simple and
well-understood CAM circuit architecture, would serve as a particularly useful model system.
Threat memory 10
Glossary
Content addressable memory (CAM): A highly efficient form of memory that allows distributed
information storage through convergent activity of feedforward inputs, which can facilitate
associative memory of diverse inputs (e.g., olfactory, multi-sensory context, and hedonic state),
and which can then be recalled by just a subset of those original inputs.
Threat conditioning: A highly reliable experimental paradigm that renders an initially neutral
cue (i.e., conditioned stimulus/CS) threatening by associating it with an aversive unconditioned
stimulus (US).
Threat engram: Necessary and sufficient neural changes encoding the learned threat.
Threat memory 11