Burnout: Emerged Issue in Business during Economic Recession in Greece
1 2 2 2
Evgenia Gkintoni , Panagiotis Togias , Constantinos Halkiopoulos , Konstantinos Giotopoulos ,
Hera Antonopoulou
1Dept. of Psychology, University of Crete, Greece
2Dept. of Business Administration (Patras), Technological Educational Institute of Western Greece, Greece
Abstract
In this research paper presents the Evaluation of burnout Index professionals working in both the private
and public sector, amid the economic recession in Greece. Data were collected by filling working adults
aged 18 years and above through a questionnaire which is designed to measure burnout at work (Maslach
Burnout Inventory - MBI). This questionnaire measures three dimensions of burnout: (1) Emotional
Exhaustion, (2) Depersonalization, (3) Personal Accomplishment. The questionnaires were created through
analysis by adding additional parameters such as gender, age, education, occupation and birth / residence.
Then an appropriate pretreatment provided as input to a special software and Machine Learning Data
Mining (R) to generate patterns and inference rules. In conclusion, the results obtained by weighting and
criteria basis, evaluate and present adult rates, which in turn analyze the degree of burnout.
Keywords: Burnout, MBI, Economic Recession, Data mining, R
1. INTRODUCTION
The Greek economy situation today is characterized particularly unfavorable. One of the areas most affected
significantly by the current reality is the workplace, with many people losing their jobs and are unable to meet basic
survival needs. Thus it is understood that the economic downturn and its impact affecting both physical and mental
health. The economic recession seems to exert a direct influence on people's behavior, in the event of stress, insecurity
and uncertainty about the future, and anger expression for the perpetrators of the situation in which the country found.
A major issue goes with an economic recession and burnout. This phenomenon has been addressed in recent decades
many disciplines, such as psychology, sociology, economics as well as the impact on the worker is very important, both
for himself and for the business in which they work. The study of the factors affecting it now becomes imperative,
given that stress at work plays a very important role in the onset, progression and deterioration of various conditions
related to mental health, this phenomenon deserves special attention.
1.1. Literature Review
Most theories describing the causes that generate
the burnout, based on two concepts, which is the
"demand" and "supply" of the worker and the work
environment to him. Specifically, we could say that
the employee when starting his professional activity
brings to the area of his work knowledge, skills and
abilities (employee offering) and also has some
personal needs, requirements and expectations of
the working space such as recognition, prestige,
financial requirements, professional development
opportunities, etc.
On the other hand, the working environment, has
certain requirements and expectations of the
employee (demand) because the reward for
promotion of (labor supply). But when these calling
and gives the practitioner does not agree to those
demands and requests the working environment is created gap, which involves an imbalance or discrepancy. This has
the effect of increasing chronic stressor likely that progressively leads to the appearance of burnout syndrome
various actors relationships that lead to the appearance of the syndrome (Schaufeli W. And Enzmann D., 1998).
1.2. Description of Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI)
In this research in order to measure the phenomenon of burnout was used the Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI). The
Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI) is the most commonly used tool to self-assess whether you might be at risk of
burnout. To determine the risk of burnout, the MBI explores three components: exhaustion, depersonalization and
personal achievement. While this tool may be useful, it must not be used as a scientific diagnostic technique, regardless
of the results. The objective is simply to make you aware that anyone may be at risk of burnout.
According to Maslach, a questionnaire composed of 22 self-declarations, 9 for emotional exhaustion, depersonalization
5 to 8 for personal accomplishment. Each statement evaluated in 7-Likert scale, with responses from 0 = never, 1 = few
times a year, 2 = once a month, 3 = few times a month, 4 = once a week, 5 = few times a week , up to 6 = every day, the
above two dimensions of burnout. The higher score indicated the subscale of emotional exhaustion and
depersonalization, and the higher levels of burnout (Maslach et al., 1996).
The internal consistency reliability of the three subscales are relatively high. Specifically, the index Cronbach's a for
emotional exhaustion are 0.83, 0.75 for depersonalization and personal achievement 0.76.
1.3. Description of Machine Learning & Data Mining methods
Data Mining is an emerging knowledge discovery process of extracting previously unknown, actionable information
from very large scientific and commercial databases. It is imposed by the explosive growth of such databases. Usually,
a data mining process extracts rules by processing high dimensional categorical and/or numerical data. Classification,
clustering and association are the most well known data mining tasks.
Classification is one of the most popular data mining tasks. Classification aims at extracting knowledge which can be
used to classify data into predefined classes, described by a set of attributes.
Association rules can be used to represent frequent patterns in data, in the form of dependencies among concepts
attributes. In this paper, we consider the special case, that is known as the market basket problem, where concepts-
attributes represent products and the initial database is a set of customer purchases (transactions).
Clustering involves finding a specific number of subgroups (k) within a set of n observations (data points/objects); each
described by d attributes. A clustering algorithm generates cluster descriptions and assigns each observation to one
cluster (exclusive assignment) or in part to many clusters (partial assignment).
2. METHODOLOGY
In this paper were applied Machine Learning and Data Mining methods in order to evaluate the burnout (MBI) of
employees in Business. The methodology, that was adopted, consists of three concrete phases. During the first phase
collected and preprocessed from the questionnaires. The data set for analysis was consisted of demographics elements
of responders, such as the gender, the birth-place, the place of present residence, educational background of both the
respondents and their parents, professional occupation of parents and also of subscales of the MBI Inventory. During
the third phase, the data set was analyzed based on Data Mining techniques and evaluate the results. More specifically,
we utilized classification algorithms so as to manage to describe the hidden patterns underlying in the data. Decision
trees are a powerful way in order to represent and facilitate statements analysis (psychological) principally, comprising
successive decisions and variable results in a designated period.
Sample:
A total of 151 employees, 72 females and 79 males, (48% female, 52% male) were recruited from several job
occupations from public and private work sectors.
Total per category:
[18,21]: Women 24, Men 21, Total 45
[22,24]: Women 20, Men 25, Total 45
[>=25]: Women 28, Men 33, Total 61
3. RESULTS
Classification methods aim to identify the classes from some descriptive traits. They find utility in a wide range of
human activities and particularly in automated decision making. Decision trees are a very effective method of
supervised learning. It aims is the partition of a dataset into groups as homogeneous as possible in terms of the variable
to be predicted. It takes as input a set of classified data, and outputs a tree that resembles to an orientation diagram
where each end node (leaf) is a decision (a class) and each non- final node (internal) represents a test. Each leaf
represents the decision of belonging to a class of data verifying all tests path from the root to the leaf. The tree is
simpler, and technically it seems easy to use. In fact, it is more interesting to get a tree that is adapted to the
probabilities of variables to be tested. Mostly balanced tree will be a good result. If a sub-tree can only lead to a unique
solution, then all sub-tree can be reduced to the simple conclusion, this simplifies the process and does not change the
final result. Ross Quinlan worked on this kind of decision trees.
Decision trees are built in "ctree (Conditional Inference Trees)" by using a set of training data or data sets. At each node
of the tree, "ctee" chooses one attribute of the data that most effectively splits its set of samples into subsets enriched in
one class or the other. Its criterion is the normalized information gain (difference in entropy) that results from choosing
an attribute for splitting the data. The attribute with the highest normalized information gain is chosen to make the
decision. During the construction of the decision tree, it is possible to manage data for which some attributes have an
unknown value by evaluating the gain or the gain ratio for such an attribute considering only the records for which this
attribute is defined. Using a decision tree, it is possible to classify the records that have unknown values by estimating
the probabilities of different outcomes. Ctree builds decision trees from a set of training data in the same way as ID3 or
C4.5, using the concept of information entropy.
The training data is a set of already classified samples. Each sample consists of a p-dimensional
vector , where the represent attribute values or features of the sample, as well as the class
in which falls. At each node of the tree, "ctree" chooses the attribute of the data that most effectively splits its set of
samples into subsets enriched in one class or the other. The splitting criterion is the normalized information
gain (difference in entropy). The attribute with the highest normalized information gain is chosen to make the decision.
The "ctree" algorithm then recurs on the smaller sublists. In order to specify the best result, it was necessary to fit the
data to the model in a proper way. This task was carried away by changing and testing the controls of "ctree".
The parameters in the control function that were altered are:
• mincriterion: The value of the test statistic (for testtype == "Teststatistic"), or 1 - p-value (for other values of
testtype) that must be exceeded in order to implement a split.
• minsplit: The minimum sum of weights in a node in order to be considered for splitting.
• mtry: The number of input variables randomly sampled as candidates at each node for random forest like
algorithms.
• maxdepth: The maximum depth of the tree.
Tree 1
✓ Depended variable: age
✓ Independed variables: sex +3 indexes
➢ ‘mincriterion’ value: 0.01
➢ ‘minsplit’ value: 20L
➢ ‘mtry’ value: Inf (Infinite)
➢ ‘maxdepht’ value: Inf (Infinite)
Tree 2
✓ Depended variable: sex
✓ Independed variables: sex +3 indexes
➢ ‘mincriterion’ value: 0.01
➢ ‘minsplit’ value: 20L
➢ ‘mtry’ value: Inf (Infinite)
➢ ‘maxdepht’ value: Inf (Infinite)
3.1. Clustering Results
Clustering involves finding a specific number of subgroups (k) within a set of n observations (data points/objects); each
described by d attributes. A clustering algorithm generates cluster descriptions and assigns each observation to one
cluster (exclusive assignment) or in part to many clusters (partial assignment).
Throughout this paper, we shall refer to the output of a clustering algorithm (e.g the medoids of the clusters) as
clustering rules. To estimate the number of clusters, we used the Partitioning Around Memoids method with the help of
‘pamk’ algorithm in R. It prints the suggested number of clusters based on optimum average silhouette width. The
optimal number of clusters that came up is 2.
Pamk performs a partitioning around medoids clustering with the number of clusters estimated by optimum average
silhouette width or Calinski-Harabasz index. The Duda-Hart test is applied to decide whether there should be more
than one cluster (unless 1 is excluded as number of clusters or data are dissimilarities).
Cluster means
Group sinesthimatiki_eksantlisi apoprosopoihsi ellipsi_prosopikon_epiteugmaton
1 -0.6385339 -0.6417615
0.2633158
2 0.8680070 0.8723945
-0.3579449
Plot interpretation
Clusplot: A bivariate plot visualizing a partition
(clustering) of the data. All observation are
represented by points in the plot, using principal
components or multidimensional scaling. Around
each cluster an ellipse is drawn.
Silhouette plot: Gives the silhouette width
information for each data point, average
silhouette width for each cluster and for the whole
data. Silhouette Width is a measure to estimate
the dissimilarity between clusters. A higher
silhouette width is preferred to determine the
optimal number of clusters.
3.2. Mining Association Rules
Association Rule Mining is a common technique used to find associations between many variables. In Data
Mining, Apriori is a classic algorithm for learning association rules. Apriori is designed to operate on databases
containing transactions (for example data collected from surveys in this case). As is common in association rule mining,
given a set of item sets, the algorithm attempts to find subsets which are common to at least a minimum number C of
the itemsets.
Apriori uses a "bottom up" approach, where frequent subsets are extended one item at a time, and groups of
candidates are tested against the data. The algorithm terminates when no further successful extensions are found.
Apriori uses breadth-first search and a tree structure to count candidate item sets efficiently. It generates candidate item
sets of length k from item sets of length k − 1. Then it prunes the candidates which have an infrequent sub pattern.
According to the downward closure lemma, the candidate set contains all frequent k-length item sets. After that, it scans
the transaction database to determine frequent item sets among the candidates.
Association rules present association or correlation between item sets. An association rule has the form of
A B, where A and B are two disjoint item sets.
The Goal: studies whether the occurrence of one feature is related to the occurrence of others.
Three most widely used measures for selecting interesting rules are:
✓ Support is the percentage of cases in the data that contains both A and B,
✓ Confidence is the percentage of cases containing A that also contain B, and
✓ Lift is the ratio of confidence to the percentage of cases containing B.
3.3. Apriori rules visualization
• Scatterplot
This visualization method draws a two
dimensional scatterplot with different measures of
interestingness (parameter "measure") on the axes and
a third measure (parameter "shading") is represented
by the color of the points. There is a special value for
shading called "order" which produces a two-key plot
where the color of the points represents the length (order) of the rule.
• Matrix3D
Arranges the association rules as a matrix with
the item sets in the antecedents on one axis, and the item
sets in the consequent on the other. The interest measure is
either visualized by a color (darker means a higher value
for the measure) or as the height of a bar (method
"matrix3D"). Specifically of our use, the parameters that
were altered are:
➢ measure = "lift"
➢ control = list(reorder = TRUE)
• Grouped Matrix plot
Antecedents (columns) in the matrix are
grouped using clustering. Groups are represented as
balloons in the matrix.
• Graph
Represents the rules (or itemsets) as a
graph. Specifically of our use, the parameters that
were altered are:
➢ control=list(type="items")
• Paracoord
Parallel coordinate charts are a visualization
that consists of N amount of vertical axes, each
representing a unique data set of 76 rules, with lines
drawn across the axes. The lines show the relationship
between the axes, much like scatter plots, and the
patterns that the lines form indicates the relationship.
We can also gather details about the relationships
between the axes when you see the clustering of lines.
Let’s take a look at this using the chart below as an
example. Specifically of our use, the parameters that
were altered are:
➢ control=list(reorder=TRUE)
4. CONCLUSIONS
The results of this study showed differences both in terms of three (3) indicators of burnout (burnout) and in terms of
demographic factors such as gender. Specifically, in the total sample, the professionals involved, reported high levels of
emotional exhaustion and lack of personal achievements, but the depersonalization factor, not noted as significant in
this sample. Regarding gender, male employees than women, appeared to occur more influenced by the phenomenon of
burnout on indicators of emotional exhaustion and personal accomplishment. Following the above, the economic
recession from which in recent years Greece is affected significantly, the phenomenon of burnout seems to influence a
proportionate manner, several of the professional categories of employees, in both the private and public sectors.