Running Head: Sociocultural Context & AMPD 1
Sociocultural Context and the DSM-5 Alternative Model of Personality Disorder:
Comment on Widiger & Hines
Craig Rodriguez-Seijas, Ph.D.
Department of Psychology
University of Michigan
This manuscript has been accepted for the journal Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and
Treatment. It has not been copy edited. It is not the copy of record.
Correspondence concerning this article can be addressed to Craig Rodriguez-Seijas, Department
of Psychology, University of Michigan, 2215 East Hall, 530 Church Street, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-1043. E-mail: crseijas@umich.edu
Running Head: Sociocultural Context & AMPD 2
Abstract
Widiger and Hines provide a brief overview of the development of the Alternative Model of
Personality Disorder (AMPD) housed within Section 3 of the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013). They
highlight eight issues and controversies related to the AMPD in need of resolution for
improvement of both the AMPD model itself as well as the field of personality disorders more
broadly. In this brief commentary, I add a ninth issue in need of attention both with respect to the
AMPD but also within the field of personality disorders more broadly: 9) How is sociocultural
context to be accommodated in AMPD—and more generally personality disorder—theory,
research, and treatment? The historical intra-individual, deficit-based models for
conceptualizing personality disorders linger in current personality disorder discourse. However,
failure to appropriately consider sociocultural context that systematically predisposes wide
swaths of the population to unequal access to resources and exposure to psychological stressors,
which can impact the appearance of personality pathology, serves to stigmatize minoritized
individuals. The personality disorder field, and the AMPD discourse, must appropriately contend
with sociocultural context in its models otherwise it risks developing models with limited
generalizability and which hold potential to adversely affect sexual and gender minoritized
populations, among others.
Keywords: Alternative Model of Personality Disorder; Sexual and Gender Minority; LGBTQ+;
Sociocultural Context; Personality Disorders
Running Head: Sociocultural Context & AMPD 3
Sociocultural Context and the DSM-5 Alternative Model of Personality Disorder: Comment on
Widiger and Hines
Widiger and Hines highlight eight issues that must be tackled in current and future
research on the Alternative Model of Personality Disorder (AMPD): (1) Does the DSM-5
AMPD have any incremental validity or utility over DSM-IV? (2) What are the treatment
implications for the AMPD? (3) Is the Level of Personality Functioning (LPF) a unitary
construct? (4) Does the LPF define the core of personality disorder? (5) Is the LPF even
necessary? (6) Is the DSM-5 trait model sufficiently comprehensive in its coverage? (7)
Synchronization of the ICD-11 and DSM-5. (8) Should any DSM-IV syndrome be retained?
By their own admission, this list of questions is not exhaustive. There are likely myriad other
issues with which personality—and AMPD—researchers and stakeholders must contend.
The purpose of this commentary is to add and briefly discuss one additional question to
this list: (9) How is sociocultural context to be accommodated in AMPD—and
personality disorder more broadly—theory, research, and treatment? Contending with
the sociocultural context necessarily complicates both the AMPD as well as the field of
personality pathology. For example, when it comes to questions 1, 3, 4, and 5—pertaining to
the definition of personality disorders—sociocultural context begets questions about how
structural determinants of health have been included in historical and contemporary
personality disorder models. Question 2, about treatment implications, raises questions of
how personality disorder interventions depart in subtle, yet arguably fundamental, ways from
evidence-based intervention principles for working with historically excluded populations
(harking back to issues of personality disorder epistemology). Question 6, regarding
Running Head: Sociocultural Context & AMPD 4
comprehensiveness of Criterion B traits, highlights issues of inclusion; to what extent have
diverse populations been included in the creation and examination of assessment measures?
It is my assertion that the field of personality disorder theory has largely operated in a
manner that is socially decontextualized from the broader structural environment in which
individuals exist. The assumptions that persist within the contemporary discourse on the
AMPD continue to reflect some of the intra-individual, deficit-based models of earlier
personality disorder theories. The net effect is ignorance of the ways in which systematic
oppression creates chronically stressful environments that do not equally apply to or affect all
members of the population. By failing to situate personality pathology appropriately in the
sociocultural context of the individual and ignoring systematic ways in which certain
populations are differentially impacted by these social structures, the field of personality
disorder inadvertently propagates stigma of its own. Accommodating sociocultural context
within personality disorder and AMPD discourse is overdue.
In terms of structure, I first discuss my positionality relative to the personality discourse.
Next, I briefly highlight the historical deficiency-based roots of personality disorder theory. I
then illustrate how neglect of sociocultural context impacts conceptualization of personality
pathology as well as its treatment, corresponding with questions 4 and 2 respectively, as
raised by Widiger and Hines. I end by calling for increased attention to context in the study
of personality pathology both in relation to the AMPD and more broadly.
Author Positionality Statement
On a professional level, I study transdiagnostic dimensional models of
psychopathology—like the AMPD—and factors associated with manifestation of
psychopathology among minoritized groups. My research has included investigating how
Running Head: Sociocultural Context & AMPD 5
minority stressors relate transdiagnostically to psychopathology outcomes (e.g., Rodriguez-
Seijas, Eaton, et al., 2019; Rodriguez-Seijas et al., 2015). My clinical training lies in the
provision of evidence-based, affirming care to sexual and gender (SGM) populations (e.g.,
Rodriguez-Seijas, Burton, et al., 2019) and in training graduate students in conceptualizing
psychopathology with an eye to sociocultural context. Most recently, my research has
broadened into the personality disorder realm, focusing on issues related to assessment and
diagnosis of borderline personality disorder among SGM populations (e.g., Rodriguez-Seijas
et al., 2021a, 2021b). On a personal level, I possess several minoritized identities including
sexual and racial/ethnic minority, and immigrant statuses. These professional and personal
experiences form the backdrop for this commentary, and explain my reference to SGM
populations throughout, though the principles I outline herein arguably apply to other
understudied and excluded populations.
Deficit-Based Conceptualization of Personality Disorder
The lineage of personality disorder theory is one of constitutional deficiency. Crocq
(2013) reviewed major theories of personality disorders/personality pathology which largely
reflect intra-individual deficit models. For instance, Kraepelin considered psychopathic
personalities the result of inborn defect. Similarly, Schneider theorized that abnormal
personalities resulted from largely inborn, constitutional factors. This intra-individual
deficiency narrative permeates earlier instantiations of the DSM. In DSM-I, personality
disorders are “characterized by developmental defects or pathological trends in personality
structure” wherein personality is “…considered deep seated disturbances, with little room for
regression” (p. 34). In DSM-II, personality pathology results from “deeply ingrained
maladaptive patterns of behavior” (p. 41) dropping the explicit reference to inborn defect.
Running Head: Sociocultural Context & AMPD 6
From DSM-III and beyond, personality disorders are described as enduring patterns of
perceiving and responding to the world in a maladaptive manner.
Sections 2 and 3 of the DSM-5 explicitly consider how an individual’s cultural
expectations impact the diagnosis of a personality disorder. Within Section 2, personality
disorders “deviate markedly from the expectations of an individual’s culture” (p. 629) and
are “… distinguished from characteristics that emerge in response to specific situational
stressors …” (p. 630). Within the AMPD, caution is suggested about diagnosing a personality
disorder as a function of the individual’s sociocultural environment. However, unlike the
clear instructions to avoid diagnosing a personality disorder when the individual meets
criteria for another mental disorder (Criterion E; p. 761), no clear instructions to avoid
personality disorder diagnosis based on a comprehensive assessment of sociocultural context
exist (see Criteria E, F, and G; p. 763).
The historical intra-individual deficiency model of personality disorder theory lingers
today. The LPF of the AMPD illustrates how failure to sufficiently consider sociocultural
context hinders generalizability of personality disorder models across populations and
inadvertently propagates stigma.
Sociocultural Decontextualization of the LPF Core of Personality Pathology
“Diagnostic entities decontextualize people’s problems and then recontextualize them by
inventing a concept called [personality] disorder” (p. 530; Schwarz, 2018)
Personality disorders are purportedly defined by “fundamental disturbances of self and
interpersonal relations” (p. 332; Bender et al., 2011) which comprise the self-interpersonal
dimensions that constitute the LPF. The LPF model of personality disorder reflects intra-
individual conceptualization divorced from extra-individual, structural determinants of
Running Head: Sociocultural Context & AMPD 7
functioning. For example, according to the LPF, an individual meets criteria for extreme-level
intimacy impairment if they demonstrate “... profound disinterest or expectation of harm” (p.
itself does not wade into defining etiological underpinnings of these behavioral indicators, the
ways in which personality pathology are colloquially discussed suggest an inherently
biologically determined framework. The LPF is positioned as the core of personality pathology
(i.e., the disease) that gives rise to observed psychosocial impairment associated with personality
disorder (i.e., the disability; Sharp & Wall, 2021).
The sociocultural context in which SGM individuals exist is one that primes individuals
to expect social rejection and enact behaviors to avoid harm. Hypervigilance and sensitivity to
potential rejection among SGM individuals is highlighted within theories of minority stress
processes (e.g., Hatzenbuehler, 2009; Meyer, 2003; Tan et al., 2020). In his review, Feinstein
(2020) notes how sensitivity to rejection can be adaptive in the face of chronic stigma from a
heteronormative society. Specifically, vigilance of potential rejection helps minoritized
individuals avoid unsafe situations. In addition, some literature suggests decreases in secure
attachment experiences as a function of social rejection (Cook & Calebs, 2016), with potential to
impact interpersonal relationships and intimacy. How does the LPF, and the wider AMPD,
contend with the fact that for SGM individuals, the sociocultural environment is one which
systematically exposes them to experiencing high levels of stigma, discrimination, and
victimization with impact on self- and interpersonal functioning? By divorcing itself from
context, how much does the AMPD (re)stigmatize SGM individuals by potentially attributing
dysfunction to an intra-individual cause (i.e., personality) rather than expectable coping
mechanisms in the face of chronic stress? For instance, borderline personality disorder is
Running Head: Sociocultural Context & AMPD 8
identified as reflecting the core of personality pathology and overlaps with the LPF in several
ways. We’ve previously suggested that sociocultural context might explain several borderline
personality disorder criteria among SM populations (Rodriguez-Seijas et al., 2021a. 2021b). The
sociocultural context is—at least part of—the disease process; what is conceptualized as
personality pathology might be the disability.
AMPD Intervention Implications and Sociocultural Context
Failure to appropriately situate sociocultural context in assessment and diagnosis extends
to intervention approaches for personality pathology. Widiger and Hines acknowledge the
relative lack of evidence-based intervention approaches for maladaptive personality domains,
with the exception of the neuroticism/negative affectivity domain. They direct readers to
references that speculate on how extant evidence-based approaches may be adapted for different
AMPD Criterion B domains. Missing from many of these approaches is explicit consideration of
the ways in which sociocultural context impacts treatment conceptualization and delivery.
Interventions for SGM populations highlight and embrace minority stress theory in their
conceptualization and treatment approaches (e.g., Burton et al., 2019; Pachankis et al., 2019).
The importance of attending to minority stress context has even been extended to dialectical
behavior therapy for SGM individuals with a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder (see
Pantalone et al., 2019). After summarizing myriad evidence-based approaches for psychosocial
dysfunction among SM populations, Rogers and colleagues (2021) conclude that interventions
share—among other things—a fundamental focus and understanding of the ways in which
sociocultural context impacts the development and persistence of psychosocial dysfunction and
necessarily informs treatment. Stemming from the epistemic exclusion of sociocultural context
within the assessment and diagnosis of personality pathology within the AMPD, and broadly
Running Head: Sociocultural Context & AMPD 9
across personality disorder theory in general, how will the field move forward to harnessing
more contextualized intervention approaches for personality disorders?
Conclusion: A Call for Sociocultural Context in the AMPD and Beyond
In discussing intersectionality theory, Cole (2009) asks scientists to consider who is
included in our categories. Grzanka (2020) proposes three additional questions for the
application of intersectionality theory within psychological science related to addressing systems
and not solely identities; examining how social power operates within structures; and questioning
the role psychologists can play in solving social problems. These questions are also important for
improving and advancing personality theory related to the AMPD. Who has been excluded
within the personality disorder discourse? I would venture to say that the modal study of
personality disorder has failed to represent historically excluded populations like sexual, gender,
and racial/ethnic minority groups. Further, I would be surprised if attention to sociocultural
context, rather than inherently operating from intra-individual deficiency models, was
accommodated in studies that center these underrepresented groups. How has the AMPD—and
personality disorder literature more broadly—considered sociocultural context within its
epistemology? How have the dominant scientific voices and their relative positions influenced
the resultant personality disorder discourse? And finally, what can we do to effectively address
sociocultural context within personality pathology models like the AMPD? The epistemic
exclusion of sociocultural context within AMPD theory, research, and treatment is tantamount to
an issue of injustice. Without contending with the socially contextualized nature of personality
pathology and the impact of structural determinants of health beyond intra-individual deficiency
models, the AMPD and any models of personality pathology, cannot appropriately generalize to
diverse populations and risk facilitating harm to those communities.
Running Head: Sociocultural Context & AMPD 10