In press: British Journal of Social Psychology (BJSP)
Strategic thinking in the shadow of self-enhancement: Benefits and costs
Short title: Strategic thinking in the shadow
David J. Grüning*1,2
Joachim I. Krueger3
1 Heidelberg University
2 GESIS — Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences
3 Brown University
*Corresponding author information: David J. Grüning, Hauptstraße 47, Heidelberg, 69117,
Germany (e-mail: david.gruening@stud.uni-heidelberg.de, or david.gruening@uni-
mannheim.de)
Data availability statement:
All the stimuli, presentation materials, and participant data can be found on this paper’s
view_only=564df787c345490791bf8310969f3183.
Acknowledgements:
We thank the students enrolled in social cognition laboratory course at Brown University
during the 2022 and 2023 academic years for their assistance with data collection. The
studies reported here were conducted without dedicated funding.
Strategic thinking in the shadow 2
Abstract:
Using a variant of the hide-and-seek game, we show in three studies that self-enhancement
can help or hinder strategic thinking. In this guessing game, one player chooses a number
while another player tries to guess it. Each player does this either in random fashion
(throwing a mental die) or by active thinking. The structure of the game implies that guessers
benefit from thinking about a number, whereas choosers are disadvantaged. Yet, regardless of
their role, respondents prefer to actively think about a number. For choosers, the belief they
can outthink the opponent amounts to self-enhancement, whereas for guessers, the same
belief can be rationally justified. We discuss the implications of the findings for theories of
strategic cognition and applications to real-world contexts.
Keywords:
self-enhancement, hide-and-seek game, strategic reasoning, theory of mind, randomization
Strategic thinking in the shadow 3
Never interrupt your enemy when he is making a mistake. – Napoleon Bonaparte
Strategic thinking involves cognitive processes designed to achieve goals (Dixit &
Nalebuff, 2008). It would then seem that successful strategic thinking must be rational.
However, cognitive biases and outright irrationality also facilitate strategic goal attainment
under certain conditions (Ellsberg, 1959; Gigerenzer, 2023; Krueger & Massey, 2009;
Schelling, 1960). We focus on one egocentric bias, self-enhancement, which, in the form of
overconfidence, has been implicated in strategic cognition (Moore, 2020). Broadly defined,
self-enhancement is a cognitive-perceptual bias that results in a tendency to view the self in a
favorable light, particularly in comparison to others (Hoorens, 1993; Krueger, 1998; Krueger
et al., 2024). With this research, we begin to explore the question of whether, and under what
conditions, self-enhancement can harm or facilitate goal attainment in strategic contexts.
The strategist’s goal is to outmaneuver an adversary, a challenge long contemplated
by military thinkers seeking ways to surprise the enemy, or at least being able to avoid being
surprised (Xenophon, 1998). The key to successful strategy is knowing that the adversary
also seeks strategic success and is likely to be equipped with similar cognitive capabilities.
The successful strategist anticipates the adversary's moves further ahead than the adversary
does. Sun Tzu (2009) advised strategists to only engage in battles that can be won. When two
disciples of Sun Tzu clash, one of them will be proven overconfident, a notion von
Clausewitz (1832/2020) and von Moltke (1871) impressed on Post-Napoleonic students of
strategy.
Similar dynamics crop up in less martial contexts. Consider the strategic challenge of
market entry: Entrepreneurs must consider not only their own readiness to enter the market,
but also the readiness of their competitors (Bolger et al., 2008; Cain et al., 2015; Moore &
Cain, 2007). The successful entrepreneur enters a market when the time is right and few
Strategic thinking in the shadow 4
others notice. A market populated with equally confident entrants will leave many
bankruptcies in its wake. Whether an entrant’s confidence amounts to overconfidence
depends in part on the confidence and the entry decisions of other agents. Or consider
European football, where a penalty kicker and a goalkeeper try to predict each other's moves
(Bar-Eli & Azar, 2009; Chiappori et al., 2002). Shooters must anticipate goalkeepers’
predictions of where the shots will hit (e.g., the left or right corner of the goal) if they are to
frustrate these predictions. The goalkeepers’ challenge is to match their reactions to the
expected actions of the shooters.
These vignettes, drawn from the domains of military combat, entrepreneurial
decision-making, and athletic competition, exemplify a broader class of decision problems,
which also comprises the dynamics of courtship (e.g., Mogilski et al., 2017; Regan, 2016),
business negotiations (e.g., Bazerman et al., 2000; Fontaine, 2008; Halevy, 2008), games like
chess and poker, and struggles over power and trust (Krueger & Grüning, 2022b; Krueger et
al., 2022). The common denominator of these strategic challenges is that they require
decision makers to engage in recursive cognition involving their own intentions and the
expected intentions of their opponents. Critically, there is no logical endpoint to the depth of
this recursive thinking. How far strategists can think ahead depends on their ability and
motivation, but it can also be influenced by their inclination to self-enhance. Someone who
thinks they can think two steps ahead while others can think only one step ahead, is self-
enhancing, and, consequently, overconfident. They might stop there. Conversely, someone
who believes that others think as deeply as he can end up staring down a cognitive rabbit
hole, trying to find ways to stay one step ahead without having a way to stop. Self-
enhancement may protect a player from such infinite cognitive regress; it may help make a
decision, even if strict rationality must be sacrificed.
Strategic thinking in the shadow 5
Strategically simulating an opponent's thoughts can bear fruit if one is, in fact, able to
outthink that opponent. By necessity, this path to success cannot be open to everyone if there
is only one winner. Research shows that, on average, individuals are able to think two steps
ahead (Arad & Rubinstein, 2012; Benndorf et al., 2017), which is conventionally described as
a k-level of 2. This level corresponds to the following reasoning: "I think the opponent thinks
that I think the opponent thinks that I think the opponent will do X" (Camerer et al., 2004;
Grüning & Krueger, 2021; Nagel, 1995). As most people show a self-enhancement bias on a
great variety of tasks (Alicke & Govorun, 2005; Heck et al., 2018), it may be expected that
they believe they can predict their opponent's choice beyond the point the other can follow.
Biased thinkers have an inflated perception of their ability to outthink others. With a
symmetric distribution of ability, however, only every other individual can outthink a
randomizing opponent.
We propose that self-enhancement can aid and impair strategic thinking in social
games (see also Humberg et al., 2018; von Hippel & Drivers, 2011), and that the likely
outcome can be predicted from the context. Our goal is to explore the conditions under which
self-enhancement is beneficial versus detrimental in zero-sum games, and to examine
whether naïve players recognize these conditions. In three studies, using a variant of the hide-
and-seek game (Falk et al., 2009; Rubinstein et al., 1997; Lahat-Rania & Kareev, 2023), we
manipulate context by varying participants' roles in the game they played.
The Guessing Game
In earlier work, we simplified a thought experiment presented by Dixit and Nalebuff
(2008), to create a game, in which a chooser selects a number from 1 to 6 and a guesser
predicts what it is. If the two numbers match, the guesser wins $60; if they do not, the
chooser wins $12 (Grüning & Krueger, 2021). Players are either instructed to think of a
Strategic thinking in the shadow 6
number or to generate one randomly by rolling a die, resulting in four different pairings. Both
players can randomly generate a number (r_r), both can think of a number (t_t), or one can
randomly generate a number while the other thinks (r_t and t_r, with the chooser’s strategy
indicated by the first letter). The question is how much money participants are willing to pay
(WTP) to play each of the four games.
We (2021) provided evidence for two relevant phenomena. First, we replicated the
finding that, in a departure from randomness, participants prefer numbers in the mid-range
(Attali & Bar-Hillel, 2003; Rubinstein et al., 1997; Teigen, 1983). Second, and more
critically, we found that guessers are willing to pay the most for the game that requires both
players to thoughtfully generate a number. This finding seems to suggest that guessers
approach the game rationally. A guesser who expects players, regardless of their role, to
generate numbers with a predictable bias (e.g., a preference for central numbers) will have an
advantage over a chooser who prefers to think of a number rather than randomize. Here, a
match between the chosen number and the guessed number is more likely than under a
random guessing regime.
Self-Enhancement as a Double-Edged Sword in Strategic Thinking
Rational thought is not the only possible explanation for guessers’ preference for
thinking in the game. Their choice may be driven by self-enhancement, that is, the belief that
they can outthink the opponent. As it stands, the benefit of self-enhancement to the guesser is
confounded with the effect of rational thinking, which supports the same preference. To
resolve this confound, it is instructive to consider the perspective of the chooser. If choosers
recognize that shared biases favor a thinking guesser over a thinking chooser, they should
avoid a mutual thinking scenario. If, on the other hand, self-enhancement is pervasive, then
choosers will also prefer a thoughtful number-selection strategy against a thinking guesser. In
Strategic thinking in the shadow 7
short, self-enhancement can help or hinder players in a hide-and-seek game, depending on
their role.
Present Studies
In three studies, we explored the benefits and risks of self-enhancement in strategic
thinking in the number guessing game. In Study 1a, participants adopted the role of the
chooser. If they were rational, but not if they were self-enhancing, choosers would be averse
to the think-think scenario. In other words, the role of the chooser pits self-enhancement
against rational choice. In Study 1b, we assessed directly whether participants believe
themselves to be more able recursive thinkers than others. Despite its crucial role in any
social game, comparative k-level reasoning has not been empirically tested. In this context,
the presence of a self-enhancement bias has only been postulated on theoretical grounds
(Burchardi & Penczynski, 2014; Camerer et al., 2004).
In Study 2, we asked participants to take on both roles in a randomized sequence. This
design made the advantages and disadvantages of each role transparent to the players. If self-
enhancement is a primary determinant of choice, participants should prefer the think-think
variant of the game, regardless of their role as guesser or chooser and regardless of which
role they take first. However, if participants rationally recognize that the think-think variant
uniquely favors the guesser, they should prefer it only when in the guesser role.
To gain additional insight into participants' self-enhancing approach to this game, we
then asked respondents which role they would prefer to play, given a choice. Rational
considerations suggest a preference for the guesser role, because only in this role can a player
hope to do better than the opponent. If self-enhancement prevails, however, respondents will
prefer the role of chooser because they associate this role with greater agency and control.
Strategic thinking in the shadow 8
After all, choosers have the prerogative of picking the number that will determine the
outcome of the game. Choosers act, whereas guessers react.
In Study 3, we set out to replicate the results of the second study while also examining
personality differences in self-enhancement effects.
Study 1a: Self-Enhancement Versus Rational Choice
In Study 1a, we ask whether choosers realize they should place the least value on a
game in which both they and the guesser are thinking of a number. Alternatively, if choosers'
decisions are driven by self-enhancement, they might even place more value on a game in
which both players are actively thinking.
Methods
Participants and design. One-hundred-and-ninety-four participants were recruited in
the U.S. by upper-division undergraduate students enrolled in a laboratory course on social
cognition at Brown University (Rhode Island, USA) via direct and social media targeting.
Each student was tasked to collect data from at least 12 respondents. Data quality was
ensured by students following a detailed protocol to invite others for participation and by the
participants taking part in the study in person with the student being present. The sample
comprised 105 (54.7%) female and 85 (44.3%) male participants, with two respondents
(1.00%) indicating “non-binary/third gender.” The sample included mostly students with age
ranging from 18 to 23 years (M = 20, SD = 1.24). The study’s within-subject design crossed
the chooser’s and the guesser’s mandated strategy (randomize vs. think). Participants took the
role of the chooser in all four versions of the game.
Procedure. After giving their consent, participants were introduced to the number
guessing game. They were asked to imagine themselves in the role of the ‘chooser’ who
would generate a number from one to six, either by rolling a die or by thinking of a number.
Strategic thinking in the shadow 9
In the game, a guesser would generate a response by either thinking of a number or by rolling
a die. Participants were instructed to sequentially consider the four scenarios resulting from
the crossing of the two players’ strategies. In each game, they were told they would win $12
if their number was different from the guesser’s number. They were then asked, for each of
the four games separately, to indicate how much money they would be willing to pay (WTP)
to play it.
Results and Discussion
For all analyses, we used the statistical software JASP, an open-access interactive
interface tool written in the R programming language. We analyzed the data using both
traditional (i.e., frequentist) null hypothesis testing and Bayesian hypothesis evaluation with
the general expectation that they would yield converging conclusions (see Krueger & Heck,
2018, for simulations and Primoceri et al., 2021, for an empirical example on this point).
Given the lively debate between advocates of Frequentist and Bayesian statistics, applications
of these analytical methods to the same data set may reinforce the pragmatic view of their
convergence.
Detecting mean differences. The simplest form of the self-enhancement hypothesis
calls for a main effect of the player’s strategy, that is, that participant’s WTP would be higher
when participants think of a number than when they randomize. A more nuanced form of the
hypothesis calls for an interaction effect such that WTPs would be highest for the scenario in
which both players actively think of a number. In a repeated measures ANOVA with two
factors of two levels each, namely, the player’s strategy (random vs. think) and the
opponent’s strategy (random vs. think), we find a moderate main effect of the player’s
strategy, F(1, 193) = 15.59, p < .001, d = .37, a small effect of the opponent’s strategy, F(1,
193) = 4.73, p = .031, d = .17, and no interaction, p = .053. A z-test for the difference
Strategic thinking in the shadow 10
between effect sizes shows that the main effect of player’s strategy is larger than the main
effect of opponent’s strategy, z = 3.70, p < .001. A Bayesian ANOVA corroborates this result,
showing that a model with only a main effect of the participant’s strategy (BF = 3.46) fits
findings descriptively. We conclude that participants care about the fact that they themselves
can think of a number, while being comparatively disinterested in the guesser’s presumptive
Visualization of participants’ willingness to pay based on their and their opponent’s strategy
as a chooser
Study 1b: Testing Direct Self-Enhancement
Having found that choosers prefer games which might allow guessers to outthink
them, we sought direct self-report evidence of self-enhancement. In Study 1b, we probed
respondents’ beliefs regarding their ability to think through more recursive layers than the
average opponent.
Methods
Strategic thinking in the shadow 11
Participants and design. All respondents of Study 1a also participated in Study 1b.
The experimental design comprised one between-subjects factor counterbalancing the order
of two within-subjects tasks (ability of self vs. others to think ahead).
Procedure. After having participated in Study 1a, respondents were introduced to the
concept of k-level reasoning. Then, half of them were asked to indicate how many steps they
could think ahead and then how many steps the average other person could think ahead. The
other half of the respondents answered the two questions in reverse order. Participants were
then thanked for their work and debriefed about the aims of the study.
Results and Discussion
The statistical software JASP was used for all analyses. We compared participants’
estimation of their strategic reasoning with their estimation of others’ reasoning ability. A
sensitivity analysis performed with G*Power (Faul et al., 2007), with N = 194, assuming α =
.05 and a power of .80, indicated that effect sizes of d > .20 were detectable. As predicted and
1.24) than others (M = 2.72, SD = 1.02), t(192) = 6.74, p < .001, by approximately half a
mental step, d = .49. A Bayesian analysis suggested that the evidence for this self-
enhancement hypothesis was extremely strong, BF > 1,000,000. Considering both studies
together, we note that our conclusions do not vary with the type of analysis, frequentist or
Bayesian.
Strategic thinking in the shadow 12
Comparison of means and overall distributions of self and other k-level reasoning
Study 2: Taking Both Perspectives
In Study 2, we give participants the opportunity to consider the number-guessing
game from the perspective of the chooser and the perspective of the guesser in sequence. If
the preference for the think-think scenario holds regardless of the player’s role, the evidence
for the self-enhancement hypothesis is strong. It would show that self-enhancement can both
help and hinder strategic decision-making. Further, we ask if participants generally prefer to
play the role with a probabilistic disadvantage in the number guessing game, namely, the role
of the chooser. We reason that respondents might prefer the role of the chooser because it
offers the prerogative of picking the critical number. A person’s active involvement in a
random process can stimulate an illusory sense of control (Langer, 1975; Sloof & von
Siemens, 2017). A preference for the role of the chooser would speak to participants’ self-
enhancement inasmuch as it disregards the guesser’s statistical advantage when thinking.
Methods
Strategic thinking in the shadow 13
Participants and design. A total of 124 U.S.-based participants were recruited by
upper-division undergraduate students (at least 12 recruited participants each) enrolled in a
laboratory course on social cognition at Brown University (Rhode Island, USA) via direct
and social media targeting. Data quality was ensured by students following a detailed
protocol to invite others for participation and by the participants taking part in the study in
person with the student being present. There were 58 (46.8%) female and 51 (41.1%) male
participants. Eight respondents (6.5%) selected the “nonbinary/third gender” option, and
seven (5.6%) preferred not to say or did not indicate anything. The sample included mostly
students. Age ranged from 19 to 56 years (M = 23.69, SD = 8.10). The experimental design
comprised three within-subjects factors, namely the chooser’s strategy (randomize vs. think),
the guesser’s strategy (randomize vs. think), and the role the participant was asked to imagine
playing (chooser vs. guesser). We treat the counterbalancing of the order in which
respondents were assigned to the two roles as a between-subjects factor.
Procedure. After giving their consent, participants were presented with eight different
scenarios of the numbers game. Four scenarios placed them in the role of the chooser, while
the other four scenarios in the role of the guesser. One half of the participants were asked to
assume the role of the chooser first, whereas the other half started in the role of the guesser.
As guessers, participants could (hypothetically) win $60 if they predicted the chooser’s
number correctly; as choosers, they could win $12. Having worked through all eight
scenarios, that is, with full information about all scenarios, respondents were asked which
role (i.e., chooser vs. guesser) they would prefer to play in this game, assuming they were
free to think of a number. They indicated their preference on a Likert scale, ranging from 1 –
‘totally prefer the chooser’, to 7 – ‘totally prefer the guesser’. Afterward, participants were
thanked for their study participation and debriefed about the purpose of the study.
Strategic thinking in the shadow 14
Results and Discussion
JASP statistical software was used for all analyses.
Detecting mean differences. Recall that the simplest version of the self-enhancement
hypothesis calls for a main effect of the player’s strategy irrespective of the opponent’s
strategy (i.e., no interaction effect). We analyzed this strategy effect on the reported WTP
including both roles in an overall model and then analyzed the data for both roles separately
to detect any potential role specific features of self-enhancement.
Overall. In a repeated-measures ANOVA including three factors with two levels each,
namely, the player’s strategy (random vs. think), the opponent’s strategy (random vs. think),
and the player’s role (chooser vs. guesser), we find a significant main effect of the player’s
strategy, F(1, 119) = 16.68, p < .001, d = .21, and a small but significant interaction effect
with the opponent’s strategy, F(1, 119) = 4.47, p = .037, d = .09. We find no main effect of
the opponent’s strategy, p = .615, but a nearly significant interaction effect of player’s
strategy with the player’s role, p = .050, d = .14.
A Bayesian ANOVA sheds further light on these results. It shows that the model
including only a main effect of the player’s strategy (BF = 124.63) predicts WTP better than
a model also including the main effect of opponent’s strategy and their interaction effect
(BF = 8.37). Notably, the best-fitting model includes the player’s role, the player’s strategy,
and their interaction, BF = 5924.21, which corroborates the need for separate analyses on
the player’s and opponent’s strategy for the two different roles, chooser and guesser.
Chooser. In a repeated-measures ANOVA including two factors with two levels each,
namely, the player’s strategy (random vs. think) and the opponent’s strategy (random vs.
think), we find no significant effect of either players’ strategy or their interaction, p ≥ .273.
Likewise, a Bayesian ANOVA suggests that no factor produces a model that predicts the
Strategic thinking in the shadow 15
WTP for a specific game more accurately than the null model. Yet, the main effect of the
participant’s strategy, at least descriptively, seems to be the most important (BF = .20)
compared with the main effect of the opponent’s strategy (BF = .19), both main effects
combined (BF = .04), and the interaction included in the model (BF = .01). As shown in
10 10
themselves in the role of the chooser.
Visualization of participants’ willingness to pay based on their and their opponent’s strategy
as a chooser
Although the absence of a main effect for the player’s own strategy fails to
corroborate the self-enhancement hypothesis, the lack of a significant interaction is a strike
against the rationality hypothesis. Recall that if choosers reasoned rationally, they should be
willing to pay the least for a game in which both players are required to think actively about a
number.
Strategic thinking in the shadow 16
Guesser. Conducting the same kind of repeated measures ANOVA, we find a
moderate effect of the player’s strategy, F(1, 123) = 9.21, p = .003, d = .39, and a small
interaction with the opponent’s strategy, F(1, 123) = 5.08, p = .026, d = .18. We find no main
effect of the opponent’s strategy, p = .996. Again, the main effect of the player’s strategy is
larger than the interaction effect, z = 2.06, p = .040. A Bayesian analysis reveals that the
model only assuming a main effect of the participant’s strategy (BF = 10.03) predicts WTP
participants seem to value their own ability to think of a number the most.
Visualization of participants’ willingness to pay based on their and their opponent’s strategy
as a guesser
Role preference. Lastly, we inspect participants’ comparative preference for the roles
available in the game. A directional one-sample t-test shows that the mean rating of M = 3.68
(SD = 1.55) lies significantly below the scale midpoint of 4, thus indicating a comparative
Strategic thinking in the shadow 17
of a Bayesian analysis, the evidence for this comparative preference is considered anecdotal,
BF = 2.198.
Participants’ role preference in general, independent of the strategy (randomizing vs.
thinking of a number)
Though slight, the comparative preference for the chooser role further supports the
idea that participants fail to fully appreciate the game’s payoff structure, and that instead they
are overconfident in their strategic thinking. Had they honored rational self-interest, they
would have selected the role of the guesser so as to be able to capitalize on this role’s
statistical advantage when both players think of a number, and they could have done so
without having to self-enhance. We submit that this preference for the chooser role reflects
self-enhancing strategic aspirations. The chooser, players may note, proactively exerts control
in the guessing game. The chooser determines the boundaries of the game by selecting the
number that needs to be guessed. Participants perhaps reached for this power, thinking they
could turn it against their opponent in an illusion of superior strategic thinking.
Strategic thinking in the shadow 18
Study 3: Replicating Both Perspectives
In Study 3, we replicate the number-guessing game with participants in both roles,
and we refine the study design and prerequisites in several ways. First, we recruited a quota
sample of participants to obtain more representative results. Second, we preregistered the
provided participants with an additional explanatory page to ensure they understood the
payoff structure of the number-guessing game in the event of a win or loss. Finally, we
assessed individual differences on personality traits that might, arguably, be associated with
self-enhancement, namely narcissism, self-esteem, and cognitive reflection.
Methods
Participants and design. A total of 183 U.S. participants were recruited through a
quota sample on the Prolific platform. There were 97 (53.0%) female participants and 84
(45.9%) male participants. Two participants (1.1%) selected the "non-binary/third gender"
option. Age ranged from 19 to 78 years (M = 41.85, SD = 14.61). As in Study 2, the
experimental design included three within-subjects factors, namely the chooser’s strategy
(randomize vs. think), the guesser’s strategy (randomize vs. think), and the role participants
were asked to imagine playing (chooser vs. guesser). Again, we treat the counterbalancing of
the two roles as a between-subjects factor.
Procedure. The design of Study 3 parallels the design of Study 2, except that
personality assessments were placed between the two role-specific phases of the experiment.
In random order, we measured participants' narcissism (NPI-13; Gentile et al., 2013), self-
esteem (Rosenberg self-esteem scale; Rosenberg, 1965), and cognitive reflection ability
(CRT; Frederick, 2005).
Strategic thinking in the shadow 19
Results & Discussion
As with the analyses of the other two studies presented, we used JASP for the
analyses of the third study.
Detecting mean differences. Again, the self-enhancement hypothesis predicts a
unique main effect of the player's strategy, unmoderated by the opponent's strategy (i.e., no
interaction effect) for both roles, chooser and guesser. We analyzed participants’ WTP
including both roles in an overall model and by analyzing both roles separately to detect role
specific features of self-enhancement in the guessing game.
Overall. In a repeated measures ANOVA including three factors with two levels each,
namely, the player’s strategy (random vs. think), the opponent’s strategy (random vs. think),
and the player’s role (chooser vs. guesser), we find a significant main effect of the player’s
strategy, F(1, 182) = 22.15, p < .001, d = .26, and no interaction effect with the opponent’s
strategy, p = .609. We find no other significant effects, p ≥ .539. A Bayesian ANOVA shows
that the model assuming only a main effect of the participant’s strategy (BF = 2361.83)
predicts WTP better than any alternative models, and particularly better than a model
including the main effect of opponent’s strategy and their interaction effect (BF = 68.20).
Chooser. Conducting a repeated measures ANOVA including two factors with two
levels each, namely, the player’s strategy (random vs. think) and the opponent’s strategy
(random vs. think), we find a small main effect of the player’s strategy, F(1, 182) = 7.89, p =
.006, d = .27; all other p ≥ .709. A Bayesian ANOVA corroborates this unique result. Only the
model comprising a main effect of the participant’s strategy fits the data better than a null
prerogative to think of a number. The guesser’s strategy does not affect their WTP.
Strategic thinking in the shadow 20
Visualization of participants’ willingness to pay based on their and their opponent’s strategy
as a chooser
Guesser. For this role too, we find a main effect of the player’s strategy, F(1, 182) =
19.59, p < .001, of moderate size, d = .45; all other effects with p ≥ .404. A Bayesian analysis
converges on this outcome, yielding the model with the participant’s strategy as the best fit
participants appear uniquely motivated by their own ability to actively pick a number.
Strategic thinking in the shadow 21
Visualization of participants’ willingness to pay based on their and their opponent’s strategy
as a guesser
Personality differences. To explore the potential relevance of select personality
traits, we looked to the scores on the scales assessing narcissism, self-esteem, and cognitive
reflection. We computed two-repeated measures ANOVAs for the chooser and guesser roles,
respectively, and treated the personality scores as covariates. None of these personality
variables showed a significant effect on the WTP in general for the chooser role, all ps ≥ .186,
or the guesser role, ps ≥ .187, and showed no significant interactions with the player’s
preference for thinking, ps > .182 and ps > .111, respectively. At minimum, this negative
result makes it unlikely that the findings of interest are limited to a particular personality
type.
Merged Analyses of Self-Enhancement
We pooled the data from Studies 2 and 3 and computed three repeated-measures
ANOVAs, namely, including both roles and for the role of chooser and the role of guesser,
Strategic thinking in the shadow 22
respectively. We included study condition as a between-subjects factor to control for
between-sample variation in the self-enhancement effect in the chooser and guesser roles. In
the repeated measures ANOVA including both roles, chooser and guesser, player’s strategy
showed a significant main effect, F(1, 302) = 38.94, p < .001, d = .23, while the interaction
with opponent’s strategy was not significant, p = .063. At the same time, the interaction
between player’s strategy and player’s role was again significant, F(1, 302) = 6.46, p = .012,
d = .11. The Bayesian approach corroborates these results, showing that the main effect of
player’s strategy is indeed substantially more likely (BF = 4526000.00) than a model that
also includes the main effect of opponent’s strategy and their interaction (BF = 0.01), which
was the least likely model out of all possible models. We also find again that the model
including the two main effects of player’s strategy and role, and their interaction is the best
model (BF = 9234000.00), corroborating the examination of the effects for participants in
the roles of the chooser and the guesser.
for the chooser, F(1, 302) = 6.85, p = .009, d = .18, and for the guesser, F(1, 304) = 26.35, p
< .001, d = .40. For the chooser role, we find no main effect of the opponent’s strategy, p =
.460, or an interaction of both strategies, p = .504. For the guesser role, we find no main
effect of the opponent’s strategy, p = .598. However, we find a significant interaction, F(1,
304) = 4.24, p = .040, d = .11. As before, the main effect of player’s strategy is larger than the
interaction effect in the role of the guesser, z = 5.78, p < .001. A Bayesian analysis
corroborates these results: only including the main effect of the participant’s strategy predict
WTP best for the chooser, BF = 4.27, and for the guesser, BF = 17058.88. Treating study
10 10
as a between-subjects factor, we find neither a main effect nor an interaction effect for the
Strategic thinking in the shadow 23
chooser, p ≥ .116, but we find a significant main effect for guesser, F(1, 303) = 16.34, p >
.001, d = .43, as well as an interaction, F(1, 303) = 3.99, p = .047, d = .04.
Visualization of participants’ willingness to pay based on their and their opponent’s strategy
as a chooser (left) and guesser (right)
General Discussion
To be successful, strategic thinking is not just a matter of cognitive ability. Instead,
success is a matter of ecological rationality (Gigerenzer, 2023), where the structure of the
strategic challenge and the capabilities of the other party are critical. The present research
was designed to shed light on these interdependencies in a narrowly defined but illustrative
context, the number-guessing game. This game is non-cooperative and zero-sum; it pits two
players against each other in an irreconcilable contest. The number-guessing game is an
unbalanced version of matching pennies, which in turn is a variant of the parlor game of
rock-paper-scissors (von Neumann & Morgenstern, 1944). The numbers game is unbalanced
in the sense that the probabilities of matching and mismatching are not equal. Because game
Strategic thinking in the shadow 24
theory identifies random play as the rational solution to the game, and because randomness
for single events cannot be defined by the outcome alone, most research focuses on repeated
play, and it has been shown that humans and other animals can reach Nash equilibria
(Furuichi, 2002; Page & Neuringer, 1985; Sanabria & Thraikill, 2009; Schaller, 1976).
Human interaction is full of one-shot encounters, and in such encounters,
randomization is unlikely to be achieved by the power of thought. Nor is randomization,
despite the dictates of game theory, always the best choice. When General von Moltke
marched on Königgrätz to engage the Austrian army in 1866, he knew he had to outwit his
Viennese opponents on the spot. There was no prospect of endlessly repeating battles from
which he could emerge as a clever randomizer. Instead, real-world strategic analogues of the
numbers game open the door for social intelligence to prevail by identifying and exploiting
an opponent's weakness (note the epigraph). We have argued and shown that most people are
prone to a self-enhancement bias, and that this bias differentially affects the prospects of a
chooser and a guesser in this game. If both players self-enhance by believing that they can
out-think the other in picking a number, the guesser stands to gain because mutual reasoning
is likely to produce matching non-random choices that hurt the chooser. Skilled strategists
understand not only the game they are in, but also the differences between their own and their
opponent’s perspectives, if there are any.
We can now ask whether the player's role in the game encourages or discourages
rational thought. Could it be that the player has access to rational reflection and choice in the
role of guesser, but not in the role of chooser? The ecological rationality framework suggests
that this question is ill-posed because rationality is not a property of the person, nor is it a
property that is selectively activated by the context. Instead, ecological rationality is revealed
Strategic thinking in the shadow 25
by its consequences. Actors may achieve desirable, that is rational, outcomes even though, or
even because, they think irrationally.
Our results suggest that players believe that their own recursive reasoning ability is
superior to that of the opponent in both roles, the guesser and chooser. But in the former role,
self-enhancement helps them, whereas in the latter role, it hurts them. Failure to understand
this difference amounts to metacognitive myopia (Fiedler et al., 2020). The idea that
irrational self-enhancement is ubiquitous and that its benefits to the guesser are random is
supported by the finding that most respondents prefer the role of the chooser, again revealing
metacognitive myopia.
If success in the zero-sum game is random, and if rationality is merely an advantage
gained in some environments, it is a misattribution and a self-serving error for a guesser to
attribute their own success to their strategic foresight. Before closing the book on the
possibility of strategic genius, we do well to note that while rational foresight as a superior
skill is possible in reality, it cannot be modelled or detected in games that assume common
knowledge and player equivalence. In other words, games that are set up fairly, that is, games
that eliminate informational or intellectual advantages, ensure that creative strategists have no
opening to display their cunning.
How then can creative strategy gain traction? One possibility is to change the game.
Strategists such as Xenophon of Athens, Scipio Africanus, or Helmuth von Moltke the Elder
succeeded not by playing well-defined games, but by changing the rules to suit their
purposes. They understood that while their opponents were preparing for the last war, the
next war would be won by whoever defined the terms first. Their rationality was not reactive
but proactive, and they may well have engaged in non-erroneous self-enhancement. Their
creative innovations transcended ecological rationality by creating the conditions under
Strategic thinking in the shadow 26
which their capabilities were most effective. Further, their rationality does not reduce to being
able to make the first move, but includes the foresight and skill to determine what moves will
be available to the opponent and being prepared to counter with the best response. In other
words, thinking outside the box in strategic interaction places the opponent in a situation of
uncertainty, a situation that cannot be mastered by algorithmic calculation or a probabilistic
(i.e., random) approach to risk.
Creative game changes can be costly and difficult to execute. Moreover, there is no
guarantee that the opponent will not anticipate creative moves. The specter of another rabbit
hole of recursive thinking can be tamed, but not slain. For the risk-averse, not playing the
game at all remains a fallback position, unless, of course, an eager opponent (e.g., the leader
of an invading force) forces the game to be played. In laboratory experiments, respondents
may choose not to play if the experimenters provide such an option (Dana et al., 2006), or
they may choose to abstain in an act of noncompliance.
In social reality, individuals are often confronted with a meta-game, with the
possibility of either entering the game or opting out (Krueger & Grüning, 2022a; 2022b). For
example, a person looking for a partner may decline further dates if alternative future
prospects are likely. A businessperson who senses something devious in a proposed contract
may walk away from the deal. A military general leading an inferior force may avoid battle
and ultimately win. Recall that Quintus Fabius Maximus, the “Cunctator", was much
maligned for his refusal to engage Hannibal in battle, but he effectively wore down the
Carthaginian. We also note that not all games are zero-sum like the guessing game. Many
non-cooperative games, most notably the Prisoner's Dilemma and its derivatives, offer the
most efficient outcomes to players who cooperate with each other, knowing that if they
benefit from unilateral defection, so do others. In this context, it is not a self-enhancement
Strategic thinking in the shadow 27
bias that may benefit one player, but a social projection bias that benefits both (Krueger,
2013).
Lastly, we consider several open research questions in the hope of stimulating further
engagement with this psychological issue. First, we find no substantial effects of selected
personality traits of the player, namely narcissism, self-esteem, and cognitive reflection.
Given the substantial correlations of these personality traits in previous studies using other
measures of the traits, but also of self-enhancement (e.g., for narcissism, John & Robins,
1994; Grijalva & Zhang, 2016; for self-esteem, Brown et al., 1988; Kobayashi & Brown,
2003; and for cognitive reflection on norms, Krueger, 1998), a more methodologically
comprehensive investigation of personality effects on self-enhancement in the number
guessing game would be valuable, also to better understand the general pattern of personality
moderators of this effect in the present paradigm.
Second, participants may have preferred to think in the number-guessing game
because it is more exciting to think than to let a die do the work. For this interpretation to be
viable, we would have needed to find that thinking was most preferred when a player knew
that the opponent was also thinking (since thinking against a random machine takes away the
thrill). However, while we find a robust main effect of the player's strategy in each study and
in both player roles, the interaction effect with the opponent's strategy on participants'
willingness to pay is only significant (with a small effect) in Study 2 when participants take
the guesser role. To further test the self-enhancement effect, we encourage future research to
replicate the design of the pre-registered and optimized Study 3, including monetary
incentives for participants.
Third, and finally, we find that although participants are willing to pay more to play
the role of guesser, most report - when asked directly - that they would prefer to play the role
Strategic thinking in the shadow 28
of chooser. This apparent disconnect is reminiscent of the classic preference reversal first
noted by Lindman (1965) and explored in more detail by Slovic and Lichtenstein (1968).
Their explanation is that respondents change their preferred option depending on their
preference indication, either an explicit choice or an indication of their option preference by
assigning different prices to the options. The central finding is that respondents prefer the
high-risk/high-reward option to the low-risk/low-reward option when given an explicit choice
between the two, but change their preference when setting a selling price for both options. We
suspect that a similar dynamic is at play when respondents are asked to choose between roles,
as opposed to being given a price for being allowed to do so. To explain these preference
differences, researchers have proposed further hypotheses (e.g., scale compatibility, Tversky
et al., 1980; random reference theory, Trautmann et al., 2011; but see also Cubitt et al., 2004)
and suggested some experimental advances (e.g., Johnson et al., 1988; Loomes, 1990). Future
research could explore these explanations and apply the appropriate experimental
manipulations to understand the similar conjecture found in the present number guessing
game.
Conclusion
The battle of wits in social games, whether hypothetical (e.g., hide-and-seek games)
or real (e.g., military battles or sports), provides a unique opportunity to explore the
psychology of strategic thinking. Competitive games allow scientists to explore the
antecedents of strategic thinking in different contexts. We used one such competitive game,
the number-guessing game, to investigate the role of self-enhancement in strategic reasoning.
We predicted and found that self-enhancement can help or hinder strategic thinking,
depending on the role of the person in the game. Self-enhancement leads players to make the
correct decision when in the role of the guesser, but not when in the role of the chooser. This
Strategic thinking in the shadow 29
finding raises questions about the ambiguous utility of self-enhancement for strategic
reasoning in its many real-world applications.
Strategic thinking in the shadow 30