BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 1
This is the accepted version of this manuscript. It may slightly differ from the published
on-the-road-to-tenure-9781793566362
Reference:
Matsick, J. L., & Sabik, N. J. (2022). Building a lab at a research-intensive institution: A feminist
and sustainable approach to productivity. In K. Richmond, I. H. Settles, S. A. Shields, &
A. I. Zelin (Eds.), Feminist scholars on the road to tenure: The personal is professional
(pp. 94-111). Cognella.
Building a Lab at a Research-Intensive Institution:
A Feminist and Sustainable Approach to Productivity
1,2 3
Jes L. Matsick and Natalie J. Sabik
Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, USA
Department of Women’s, Gender, and Sexuality Studies, The Pennsylvania State
University, USA
Department of Health Studies, University of Rhode Island, USA
Author Note
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this chapter. Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Jes
Matsick at the Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, 416 Moore
Building, University Park, PA 16803. Email: jmatsick@psu.edu
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 2
Building a Lab at a Research-Intensive Institution:
A Feminist and Sustainable Approach to Productivity
"To build feminist dwellings, we need to dismantle what has already been assembled; we need
to ask what it is we are against, what it is we are for, knowing full well that this we is not a
foundation but what we are working toward.” - Ahmed (2017, p. 2)
In Living a Feminist Life, feminist scholar Sara Ahmed reminds readers of the tools
required for creating a life of feminist work, including the resources, spaces, personnel, and care
that are needed to make feminist projects enjoyable and sustainable. We adopt a similar outlook
for building a research laboratory. We suggest that constructing a feminist lab requires faculty to
assess their values, including the academic norms they wish to unlearn (“what it is we are
against”) and the feminist principles they aspire to promote (“what it is we are for”). A lab offers
feminist faculty the opportunity to counteract oppressive forces within academia and bring their
feminist vision for academia to fruition. Indeed, feminist faculty likely find themselves at odds
with the academy’s masculinized culture. Born from a longstanding tradition of sexism, racism,
capitalism, and colonialism, mainstream academic norms often foster competition, reward
independence, prioritize productivity, exclude marginalized scholarship and scholars, and
devalue teaching and mentoring (e.g., Bagilhole & Goode, 2001). We propose that a carefully
developed lab can offer much-needed feminist space within the institution and provide
resources that pre-tenure faculty can use to flourish in doing their feminist work.
This chapter focuses on strategies for developing sustainable research practices and
thriving collaborations for feminist research within a lab. We draw upon our experiences as
feminist psychologists at research-intensive institutions and discuss best practices for building a
feminist lab culture. We address the following: establishing a vision, starting the lab, mentoring
students while meeting pre-tenure goals, creating space for collegiality and collaboration, and
sustaining oneself as a feminist academic. Throughout, we provide practical strategies toward
productivity and sustainability for the feminist psychologist on their way to tenure.
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 3
Jes: I direct a large lab in Psychology and Women’s, Gender, and Sexuality Studies. On
average, I mentor three PhD students in a primary capacity, six in a secondary capacity (e.g.,
working on one project with each student), and 5-7 undergraduate research assistants. Most of
my pre-tenure publications involved PhD students. Finding synergy between graduate training
and my research agenda has been a challenging but positive part of my pre-tenure experience.
Natalie: I run a lab in an Interdisciplinary Public Health Program and collaborate with
undergraduate students as well as faculty and graduate students from other departments.
Mentoring graduate students from other departments (typically 4-6 per year) while working with
undergraduate students in my lab has challenged me to think creatively about how to structure
mentorship across these different levels to align with my research program and goals.
Attending the Institute for Academic Feminist Psychologists in 2016 and 2018 sparked
what has now become a thriving collaborative relationship and supportive friendship between
us. We recognize shared values and goals in one another; namely, we both aspire to create a
healthier and more just version of academia. Our philosophy of feminist work includes the
promotion of equity and inclusion, anti-exploitation, respecting rest and sustainability, practicing
self-awareness, and “working smarter not harder” (e.g., embracing organization strategies for
work). We appreciate that feminist psychologists play a significant role in institutional change
through our efforts to disrupt the status quo of the university (Stewart, 2016). Although our
values are somewhat at odds with mainstream academic culture, we believe that these values
are the foundation for lasting careers in academia and high-quality lab conditions that facilitate
thoughtful and impactful research.
Developing a Vision for your Research Program
Advice is often given to early career researchers to develop a 5-year plan, and
developing and adapting a vision is central to building a lab. To do so, you need to consider
your core values and to sketch out your projects, research arcs, and goals. It is well worth the
time, even though the task may feel non-essential in the short term. Writing down an outline of
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 4
your plans and values— allowing room for this to change and grow— can guide decisions about
what projects to pursue within the lab, how to allocate time, which projects to prioritize, and with
whom to collaborate. We recommend allocating time (even 20 minutes per week can have a big
impact) to write and brainstorm your responses to some of the following questions as
applicable: What do you think is most important and exciting in your work? What area, theory, or
method do you want to shape? What impact do you hope to have? What collaborators do you
thrive with, and how does your work intersect with theirs? What skills or resources will you need
to acquire for the work you’re imagining? How do you want your work to make you feel? What
would make you proud of the lab you have created? Be specific and record your responses
somewhere that you can easily retrieve to consult and update.
Allowing Your Vision to Take Shape within the Constraints of Your Institution
We recommend updating this planning document at regular intervals. Opportune
moments to do so are when identifying projects to move forward (e.g., at the beginning of an
academic term), when preparing for an annual review, and when reflecting at the end of the
year. Are your values, goals, and career expectations aligned with how you are spending your
time? In addition to learning about criteria for tenure at an institution, while starting a lab, faculty
must consider how their institution evaluates different activities (e.g., graduate training, student-
led publications, undergraduate research). New faculty should aim to gather this information
sooner rather than later so that their vision can be calibrated accordingly. It is important for you
to note where your vision and that of your institution align; however, it is acceptable (and often
necessary!) to pursue aspects of your vision that do not mimic institutional values. The key is to
know how and why your work leads you in directions that may depart from the norm. Be ready
to defend your vision. For example, articulating why you publish in the journals that you do, why
you attend specific conferences, or why you pursue certain topics or methods should be
integrated into your annual reviews and tenure dossier. Connecting with the “why” behind your
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 5
plans and aligning your values with your vision is a cornerstone of building a sustainable and
evolving research program.
Getting Started
Labs can take on many different formats, and the labs we build as feminist psychologists
may differ from those of other colleagues. Though setting up a lab is not a “one-size-fits-all”
endeavor, thinking through the following processes has helped us to get started.
First, we address cultivating a lab identity. Establishing a lab name, often using
keywords to describe the lab’s interests, is a common way to signal your research program. As
one example, Jes named her lab the “Underrepresented Perspectives (UP) Lab” which is
general enough to accommodate her research as it evolves in different ways but specific
enough to highlight her core values of centering historically excluded people, theories, and
perspectives in psychology. She then used her lab name to form the basis of a website to
publicize her work.
Second, we emphasize the importance of building a lab team. Recruiting graduate and
undergraduate students in the early years on the tenure clock lays a solid foundation for the lab.
You should ask questions of other faculty and administrators to learn how graduate admissions
work at your institution. To recruit graduate students who share research interests with you, it is
important to advertise your intention to admit students. This information should be announced
on your lab’s website, via social media, and to colleagues at other institutions who may have
students applying to graduate school. In addition, Jes created a frequently asked questions
(FAQ) handout to circulate to prospective students, which includes unique information about the
graduate program, lab interests and future directions, and the lab’s values. To select students,
we use a rubric that facilitates a fair and effective evaluation process (Posselt, 2016). For
example, Jes evaluates applicants on research experience and academic preparation,
alignment with the lab’s interests and future goals, readiness for a PhD, and commitment to
improving DEI in academia; the components of assessment are noted in the FAQ handout. Jes
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 6
then uses interviews with prospective students to gain more insight into students' compatibility
with her values of collegiality, sustainability, and prioritizing underrepresented perspectives. The
decision to admit students and which students to admit must be considered in light of your
vision so that the benefits gained from an advisee-advisor relationship are mutually beneficial.
To recruit undergraduate students, seek out department- or university-based websites or
listservs that can advertise research opportunities or contact students who have performed well
in class with you. Approaching students from your classes allows you to recruit students who
may be less familiar with why research opportunities are advantageous and thus not searching
for these positions on their own. We often recruit students who have taken our classes, and
have undergraduate students contribute to ongoing lab projects to build their skills before we
agree to a larger project (e.g., honors thesis) with them. Students collaborate with each other in
Natalie’s lab, so determining who works well together and building expectations around
supportive collaboration among students is a focus for her. Finally, streamline your process for
engaging undergraduate students in the lab. For example, create an online application for
interested students to complete, maintain a list of tasks that could require assistance, and
design a lab syllabus that conveys policies, procedures, and expectations.
Third, we recommend strategies for maintaining the lab. Lab maintenance requires good
record keeping and planning. We suggest keeping a spreadsheet of personnel as students
come and go (e.g., semester, course credit, projects, contact information). A list is convenient
when needing to provide student information for the tenure review process, writing letters of
recommendation, and avoiding gaps in personnel (e.g., graduating students). Another strategy
for maintaining the lab is to prepare tutorials for common tasks (e.g., conducting literature
reviews). Writing down or recording how to complete a task can yield an impressive set of
resources, and skilled students can help to create these resources. Natalie also encourages
detailed memo-making in the lab and writing meeting minutes so that work can be easily picked
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 7
up from where it was left or checked by other lab members. Having an organized lab facilitates
your progress on current projects while making future work within the lab more straightforward.
Mentoring Students within Your Lab
Working with students can be highly rewarding. Students contribute to the lab’s growth,
reputation, and culture, and may provide a space for shared feminist values that help to sustain
you. However, incorporating students into your research is also time-consuming. You thus need
to learn how to balance the need to meet tenure criteria at your institution with your desire to
support students in research. That is, consider how mentorship can advance your vision.
Establishing boundaries. You should be empowered to select which student(s) with
whom to work and in which capacity, and accept that there will be times when you have to say
“no.” One strategy for the “no” decision-making process is to consider when you want discomfort
to occur: in the short-term of saying “no” to something you do not have the capacity to do, or in
the long-term when you may not have the resources (e.g., time, energy) to meet the demand.
We notice that we are more likely to decline requests that coincide with upcoming commitments
(e.g., preparing a new course, serving on a time-consuming committee). Recognizing the
obligations we already have– and having that list readily available– validates our need to say
“no.” Also, keep in mind that women and/or people of color are often asked to do the most in
terms of service and special requests. Practicing saying “no” is especially important for them to
prevent an overload of demands on their time and energy.
When deciding when to decline a request, think about whose needs you should
prioritize. The needs of your department head or chair might be high on the list. Requests from
people with more power than you may be understandably difficult to refuse. However, ideally
those people already have your best interests in mind and would understand and respect your
decision if you had to say “no.” In contrast, the needs of some students (i.e., students on
campus but not in your classes, students who you do not already advise) will likely be ranked
lower on your list and therefore might be the recipients of your “no.” While pre-tenure, Jes was
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 8
surprised by the number of requests she received to work with students, and she quickly
realized that it would not be sustainable to say “yes” every time. She found it helpful to consider
the (1) alignment of a student or new project with her goals and interests, and (2) stages of
graduate and undergraduate students in her lab (i.e., those to whom she has already
committed). It feels more feasible to say “yes” when knowing that a current student will be busy
dissertating, graduating, or otherwise requiring less guidance. In contrast, it feels stressful to
say “yes” when already feeling overwhelmed with trying to meet the lab’s needs. It can ease the
letdown if you continue to encourage the student, provide an alternative suggestion, or remind
them that you are a limited resource and have already overcommitted at this time.
Mentoring processes. Both students and faculty benefit when faculty provide students
with clear goals and constructive feedback. Investing in students’ development, such as by
editing their writing or teaching them how to perform a task correctly, ensures that students are
growing and have the capacity to contribute to your research. You can inspire students to thrive
within the lab by instilling confidence in students, nurturing their autonomy, and strengthening
their social connectedness (Alon, 2010). You should thus aim for students to feel sufficiently
capable and valued, which will strengthen their contributions to the lab. Another benefit of
investing in mentorship is that it may work toward building the feminist version of academia that
you envision. Faculty serve a powerful role in repopulating the academic workforce, and your
investment in feminist-minded students, particularly those from underrepresented backgrounds,
helps to disrupt hegemonic perspectives and foster institutional change. Feminist labs can be
safe havens for many students and faculty, especially those who experience their identities and
scholarly interests as marginalized (e.g., see notions of epistemic exclusion, Settles et al. 2020).
Feminist mentoring tends to be less hierarchical, which can be a strength for working
through interpersonal and work-related challenges in the lab. Open communication is key.
When you decide to work with a student on research, it is important to clarify roles and
emphasize that discussing responsibilities and defining authorship roles will be ongoing as the
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 9
project unfolds. We state the resources (e.g., time, attention, skills, data, funding) we can offer
and what our limitations are (e.g., timing for feedback, other priorities, bandwidth for
collaboration). We also consider what projects we want to prioritize, what progress we envision
for various projects, and what self-imposed deadlines we want to put into place. This
conversation helps to determine whether a student-faculty collaboration will be a good fit.
Open communication also includes listening to and respecting students’ circumstances,
ideas, and plans; practicing non-judgment (e.g., not making immediate top-down decisions
about collaborative work); and working to be approachable and trustworthy so that students
know they can have honest conversations within the lab when needed. As a feminist academic,
you may feel a greater responsibility in your mentoring and compelled to invest more than
others do. Indeed, feminist mentoring sometimes includes providing psychosocial support that
goes beyond mentoring academic performance. This requires emotional labor that is often
unrecognized but essential for helping students navigate challenges. The benefits students may
experience from your mentorship are often well worth the investment. However, we aim to be
conscious of the time and energy that we put into this aspect of mentoring, and we often identify
this mentoring in annual review forms. Even if you are not provided with space to document this
mentoring work, thorough mentorship is consistent with feminist values and thus consistent with
your scholarly identity. Try to create a space for it that your evaluators will have to recognize.
Mentorship for yourself. Mentoring others is important, but you should build mentoring
networks that support you too (see Tang, Chapter 4 and Warner, Chapter 3). You can begin by
creating a mentor map: a visual to display people in your network who you can rely on for
advice and support. The National Center for Faculty Development and Diversity (NCFDD) has a
useful example of a mentor map structure (search engine term: “NCFDD Mentor Map”).
Mentoring can be valuable for research and for navigating institutional norms, conflict, student
issues, promotion processes, and career decisions. Including “sponsors” in your mentor map
can also be used to identify colleagues who would be willing to help make your work visible and
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 10
put you forward for opportunities. A map will illuminate gaps in your network that you can seek
to close by cultivating new relationships. Thinking about what you can offer as well as what you
need can make new relationships mutually beneficial. We also suggest protecting time for peer
support. We recommend forming a small group with people who seem trustworthy, non-
competitive, and at a similar career stage. Attending the Institute for Academic Feminist
Psychologists could facilitate these connections. Two options to consider are forming a writing
group or a peer mentoring group. In our experience, smaller structured groups (~3-5 people)
work best. More information and suggestions about creating and maintaining peer mentoring
We have engaged in an online writing accountability group and peer mentoring group
and have found them to be helpful for counteracting isolation, providing dedicated time to
exchanging advice, navigating challenges (e.g., in running a lab), and tracking research goals.
Our peer mentoring group, that developed from the Institute for Academic Feminist
Psychologists, has provided support for thinking through lab-related issues. For example, we
discussed how to communicate our limited time to students so that they have a reasonable and
realistic perception of how we are working (e.g., when to expect feedback). Crafting language
with our peers helped us to feel empowered to communicate our boundaries to students. Writing
groups and peer groups can be incorporated into the lab too, and we have encouraged our
students to create them. For example, students can meet in person or virtually to write or take
turns hosting grading “parties” to work on small tasks in the company of others (something that
we have enjoyed doing together from afar too!). In sum, it is important to us that we teach our
students about the strategies that help us to sustain our work as feminist psychologists.
Promoting a Feminist Lab Environment
Great labs that produce great research do not occur by chance. Such lab environments
require us to imagine the culture that we wish to create and work within. Prevailing notions of
academic culture– and its emphasis on competition, ego, and hierarchy– are often at odds with
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 11
feminist principles such as valuing community, collaboration, and valuing outcomes that center
marginalized groups. Rather than ascribing to a mainstream approach to academic productivity,
we propose another path forward. At the helm of a new lab, you are responsible for the
environment and will benefit from asking yourself, “How can I create a space that fosters
research toward tenure while I uphold and model feminist values?” The duty of infusing feminist
values into the academy requires us to unlearn (mentally) and undo (behaviorally) mainstream
academic culture and approaches to research (Bagilhole & Goode, 2001; Matsick et al., 2021).
To build a feminist lab we encourage you to promote collegiality and collaboration, as we
believe in their transformative potential to advance a feminist academic culture more broadly.
We stress the need for trust in building a feminist environment. Trust must exist within
the lab if you intend to resist pervasive, non-feminist academic norms. Without trust, it will be
difficult to nurture feminist approaches because feminist processes for research often counter
what students learn elsewhere. One approach to building trust is to speak honestly with
students about feminist struggles against mainstream academia. Discussing both the rewards
and challenges of being a feminist psychologist shows students that, as feminist psychologists,
we often push conventional boundaries (e.g., the journals in which we publish, the institutions
we seek to change) but we deem those “risks” to be worth it and we prepare to overcome them.
For example, in conversations with students, we have shared our experiences of feeling
like we do not “fit” within psychology, which likely characterizes the feelings of many scholars
who have interdisciplinary roots or personal backgrounds that are undervalued or
underrepresented in their discipline. Our lack of fit is salient when attending mainstream
conferences in which feminist work is underrepresented. We have thus learned to offset those
feelings by also attending more feminist-leaning conferences, such as those by the Society for
the Psychological Study of Social Issues or the Association for Women in Psychology. This is a
strategy that we share with our students. Another example of the challenges encountered when
belonging to a feminist lab involves our refusal to thoughtlessly buy into dominant standards. As
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 12
one example, our labs tend to reject currently valued metrics of research impact (e.g., impact
factor) and instead use other criteria to measure the value of our work (e.g., contributing to
communities, advancing knowledge for equity and justice, promoting feminist theory and
methodology). We prioritize placing research in journals that have a record of appreciating and
promoting feminist work, even when we have heard that others perceive these journals as
“specialty” outlets because they often center research and researchers that have been
historically excluded from mainstream publishing. As feminist psychologists, we willingly choose
not to play by the same rules as other psychologists in defining success, but we recognize that
our students may feel conflicted as they encounter more traditional messaging. We therefore
aim to prepare students to be thoughtful and confident when challenging the status quo, and we
have found it useful to remind our students (and ourselves!) that survival of feminist scholarship
requires us to become champions of our work and that of other feminist psychologists.
Collegiality
We recognize that we will thrive the most when we build supportive and collegial
environments for ourselves. To us, collegiality facilitates peer-to-peer support and
noncompetitiveness, collective pride and teamwork, respect for individual differences, inclusion
and belonging, and psychological safety (i.e., comfort in vulnerability). The potential for labs to
also be sources of joy also should not be underestimated; indeed, work within a lab can provide
relief to the otherwise solitary aspects of our work. In our experience, the best lab environments
provide fun, companionship, and a lot of laughter! We agree with other feminist scholars that
weakening boundaries between the personal vs. professional and play vs. work can help to
sustain feminist work (Abel et al., 1983; Ahmed, 2017). To become transformational feminist
psychologists, we need to push back on noncollegial aspects of academic culture (Bagilhole &
Goode, 2001; Stewart, 2016) and we need to teach students to do this too.
We seek to model collegial behavior as faculty. For example, advancing the idea that
when one of us “wins” we all “win,” we encourage showing up to support other lab members
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 13
when they are presenting their work at a conference or research event. This behavior conveys
an investment in the work and success of others. Other examples of how we model supporting
and celebrating the work of others include Tweeting about recent publications or awards of our
colleagues, attending colleagues’ talks and events, and sharing information about resources or
opportunities that are a good fit for others in our network. In addition to recognizing academic
accomplishments, Natalie celebrates non-research related life events with her lab, such as a
student adopting a new pet. Appreciating people’s lives outside of the lab strengthens
relationships and helps model work-life balance, and both contribute to sustained collegiality.
Modeling how to handle feedback is also important to the lab’s environment. Rejection
and criticism happen, and the lab can provide crucial space for learning how to process it. When
a manuscript rejection included comments from an exceptionally critical reviewer, Jes discussed
with student co-authors how it felt to receive that tone of review and used rejection as an
opportunity to discuss how to give feedback. Students agreed that the tone was distracting and
not as useful as constructive criticism (this observation is good to remember when providing
feedback to undergraduate and graduate advisees). In our experience of giving feedback within
our labs, constructive criticism works best when it balances positive and negative observations,
avoids assumptions, is presented with care, and provides actionable ideas and suggestions.
Central to building collegiality is also encouraging noncompetitiveness in the lab. It is
important for you to proactively address competition and retroactively lessen it if it occurs. For
example, we encourage lab members to consider how the overlap of ideas and sharing of
authorship within the lab can be mutually beneficial. We promote the idea that it is exciting and
promising, rather than threatening, to have multiple people interested in similar inquiries.
Staking claim in work can undermine the feminist foundation of a lab if it reproduces the ego
and “building your brand” messaging so often encouraged of academics; moreover, being
territorial about research can block productivity as it lessens possibilities for collaborations to
succeed. The faculty mentor within a lab plays a big role in shaping students’ confidence and
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 14
security, especially given our relative position of power for establishing norms. We can enhance
confidence and lessen competition by celebrating accomplishments for the lab as a collective
(advocating for a shared group identity), reflecting on how social comparison feels and why it is
not helpful, and providing positive feedback to students.
Within a lab, all people should be made to feel valued, but they do not need to be valued
for the same reasons. Promote the idea that everyone has something to offer. Encouraging lab
members to focus on what they, specifically, have to offer can help to reduce insecurities– an
important aspect of student motivation (Alon, 2010). It is easy to do this in everyday forms of
interaction, such as using microvalidations to communicate students’ strengths through small
messages of praise and affirmation. For example, telling a student that you value the
perspective they are bringing to the work or telling another student that you appreciate how they
mentor undergraduate students might offset invalidations that they receive elsewhere. Knowing
when students need validation is also important. Jes believes that an effective part of her
mentorship involves sensing when students might be in most need of validation to push forward.
When a student feels discouraged or is struggling to finish a challenging writing task, Jes
reminds them of their strengths and praises their growth. Validations can be motivating.
Finally, we emphasize that faculty should not only model collegial behavior but reward it.
Positively reinforce collegial behavior in the lab when it occurs. We can do this by nominating
highly collegial students for awards, emphasizing the usefulness of students’ collegiality in
letters of recommendation, and publicly thanking or recognizing their efforts (e.g., in lab-wide
communications). Show students that good people serve as the best of colleagues!
Collaboration
Strong collaborations, whether that be with graduate students, undergraduate students,
or other faculty, is a cornerstone to a thriving lab. Cultivating collaborations with students and
other faculty who are supportive, whom you enjoy spending time with, and whose vision is
similar can contribute to your quality of life and to long-lasting collaborations. Though faculty-
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 15
student collaborations within the lab have an inherent power dynamic built into them and often
occur in the context of mentoring, they function similarly as any collaboration and raise the
same questions of when to start a collaboration and how to maintain it. A good reason for
starting a new collaboration with a graduate student, for example, may be because they posed
an interesting research question in a class you taught. With your guidance, the student could
develop that idea into a successful project, and perhaps all it takes is a little encouragement
from you for the idea to get the ball rolling. Or maybe you have an idea or already lead a project
that could use a spark. Folding a graduate or undergraduate student into the project could
reignite your progress and provide an opportunity for training and mentorship. Natalie also has
built collaborations with graduate students in other departments by offering data as the basis for
the collaboration around a shared interest. For example, she collected cortisol data as part of a
larger project on women’s health but had not yet analyzed the data. A graduate student wanted
to learn this analysis, which led to an ongoing collaboration. Sharing information about your
research and data both within and across departments can foster collaborations.
A common problem with collaborations, even those occurring within a lab, is that people
might have different levels of investment in the work and different schedules for completing the
work. Their behavior can interfere with your goals and delay your progress, which can feel
stressful. Consider discussing the timeline (and returning to this discussion throughout a project)
to avoid frustration and stalled projects that may be critical to your own research trajectory for
promotion. Nevertheless, some collaborators may miss deadlines, be difficult to contact, or
delay progress in other ways. We have both had this happen and have learned that the only
way to resolve the problem is to address it directly. Handling difficult conversations is a skill that
helps us to become good communicators and team members in other spaces we occupy. Think
about what needs to happen for a collaboration to succeed, and either write an email or request
a brief “check in” meeting. Plan for what you need to say and focus on the outcomes you’re
hoping to achieve. For example, restate expectations, set dates together, and also ask them
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 16
how they are doing as there may be serious reasons for not meeting expectations (e.g., health,
other work demands). Prepare yourself with talking points, which can make the exchange feel
less nerve-wracking and scattered, and take time to work through emotions prior to having a
difficult conversation as that can help to keep communication collegial. If working with a
collaborator who isn’t responding, another strategy is to email them with language such as, “If I
don’t hear from you by X date, then I’ll move forward with the proposed plan.” In some cases,
you may choose to discontinue the collaboration, revisit it at a later date, or choose not to work
with this person on future projects. Working through the challenging moments of collaboration
can also be a great topic to be discussed within a peer mentoring group.
Ultimately, your collaborative behavior sets an example for others to follow, which will
strengthen dynamics within the lab if everyone upholds best practices for collaboration. For
example, on various occasions with students, we have demonstrated that it is simple but
effective to admit when we have missed something or messed up, and how not responding in a
collaboration is worse than a quick response. We emphasize how allowing room for
collaborators and nurturing our relationships with them improves our work and well-being.
Sustainability
In academia, burnout is common, and it has been exacerbated by the added physical
and psychological demands of the COVID-19 pandemic. Burnout (i.e., prolonged stress and
exhaustion) can be a barrier to building a thriving lab for the long term; therefore, we need a
sustainable approach to success. We put forward two questions to guide a sustainability plan:
(1) How will you approach research, mentoring, and collaboration in ways that are sustainable?
(2) How will you evaluate and course correct as you determine which strategies work for you?
How to Create a Plan for Sustainable Research
We encourage all faculty and students to engage in documentation and experimentation
to develop a sustainable plan. What constitutes a sustainable research plan will be specific to
your preferences (e.g., What time of day do you do your best thinking and writing? How do you
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 17
best communicate with collaborators?), the demands on your time (e.g., Do you have
commitments to groups or people outside of work? Are you a parent, a partner, or part of a
friend group that requires time and mental energy? Are you managing health issues or
caregiving?), and the expectations for your position (e.g., What must you do to achieve tenure
and to continue a satisfying and productive career post-tenure?). For your lab’s research to be
sustainable, it must integrate your non-work life as part of the plan, not as an afterthought. We
believe that taking good care of ourselves is part of the job and our responsibility to the lab.
Learn to lean into the ebb and flow of your semester. To get started, it is helpful to
note or track the ebb and flow of the academic term and work with this instead of against it.
Create a calendar that allows you to see the scope of the semester or year; bullet journals can
be used to customize this approach. After trying many planners over the years, Natalie found
that a bullet journal she creates herself works best for both short- and long-term planning. She
uses a blank journal that is divided into sections that are easy to flip between. The first section
houses ongoing to-do lists that are carried over from week to week. The second section has
monthly calendars that lay out all deadlines and important dates. The third section tracks each
project she’s working on and notes the status and next steps, so that there’s room to organize
and document any notes or details in one place. Bullet journals are customizable, so testing out
different sections, layouts, or systems may be of interest. Jes uses a similar planning process
as Natalie but prefers to work electronically via an application called “Evernote” that syncs
across devices (e.g., phone, computer). Across our approaches, a common theme is that we
know what we will be working on and when. There is no right or wrong way to organize and plan
for work, but organization is instrumental to our success and well-being. Planning frees space in
our minds to focus on the tasks at hand because we trust our process will tell us what is next.
When it comes to organizing your schedule, it is key to look ahead and make note of
upcoming deadlines. For example, when are conference proposal deadlines? Are there any
upcoming deadlines for journal articles? When are larger assignments or exams due for classes
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 18
that you may need to grade? Do you want to block off time for friends and family and self-care
(e.g., doctors’ appointments)? Visualizing how commitments unfold across your semester can
illuminate how full your time is. For example, grading often is not factored into planning, but
recognizing that you need to grade 30 papers in the 6th week of the semester can help you form
realistic plans. Know which weeks will require the most time or energy for service, teaching, and
advising. Anticipating these and planning for them helps adjust or plan ahead for research
expectations when needed, which can reduce feelings of guilt or disappointment.
Set limits on what you agree to do for others. We recommend balancing your own
projects (e.g., first-authored projects) with projects that you support for others, and the balance
between these may shift depending on the criteria for your promotion. It can be helpful to revisit
the list of your major projects that serve your vision before filling in what you can offer others.
Convey to others when you have reached the maximum you can handle, which will take some
trial and error to determine. Natalie uses her writing accountability group spreadsheet to track
her tasks and identify when she’s at capacity. In the spreadsheet, she tracks how many writing
days she has each month (e.g., weekdays when she has childcare) and notes how much time
she spends on different types of tasks. By tracking this over time, it became clear what amount
of work she can reasonably accomplish with regard to her research depending on prior
commitments, teaching, and service. Knowing where you stand in terms of current short- and
long-term commitments will make it much clearer whether you have the capacity to take on new
projects and when to say no.
Start or maintain a weekly check-in with yourself. This can be as detailed or broad
as suits you, but you should articulate what you aim to move forward within the lab each week.
At the most basic level, this can be kept short and may simply require listing active projects
versus those that are on hold. Be sure to loop in students and collaborators periodically so that
everyone is working from the same understanding. A more granular approach to your check-in
could identify specific tasks that will fit into your schedule in the upcoming week. We
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 19
recommend taking 10-15 minutes per week to engage in this process; this can even be factored
into your planning for the ebb and flow of the semester. Another way to approach the weekly
check-in is to consider it a brain dump. Your check-in need not be strictly limited to research. In
fact, documenting other tasks and commitments you have in a week can help you to be realistic
about your time, what will fit into your calendar, and when you are at your limit.
Work in short bursts. Small bits of work add up! If you spend 10 minutes per day
moving a project forward, at the end of a week you have put in nearly an hour on a project that
may not have happened otherwise. Although some tasks may seem as though they require
large blocks of uninterrupted time to be executed, experiment with what tasks you can do to
prepare for the larger task (i.e., “pre-work”). For example, for a daunting data analysis session,
using 10-15 minutes ahead of time to open the data, open the codebook, and identify your
variables can be your pre-work and a big help in setting up an effective work session later.
When preparing to write a section of a manuscript, your pre-work may require you to gather
material you need to read or review for the section. Getting organized before doing the larger
task sets yourself up to a) actually complete the task, b) not feel overwhelmed, and c) effectively
use time in your day to make progress on a project. Relatedly, you do not need to wait for
motivation to get your work done; rather, motivation might often follow small bursts of work.
Choose when to focus. Our attention is pulled in a hundred different directions yet the
most important research toward tenure will require deep focus. Choose a short, finite amount of
time each week and keep your focus squarely on the task at hand by closing email or
notifications, disconnecting from the internet, using noise-canceling headphones, closing your
office door, blocking time on your calendar, putting your phone in another room, or using a
timer. Your attention is your most powerful tool. Learning how to wield and control it feels like a
superpower. We recommend the book by Cal Newport (2016) on working through distractions,
titled Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World (see Resources).
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 20
Track your energy, not just your time. Not all time is created equal. Learn when to
work on tasks in relation to your energy levels. Of course, this may be compromised by the
demands that other people put on your time. Noticing how and when your energy affects your
ability to focus and to complete your work will help you begin to plan to protect your energy. You
are the steward of your energy, your time, and your focus.
How to Create Sustainable Life-Work Integration
Integrating work and aspects of your life in your sustainability plan is critical for building a
lab and research career for the long term. Incorporating non-work aspects of your life into your
plans can produce less friction in both areas and can benefit your productivity overall. For
example, designating time for non-work tasks, such as exercise, time with friends, food prep,
reading, or other activities in our weekly schedule– even during typical “work” hours– can help
provide a break from work and increase feeling restored. One suggestion is to put these
activities in your calendar at your weekly check-in and to protect it the same way that you would
for work commitments. It is ok to be unavailable because you’ve already committed to
something that sustains you. We endorse the idea that taking care of ourselves, physically and
mentally, helps us best take care of the students and collaborators with whom we work too. We
suggest that you encourage your students to follow these guidelines as well.
Figuring out what works best for you is key, even when this seems to contradict the
external expectations that academia seems to convey. Identify when you are getting diminished
returns and when you would benefit from a different approach. Feeling tired, having trouble with
focusing, or finding that work is progressing more slowly than usual can be indicators of
diminished returns. The assumption in academia is that faculty and students “push through” to
produce. However, noticing when a break would serve you better than continuing to work can
alleviate overwork and can open up experimentation with ways to take breaks (even short
breaks) that help you return refreshed and ready to work. One example of this is that when you
don’t get enough sleep, your brain works less efficiently, so prioritizing sleep (or taking a nap
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 21
instead of continuing to work) is a good strategy to reduce diminished returns. Similarly, taking
time to prepare or purchase nourishing foods that you enjoy and that fuel you is a worthwhile
task. When your body is signaling that you need a break, listen to it. Reframing productivity as
encompassing elements beyond work is key for unlearning mainstream pressures of academia.
To learn more, we recommend Hillary McBride’s (2021) book, The Wisdom of Your Body:
Finding Healing, Wholeness, and Connection through Embodied Living (see Resources).
Rest can encompass any activity that gives you energy or sustains you. Engaging in
restorative and enjoyable physically active time that is not focused on work can contribute to
rest. For example, Natalie loves to quilt and regularly takes breaks from academic work to sew.
The time spent using her hands and creating a tactile object fuels creativity and brings a sense
of accomplishment unrelated to academic work, and she’s noticed that when working with her
hands, her mind is freer to process information and make connections. Although her goal is
never to intentionally engage in academic work while crafting, taking time away from academic
work lends itself to making progress in thinking about complex ideas or solutions to work-related
challenges. To learn more about the value of rest, we recommend Alex Soojung-Kim Pang’s
(2016) book, Rest: Why You Get More Done When You Work Less (see Resources).
Finally, facing resistance you may hold around both work and time spent on your own
needs is a powerful way to change long-standing patterns that are not serving you. Most of us
have internalized scripts around what we think we need to do to be “successful” as an academic
(or a partner, parent, or in other roles we embody), but the needs we actually need to meet are
our own. Enacting some of the choices needed to build a sustainable research program may not
serve everyone else yet are valuable characteristics of the feminist psychologist who endures.
Conclusion
Establishing your lab while on the tenure track is an exciting opportunity, but it will
present challenges that you have likely not yet encountered. We encourage you to leverage
your network of feminist psychologists to provide you with support as you embark on this new
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 22
academic task. Be patient with your progress. It may take a few years before you see the impact
of your efforts, but we strongly promote the idea that planting the seeds now will help everyone
within your lab to blossom later. Your lab can become a hub for your work toward tenure, the
enactment of your vision, and a mechanism toward institutional transformation for the next
generation of scholars. We hope you cherish the opportunity to build a lab that reflects your
feminist values and nurtures the growth of feminist psychology.
Suggested Resources
McBride, H. L. (2021). The wisdom of your body: Finding healing, wholeness, and connection
through embodied living. Brazos Press.
Newport, C. (2016). Deep work: Rules for focused success in a distracted world. Grand Central.
Pang, A. S-K. (2016). Rest: Why you get more done when you work less. Hachette Book Group.
BUILDING A LAB AT A RESEARCH-INTENSIVE INSTITUTION 23