ECP LIVING LAB
ANNUAL REPORT 2022
PREPARED BY : PRESENTED TO :
Bryant Research Educated Choices Program
Executive Summary
We present an impact evaluation of The Educated Choices Program (ECP), a non-profit
which delivers educational presentations on the impact of food choices with the aim of
reducing animal product consumption and promoting plant-based eating.
We used survey data from over 5,000 presentation viewers to assess the overall impact,
investigate viewers’ motivations, barriers, and comments on plant-based diets, and assess
the impact of different presentations, audiences, and delivery methods.
Our major findings suggest that:
1. ECP presentations reduce consumption of animal products. ECP viewers were 67%
more likely to intend to change their diets compared to a control group. Viewers who
had seen an ECP presentation previously were 20% more likely to be meat-reducers,
and 10% more likely to avoid meat entirely.
2. Viewers’ major motivations to change were health, the environment, and animals,
while major barriers included taste, family diets, and cost. Facts about animal
slaughter were among the most memorable despite making up a relatively small
proportion of the presentation content.
3. Recommending that students adopt one meat-free meal per day is perceived as
achievable, and is likely to be more impactful than other methods.
4. Female and non-binary viewers, older teenagers, and those in relevant classes are
most likely to intend to change their diets.
5. The Healthful Eating presentation was the most impactful, while in-class
presentations are more impactful than those delivered online.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
Contents
Executive Summary 1
Contents 2
1. Background 3
1.1. Healthy & sustainable eating 3
1.2. Education, education, education 4
1.3. The Educated Choices Program 5
2. Materials & Methods 6
2.1. Presentations 6
2.2. Surveys 6
2.3. Participants 7
2.4. Real food choice data 8
3. Findings 9
3.1. Overall impact 9
3.1.1. Treatment vs. control 9
3.1.2. First-time vs. repeat viewers 10
3.1.3. Follow-up data 10
3.2. Motivators and barriers 11
3.2.1. Motivators 11
3.2.2. Barriers 12
3.2.3. Comments 12
3.2.4. Difficulty of asks 14
3.3. Promising audiences & messages 15
3.3.1. Impact by demographics 15
3.3.2. Different presentations 18
3.3.3. In-class vs. online 18
3.4. Outreach & teachers’ perceptions 19
3.4.1. New bookings outreach 19
3.4.2. Teachers’ perceived educational quality 20
4. Conclusions & Recommendations 21
Appendices 22
Appendix A: Full survey instrument 22
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
1. Background
1.1. Healthy & sustainable eating
It is increasingly clear that we need to move towards healthy and sustainable diets
containing more plant-based foods and fewer animal-based foods.
First, the personal health consequences of diets heavy in animal products are dire.
According to the CDC1, heart disease and cancer were the leading causes of death in the
USA in 2020, and both of these diseases are associated with animal product
consumption2,3,4. Diets containing meat are also associated with an increased risk of
cardiovascular disease, high blood pressure, obesity, and diabetes5,6.
Second, the public health implications of mass animal production are similarly negative.
Rearing large numbers of genetically-similar animals in cramped and unsanitary conditions
leads to frequent outbreaks of diseases, many of which are subsequently passed on to
humans7,8. Three quarters of emerging diseases come from animal origins9. Moreover,
animals consume more than two-thirds of medically important antibiotics10,11, which
exacerbates antibiotic resistance and has dire implications for future disease outbreaks12,13.
Third, the environmental impacts of animal agriculture are disastrous. Animal products
provide just 37% of our protein and 18% of our calories but contribute 57% of food-related
greenhouse gas emissions and use 83% of agricultural land14. Animal production also
contributes to a range of other environmental issues, including soil acidification,
eutrophication, ozone depletion, and photochemical smog15. Adopting plant-rich diets would
do more to help the planet than cutting food waste in half16.
Fortunately, there is an increasing range of healthy and sustainable animal product
alternatives. Plant-based meat, dairy, and egg alternatives have proliferated over the last few
years, and are increasingly liked by consumers17. Not only are plant-based alternatives lower
in saturated fat, LDL cholesterol, and calorie density than animal products, they also produce
20environment%20-%20Reducing%20unnecessary%20use%20and%20waste.pdf
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
up to 98% fewer greenhouse gas emissions, use up to 92% less agricultural land, and cause
up to 97% less marine eutrophication18,19,20,21,22.
1.2. Education, education, education
While the impetus to reduce consumption of animal products is strong, and the alternatives
to animal products are increasingly favourable, most people are unaware of this dynamic23,24.
Therefore, educational interventions to inform and explain to people the need to reduce their
consumption of animal products are important25. Moreover, it is likely to be optimal to target
such interventions at young people, as they are typically the most open to change and have
the most years of food choices ahead of them26,27.
Indeed, there are now several published studies investigating the efficacy of educational
interventions for reducing the consumption of meat and animal products.
Study Major Findings
Jalil, Tasoff & Students who had a 50-minute lecture on food choices and the climate as
Bustamante well as additional information about the health benefits of plant-based
(2019)28 eating reduced their consumption of meat and increased their
consumption of plant foods compared to a control group. The
probability of students in the intervention purchasing meat meals fell by
4.6 percentage points (pp), and their probability of purchasing plant-based
meals increased by 4.2 percentage points.
Jay et al. Freshman undergraduates enrolled in a six-month course on food-related
(2019)29 sustainability reduced their overall dietary carbon footprint by 7%,
their dietary carbon footprint from beef by 19%, and their reported
ruminant consumption by 28% compared to undergraduates enrolled in
a climate change-related course which did not discuss food choices.
Schwitzgebel, Philosophy undergraduates who engaged with an article, a video, and an
Cokelet & in-class discussion about the ethics of eating meat were more likely to
Singer agree that eating meat from factory farmed animals is unethical
(2020)30 (43%) compared to a control group (29%). Food purchase receipts
showed that the students in the intervention reduced their purchase
of meat products (from 52% of purchases before to 42% after) while the
control group showed no change (52% before and after).
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
Schwitzgebel, Students who read a book chapter arguing for vegetarianism and watched
Cokelet & a vegetarian advocacy video containing factory farm footage increased
Singer in agreement that eating factory farmed meat is unethical (from 37%
(2021)31 before to 54% after), and 39% of them anonymously pledged to avoid
factory farmed meat for 24 hours. Receipts indicated that meat
purchases fell from 30% of all purchases to 24% in the intervention
group but were unchanged in the control group.
Mathur, A documentary on the animal-, health-, and environmental-related
Peacock, reasons to eat less meat increased intentions to reduce meat
Robinson & consumption, but follow-up surveys using ‘naive recruitment’ (i.e.,
Gardner appearing to relate to a different study) found no significant difference
(2021)32 in self-reported consumption compared to the control group.
Jalil, Tasoff & A follow-up study to the above found that students who engaged with the
Bustamante 50-minute lecture on food choices and the climate and further educational
(2022)33 material on the health benefits of eating plant-based reduced their meat
consumption by 5.6 percentage points and the effects were
sustained over three years.
Feltz et al. Students from US universities who took animal ethics courses and
(2022)34 engaged with animal ethics readings were significantly more
knowledgeable about animals used for food and significantly less
likely to justify meat consumption by appealing to the ‘4 Ns’ (normal,
natural, necessary, nice) compared to a control group. However, there
was no significant difference in self-reported consumption of animal
products.
As shown the majority of these studies show that educational interventions can significantly
reduce consumption of meat and animal products. However, there is significant variation in
these studies, and a lot we still do not know about how to optimize such interventions.
1.3. The Educated Choices Program
One of the largest organizations delivering educational interventions on the benefits of
plant-based eating is the Educated Choices Program (ECP)35. ECP designs a range of
high-quality science-based educational presentations and delivers them to audiences via
online videos. After some years of having educators deliver presentations in classrooms,
ECP recently moved all of its content online to reduce costs and expand its reach.
ECP’s audiences are primarily high-school and middle-school students, but also include
students at colleges and universities. This year, ECP also started to offer its presentations to
church groups, fitness groups, and other community groups outside of educational
institutions. The majority of ECP audiences are in the US and Canada, but this year ECP
expanded its reach to include Europe and Latin America, including developing Spanish and
German language presentations.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
Since our previous evaluations of ECP36,37, the organization has also made a range of other
changes, including updates to presentation materials, moving to an automated email
booking system, moving to a new survey and CRM system, and developing the first of its
planned ‘shorts’ presentations, which are just 15 minutes rather than 45 minutes. In this
report, we will use a range of methods and data sources to evaluate ECP’s impact in 2022.
2. Materials & Methods
2.1. Presentations
ECP contacts teachers by email to offer a range of educational presentations to their
classes. Teachers can choose from the following presentations:
Presentation Content
Healthful Eating Focuses on the health impact of animal products and the
benefits of choosing plant foods.
The Environment and Focuses on the environmental impact of animal agriculture and
Modern Agriculture the benefits of choosing plant foods.
The Ethics of Eating Focuses on the health, environmental, and ethical
considerations of animal products and the benefits of plant
foods.
The Future of Food Focuses on future food technologies including plant-based,
cell-cultivated, and fermentation-derived animal product
alternatives.
The Power of Developed with the Physicians Association for Nutrition, focuses
Nutrition for Disease on the benefits of plant foods for preventing chronic disease.
Prevention
The Micronutrient A short (15-minute) presentation which focuses on the
Rainbow micronutrients available from a range of plant foods.
We collected survey data from students who saw each of these presentations, as well as
from a control group who had not yet viewed a presentation.
2.2. Surveys
After viewing the presentations, students are invited to take a survey. They follow a QR code
or a unique URL, automatically records the audience they belong to, the version of the
presentation they have seen, and some other information, and shows the appropriate
questions accordingly.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
First, the survey asked about the viewers, including age, stage of education, field (for
teachers and medical students), the type of venue (for community viewers), ethnicity, diet,
consumption of a range of animal- and plant-based foods, and geographical location.
Second, viewers were asked about their intended future diet, how they planned to change
consumption of a range of animal- and plant-based foods, their motivations and barriers for
moving towards a plant-based diet, the extent to which they feel they have control over their
diets, whether they had seen an ECP presentation before, and how easy or difficult a range
of dietary change strategies would be.
Third, viewers were asked which presentation they had seen, which class they were in (for
students only), what was the most memorable or surprising thing they had learned, their
agreement with some statements about the importance, reliability, and novelty of the
information, and additional feedback.
Next, medical students were asked about whether they would recommend plant-based diets
for a range of health reasons, how they thought intake of a range of nutrients would be on a
plant-based diets, and the importance of diet in predicting a number of chronic diseases.
Next, school-based viewers were asked whether their institution had a Meatless Monday
program, whether they would support such a program, whether they had changed their meat
consumption outside of school as a result of the program, and their likelihood of choosing a
plant-based option in their school cafeteria.
Next, viewers were asked about their likelihood of eating plant-based and cultivated meat
and dairy products and the importance of different benefits and concerns relating to these
products.
Finally, participants were asked to give their email addresses to be entered into a prize draw
and, optionally, contacted for a follow-up survey. The full range of survey questions is shown
Some students were then invited to take part in a follow-up survey. These students were
over the age of 18, gave a valid email address, consented to be contacted for a follow-up,
and saw the presentation at least 30 days before.
2.3. Participants
Participants were mostly students of middle schools and high schools, primarily in the US
and Canada. However, there were also members of community groups (less than 1%), as
well as some students from countries in Europe and Latin America. The demographic
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
Gender N % Grade N %
Male 2,842 42.77% 6th Grade 201 3.19%
Female 3,571 53.74% 7th Grade 516 8.19%
Non-binary 232 3.49% 8th Grade 578 9.17%
Country N % 9th Grade 1,886 29.93%
USA 5,826 88.39% 10th Grade 1,069 16.96%
Canada 703 10.67% 11th Grade 832 13.20%
Germany 3 0.05% 12th Grade 937 14.87%
UK 10 0.15% Freshman (college) 46 0.73%
Austria 1 0.02% Sophomore (college) 47 0.75%
Switzerland 2 0.03% Junior (college) 41 0.65%
Liechtenstein 2 0.03% Senior (college) 94 1.49%
Chile 40 0.61% Graduate school 55 0.87%
Colombia 1 0.02%
Mexico 3 0.05%
2.4. Real food choice data
As well as having thousands of viewers taking the survey after viewing the presentation, and
dozens taking the follow-up survey, we also started to explore using real food choice data
this year.
We have run some initial trials at the University of Bath, recruiting students via the
University’s Research Participation Scheme and using data on food choices from the
University’s Eat & Drink scheme before and after students viewed an ECP presentation vs. a
control. However, only a minority of students are enrolled in these schemes, and very few
are enrolled in both. As a result, we have only been successful in collecting food choice data
from 4 students who are enrolled in both schemes.
We have ongoing discussions with the University of Cambridge and Drexel University to run
similar trials with more students at their institutions and will report on these in 2023.
A note on comparing percentages
We report some results both as a percentage difference (%) and a percentage point
difference (pp). Percentage difference refers to the difference as a percentage of the
percentage of the total subsample.
For example, a comparison of 10% in Group A to 20% in Group B is an increase of 10
percentage points (out of 100), but is an increase of 100% (since it is double the
proportion).
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
3. Findings
3.1. Overall impact
The first set of analyses was designed to assess the overall impact of ECP presentations on
viewers’ diets, i.e. do ECP presentations cause people to reduce their consumption of meat
and animal products?
3.1.1. Treatment vs. control
First, we compared the proportion of people who intended to change their diet and give up
meat completely among viewers of ECP presentations compared to a control group, who
answered the survey before viewing a presentation.
As shown, those who viewed ECP presentations were 67% (18pp) more likely to intend to
change their diet compared to the control group. Moreover, ECP viewers were 143%
(10pp) more likely to intend to give up meat entirely.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
3.1.2. First-time vs. repeat viewers
Our next analysis compared the current self-reported diets of people who had seen an ECP
presentation before compared to first-time viewers.
As shown, people who had seen an ECP presentation before were 9% (6pp) less likely to
be unrestricted meat-eaters. They were 20% (5pp) more likely to be meat-reducers and
10% (1pp) more likely to avoid meat entirely.
3.1.3. Follow-up data
Our next analysis looked at the reported changes in diet and animal product consumption of
students who took the follow-up survey.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
In this graph, red segments show the portion of the viewers who increased their
consumption or moved towards more meat consumption; yellow segments show the portion
of viewers who maintained the same level of consumption or did not change dietary
category; green segments show the portion of viewers who reported changing their diet in a
positive direction. The black line shows the average magnitude of change for each column:
anything below 0% represents a reduction in consumption or move towards a plant-based
diet.
As shown, many viewers who responded to the follow-up survey had not changed their diet.
However, on average, the responses indicated a move towards plant-based diets with
two exceptions: there was no reported change in overall egg consumption, and there was a
reported increase in overall fish consumption.
3.2. Motivators and barriers
The next set of analyses looked at what viewers thought about the issues in more detail.
This section reports on motivators, barriers, thoughts, and the perceived difficulty of different
dietary change methods.
3.2.1. Motivators
This analysis focuses on the frequency of different motivators given, and the strength of
each of them in determining dietary change.
As shown, the most frequently cited motivators were health, the environment, and
animals. These generally mirror the focuses of the major presentations given: Healthful
Eating was the most commonly viewed presentation, and no presentations focused on
animal issues exclusively. 51% of viewers who cited animals as a motivator intended to
change their diets, compared to 48% for health and 50% for the environment.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
3.2.2. Barriers
The next analysis focused on viewers’ cited barriers to changing their diets.
As shown, taste was the most commonly-cited barrier to dietary change, followed by
viewers’ families eating meat and the cost of plant-based foods. Taste was also among
the strongest barriers: just 43% of those citing this barrier intended to change their diet,
compared to 51% who cited family and 48% who cited cost.
3.2.3. Comments
We used a word cloud generator to illustrate the most frequently used terms from two open
questions. More commonly mentioned words are shown in larger fonts. First, students were
asked to recount the most memorable or surprising things they had learned.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
As shown, the most commonly used terms in response to the first prompt included ‘animals’
and ‘meat’, which suggests that the salient points and implications of the presentations were
clear to students.
Among the more commonly used terms were ‘plant’, ‘based’, ‘eat’, ‘eating’, and ‘food’, which
suggests that students were also reflecting on alternative ways of eating, and the content of
what they eat.
Also frequently mentioned were ‘amount’, ‘animal’, ‘hour’, ‘lot’, ‘chicken’, ‘cows’, and
‘slaughtered’, suggesting that viewers were reflecting on the scale of animal slaughter for
food. Although this was not the primary focus of any presentations, it seems to be among the
most memorable themes.
Commonly-used terms also included ‘health’, ‘healthy’, ‘disease’, ‘heart’, and ‘cancer’. This
reflects the health themes and messages discussed in the presentations. Further
commonly-used terms included ‘environment’, ‘water’, and ‘waste’, reflecting the
environmental themes discussed in the presentations.
Second, students were asked to give any other feedback about the presentations.
Here, the most common terms were ‘presentation’, ‘good’, ‘great’, ‘none’, ‘really’, ‘think’,
‘video’, ‘information’, ‘feedback’, and ‘nothing’. This reflects a generally positive response to
the presentations overall, with positive terms and no feedback amongst the most common
responses.
There was also a variety of other positive terms featured prominently in the second word
cloud, including ‘nice’, ‘thank’, ‘interesting’, ‘amazing’, and ‘enjoyed’.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
3.2.4. Difficulty of asks
The next analysis looked at the reported difficulty of various strategies for dietary change.
As shown, 56% of viewers said that cutting out meat one day per week (e.g. Meatless
per day, 40% for cutting out one type of meat completely and for cooking a meat-free meal
for friends and family once a week, 21% for cutting out meat completely with a buddy, and
19% for doing a meat-free month (e.g. Veganuary).
This is informative in at least two important ways. First, some common interventions, such as
Meatless Mondays, are perceived as far easier than others, such as Veganuary. More
achievable asks are likely to persuade more people to try. Second, some more impactful
interventions, such as cutting out meat one meal per day, are perceived as similarly
achievable to less impactful interventions, such as cutting out meat one day per week.
Meatless Monday No meat one meal/day
14% meat-free meals 33% meat-free meals
M T W Th F S S M T W Th F S S
B B
L L
D D
As shown, this represents more than double the meals in a week being meat-free, and is
perceived as only slightly more difficult.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
3.3. Promising audiences & messages
The next set of analyses looked at the most promising audiences and messages in terms of
dietary change intent.
3.3.1. Impact by demographics
First, we looked at the intention to change diet by gender, age, class, and location.
As shown, female viewers were 28% (11pp) more likely to change their diet after viewing
an ECP presentation compared to male viewers. Moreover, non-binary students remain a
strong promising audience: 53% of them intended to change their diets after viewing an ECP
presentation.
Additionally, older viewers were more likely to intend to change their diets compared to
was 58% for 19-year-olds.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
We also compared dietary change intention between different classes.
In general, we see a higher rate of dietary change intention for classes where the material
seems to be most relevant. Viewers in health and physical education classes were most
likely to change their diets (49%) and viewers in math classes were least likely to change
(30%).
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
Finally, we looked at dietary change by country and region for those countries and regions
with more than 30 responses. In the graph below, regions are ordered by least-to-most
conservative according to the most recent federal election results.
As shown, there was no major difference in impact between the US and Canada, with 46%
and 44% intending to change their diets respectively. There is also some evidence of
increased effectiveness in more conservative regions. Although counterintuitive, this
mirrors our 2021 finding and suggests that there is more potential for change in areas where
people are less likely to be following a meat-free diet already.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
3.3.2. Different presentations
Our next analysis looked at dietary change intentions by different presentations.
As shown, all of the presentations increased intentions to change diet compared to the
control group. However, there were also significant differences between the presentations.
The most impactful presentation was Healthful Eating, of which 54% of viewers intended
to change their diets, this was just 48% of Ethics of Eating viewers and Environment and
Modern Agriculture viewers, and just 44% of Future of Food viewers.
3.3.3. In-class vs. online
Next, we compared the responses of viewers who saw presentations in-class vs. those who
saw presentations online.
As shown, 59% of those who saw the presentation in-class intended to change their diet,
compared to 43% of those who saw the presentation online, an increase of 37% (16pp).
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
3.4. Outreach & teachers’ perceptions
3.4.1. New bookings outreach
This analysis used data from ECP’s bookings dashboard to investigate the number of
students reached by country and venue type over time. ECP adopted a new booking system
and dashboard to record bookings this year, so data begins in the new school year.
As shown, the majority of bookings came from secondary schools, while postsecondary
schools and community venues remained a minority of bookings. We also see evidence of
ECP’s expansion into Latin America, with over 2,000 students booked in October and
November 2022.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
3.4.2. Teachers’ perceived educational quality
This analysis looked at teachers’ agreement with statements about the educational quality,
reliability, and novelty of ECP presentations.
As shown, 88% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the information presented
was supported by reliable sources, while 91% agreed or strongly agreed that it is
important for students to learn about this information. 71% agreed or strongly agreed
that they already knew a lot about the information presented.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
4. Conclusions & Recommendations
Based on our analyses, we offer the following conclusions and recommendations.
1. Overall, the evidence suggests that ECP presentations reduce consumption of
meat and animal products. Compared to the control group, who answered surveys
without having seen an ECP presentation, ECP viewers were 67% more likely to intend
to reduce animal product consumption and 143% more likely to intend to give up meat
completely. Moreover, compared to first-time viewers, repeat viewers were 9% less likely
to identify as meat-eaters, 20% more likely to be meat-reducers, and 10% more likely to
eat no meat at all. Follow-up survey data suggests minor changes in reported
consumption but an average move towards plant-based diets.
2. The major perceived benefits were health, the environment, and animals. While
health was the most-cited motivator to reduce meat consumption (followed by the
environment and animals), those who cited animals as a motivator were most likely to
intend to change their diet. The frequency of cited motivations likely reflects the most
commonly-viewed presentations.
3. The major perceived barriers were taste, family, and cost. Taste was both the
most-cited and among the most important barriers to transitioning towards a plant-based
diet. Presentations should continue to highlight tasty and appealing animal product
alternatives.
4. The most memorable themes included food, animal slaughter, health, and the
environment. This suggests that the central message and implications of the
presentations are clear to viewers, and facts about animal slaughter tend to be
especially memorable despite making up a relatively low proportion of the content.
5. Cutting out meat one day a week or one meal a day were seen as relatively easy,
while a meat-free month and buddying up to cut out meat were seen as relatively
difficult. Some meat reduction strategies are seen as far more achievable than others,
while some also have far more impact than others. Recommending meat-free lunches
seems to be an achievable and impactful goal.
6. The most receptive audiences are females and non-binary students, as well as
older teenagers. There is also some evidence that students are more likely to intend to
change their diets in more conservative regions and in more relevant classes.
7. Healthful Eating was the most impactful presentation in terms of intended dietary
change. Viewers of Ethics of Eating and Environment & Modern Agriculture were 11%
less likely to change, and viewers of Future of Food were 19% less likely to change, but
all presentations increased dietary change intentions compared to the control group.
8. In-class presentations convince more people to change their diets than online
presentations. Compared to online viewers, in-class viewers were 37% more likely to
intend to change their diets. ECP was aware of this efficacy loss when moving to online
presentations, but it can be offset by reaching more viewers.
9. Teachers regard ECP presentations as evidence-based and important. 88% agreed
that the presentations were based on reliable sources, and 91% agreed the topics were
important for students to learn about.
10. Our findings fit with a growing body of research on the efficacy of educational
interventions for meat reduction. New evidence points to the long-term impact of such
interventions on viewers’ food choices.
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
Appendices
Appendix A: Full survey instrument
Section Question(s) Answers
About You What is your current school grade or > 6th Grade
college level? ✝ > 7th Grade
> 8th Grade
> 9th Grade
> 10th Grade
> 11th Grade
> 12th Grade
> Freshman (college)
> Sophomore (college)
> Junior (college)
> Senior (college)
> Graduate school
What is your current education stage? > Freshman (First year)
■ > Sophomore (Second year)
> Junior (Third year)
> Senior (Fourth year)
> Postgraduate degree program
> Internship or residency
> Adult education
Which school level do you teach? ● > Middle school
> High school
> College/University
> Other (Please specify)
I plan to practice as a: ■ > Nutritionist
> Dietician
> Pharmacist
> Physical/Occupational/Speech
Therapist
> Physician
> Dentist
> Mental Health Professional
> Nurse
> Other (Please specify)
What type of venue or group hosted > Religious or spiritual venue
the presentation today? ▲ > Library
> Fitness group
> Workplace
> Social group
> Other (Please specify)
What is your age (years)? ✝ (Open text)
Please indicate your age group: ●▲ > Under 18
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
> 19-29
> 30-39
> 40-49
> 50-59
> 60+
What is your gender? > Male
> Female
> Non-binary (Please specify)
Which of the following best describes > Asian or Pacific Islander
your race/ethnicity? > Black or African American
> Hispanic or Latino
> Native American or Alaskan
Native
> White or Caucasian
> Multiracial or Biracial
> Prefer Not To Say
> Other (Please specify)
Which of the following best describes > Meat-eater (no restrictions on
your diet? eating animal products)
> Meat-reducer (reducing meat
consumption or only eating it
occasionally)
> Fish eater (eats plant-based
foods, eggs, dairy, and fish)
> Meat-free (eats plant-based
foods, eggs, and dairy)
> Completely plant-based (eats
only plant-based foods)
In the past 3 months, how often did > Never
you eat these foods? > Less than once per MONTH
> 1-3 times per MONNTH
> Meat (any type of meat, including > Once per WEEK
beef, pork, chicken, turkey, fish, > 2-4 times per WEEK
shellfish, or other meats) > 5-6 times per WEEK
> Beef (hamburger, steak, roast beef, > Once per DAY
meatloaf, in stews / lasagna / pasta / > 2-3 times per DAY
pizza / etc.) > 4 or more times per DAY
> Pork (bacon, ham, pork chops,
spare ribs, bacon bits, etc.)
> Chicken (wings, nuggets, chicken
breast, chicken sandwich, in soup,
etc.)
> Turkey (turkey dinner, turkey
sandwich, turkey burger, turkey bacon,
in soup, etc.)
> Fish, not including shellfish (salmon,
tuna, fish sticks, haddock, fish & chips,
etc.)
> Shellfish (lobster, shrimp, scallops,
oyster, crab, etc.)
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
> Other meats (duck, lamb/sheep,
goat, bison, etc.)
> Dairy (cheese, milk, yogurt, ice
cream, butter, etc.)
> Eggs (boiled, fried, omelet, in salad,
in baked goods, etc.)
> Plant-based meat substitutes
> Plant-based fish substitutes
> Plant-based dairy substitutes
> Plant-based egg substitutes
Please enter the name of (your school (Open text)
/the venue or group hosting the
presentation today) ✝▲
Please enter the name of the town/city (Open text)
(your school is/the venue or group) is
in ✝▲
Please select the country (your > USA
school/the venue or group) is in ✝▲ > Canada
> Germany
> United Kingdom
> Austria
> Switzerland
> Liechtenstein
> Other (please specify)
Please select the state or region (your [List of US states, Canadian
school/the venue or group) is in ✝▲ provinces, UK counties, German
regions]
About your In the future, what type of diet do you > Meat-eater (no restrictions on
diet intend to eat? eating animal products)
> Meat-reducer (reducing meat
consumption or only eating it
occasionally)
> Fish eater (eats plant-based
foods, eggs, dairy, and fish)
> Meat-free (eats plant-based
foods, eggs, and dairy)
> Completely plant-based (eats
only plant-based foods)
Please indicate how you intend to > Start eating
change your consumption of the > Eat more
following foods (if at all) > Eat the same amount
> Eat less
> Meat (any type of meat, including > Stop eating
beef, pork, chicken, turkey, fish, > Continue not to eat
shellfish, or other meats)
> Beef (hamburger, steak, roast beef,
meatloaf, in stews / lasagna / pasta /
pizza / etc.)
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
> Pork (bacon, ham, pork chops,
spare ribs, bacon bits, etc.)
> Chicken (wings, nuggets, chicken
breast, chicken sandwich, in soup,
etc.)
> Turkey (turkey dinner, turkey
sandwich, turkey burger, turkey bacon,
in soup, etc.)
> Fish, not including shellfish (salmon,
tuna, fish sticks, haddock, fish & chips,
etc.)
> Shellfish (lobster, shrimp, scallops,
oyster, crab, etc.)
> Other meats (duck, lamb/sheep,
goat, bison, etc.)
> Dairy (cheese, milk, yogurt, ice
cream, butter, etc.)
> Eggs (boiled, fried, omelet, in a
salad, in baked goods, etc.)
> Plant-based meat substitutes
> Plant-based fish substitutes
> Plant-based dairy substitutes
> Plant-based egg substitutes
Which of the following do you consider > Benefiting the environment
the biggest motivation(s) for eating a > Benefiting your health
more plant-based diet? (You can > Benefiting the animals
select several) > Improved food safety
> Global food security
> Saving money
> Taste preference
> None
> Other (please specify)
Which of the following do you consider > I like the taste of meat and
the biggest barriers to eating a more animal products
plant-based diet? (You can select > Plant-based foods are too
several) expensive
> Eating plant-based is too
inconvenient
> Health reasons
> My friends and peers eat meat
> My family eat meat
> I don't think there are good
reasons to eat less meat
> No barriers
> Other (Please specify)
To what extent do you feel you have > None at all
control over which foods you eat? > A little
> A moderate amount
> A lot
> A great deal
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
Have you seen an ECP presentation > Yes
before today? > No
> Don’t know
In your personal opinion, please > Very easy
indicate the level of difficulty for each > Easy
of the following meat-reduction > Neutral
implementation techniques > Difficult
> Very difficult
> Choosing one day a week to cut out
meat entirely (e.g., meatless
Mondays)
> Choosing one type of meat to cut
out of your diet entirely (e.g.,
completely stopping beef intake but
continuing to eat other meat sources)
> Choosing one daily meal to be
consistently meat-free
> Participating in a meat-free month
(e.g., Veganuary)
> Cook one meat-free meal for friends
and family each week
> Buddying up with a friend and
cutting meat out of your diets together
entirely
About ECP Which presentation did you see > The Environment and Modern
today? Agriculture
> Healthful Eating
> The Ethics of Eating
> The Future of Meat and Dairy
> Power of Nutrition in Disease
Prevention
In which class did you see the > English
presentation today? ✝ > Foreign language
> Health and physical education
> Math
> Physical/Environmental/Life
Sciences
> Social sciences
> Family and consumer science
> Other (please specify)
What did you learn today that was (Open text)
most surprising, memorable, or
interesting?
To what extent do you agree with the > Strongly disagree
following? > Disagree
> Neither agree nor disagree
> The information presented today > Agree
was supported by reliable sources > Strongly agree
> It is important for students to learn
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
about the information presented today
> I already knew a lot about the
information presented today
Please enter any additional feedback (Open text)
you have about the presentation,
including anything that could be
improved
Plant-based Please indicate your agreement with > Strongly disagree
nutrition each of the following > Disagree
> Neither agree nor disagree
> I would recommend a plant-based > Agree
diet for reducing chronic disease > Strongly agree
> I would recommend a plant-based
diet for losing weight
> I would recommend a plant-based
diet for general health and wellbeing
> I believe it is possible to get all of
your required nutrition from a
plant-based diet
> I believed prior to the presentation
that it is possible to get all of your
required nutrition from a plant-based
diet
Please indicate your views of a > Intake likely to be too low
plant-based diet with respect to each > Intake likely to be adequate
of the following ■ > Intake likely to be too high
> Calcium
> Cholesterol
> Fiber
> Iron
> Omega 3s
> Protein
> Saturated fat
> Vitamin B12
> Vitamin D
In your view, how important is diet as a > Not at all important
predictor of each of the following > Somewhat important
chronic diseases? ■ > Very important
> Extremely important
> Heart disease
> Stroke
> Obesity
> Type 2 diabetes
> Colorectal cancer
> Osteoporosis
Meatless Does your school currently have a > My school has Meatless Monday
Mondays meat reduction program, such as > My school has another meat
Meatless Mondays? ✝●■ reduction program
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
> My school DOES NOT have a
meat reduction program
> Don’t know
How do you feel about a meat > Strongly support
reduction program like Meatless > Support
Monday at your school? ✝●■ > Neither support not oppose
> Oppose
> Strongly oppose
Which of the following best describes > The school promotes meat-free
your school's Meatless Monday options but still serves meat
program? ✝●■ > The school only serves
meat-free options and does not
serve meat
> Don’t know
How has your school's meat reduction > Greatly reduced
program affected your consumption of > Slightly reduced
meat outside of school or on other > Remained the same
days of the week? ✝●■ > Slightly increased
> Greatly increased
If both meat and > Very unlikely
meat-free/plant-based options are > Unlikely
available at your school cafeteria, how > Neutral
likely are you to choose the > Likely
meat-free/plant-based option? ✝●■ > Very likely
Cultivated Please indicate your interest in eating > Definitely would not eat
meat each of the following foods > Probably would not eat
> Maybe would eat
> Cultivated meat > Probably would eat
> Cow-free dairy > Definitely would eat
> Plant-based meat
> Plant-based dairy
Please indicate the importance of > Very unimportant
each of the following potential benefits > Quite unimportant
of cultivated meat in your view > Maybe important
> Quite important
> Being better for animals > Very important
> Being better for the environment
> Being healthier (e.g., less saturated
fat)
> Being safer (e.g., less risk of
infections)
> Helping to alleviate world hunger
Please indicate the importance of > Very unimportant
each of the following issues in your > Quite unimportant
decision whether to eat cultivated > Maybe important
meat. > Quite important
> Very important
Educated Choices Program Impact Evaluation 2022
> Taste
> Price
> Naturalness
> Safety
> Healthiness
> Novelty or unfamiliarity
Final Please enter your email address so (Open text)
questions that we can contact you if you win the
$100 Amazon gift card! (Optional)
✝ Only asked of students
● Only asked of teachers
▲ Only asked of community viewers
■ Only asked of medical students