Children With Autism Spectrum Disorder in Times of COVID-19:
Examining Emotional and Behavioral Problems, Parental Well-Being, and Resilience
1,2 1,3 3,4 3,5
Donna A. de Maat , Ruth Van der Hallen , Pieter F. A. de Nijs , Kirsten Visser , Dennis
3,6 1,3 1,3 3,5,7,8
Bastiaansen , Femke L. Truijens , Elisabeth H. M. van Rijen , Wietske Ester , Peter
1 1,2,4 1,3
Prinzie , Pauline W. Jansen , & Linda P. Dekker
Draft version 3, 12/06/2023
This paper has been published in the Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders.
Published version openly available:
Please cite as:
de Maat, D. A., Van der Hallen, R., de Nijs, P. F. A., Visser, K., Bastiaansen, D., Truijens,
F. L., van Rijen, E. H. M., Ester, W., Prinzie, P., Jansen, P. W., & Dekker, L. P. (2023).
Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder in Times of COVID-19: Examining Emotional
and Behavioral Problems, Parental Well-Being, and Resilience. Journal of Autism and
Corresponding author information: Donna A. de Maat, Burgemeester Oudlaan 50, 3000 DR
Rotterdam, the Netherlands, demaat@essb.eur.nl, ORCID: 0000-0002-7096-2606
1 Department of Psychology, Education, and Child Studies, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands 2 The Generation R Study Group, Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands 3 Rotterdam Autism Consortium (R.A.C.), Rotterdam, The Netherlands 4 Department of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry/Psychology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands 5 Sarr Autism Rotterdam, Youz Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Parnassia Group, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands 6 Yulius Center for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Dordrecht, The Netherlands 7 Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Curium-LUMC, Oegstgeest, The Netherlands 8 Parnassia Bavo Group, Parnassia Bavo
Academy, The Hague, The Netherlands
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 2
Abstract
This longitudinal study assessed the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on children with
autism spectrum disorder (ASD; n = 62; M = 13 years) by measuring emotional and
age
behavioral problems before and during the pandemic, and by comparing this change to a
matched sample of children without ASD (n = 213; M = 16 years). Moreover, we examined
age
whether indicators of parental well-being promoted resilience of children with ASD. Results
showed that the mean change in problems did not differ between children with and without
ASD. Importantly, some children showed an increase in problems, while others showed
resilience. Parental well-being indicators were not related to resilience among children with
ASD. The interindividual variability in responses, particularly among children with ASD,
highlights the need for personalized support.
Keywords: COVID-19, autism spectrum disorder (ASD), emotional and behavioral
problems, parental well-being, resilience
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 3
Children With Autism Spectrum Disorder in Times of COVID-19:
Examining Emotional and Behavioral Problems, Parental Well-Being, and Resilience
The COVID-19 pandemic constitutes a challenging period for many families. In
various countries, prevention measures were imposed, which led to drastic changes in life,
particularly for families with children. During periods of lockdown, children could not
physically attend school, parents had to work from home, and families were discouraged
from having social contact with others. Previous findings indicate that the COVID-19
pandemic can result in higher levels of psychological distress among children, especially
among those with neurodevelopmental disorders (Panchal et al., 2021) such as autism
spectrum disorder (ASD). In fact, children with ASD may be particularly at risk due to their
vulnerability to unpredictable and complex changes (Boulter et al., 2014; Demetriou et al.,
2018).
Children with ASD have impairments in communication and reciprocal social
interaction and exhibit restricted, repetitive patterns of behaviors or interests (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013). As such, these children prefer highly predictable
environments and may experience stress, anxiety, or confusion if unexpected changes occur
(Baron-Cohen, 2006). The COVID-19 prevention measures may affect the functioning of
children with ASD in particular due to the higher rates of co-occurring mental health
problems (Lai, 2019), the disruption in day-to-day routines, and the reduced access to
necessary supports. Simultaneously, some children with ASD may experience less stress
during the pandemic as a result of reduced social interactions and demands (Ameis et al.,
2020; Mumbardó-Adam et al., 2021), potentially improving their emotional and behavioral
functioning (Mumbardó-Adam et al., 2021).
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 4
Children With ASD During COVID-19
Some empirical studies indicated that children with ASD experienced more emotional
and behavioral problems (EB-problems) during COVID-19, compared to before the
pandemic (e.g., Colizzi et al., 2020; Di Renzo et al., 2020). However, other study findings
revealed that children with ASD showed no changes between clinical scores (including
anxiety and behavioral problems) collected at the beginning and the end of the lockdown
period (Guidotti et al., 2020), although clinical scores before the pandemic were not assessed
in this study. Mixed findings have also been found among other youth with pre-existing
mental health problems, with some results suggesting an increase in problems over the course
of the pandemic (Cost et al., 2022; Fischer et al., 2022), whereas other results point to
stability or improvement in mental health during these challenging times (Bouter et al., 2021;
Cost et al., 2022).
For now, it remains an open question whether children with ASD are more affected by
the COVID-19 pandemic compared to children without ASD. Only a handful of studies have
directly compared the impact of the pandemic on the functioning of children with and without
ASD. These findings suggest that children with ASD experienced higher levels of EB-
problems than children without ASD during the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g., Nonweiler et al.,
2020; Polónyiová et al., 2022; Waite et al., 2021). In another study, youth with ASD showed
more negative changes in behavior during the lockdown period than their peers without ASD,
as retrospectively reported by parents (Amorim et al., 2020). Nevertheless, many children
with ASD experience elevated problems in normal times as well (Lai et al., 2019),
underscoring the need to consider children’s pre-pandemic functioning when comparing the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic between children with and without ASD. However, due
to a lack of longitudinal studies measuring child behavior before the pandemic, it is still
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 5
unclear how the COVID-19 outbreak has affected the functioning of youth with ASD as
compared to youth without ASD.
Resilience of Children With ASD
Despite recent studies on the functioning of children with ASD during the COVID-19
pandemic, little is known about why some children with ASD show more resilience than
others during this period. Resilience refers to the dynamic process of relatively positive
adaptation despite exposure to significant risk (Masten, 2018). Parental well-being may be an
important factor that contributes to the resilience of children with ASD under stressful
conditions, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Previous findings indicate that better parental
mental health, including lower levels of parental depression, anxiety, and stress, can protect
children with ASD from emotional and behavioral difficulties during COVID-19 (Polónyiová
et al., 2022) and promote children’s post-disaster mental health (Cobham et al., 2016). In
addition, the extent to which parents feel socially connected to other people may play a role
in children’s positive outcomes and resilience. Previous work suggests that perceived social
support of parents is a key protective factor for children with ASD in normal times
(Drogomyretska et al., 2020) as well as during the COVID-19 pandemic (Tokatly Latzer et
al., 2021). Parents’ perceptions of social connectedness to others could diminish parental
stress (e.g., Zaidman-Zait et al., 2017), which in turn may lead to more effective parenting
practices (e.g., Keen et al., 2010) and fewer EB-problems among children with ASD during
the lockdown (Chen et al., 2021; Polónyiová et al., 2022). Yet, the aforementioned studies
examining the role of parental well-being in the resilience of children with ASD did not
include a pre-pandemic assessment. To better understand which children are at risk and
which show resilience to the COVID-19 situation, longitudinal studies are needed that focus
on potential protective factors and simultaneously consider children’s functioning before the
pandemic.
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 6
The Current Study
The COVID-19 pandemic offers a unique opportunity to examine how challenging or
stressful situations affect families from populations potentially at risk. Obtaining more
knowledge on the impact of the pandemic on children with ASD and protective factors at the
family level is crucial for providing tailored interventions and support for children with ASD
and their parents. This knowledge may also be used to better assist vulnerable families during
other life-changing events, such as following natural disasters or health crises. Therefore, the
current study aimed to (1) investigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on EB-
problems of children with ASD as compared to children without ASD. Uniquely, we had pre-
COVID-19 data on children’s functioning, which enabled us to determine the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on children’s problems more objectively. Based on the available
literature, we hypothesized that, on average, children with ASD experienced a larger increase
in EB-problems from pre-COVID-19 (T0) to during COVID-19 (T1) than children without
ASD.
Moreover, we aimed to (2) examine to what extent parental well-being, i.e., indicators
of parental mental health and social connectedness, was associated with resilience of children
with ASD in times of COVID-19. According to resilience frameworks (e.g., Infurna &
Luthar, 2018; Masten, 2018; Rutter, 2012), resilience is never directly measured but instead
is indirectly inferred based on the presence of two dimensions: exposure to risk that increases
the probability of negative outcomes and relatively positive adaptation that is better than
expected, given the risk experienced. In the current study, we operationalized risk as
children’s exposure to the COVID-19 pandemic, whereas positive adaptation was assessed
by better emotional and behavioral functioning, specifically a smaller increase in emotional
and behavioral problems from pre-pandemic to during the pandemic. We expected that higher
levels of parental mental health and social connectedness were related to smaller increases in
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 7
problems from T0 to T1 among children with ASD, i.e., potentially contributing to resilience
during COVID-19.
Methods
Our study hypotheses, design, and analysis plan were preregistered; see
the manuscript.
Participants and Procedures
This investigation was based on two studies. Families participating in the ASD &
COVID-19 study (Dekker et al., 2022) were included for aims 1 and 2. Additionally, we used
data of families participating in the Generation R Study (Kooijman et al., 2016) to make a
comparison with children without ASD for aim 1. Both studies were approved by the Medical
Ethics Committee of the Erasmus Medical Centre. Informed consent was obtained from all
participants.
ASD & COVID-19 Study. The ASD & COVID-19 sample contains 69 families in
the region of Rotterdam, the Netherlands, with a child or adolescent diagnosed with ASD,
who were in care in one of three specialized mental health care institutions (i.e., Youz,
Yulius, or Erasmus MC – Sophia Children’s Hospital). Children were diagnosed with ASD
by a qualified mental health care professional. For more details on the recruitment and study
design, see (Dekker et al., 2022). One of the parents (89% mothers; 11% fathers) filled out an
online survey on child and family functioning during the second COVID-19 lockdown in the
Netherlands (for information on restrictions during the lockdown, see Supplementary
Material). Data were collected between 11 January 2021 and 26 May 2021 (T1). Prior to any
COVID-19 related restrictions, between 1 March 2019 and 1 March 2020 (T0), data about
child functioning were collected as part of routine outcome monitoring by the participating
institutions. In the current study, we included all families with data on child EB-problems at
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 8
T0 or T1 and data on parental mental health or social connectedness at T1. This resulted in a
Generation R Study. Participants from the ASD sample were matched to controls
from the Generation R Study, a prospective population-based cohort in Rotterdam, the
Netherlands. The design and sample characteristics of the study have been described in detail
elsewhere (Kooijman et al., 2016; Jaddoe et al., 2007). During the second lockdown in the
Netherlands, all adolescents participating in the study were invited to participate in an online
survey. Data were collected between 21 December 2020 and 3 March 2021 (T1). Prior to the
pandemic, information about child functioning was available at the average age of 13 years
(20 April 2016 – 30 January 2020; T0). In the current study, we included all adolescents with
data available on child EB-problems at T0 and T1, who filled out the baseline questionnaire
(T0) between 1 January 2018 and 30 January 2020 to better match the baseline period of the
participants in the ASD & COVID-19 study (not preregistered), and without an ASD
diagnosis. Of the 494 adolescents with data available on child EB-problems at T0 and T1,
213 adolescents completed T0 between 1 January 2018 and 30 January 2020. Within this
group, no adolescents were diagnosed with ASD, resulting in a sample of 213 children.
To compare the ASD and Generation R samples, we created a matched dataset using
propensity score matching in R (R Core Team, 2017) using the package MatchThem (Phisgar
et al., 2020). We matched the full sample of 275 children (62 from ASD sample, and 213
from Generation R) on child sex and parental age. Following power analysis (Faul et al.,
2009), sample sizes were found to be sufficiently large for the analysis of both aim 1 (n =
2 2
275, f = 0.15, α = .05, power > .99) and 2 (n = 62, f = 0.15, α =.05, power = 0.91). We
performed attrition analyses and used multiple imputation to handle missing data. A detailed
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 9
is provided in Supplementary Material.
Materials
Child EB-Problems (T0 and T1)
In both samples, children’s EB-problems were measured by the Brief Problem
Monitor (BPM; Achenbach et al., 2017) at T0 and T1. We chose to use the BPM, an
abbreviated version of the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL), to minimize burden on the
participants. Previous work has supported the psychometric properties of the BPM and
indicated an excellent correspondence between the BPM and CBCL total scores (e.g., r = .95;
Piper et al., 2014; r = .93; Richter, 2015). Parent report (BPM-P) was used in the ASD
sample and adolescent report (BPM-Y) was used in Generation R. All 19 items were
answered on a 3-point scale (0 = not true, 1 = somewhat or sometimes true, 2 = very true or
often true). We computed total problem scores for T0 and T1 by summing all item scores
(range α = .77–.87; theoretical range: 0–38), with higher scores indicating more EB-
problems. In addition, we calculated difference scores, i.e., Δ EB-problems = EB-problems
T1 – EB-problems T0. Positive scores on Δ EB-problems indicated an increase in child EB-
problems from T0 to T1, whereas negative scores pointed to a decrease.
Parental Mental Health (T1)
In the ASD sample, parents rated the extent to which they had experienced anxiety
and depression symptoms during the past week at T1 using the Anxiety (6 items) and
Depression (6 items) subscales of the Brief Symptom Inventory (BSI; Derogatis, 1993).
Previous findings indicated good reliability and validity of the Anxiety and Depression
subscales (e.g., Derogatis, 1993; Recklitis et al., 2006) and demonstrated that these subscales
measure one single dimension representing ‘psychological distress’ (Endermann, 2005;
Khalil et al., 2011). Items were answered on a 5-point scale (ranging from 0 = not at all to 4
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 10
= very much). We reverse coded the scores so that higher scores indicated better mental
health of parents. We computed total parental mental health scores by summing all items on
the two subscales (α = .89; theoretical range: 0–48).
Social Connectedness (T1)
In the ASD sample, parents reported on their feelings of loneliness at T1 using 3 items
(“How often do you feel alone?”; “How often do you feel left out?”; “How often do you feel
isolated from others?”) of the Three-Item Loneliness Scale (Hughes et al., 2004), which has
demonstrated good reliability and validity in previous work (e.g., Hughes et al., 2004; Klein
et al., 2021; Trucharte et al., 2021). The loneliness items were answered on a 3-point scale (0
= never or rarely, 1 = sometimes, 2 = often). We included an additional item on social
isolation that was completed by parents (“How socially isolated did you feel in the past 7
days”?), answered on a 10-point scale (ranging from 1 = not socially isolated to 10 =
extremely socially isolated). Scores were reverse coded so that higher scores indicated fewer
feelings of loneliness and social isolation, i.e., more perceived social connectedness. To
combine the 4 items, we standardized (z scores) the items and calculated sum scores (α = .78;
theoretical range: -16–16).
Covariates
We considered the inclusion of child age at T1 (years) and child IQ at T0 as covariates
in the analyses. In the ASD sample, information on IQ was collected by trained practitioners
using various intelligence scales, e.g., the Wechsler scales (Wechsler Intelligence Scale for
Children – 5th ed.; WISC-V; Wechsler, 2014; Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale – 4th ed.;
WAIS-IV; Wechsler, 2008), or other comparable scales. In Generation R, IQ was assessed by
trained researchers using the WISC-V (Wechsler, 2014). In case only mental age equivalents
were available, these were transformed into estimations of full-scale IQ. Additionally, we
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 11
considered including other background variables as covariates, based on our inclusion criteria
(see Statistical Analyses).
Statistical Analyses
Comparison Between Children With and Without ASD
First, to compare the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in children with ASD versus
without ASD (aim 1), we conducted a linear regression analysis in the matched sample (n =
275) with the type of sample (0 = control; 1 = ASD) as predictor and Δ EB-problems from
pre-pandemic to lockdown as outcome variable. In addition, we computed the percentages of
rd
problem scores in the elevated range (≥ 93 percentile; Achenbach et al., 2017) at T0 and T1
per sample. Next, we exploratively tested whether the variances for problem scores at T0 and
T1 differed between the ASD and control samples (not preregistered).
Parental Well-Being and Resilience of Children With ASD
Second, we examined to what extent indicators of parental mental health and social
connectedness were related to resilience of children with ASD in times of COVID-19 (aim 2)
by performing a multiple regression analysis. This analysis was only performed in the ASD
sample (n = 62), due to a lack of matching measures in the control sample. Parental mental
health and social connectedness indicators were simultaneously included as predictors and Δ
EB-problems as outcome variable. To interpret the results in terms of resilience, the direction
of any significant regression coefficient (positive or negative) was evaluated. For example, a
negative regression coefficient of parental mental health would indicate better parental
mental health is related to smaller increases in child EB-problems from T0 to T1, i.e.,
potentially contributing to resilience. Finally, we conducted an exploratory logistic regression
analysis (not preregistered) to test whether parental mental health and social connectedness
were related to the direction of Δ EB-problems among children with ASD (0 = decrease; 1 =
increase).
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 12
Effect Sizes and Covariates
We computed pooled standardized regression coefficients (β) and R -values as
measures of effect size (Van Ginkel, 2019). Covariates were included in the regression
analyses if these variables correlated significantly with the relevant predictors (i.e., Model 1:
sample; Model 2; parental mental health and social connectedness) and the outcome variable
(i.e., Δ EB-problems). Based on these criteria, we included child IQ and EB-problems at T0
as covariates in Model 1, and we did not include any covariates in Model 2.
Results
Comparison Between Children With and Without ASD
here]. Children with ASD scored higher on EB-problems than children without ASD both
before (t (81) = -13.46, p < .001) and during the COVID-19 pandemic (t (76) = -7.24, p <
.001), but the level of problems remained fairly stable. In the control sample, the children had
higher EB-problem scores during the COVID-19 pandemic than before, as also visualized in
between children with versus without ASD, after controlling for child IQ and problems at T0
(B = 2.05, SE = 1.65, p = .222, β = .16). Higher levels of pre-pandemic problems at
ASD sample
T0 were significantly associated with smaller increases in problems from pre-pandemic (T0)
to lockdown (T1; B = -0.34, SE = 0.09, p = < .001, β = -.42). Full regression
problems T0
In the ASD sample, 33 (53.2%) versus 30 (48.1%) children had elevated problem
rd
scores (≥ 93 percentile) at T0 and T1, respectively, compared to 10 (4.6%) versus 27
(12.7%) children in the control sample. Besides, Levene’s test demonstrated that the
variances for EB-problems were significantly larger in the ASD sample than in the control
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 13
This result indicated that children with ASD showed more interindividual variability in EB-
problems than children without ASD both before and during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Parental Well-Being and Resilience of Children With ASD
Furthermore, the results indicated that indicators of parental mental health (B = -0.02,
SE = 0.15, p = .901, β = -.02) and social connectedness (B = -0.04, SE = 0.25, p = .878, β = -
.03) were not significantly related to Δ EB-problems in the ASD sample, i.e., did not
Finally, the exploratory logistic regression analysis yielded the same conclusions as
our main analyses. The results revealed that indicators of parental mental health (B = -0.01,
SE = 0.08, p = .881, β = -.06) and social connectedness (B = 0.01, SE = 0.13, p = .925, β =
.04) were not significantly related to the direction (i.e., positive or negative) of Δ EB-
problems in the ASD sample. Thus, levels of parental mental health and social connectedness
did not differ between children who experienced an increase (n = 32) in problems and those
who remained stable or experienced a decrease (n = 30).
Discussion
The current study compared the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on EB-problems
of children with ASD and a matched control group, and examined potential predictors of
resilience of the children with ASD. The results indicate that the change in EB-problems
following COVID-19 did not differ significantly between the groups, after adjustment for
child IQ and problem level before the pandemic. This result is important, as various studies
reported that children with ASD experienced more EB-problems than peers without ASD
during the pandemic (e.g., Nonweiler et al., 2020; Polónyiová et al., 2022; Waite et al.,
2021). However, this was the first longitudinal study that directly compared the change in
EB-problems from pre-COVID-19 to during COVID-19 between children with and without
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 14
ASD. On average, children with ASD showed a high, yet stable level of EB-problems across
T0 and T1, whereas children without ASD reported fewer problems at both timepoints, yet
they slightly increased from T0 to T1. As recently suggested by others (Ameis et al., 2020;
Mumbardó-Adam et al., 2021), it is likely that children with ASD benefitted from the
COVID-19 pandemic related measures, as they may have felt less social pressure, exclusion,
and rejection, which could result in reduced stress and improved functioning. In contrast,
children without ASD may have been more negatively affected by the loss of face-to-face
social contacts and activities, given the salience of peer relationships for youth’s
psychological well-being (Orben et al., 2020) and evidence suggesting that children and
adolescents without ASD are more engaged with peers and have higher friendship quality
compared to ASD youth (e.g., Locke et al., 2010; Petrina et al., 2014).
Moreover, in line with previous work (e.g., Colizzi et al., 2020; Cost et al., 2022;
Tokatly Latzer et al., 2021), our results point to interindividual variability in children’s
responses to the COVID-19 situation within both samples: Some children showed an increase
in EB-problems following the lockdown, whereas other children remained stable, or showed
a decrease in problems. Children with ASD showed more interindividual variability in
problems than children without ASD both before and during the COVID-19 pandemic, which
emphasizes the notable heterogeneity within the ASD population (e.g., Georgiades et al.,
2013) and highlights the importance of considering individual differences when examining
the impact of the pandemic or other stressful situations in this clinical group (Cost et al.,
2022).
Additionally, we examined to what extent parental mental health and social
connectedness acted as protective factors for children with ASD in times of COVID-19. Our
findings showed that indicators of parental mental health and social connectedness were not
related to the change in child problems following the COVID-19 pandemic. This conclusion
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 15
was supported by additional analyses which indicated that the mental health and social
connectedness of parents did not differ between children who increased versus decreased in
terms of problems. Hence, these parental characteristics were possibly not related to
resilience in times of COVID-19. This result contrasts with previous findings suggesting that
parents’ mental health (Polónyiová et al., 2022) and social support (Tokatly Latzer et al.,
2021) may promote positive emotional and behavioral functioning of children with ASD
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Several explanations are possible for the limited evidence
supporting these parental characteristics as potential protective factors in this study. First,
parents of children with ASD in the current study reported relatively high levels of mental
health (i.e., low levels of anxiety and depression) and social connectedness (i.e., low levels of
loneliness), which may have reduced the ability to detect any association of parents’ mental
health and social connectedness with the change in children’s EB-problems. These
characteristics may represent a sampling bias, as it is possible that parents that struggled more
were less likely to participate. Second, children with ASD may be less affected by others,
parents in this case, showing distress or fear than children without ASD (Dawson et al., 2004;
Sigman et al., 1992). Third, we assessed these indicators of mental health and social
connectedness by asking parents how they felt in the past 7 days. However, it is known that
feelings of anxiety and depression can fluctuate over time (e.g., Schoevers et al., 2020).
Perhaps more stable characteristics of parents, such as personality and coping style (Burlaka
et al., 2019) or parenting practices (Oliveira et al., 2022), might have a greater impact on
children’s functioning in the context of life-changing situations. Yet, more research on
potential protective factors for child resilience to the COVID-19 pandemic including
longitudinal assessments of parental characteristics is needed to test this hypothesis. Fourth,
other factors that were not considered in the current study could have affected the functioning
of parents and children during the pandemic. For instance, the severity of children’s ASD
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 16
symptoms or the amount of (in)formal support that parents received during the COVID-19
lockdown may have influenced levels of parental well-being as well as children’s EB-
problems.
Given that, in particular, children with ASD showed great interindividual variability
in their responses to the COVID-19 lockdown, it is important that clinicians provide adjusted
and personalized support (Spain et al., 2021). For instance, children who deteriorated in
functioning may benefit from continuity of daily routines (e.g., going to school) and of access
to adequate mental health services (e.g., virtual therapy, parental support) during lockdown
periods and other life-changing circumstances (Cost et al., 2022; Kalvin et al., 2020; Spain et
al., 2021). Likewise, social skills interventions can support children with ASD, including
children who showed improved functioning during lockdown, during the return to school and
in habituating to social environments post pandemic (Spain et al., 2021). Moreover, our
finding that children with ASD had elevated levels of EB-problems highlights the need for
effective intervention strategies such as cognitive behavioral therapy (Kreslins et al., 2015) or
parent training (Deb et al., 2021) to reduce problem behavior and optimize the well-being of
children with ASD and their parents.
Although this study employed a rigorous methodology, including a pre-registered
study plan, a baseline assessment before the COVID-19 pandemic, and a matched sample to
reduce bias due to confounding variables, some limitations should also be noted. First, due to
a low response rate of children with ASD during COVID-19, child EB-problems were based
on parent report in the ASD sample, whereas child report was used in the control sample,
which might have affected the comparability of the samples. Self-report instruments can
provide valuable information about children’s feelings and behavior, however, this can be
challenging in children with ASD, especially when lower IQ levels prevent the valid use of
self-report measures (Bakthiari et al., 2021). Although ASEBA questionnaires (i.e., CBCL,
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 17
YSR, BPM) have shown moderate to good cross-informant agreement in both general and
ASD populations (e.g., Achenbach et al., 2011; Hurtig et al., 2009), it cannot be ruled out that
parents and children have different views on emotional and behavioral functioning. The
chance that the current results are affected by informant discrepancies should be
acknowledged. In future studies, it would be valuable to compare the impact of stressful
circumstances on EB-problems between children with and without ASD by using both
respondents jointly. Second, indicators of parental mental health and social connectedness
were assessed during the COVID-19 pandemic. Parents of children with ASD experienced
increased stress and anxiety during the pandemic (Yilmaz et al., 2021), and emerging
evidence indicates that this distress can spill over to their children, leading to increased EB-
problems (Eshraghi et al., 2022; Russell et al., 2020). This suggests that the well-being of
parents during the lockdown may be particularly important for their children’s functioning.
Nevertheless, the possibility that these self-reports of the parental characteristics had already
been affected by the lockdown (Polónyiová et al., 2022) or by the behavioral difficulties of
their children (Falk et al., 2014), can be considered a limitation of this study. Clinical data
from prior to the pandemic was available on child functioning, allowing for a direct
comparison of behavior before and during the pandemic. However, pre-COVID-19 data did
not include parental functioning. Third, we examined both (changes in) emotional and
behavioral problems as outcomes during the COVID-19 pandemic, as resilience may depend
on the domain of outcome studied (e.g., Infurna & Luthar, 2018). Yet, our study does not
yield an all-compassing understanding of children’s resilience in this stressful period, given
that we only focused on certain maladaptive outcomes. To get a more comprehensive picture
of children’s functioning and resilience in times of a pandemic, we recommend that studies
examine adaptive outcomes (e.g., positive affect, self-efficacy) as well.
In conclusion, our findings indicate that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 18
terms of emotional and behavioral changes at group level did not differ significantly between
children with and without ASD. In both samples, some children experienced an increase in
EB-problems, whereas others remained stable or even seemed to thrive during the lockdown.
Especially children with ASD showed large interindividual variability in emotional and
behavioral functioning before and during the pandemic. Furthermore, indicators of parental
mental health and social connectedness were not associated with resilience of children with
ASD in times of COVID-19, at least at group level. These results highlight the need for
adjusted and personalized support for children with ASD and their parents during the
pandemic and future life-changing circumstances.
CHILDREN WITH ASD IN TIMES OF COVID-19 19