AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 1
RUNNING TITLE: AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES
The Impact of Air Pollution on Neurocognitive Development:
Adverse Effects and Health Disparities
Kim-Chi T. Pham, Kimberly S. Chiew
Department of Psychology, University of Denver
Acknowledgements
K.S.C. is supported by the National Institute of Mental Health (R15MH117690) and a Young
Investigator Award from the Brain & Behavior Research Foundation.
Conflict of Interest Disclosure
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
Corresponding Author:
Kimberly S. Chiew, Ph.D.
Department of Psychology
University of Denver
2155 South Race Street
Denver CO 80208
kimberly.chiew@du.edu
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 2
Abstract
Air pollution is recognized as a major public health concern. The number of deaths
related to ambient air pollution has increased in recent years and is projected to continue rising.
Additionally, both short- and long-term air pollution exposure has been linked with deleterious
effects on neurocognitive function and development. While air pollution poses as a threat to
everyone, people of color and individuals of lower socioeconomic status are often exposed to
elevated levels of air pollution as a function of systemic racism and classism. Further, given
additional disparities in access to healthcare and other compounding stressors, adverse effects of
air pollution on neurocognitive health are exacerbated among individuals who hold marginalized
identities – making effects both less likely to be detected and treated. This review examines
evidence of the effects of air pollution on neurocognitive development across the lifespan and
incorporates an environmental justice perspective to highlight disparities in air pollution
exposure across race and socioeconomic status. Lastly, upon the reviewed evidence, limitations
of past research and recommendations for policy are discussed.
Keywords: air pollution, neurocognitive development, health disparities, environmental justice
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 3
Introduction
Addressing and mitigating poor air quality has been a long-standing environmental and
public health issue. In the United States, the Clean Air Act (CAA), the first federal air quality
law intended to limit air pollution, was enacted in 1963 (CAA, 1963). Over the past half-century,
the CAA and other environment protection laws have helped to drastically reduce air pollution
nationally. However, after decades of reduced emissions, the United States experienced a 5.7%
increase in fine particulate matter (PM ) from 2016 to 2018 (Clay et al., 2021). Increases of
2.5
natural gas emissions, nitrate production from motor vehicles, and wildfires in recent years have
negatively impacted ambient air quality and contributed to these national increases of PM and
2.5
other harmful air pollutants. Air pollution has been fully recognized as a significant public health
problem (Kelly & Fussell, 2015), with increased levels of PM contributing to an estimated
2.5
9,700 premature deaths and $89 billion in damages in the U.S. alone (Clay et al., 2021).
Exposure to fine particulate matter has also been associated with adverse effects on cognitive and
brain development, with implications for physical and mental health outcomes (Bakolis et al.,
2021; Genc et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2018). Further, there are widespread inequities present in
exposure to air pollution and its resultant effects (Pratt et al., 2015; Zou et al., 2014). The present
review outlines the effects of air pollution on neurocognition over development, the
disproportionate impact of air pollution on historically marginalized groups, and
recommendations for policy.
Air pollution represents a combination of diverse components, including particulate
matter (PM), gases, organic compounds, and toxic metals (Costa et al., 2014; Genc et al., 2012)
that can be found in both outdoor and indoor air. Although there are many types of air pollutants
inside the Earth’s atmosphere (e.g., elevated levels of ozone, lead, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 4
dioxide, carbon monoxide), this review’s primary focus is the impact of PM and ultrafine
2.5
particulate matter (UFPM), given these compounds’ ability to enter the circulatory system and
penetrate organs, including the brain (Costa et al., 2014; Miller et al., 2021). Particulate matter is
characterized by its size and aerodynamic features that affect biological properties (Genc et al.,
2012; Oudin, 2020). Fine particulate matter is classified as < 2.5 µm and UFPM as < 0.1 µm
(Genc et al., 2012) and is believed to be the most widespread and threatening air pollutant (Costa
et al., 2014; Suades-González et al., 2015).
Across different research studies, multiple methods have been used to estimate exposure
to air pollution and its constituent compounds. Many of the research studies in the present review
rely on participants’ reported zip code or reported residential address, then use pollutant
measurements from nearby municipal monitoring sites to provide an estimate of annual
exposure. Over time, the models used to estimate pollution exposure from such measurements
have evolved, incorporating algorithms such as land-use regression that draw on geographical
characteristics of the terrain, climate patterns, and human land use to improve their predictive
ability (Hoek et al., 2008). However, it has also been noted that these approaches have
limitations in their ability to provide exact measures of personal air pollution exposure, including
missing data, missing geographic areas (dependent on the location of monitoring sites), and
failing to capture variations in pollutant exposure as a function of where people live versus
work/study (Gray et al., 2013). A more limited number of research studies in the present review
have incorporated direct personal monitoring of air quality (i.e., at participants’ residential or
school sites, or using devices carried by participants), used participant residential addresses to
compare between individuals living relatively close versus far from major roadways to examine
relative pollutant exposure, or used biomarkers of benzene collected from participant urine
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 5
samples as a more direct marker of traffic-related pollution exposure (i.e., Kicinski et al., 2015).
However, these approaches also have practical limitations, especially in large-scale population
studies.
Along with long-documented effects on respiratory and cardiac function (Brunekreef &
Holgate, 2002), recognition that air pollution adversely affects the brain and nervous system has
been growing in the past two decades (Genc et al., 2012). Converging observations across
animal, in vitro, and human studies suggest that the biological mechanisms by which air
pollution may harm neurocognitive development include increases in oxidative stress and
neuroinflammation (reviewed in Costa et al., 2014; Costa et al., 2020). Early studies of post-
mortem brain tissue from canines from the Mexico City area (characterized by high levels of air
pollution) relative to control samples from a less-polluted region suggested that higher air
pollution exposure might be linked to elevated neuroinflammation, DNA damage, and evidence
of neurodegeneration in cortical and glial cells (Calderón-Garcidueñas et al. 2002, 2003). In vitro
studies confirm cytotoxic effects of particulate matter exposure, resulting in elevated oxidative
stress and inflammation (Block et al., 2004; Xu et al., 2020). Consistent with these findings in
animal and in vitro models, studies in humans have reported higher levels of proinflammatory
markers in cerebrospinal fluid of the brain as a function of air pollution exposure (Calderón-
Garcidueñas et al., 2008).
Such changes at the cellular level may serve as mechanisms underlying observed adverse
effects of air pollution on human health. Short-term exposure to harmful air is associated with
increased risk of asthma-related emergency room visits (Dominici et al., 2006; Yang et al., 2019;
Zheng et al., 2015), increased inflammation (Dauchet et al., 2018; Tsai et al., 2019), and short-
term cognitive decline (Shehab & Pope, 2019). Chronic exposure to air pollution is associated
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 6
with higher incidences of cardiovascular diseases (Brook et al., 2010; Chi et al., 2016;
Rajagopalan et al., 2018; Tonne et al., 2007), respiratory diseases (Katanoda et al., 2011;
Kravitz-Wirtz et al., 2018; Raju et al., 2019), neurodegenerative disorders (Costa et al., 2017;
Oudin, 2020; Power et al., 2016), and neurodevelopmental delays (Block et al., 2012; Clifford et
al., 2016; Costa et al., 2017). Prolonged exposure to ambient air pollution has been linked to
increased rates of depression (Gładka et al. , 2018; Kim et al., 2016), aggressive behavior
(Burkhardt et al., 2020), and other mental health challenges (Miller et al., 2019; Tzivian et al.,
2015).
While detrimental effects of air pollution on human health are well-established, its impact
has been inequitably distributed, with some communities affected more than others. Global
evidence (including studies from North American, South American, European, Asian, and
African locations) indicate a link between socioeconomic status (SES) and exposure to air
pollution: specifically, individuals that experience economic hardship are more likely to reside in
areas with elevated levels of air pollution (Evans & Kantrowitz, 2002; Martins et al., 2004; Hajat
et al., 2015; Yang & Liu, 2018; Ofoezie et al., 2022). In the United States, Americans of color
are disproportionately exposed to and negatively impacted by air pollutants relative to White
Americans (Hadeed et al., 2021; Wooduff et al., 2003).
Taken together, this manuscript reviews recent evidence of the impact of air pollution
(with a particular focus on PM and UFPM) on neurocognitive function and development and
2.5
related health disparities. We largely focus on evidence from studies based in the United States,
but also draw on findings from studies conducted globally. We note that the evidence reviewed
generally indicates consistent findings regarding the adverse impact of air pollution across
geographic regions, but that the present review does not systematically compare for differences
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 7
in outcomes as a function of location. Additionally, given variability in the neurocognitive
outcomes examined relative to air pollution exposure across studies in current literature, we
review evidence from studies utilizing a broad range of cognitive, behavioral, and neural
outcomes, including measures of cognitive performance from multiple domains (such as
attention, memory, visual, verbal, and motor function) as well as related measures such as IQ and
academic performance, sleep and behavioral outcomes (such as hyperactivity), and measures of
brain structure, function, and connectivity. We use a lifespan perspective, examining adverse
effects of air pollution at ages ranging from gestation to older adulthood, as well as intersecting
influences of poverty and racism associated with disparities in the adverse effects of air pollution
on cognition and neurodevelopment. Finally, on the basis of the reviewed evidence, we will
present policy recommendations to address both the impact of air pollution generally as well as
in terms of racial, ethnic, and socio-economic disparities. These policy recommendations are
primarily framed within the United States context, given that the reviewed evidence is largely
United States-based, as are the manuscript authors.
Impact of Air Pollution on Cognition and Behavior Over the Lifespan
A growing literature provides evidence that air pollution exposure adversely effects
cognitive and behavioral outcomes across a broad range of domains and over the course of the
lifespan. In the present section, we highlight key findings from this literature, organized
chronologically from the prenatal and infant stage through adolescence to older adulthood.
The early years of life are critical for the development of cognitive processes, including
attention, memory, language and motor functions, essential to adaptive behavior and daily
activities (Johnson & Munakata, 2005; Kundakovic & Champagne, 2015). An ever-growing
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 8
body of research has implicated air pollution as a harmful agent that disrupts cognitive
functioning and development. There is mounting evidence that adverse cognitive outcomes are
associated with exposure to fine particulate matter beginning in the prenatal period. Utilizing
data from 1,109 mother-child dyads in Massachusetts, Harris and colleagues (2015) found that
prenatal residential proximity to major roadways (i.e., higher exposure to traffic-related air
pollutants) measured during the third trimester predicted lower verbal and nonverbal skills as
well as poorer visuomotor abilities in middle childhood (at ~8 years of age), controlling for
demographic and parental factors, neighborhood income, and predictors of indoor pollution.
Furthermore, a systemic review of 126 recent epidemiological studies examining air pollution
exposure and neuropsychological development during infancy and early childhood identified a
significant association between air pollution during gestation and infant cognitive development
(Suades-González et al., 2015). Specifically, exposure to high levels of PM during the prenatal
2.5
period was linked to delayed global, verbal, and psychomotor development during infancy.
There is also evidence that prenatal exposure to air pollutants can adversely affect sleep
and behavioral outcomes during early childhood. Bose and colleagues (2019) examined
gestational PM exposure, estimated from reported residential addresses, and sleep outcomes
2.5
subsequently in childhood in a sample of parents and children from Mexico City, a geographic
region characterized by high levels of air pollution (Calderón-Garcidueñas et al., 2016; Mahady
et al., 2020). Bose et al. identified a sensitive period at 31-35 weeks of gestation (i.e., during the
third trimester), during which PM exposure was significantly associated with decreased total
2.5
hours of sleep later during the preschool years. The American Association of Sleep Medicine
(AASM) recommends that children between the ages of three and five years old get 10-13 hours
of sleep every day (Paruthi et al., 2016). However, the sample of children examined in Bose et al.
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 9
averaged 7.8 hours of sleep a day, well below this recommendation, even when controlling for
SES, mother’s body mass index, season, and maternal age. Bose and colleagues also found that
prenatal PM exposure at 1-8 weeks (i.e., during the first trimester) was associated with lower
2.5
sleep efficiency (defined as the percentage of time spent in bed asleep vs awake) during the
children’s preschool years. The authors linked these poor sleep outcomes to heightened regional
pollution exposure during pregnancy. Importantly, reduced sleep hours and poor sleep quality
during this developmental stage can lead to challenges in cognitive function, weight problems,
and behavioral maladjustment (Spruyt, 2019).
Exposure to high levels of air pollution during infancy are also associated with elevated
rates of neurodevelopmental disorders such as attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
(Aghaei et al., 2019; Costa et al., 2020; Siddique et al., 2011; Thygesen et al., 2020). A 2016
meta-analysis of the relationship between early life exposure to air pollution and Autism
Spectrum Disorder (ASD) risk provided limited evidence of toxicity for this association, with the
strongest observed relationship between air pollution and ASD diagnosis for PM (Lam et al.,
2.5
2016). Notably, this meta-analysis included both studies of prenatal as well as postnatal
exposure, but did not systematically test for differences in the association between pollution and
ASD diagnosis as a function of exposure period. Relatedly, longitudinal data from the Cincinnati
Childhood Allergy and Air Pollution Study, which recruited Cincinnati-area children from
families living near (< 400 meters) or far (> 1500 meters) from a major highway or bus route,
indicates that exposure to higher levels of traffic-related air pollution during the first year of life
predicts subsequent rates of hyperactivity, a key behavioral characteristic of ADHD, at ~7 years
of age (Newman et al., 2013).
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 10
These studies together provide important evidence that exposure to air pollution during
the prenatal period and early life is associated with adverse effects on cognitive and behavioral
outcomes. However, given limited research literature investigating this relationship as well as
heterogeneity in analysis approaches, observed results, and studied periods of exposure over the
course of pregnancy, it is currently an open question whether specific critical periods during
pregnancy exist whereby air pollution exposure presents a greater or lesser threat to cognitive
development (Suades-González et al., 2015). Some studies of brain development have suggested
that air pollution exposure during pregnancy might be most impactful on neural outcomes during
the third trimester, as discussed in more detail below (see in The Impact of Air Pollution on
Brain Health Over the Lifespan).
Along with evidence that poor air quality during early development is associated with
adverse cognitive and behavioral outcomes, studies suggest that improving air quality might
improve such outcomes as well as related metrics such as academic performance. Stafford (2015)
conducted a natural quasi-experiment that included virtually every elementary school within a
Texas school district and reported that students’ standardized test pass rates improved with mold
removal (~3-4% increase), renovations to air ventilation (~2-3% increase), and roofing
replacement (~3% increase) in the schools. These results remained significant even after
controlling for confounding variables such as student attendance, school finances, and
sociodemographic characteristics. On the basis of these observations, Stafford (2015) posited
that renovations to improve schools’ indoor air quality may be a cost-effective way to improve
students’ test scores, relative to other strategies such as reducing classroom sizes. While PM
2.5
concentrations were not directly characterized in this study, Stafford’s results suggest a
relationship between air quality and cognitive/academic performance to be explored further in
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 11
future work. These findings also highlight one possible strategy for mitigating the impacts of
poor air quality, we return to later in the paper.
Adolescence is also a critical period for cognitive and behavioral development
(Steinberg, 2005) but the impact of air pollution exposure on cognitive performance in
adolescence has been understudied relative to its impact earlier in childhood. Kicinski et al.
(2015) conducted an initial study investigating the association between traffic-related air
pollution (characterized using biomarkers of benzene from urine samples as well as self-reported
exposure to traffic) and performance on a series of neurobehavioral tasks (assessing sustained
attention, short-term memory, and manual motor speed) in an adolescent sample (N=606) based
in the Netherlands. They reported that increased traffic-related pollution exposure was associated
with decreased sustained attention – specifically, for every one standard deviation (SD) increase
in composite traffic-related air pollution exposure, they observed a 0.26 SD decrease in sustained
attention performance (approximately one-third of the effect size of maternal education on
attentional performance in this sample). On the other hand, Kusters et al. (2022) examined
associations between prenatal and childhood air pollution exposure (using estimates based on
residential address) and cognitive and behavioral outcomes (including processing speed, working
memory, fluid reasoning, and IQ measures) in adolescents 13-16 years old (N=4683) from the
Generation R longitudinal study conducted in the Netherlands. For the most part, these
relationships were insignificant (or even positive, as observed between exposure to a small
number of pollutant compounds and fluid reasoning as well as verbal IQ; these positive results
were interpreted as reflecting negative residual confounds, selection bias, or chance). While
further research needs to be done to characterize these relationships further, taken together,
current findings indicate that air pollution is associated with adverse cognitive and behavioral
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 12
outcomes during infancy and childhood in terms of lower verbal and nonverbal skills,
visuomotor abilities, delayed psychomotor development, sleep, and academic performance, as
well as poorer attentional performance in adolescence.
In addition to evidence indicating that ambient air pollution adversely impacts cognitive
functioning in early life, numerous studies demonstrate that air pollution has negative effects on
cognitive performance in adulthood as well. In a sample of 1,764 American adults ages 20-59
years in the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES-III), Chen and
Schwartz (2009) observed cross-sectional associations between greater long-term exposure to air
pollution (assessed using participants’ residential location at the time of study enrollment and
EPA measurements of annual PM levels to approximate long-term exposure to ambient air
pollution; note that PM levels were not measured in this study) and reduced cognitive
2.5
performance (measures of reaction time, visuomotor speed, sustained attention, perceptual
functioning, and short-term memory). La Nauze and Severnini (2021) provided further cross-
sectional evidence for the relation between air pollution and cognitive functioning: by examining
performance on popular brain-training games as a function of users’ geographic location
(measured by zip code) within the United States, they were able to characterize the relationship
between PM exposure (estimated by zip code using monitoring data) and adult cognitive
2.5
functioning across seven domains (verbal, attention, flexibility, memory, math, speed, and
problem solving). Their results suggested that increasing levels of PM were associated with
2.5
poorer cognitive performance, with the strongest deleterious effects observed on memory
performance. Additionally, the inverse relationship between PM exposure and cognitive
2.5
performance was strongest in low-performing individuals, suggesting that PM exposure might
2.5
compound with other influences to exacerbate inequalities in cognitive performance. Finally, in
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 13
this sample, the strongest negative relationship between air pollution exposure and cognitive
performance was observed in young to middle-aged adults (under 50 years). Given that adults in
this age range comprise a large portion of the workforce (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2022), this
finding implies that air pollution might impact group-level work performance, with major
economic implications.
Adverse effects of air pollution on cognitive performance have also been observed in
older adulthood. A recent systematic review identified multiple studies, both longitudinal and
cross-sectional, demonstrating that elevated exposure to PM was negatively associated with
2.5
verbal learning and working memory abilities in older adults globally (Clifford et al., 2016).
Additionally, by reviewing global epidemiological and experimental data, Oudin (2020)
identified that long-term air pollution exposure was associated with elevated risk of Alzheimer’s
disease (AD), vascular dementia, and mild cognitive impairment in older adults. Delgado-Saborit
et al. (2021) highlight further evidence, both longitudinal and cross-sectional, that chronic
exposure to high levels of air pollution was associated with declining global cognition and visuo-
spatial abilities in older adults at an accelerated rate beyond normative aging; this decline was
also associated with increased risk of developing dementia. Given exponential growth of older
adults as a proportion of the United States population (Vespa, 2018), the link between air
pollution exposure and accelerated age-related cognitive decline is particularly important from a
public health standpoint.
Taken together, this reviewed evidence demonstrates the negative impact of air pollution
on cognitive functioning. These adverse effects can be observed in a wide range of cognitive
domains across the lifespan, with widespread implications for daily behavior, academic and
behavioral outcomes, as well as rates of cognitive decline and dementia later in life.
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 14
The Impact of Air Pollution on Brain Health Over the Lifespan
Along with adverse effects on cognition and behavior, air pollution exposure has been
associated with alterations in the development of brain structure, function, and connectivity
across the lifespan. Organized similarly to our review of cognitive and behavioral outcomes
above, the present section reviews evidence regarding the impact of air pollution on brain health,
spanning from the prenatal stage to older adulthood.
Exposure to PM during pregnancy, estimated using measurements of pollutant
2.5
compound concentrations and traffic exposure by birth county, has been linked to low
birthweight (Bell et al., 2010) which increases risk of neurological disorders, intellectual
impairment, and other developmental challenges (Martinussen et al., 2005). Bell et al. (2010)
further suggested that the relationship between PM exposure and low birth weight may be
2.5
more robust for exposure during the third trimester. Additionally, Nawrot et al. (2018) reported
that PM exposure during the third trimester, estimated from monitoring site data using
2.5
residential address, influenced methylation of circadian pathway genes in both parent and fetus.
Given the critical role of circadian rhythms (internal processes that regulate the sleep-wake
cycle) in biological, psychological, and social development (Foster, 2020), such disruption can
have serious health implications, including elevated risk of premature birth (Kajeepeta et al.,
2014, Reschke et al., 2018), adverse experiences at birth (van den Berg et al., 2017), and
neurological disorders (Nawrot et al., 2018). Ambient PM exposure is also associated with
2.5
alterations in brain structure and function during development (Bell et al., 2005; Block et al.,
2012; Calderón-Garcidueñas et al., 2016; Costa et al., 2017). A recent systematic review (de
Prado Bert et al., 2018) of effects of air pollution exposure on the brain over the course of
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 15
development suggested that children with greater exposure to PM displayed reduced white
2.5
matter structure throughout the brain, including in the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes, which
in turn were associated with deficits in attention, short-term memory, and learning abilities, as
well as deleterious effects on behavioral and psychomotor development in children. While not
directly measuring for differences in the relative impact of air pollution on the brain as a function
of prenatal period exposure, de Prado Bert et al. (2018) also suggest that the third trimester of
pregnancy might be particularly critical given that neuron myelination starts during this period
and follows specific spatiotemporal ordering (Baumann & Pham-Dinh, 2001) that may be
disrupted by exposure to toxins (Maiuolo et al., 2019). However, as when considering cognitive
and behavioral outcomes, additional research is needed to pinpoint critical periods during
pregnancy where brain development and neural outcomes may be most vulnerable to the impact
of air pollution exposure.
While early life is a critical period for brain development, large-scale functional networks
of the brain continue to mature through childhood and adolescence; evidence suggests that the
impact of air pollution on neurodevelopment also continues through this period. Pujol et al.
(2016) used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine effects of traffic
pollution exposure on functional brain connectivity during a sensory task in a Barcelona-based
sample of children ages 8-12 years. Increased exposure to traffic-related air pollution, measured
directly at children’s school sites during class time for two 1-week periods separated by 6
months, was associated with reduced integration and segregation in brain networks supporting
both internally- and externally-guided cognition (the default mode network and task-related
networks; Fox et al., 2005), as well as poorer attention and motor task performance. Herting and
colleagues (2019) conducted a systematic review of structural and function MRI studies to
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 16
evaluate how early-life exposure to ambient air pollution affects neurodevelopment, and
identified that higher levels of outdoor air pollution were associated with abnormalities (both
decreases and increases) in white matter, cortical and subcortical gray matter, and brain volume
within pre-adolescent children (under 13 years old). Finally, Miller and colleagues (2021)
examined longitudinal effects of PM and early life stress (ELS), as well as their interaction, on
2.5
adolescent brain development in a sample of 115 San Francisco and San Jose Bay Area
adolescents. PM exposure was estimated for each participant using satellite-derived estimates
2.5
of PM concentrations relative to reported residential address. Miller et al. identified changes in
2.5
brain volume associated with both independent and interactive effects of ELS severity and PM
2.5
levels; further, adverse effects of PM were attenuated in adolescents with histories of more
2.5
severe ELS. Together, the results of these studies demonstrate the negative impact of air
pollution on brain development and associated cognitive function during childhood and
adolescence.
In contrast to literature examining effects of air pollution on neurodevelopment in
childhood and adolescence, relatively few studies have examined effects of air pollution on brain
health in older adulthood. In one such study, Hedges and colleagues (2019) evaluated the cross-
sectional relation between estimated exposure to atmospheric toxins, based on reported
residential address, and hippocampal volume in a United Kingdom-based sample of adults
between 40-69 years. The study observed reduced left hippocampal volume with increasing
exposure to PM ; these effects were significant even when controlling for age, sex, body-mass
2.5
index, overall health, alcohol use, smoking, education attainment, and socioeconomic status.
These findings are particularly alarming given the vital role of the hippocampus in learning and
memory, and observations of reduced cognitive function in association with hippocampal
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 17
volume reductions in cognitive aging, dementia, and neuropsychiatric diseases (Hedges et al.,
2019). Relatedly, Chen and colleagues (2015) longitudinally examined the adverse effects of
ambient PM (estimated using residential history and monitoring data) on brain matter in a
2.5
sample of 1,403 older women (age range: 71-89 years) in the United States-based Women’s
Health Initiative Memory Study (WHIMS). Chen et al. observed that in this sample, greater
long-term exposure to PM predicted significant reductions in frontal lobe, temporal lobe, and
2.5
corpus callosum white matter volume, independent of demographic factors, SES, lifestyle
factors, and geographical region (although notably, in contrast to Hedges et al. (2019), Chen et
al. (2015) did not observe a significant relationship between PM exposure and hippocampal
2.5
volume). Finally, exposure to particulate matter and environmental nanoparticles has been
identified as a risk factor for the development of neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in
older adulthood (Calderón-Garcidueñas et al., 2016; Costa et al., 2017). In recent years, there
has been increasing evidence linking air pollution to diseases of the central nervous system
(CNS), including stroke, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and neurodevelopmental
disorders (Block et al., 2012; Genc et al., 2012). Taken together, these findings indicate that air
pollution has deleterious effects on brain health and development at all stages of the lifespan,
with widespread health, economic, and human costs.
Disparities in Exposure to and Impact of Air Pollution
While there is mounting evidence that environmental contaminants pose a threat to all of
us, exposure to low air quality does not affect everyone to the same extent. In particular, growing
evidence indicates that exposure to air pollution might vary as a function of race and
socioeconomic status as a function of systemic racism and classism. These differences in air
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 18
pollution exposure compound with other group disparities in health, education systems, and other
factors to amplify disparities in related health outcomes, including those in the neurocognitive
domain. These compounding disparities and the need to address them has been recognized as a
fundamental issue of environmental justice by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and
evidence of racial/ethnic and SES-related disparities in air pollution exposure and impact, and
advocate for evidence-based policy changes to reduce both air pollution exposure as well as
disparities in its impact. Given that our policy recommendations below are targeted towards the
United States, we primarily focus on evidence of United States-based disparities, although note
that studies have suggested that similar racial/ethnic- and socioeconomic status-related
disparities in air pollution exposure exist globally, including in France (Havard et al., 2009),
Ghana (Rooney et al., 2012), India (Kopas et al., 2020), and China (Yang et al., 2022) and that
calls have been made for more comprehensive studies of pollution-related health disparities
outside the United States as well as comparatively (Jerrett, 2009).
Decades of research has demonstrated that exposure to air pollutants varies as a function
of socioeconomic status (SES): specifically, lower-SES communities have often been the target
of policies resulting in greater concentrations of air pollution (Ferguson et al., 2020) such as
higher exposure to traffic and industrial emissions (Havard et al., 2009). A study conducted in
North Carolina revealed that neighborhood-level concentration of fine particulate matter,
estimated using air quality monitoring data and numerical output, was significantly associated
with three SES-related factors: median household income, percentage of people living below the
poverty line, and percentage of people with less than a high school education within the
population (Gray et al., 2013). Further, Hajat et al. (2013) reported that in the Multi-Ethnic Study
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 19
of Atherosclerosis (MESA), a large population-based study conducted in several regions of the
United States, increased SES at both the neighborhood- and individual-level was significantly
inversely correlated with air pollutant concentration levels (estimated for each participant’s home
address using a combination of air quality monitoring data, personal sampling, measures of
housing quality, and geographic covariates), even after adjusting for demographic variables and
metropolitan area. This relationship was larger for neighborhood-level SES, although
relationships between pollutant levels and both SES measures were significant. The significant
inverse relationship between neighborhood-level SES and air pollutant levels may be understood
as the product of policy decisions leading to elevated traffic and industrial emissions exposure in
lower-SES neighborhoods; the similar relationship observed for individual-level SES may also
reflect such community-level influences as well as related factors at the individual level (i.e.,
housing quality and direct proximity to roadways; but Hajat et al. also note that the extent to
which individual- and neighborhood-level SES variables in the MESA dataset capture shared
variance remains unclear given differences in their data collection).
In addition to the disparities in exposure and adverse effects of air pollution across
socioeconomic status, people of color are also disproportionately impacted by air pollution.
Nationally, this can be understood as a legacy of the United States’ longstanding history of racist
segregation policies, corresponding disparities in neighborhood development, and broader
structural violence towards racial and ethnic minorities (Namin et al., 2020; Smith & Stovall,
2008; Woo et al., 2019). Using census block group data from American urban areas, Ash and
Fetter (2004) reported that Black and African American populations are higher in cities with
higher levels of air pollution; and within those cities, Black populations are higher in heavily
polluted neighborhoods, as are Latino populations. Using urban census tract data from across the
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 20
United States, Zou and colleagues (2014) provided further evidence that on average, African
Americans, Native Americans and Indigenous people, along with Asian Americans and Pacific
Islanders (AAPI), are exposed to greater levels of air pollutants than White Americans.
While there is mounting evidence that socioeconomic status and systemic race/ethnicity-
based discrimination each predict ambient air pollution exposure independently, effects of
economic and racial-ethnic disparities can also compound. Grineski and colleagues (2007)
uncovered that in the Phoenix metropolitan area, neighborhood-level SES was negatively
associated with estimated carbon monoxide (CO) levels, indicating that neighborhoods with
lower SES had higher levels of CO. Grineski et al. also reported that racial/ethnic neighborhood
composition was a significant and positive predictor of exposure to CO pollution: specifically,
neighborhoods with higher proportions of Native Americans and Latino immigrants had higher
levels of CO, independent of SES. Housing tenure was also a significant predictor of CO
exposure: areas with higher proportion of renters (relative to homeowners) had higher levels of
CO. These results are especially concerning given that the Phoenix Metropolitan area is the fifth
largest metropolitan area in the U.S., one of the fastest growing areas in the country, and has
failed to meet EPA standards for atmospheric pollutants for decades (Grineski et al., 2007).
These findings indicate that while poor air quality poses a health threat to everyone in a given
region, historically marginalized communities might be particularly exposed to the harmful
effects of air pollution.
In addition to increased exposure to air pollution at the neighborhood level, low-income
and historically marginalized communities may also be exposed to elevated air pollution within
the household. Poverty is strongly related to increased exposure to household air pollutants
including greater use of high-emission fuel sources, such as biomass and coal, for cooking,
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 21
heating and lighting (Hadeed et al., 2021). Additionally, individuals from low-SES and
historically marginalized communities might spend more time indoors, given reduced access to
recreational spaces and opportunities as well as perceived neighborhood concerns, placing them
at greater vulnerability to indoor pollutants, such as cigarette smoke and household chemicals
(Ferguson et al., 2020; Woo et al., 2019). Housing in such communities might also be more
poorly ventilated and in poorer condition, contributing to greater risk of indoor air pollution
exposure (Tieskens et al., 2021).
This increased exposure to air pollution compounds with other health disparities to
amplify adverse pollution-related health outcomes for vulnerable communities. People from
lower SES groups tend to have worse overall health than individuals of high-SES, which could
make them more susceptible to the damaging effects of air pollution (Bell et al., 2005).
Additionally, people of color and lower-SES individuals experience elevated levels of
psychosocial stress related to discrimination; this stress exposure has been shown to predict
poorer health outcomes including heightened vulnerability to air pollution’s adverse effects
(Block et al., 2012, Nardone et al., 2018). Multi-directional relationships between increased
susceptibility, heightened exposure to polluted air, financial hardship, and discrimination-based
stress may have cumulative effects on people’s overall physical and socioemotional well-being.
Furthermore, poor people tend to have less access to health care – and lower quality care – than
people of higher socioeconomic status, which might make addressing the physical effects of
exposure to air pollution even more difficult (Kravitz-Wirtz et al., 2018).
Differences in air pollution exposure may also have contributed to disparities in wide-
ranging outcomes related to the Coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) pandemic (Brandt et al.,
2020). While the evolving nature of the pandemic, confounding socioeconomic variables,
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 22
geographic differences, and underestimation of case and mortality data present challenges to
quantification of the relationship between air pollution exposure and COVID-19 outcomes, a
recent review indicated a significant positive association between air pollution and averse
COVID-19 health outcomes globally in 91% of papers included (Bhaskar et al., 2023). A
growing literature indicates broader racial disparities in COVID-19-related outcomes; in the
United States, this has included disparities in case rates (Credit, 2020; Ramprasad et al., 2022),
hospitalization (Ogedegbe et al., 2020; Romano et al., 2021), mortality (Alcendor, 2020; Parpia
et al., 2021), and “long COVID”, characterized by symptoms persisting for three months or more
after COVID-19 infection (Jacobs et al., 2023). The detrimental effects of air pollution on health
and disparities in these effects may have contributed to disparities in COVID-19 outcomes. It is
likewise possible that disparities in COVID-19 outcomes and related ongoing adverse health
outcomes (including long COVID and elevated risk of other subsequent adverse health events
including stroke and cardiac disease post-infection; Ahmed et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022) may
position marginalized communities to be further negatively affected by ongoing air pollution
exposure, but to our knowledge this bidirectional relationship has not been explored in the
literature and remains an important question for future research. Thus, compounding effects of
COVID-19, air pollution, and systemic racism and classism on brain health and cognitive
function have yet to be fully characterized.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has recognized that race-, ethnicity-,
and income-based discrimination plays a role in the inequitable distribution of environmental
health burden: addressing such disparities has been identified by the EPA as a major goal and an
issue of environmental justice (USEPA, 2022). Uneven urban development and residential
segregation have pushed people of color into communities with fewer public goods (Grineski,
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 23
Bolin & Boone, 2007), including green spaces (Nardone et al., 2021), opportunities for outdoor
recreation (Winter et al., 2020), and pharmacies (Qato et al., 2014), as well as increased
industrial and freeway exposure (Woghiren-Akinnifesi , 2013; Houston et al., 2004). This is in
spite of the fact that people of color have been identified as consuming fewer goods and services
and having a smaller “carbon footprint” on average, relative to white people (Tessum et al.,
2019). This body of research illustrates the disparities in benefit and burden existing in the
consumption of goods and exposure to air pollutants across race/ethnicity and SES (Zou et al.,
2014), as well as interactions between race/ethnicity and SES in predicting exposure to harmful
air pollutants (Ash & Fetter, 2004; Brochu et al., 2011).
Although environmental justice and equity issues have garnered the interest of
researchers, policy holders, advocacy groups, and the general public, very few studies have
assessed the cumulative risks of holding historically marginalized identities (i.e., racial-ethnic
minorities in the U.S. and/or being of low-SES) in addition to heightened exposure to ambient air
pollutants on human health (Smith & Laribi, 2022). One recent study (Schulz et al., 2020)
examined the joint effects of race-based residential segregation, neighborhood socioeconomic
factors, and environmental pollutant exposure (estimated using air quality monitoring and
modeling data) in the Detroit Metropolitan Area and reported that race-based residential
segregation was associated with increased rates of all-cause mortality (all deaths that occurred
within a population, regardless of the cause). This effect was mediated by education attainment
level, income inequality across the area, and exposure to PM . Additionally, there were
2.5
significant associations between each individual pathway and the all-cause mortality rate,
indicating that each factor can partially explain regional-level all-cause mortality rates. Despite
these indicators that historic marginalization, SES, and pollution exposure interact with one
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 24
another to predict all-cause mortality, their cumulative risk on other specific health
consequences, such as neurocognitive outcomes, remains to be fully examined. A recent pilot
study (Medrano et al., 2022) provides an important step in this direction by investigating
cognitive performance as a function of real-time measured personal exposure to PM (measured
2.5
using personal monitoring devices carried by participants for a three-day period) and zip code-
aggregated Social Vulnerability indices, and reported initial evidence that higher real-time PM
2.5
exposure was negatively associated with cognitive performance as well as with socioeconomic
metrics (higher parental education and income). Medrano et al.’s study was limited by use of a
relatively small convenience sample (N=30 families with a child between the ages of 7 and 11
years old) and a constrained timeline; additional studies with larger, more diverse samples
measured over longer periods of time will be beneficial in disentangling the cumulative impacts
of air pollution and social vulnerability on neurocognitive outcomes.
Recommendations for Policy
The evidence reviewed here indicates that air pollution has major and adverse effects on
neurocognitive development. Further, there are disparities in these effects, with some
communities impacted more than others. A number of potential actions will help to address these
issues. First, as noted by Clay and colleagues (2021), ambient air pollution has increased since
2016 and this might be largely due to increased vehicle emissions. One strategy to address this
increase might be to expand electric vehicle rebate programs, encouraging purchase and use of
lower-emission vehicles. Additionally, increased investment into public transit infrastructure
might increase its usage, thus decreasing air pollution by lowering vehicle emissions output.
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 25
Investment in sustainable energy sources more broadly will also reduce air pollution by
promoting transition away from use of high-emission fossil fuels.
In addition to these strategies to reduce emissions output generally, recommendations
have also been put forward to specifically address the problem of inequity in pollution exposure
and related health outcomes. While many previous environmental interventions have
disproportionately benefited high-income communities, The Union of Concerned Scientists, a
nonprofit advocacy organization, has recommended prioritizing investments in electric transit
and school buses serving communities of color and lower income to decrease emissions exposure
in these communities, decreasing racial and income disparities in pollution impact (Pinto de
Moura, 2019). Additionally, while electric vehicle rebate programs could encourage purchase of
lower-emission vehicles generally, such programs could prioritize low- to moderate-income
individuals in particular, helping to mitigate disparities in pollution impact as well.
Furthermore, given that green space is lacking in marginalized communities and
improves air quality (Jennings et al., 2015; Wen et al., 2013), prioritizing the development of
green spaces in such communities could also help reduce disparities in pollution exposure and
related health outcomes. Increases in green space also offer many other health benefits for
communities: along with reducing air pollution, green space also decreases noise and heat
pollution (Andersson et al., 2015; Douglas et al., 2017), promotes stress recovery and positive
mental health outcomes (Bratman et al., 2019; Nutsford et al., 2013), and is negatively associated
with neighborhood-level crime (Bogar & Beyer, 2016; McCabe, 2014). In addition to these
recommendations to reduce disparities in exposure to and the impact of air pollution specifically,
these considerations can be considered part of the larger need to address structural disparities
disadvantaging marginalized communities (Rigolon et al., 2021).
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 26
In addition to strategies improving outdoor air quality, steps to improve indoor air quality
are important as well. As demonstrated by Stafford (2015), ventilation systems renovations
improving indoor air quality in schools have been associated with significant improvements in
students’ cognitive, behavioral, and academic outcomes. Removal of harmful indoor
contaminants (e.g., mold, asbestos), renovating air ventilation systems, and updating roofing and
wall panels are all proven cost-efficient ways to reduce indoor air pollution and improve air
quality. In addition to support for such improvements in older buildings, regulatory standards for
indoor air quality should be developed and enforced. Current air quality regulations generally do
not go beyond addressing outdoor air conditions, despite indoor air pollution posing a serious
threat to public health (Roselund, 2020).
Finally, government agencies should both aim to better enforce current regulations and
develop future environmental policies. Many large sources of air pollutants, such as factories and
coal mines, are not properly regulated and penalized for failing to meet federal air quality
standards (Payne-Sturges et al., 2019). Additionally, state governments and individual
organizations need to be held accountable for failing to provide and regulate safe air for their
residents (Melnick, 2010; Jacob & Winner, 2009). The 2022 Supreme Court decision curtailing
EPA authority to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from power plants (Huang, 2022) is a
concerning step in the wrong direction regarding such regulatory authority.
Conclusion
Air pollution has been fully recognized as a public health concern. Scientists have
established a clear link between air pollution and negative health outcomes. As reviewed in the
present manuscript, prenatal exposure to fine particulate matter can impact fetal programming
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 27
and early development, while air pollution exposure during infancy and childhood is associated
with poorer outcomes in a wide range of neurocognitive measures. Air pollution also adversely
affects health outcomes in adulthood, including elevated rates of Alzheimer’s disease, dementia,
and cognitive impairment in older adults.
Further, environmental justice advocates and environmental inequity researchers have
brought to light the disproportionate exposure and harmful effects of air pollution amongst
people of color and low socioeconomic status. Despite historically contributing the least to
environmental pollutants, people of color and low-income individuals are experiencing the most
damaging and lasting effects of air pollution and climate change more broadly. We all deserve
the right to clean air and we should all be invested in climate change policy. Given the economic
and human costs of air contaminants, it is imperative that local and federal legislators prioritize
recommendations such as those we have outlined here to ensure that every person has access to
clean and safe air.
AIR POLLUTION, NEUROCOGNITION, & DISPARITIES 28