The Database of Religious History (DRH): Ontology, Coding Strategies and the Future of
Cultural Evolutionary Analyses
Edward Slingerland, Department of Philosophy, University of British Columbia
(edward.slingerland@ubc.ca)
M. Willis Monroe, Department of Philosophy, University of British Columbia
(willismonroe@gmail.com)
Michael Muthukrishna, London School of Economics and Political Science
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (michael@muthukrishna.com)
Abstract
Perhaps the biggest challenge facing designers of large-scale, cross-cultural databases is that of
ontology, both in terms of defining the unit of analysis and the construction of an appropriate
back-end architecture. These decisions are also impacted by the coding strategies adopted,
envisioned users, and funding limitations. This article explores how one particular database
project, the Database of Religious History (DRH), has addressed these issues, the advantages and
drawbacks of the approaches adopted, and the potential of the DRH as a data resource for
exploring the cultural evolution of religion.
Keywords
large-scale cultural databases, big data, cultural evolution, evolution of religion
Data Sharing Statement
All of the data discussed in this paper can be freely accessed at religiondatabase.org.
Funding Statement
This work was funded by a grant from the John Templeton Foundation (Grant ID# 61837) to the
first and second authors, “Exploring the Cultural Evolution of Religion Employing a Large-
Scale, Quantitative-Qualitative Historical Database” (2021-2024)
Conflict of Interest Disclosure
The first author is Director, second author Associate Director, and third author Technical
Director of the Database of Religious History
The Database of Religious History (DRH): Ontology, Coding Strategies
and the Future of the Study of the Cultural Evolution of Religion
Originally created in 2012, as part of a larger grant on the cultural evolution of religion and
morality, the Database of Religious History (DRH; religondatabase.org) is an open access, online
resource for the study of religion and cultural evolution. A flexibly-designed temporal and geo-
coordinated system, built on a relational database that can also be browsed like an encyclopedia,
the DRH has pioneered a distinctive approach to the design, coding strategies, and function of
cultural databases, while also slowly building a new form of scholarly community. As of
September 23, 2022, the DRH has 832 entries and 445 expert contributors,1 which can be
browsed and searched in various ways through powerful built-in tools. Thanks to our latest
infusion of funding,2 our coverage is rapidly growing and our technical features expanding.
In this paper we discuss the challenges involved in creating cultural database ontologies, the
theoretical and practical rationales behind DRH ontology and design decisions, current and
future uses of the DRH, and strategies that we have adopted for mitigating the downsides of
pursuing an expert-based coding approach. In the case of the DRH, the evolution of our database
ontology and technical features has often been in response to the unique demands of expert-
based coding (Slingerland & Sullivan 2017, Sullivan et al. 2015/2017), which we believe—
despite the difficulties involved—is the only sustainable way forward when it comes to
converting qualitative knowledge about cultural history into quantitative data, especially when it
comes to large-scale societies. We hope here to not only introduce scholars of religion and
cultural evolutionary theorists to an important new data resource, but also advance the more
general conversation concerning cultural database design and coding strategies.
The Ontology of Cultural Databases
As recent methodology papers on large-scale cultural databases (Slingerland et al. 2020a,
Watts et al. 2021) have pointed out, perhaps the central challenge designers face is determining
the unit of analysis.3 In theory, these could range quite widely both geographically and
temporally. At one extreme we can imagine a database built around very large units, such as
“Western” vs. “Eastern” or “ancient” vs. “modern” cultures, that radically collapse either space
or time in the interest of documenting extremely broad trends. At the other, a very fine-grained
database might document the cultural beliefs and behaviors of a single individual, or even sub-
divide the individual depending on life-stage or activity (e.g., individual X when worshiping at a
Shinto shrine as opposed to a Buddhist temple, or pre- and post-child rearing). Apart from scale,
there is also the question of whether units of analysis should be artificially imposed upon the
evidence or derive from emic distinctions (i.e. standard geographic sample or historically
contingent polities; 200 year spans or historical political divisions).
A summary of current DRH coverage can be found on our landing page and entries can browsed at
The DRH was originally created as part of a Canadian Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC)
grant to PI Slingerland in 2012, with further development funded by a grant by Templeton Religious Trust to
Slingerland and Muthukrishna in 2017. Current DRH development and operations is funded by a John Templeton
Foundation grant to Slingerland and Monroe from 2021-2024.
See, especially, Slingerland et al. 2020a: 4-5 and Watts et al. 2021: 65-68.
Until recently, the databases employed in cultural evolutionary analyses have, for the most
part, been limited to the Human Relations Area Files (HRAF; cite), the Standard Cross-Cultural
Sample (SCCS; Murdock and White 1969) and the Ethnographic Atlas (EA; Murdock 1967).4
These are all derived from ethnographic data, are temporally “flat” (typically coding a single
slice of time, or at most two), and focus on the “culture” or “society” as their unit of analysis. As
Watts et al 2021 observe, one problem with this approach is that “people live in communities
that change in structure and features over time, contain internal variation, and have fuzzy and
layered boundaries,” which makes it difficult to define a “culture” or a “society” in such a
manner that the resulting units of analysis are “meaningfully comparable” (65-66). Commonly-
used databases, such as the Ethnographic Atlas, do a poor job of responding to this challenge,
typically homogenizing different subgroups within a larger unit, or simply choosing a particular
subgroup as representative, often without explicitly noting or defending this decision.
With regard to the EA unit labeled “Sumatra,” for instance, “the terms ‘society’ and
‘culture’ could conceivably refer to the group of villages that make up a district, the Toba
Batak, the Batak peoples, or the broader political state of the Island of Sumatra. In
practice, the Ethnographic Atlas identifies the Toba Batak as their unit of analysis, but it
remains unclear how and why the authors chose this particular grouping (Watts et al.
2021: 67).
More recent databases have tried to be more specific and consistent. The Pulotu Database of
Pacific (Watts et al. 2015), for instance, defines their unit of analysis, the “culture,” as “a group
of people living in a similar physical, social and economic environment that speak mutually
intelligible languages and have relatively homogenous supernatural beliefs and practices” (Watts
et al., 2015). This represents a great improvement over the traditionally dominant databases, but
analysts are still left with a lack of historical depth and a focus mostly on small-scale societies.
Besides the DRH, the only existing database attempting to tackle the challenge of coding
large-scale societies with real historical depth is the Seshat Databank project
Geographical Areas (NGAs) as a sampling technique, Seshat then employs as its unit of analysis
a particular polity within that NGA, temporally slicing that polity into intervals that can range
from 50 to several hundred years. This serves as a good example of how choosing the “right”
level of analysis can very much depend on what sorts of research questions one intends to ask,
and therefore which particular aspects of culture one wishes to capture. Seshat was originally
focused on coding aspects of political organization, technology, warfare and economics, which
means that it found a natural unit of analysis in the administrative district or polity. When it
comes to a large geographic region, such as the Middle Yellow River Valley, one can reasonably
expect to be able to formulate coherent codes for these sorts of variables over a time period of
roughly two hundred years.
Such large geographical and temporal units are less helpful, however, when it comes to
aspects of culture such as religion, where a geographical and temporal range of this size should
be expected to host a myriad of religious groups, places and circulating written texts, all enjoying
Exceptions to this trend include studies that have created their own, bespoke databases, such as Sosis & Bressler
2003.
various degrees of political support, developing rapidly over time, and perhaps existing in
competition with one another. We would also argue that this structure is best suited to capturing
those aspects of historical culture that are associated with clearly-defined and relatively dominant
polities, which could include aspects of state cults or officially-sponsored religions, but will
inevitably erase the sort of diversity and complexity that typically characterizes human religious
life in large-scale societies.
DRH Technical Architecture, Coding Strategies and Ontology: Let a Hundred
Flowers Bloom
The DRH approach to defining units of analysis was very much influenced by research on
cultural evolution, and in particular by models of cultural-group selection (Richerson, et al. 2016;
Zefferman & Matthew, 2015). Building on seminal work by David Sloan Wilson (1975),
cultural-groups are defined as collections of traits rather than groups of people. For example,
models often define a group of those who possess altruistic beliefs and a group of those who
possess selfish beliefs. These groups may be structured in a variety of ways, from being fully
intermixed within the same geographic location to being structured and separate, maintaining
cultural boundaries through geography (e.g. separated by a mountain range) or through
differential levels of norm enforcement (punishment for norm violation or rewards for following
norms). New advancements in empirical research confirm the value of measuring with a focus on
distribution of cultural traits, since people belong to multiple overlapping and embedded groups
(Muthukrishna et al 2020; White, Muthukrishna, & Norenzayan, 2021). For instance, a person
may be Buddhist with animist practices and have cultural traits that are also shared with their
fellow Californians. It is important therefore to study the overlapping influence of a variety of
cultural (including religious) groups in time and space on historical populations through the
detailed and intricate web of traits that make up these groups.
Given this theoretical foundation, the DRH was designed with a focus on flexibly storing
answers to questions about specific cultural traits—beliefs, behaviors, practices, and traditions—
attached to space-time coordinates rather than traditions or groups of people. The space-time
coordinates are defined by a Geographic Information System (GIS) polygon mapping an area
and a time range. Of course, even if people can hold multiple traits or change their beliefs,
ultimately it is groups of people, defined in various ways, who are seen as the origins of these
traits. Indeed, it may be more natural to think of groups of people than of groups of traits
possessed by people. Experts therefore characterize these traits as features of an aggregate unit of
analysis, the original one being the Religious Group. When the DRH began, experts were asked
to answer questions about religious beliefs and practices that were characteristic of a particular
group of people who could be located in space and time. We have since introduced other units of
analysis as alternative lenses through which experts can characterize cultural traits, including the
Religious Place and Religious Text.5
From the perspective of a reader, analyst or expert contributor, this freedom in defining units
of analysis is one of the primary ways in which the flexibility of the underlying database
structure is most clearly experienced. The key to this architectural design is that the fundamental
unit of data is a trait located in time and space, with the ability to assign these traits to a variety
For an overview of current polls, see Overview of Polls.
of units of analysis. The design of the DRH’s backend database allows for new poll types to be
continually introduced while also maintaining discoverability and coherence in our dataset. The
centrifugal force of proliferating units of analysis—which could potentially spawn a chaotic or
incoherent collection of data—is counterbalanced by the centripetal force of linked questions,
named units of analysis and shared tagging systems grounded in the idea of cultural-groups as
groups of cultural-traits.
The balancing of these two forces is a good example of how early design decisions can have
significant downstream effects on the flexibility and adaptability of a technical platform, because
multiple units of analysis was not at all part of the original conception of the project. The DRH
began with its original unit of analysis, the “Religious Group,” as the sole poll type. This unit
was defined as “a community or network of people (locatable in space and time) who share
common practices, beliefs, and/or institutions, but who are not necessarily conscious members of
an explicitly recognized group. The group can be an emic (indigenous) name or category or an
etic (scholarly attributed) one” (see Tappenden 2017).
This was sometimes construed by our expert coders quite broadly, especially in the early
days of the project. For instance, one early entry by the eminent historian of religion Stanley
Stowers, on “Mediterranean Religion” (Stowers 2019), took as its scope the greatest extent of the
While such broad-brush entries may, indeed, capture some important shared aspects of religious
culture across broad swaths of space and time, we tried to actively steer experts away from such
expansive understandings of “groups” and focus, instead, on distinct communities. The mantra
that we have encouraged our editorial team to employ when advising new contributors, and that
Religious Groups that are, from our perspective, overly broad, such as Stowers’ Mediterranean Religion entry, is
one way in which our deference to the preferences of our experts has affected the structure of our data, a topic to
which we will return below.
still guides our strategy, is “smaller is better.” Rather than coding “Tang Dynasty Buddhism,” for
instance, editors encourage an expert in this period to focus on a specific Buddhist sect in a
specific location over a relatively short time period. The idea is that, as such smaller entries
proliferate, an analyst interested in the broader construct of “Tang Dynasty Buddhism” as a unit
of analysis can derive it by combining all of the relevant smaller entries, resulting in a more
accurate and nuanced generalization. This bottom-up approach to broader religious categories
also allows us to assess the coherence of the categories themselves: does the label “Tang
Buddhism” actually capture anything analytically useful, or do we need to revise our categories?
We could discover, for instance, that “Tang capital-region religions” or simply “Tang religion”
captures more variance in poll questions answers than more traditional labels such as
“Buddhism.” This focus on small units also directly responds to one of the research desiderata
suggested by Watts et al. 2021: by encouraging experts to focus on smaller units of analysis, we
“[enable] variation to be studied in its own right” (71). It is impossible to capture this level of
granularity with the broad units of analysis employed by Seshat or the various ethnographic
cross-cultural databases.
To be sure, broad entries from earlier periods of the project remain in the DRH, and newer
ones have been added in cases where RAs or experts have attempted to import data from existing
ethnographic or archaeological databases into the DRH. One entry singled out by Watts et al.
2021 in their discussion of the DRH is Central Africa Iron Age (Carleton 2017), which has a
very broad geographical and temporal range compared to a more typical DRH Religious Group
represent the perspectives of scholars working with historical evidence, and serve as a test for
future studies of coherence of regional generalizations.

Watts et al. present the simultaneous presence of groups defined on such different scales as a
serious flaw in the DRH design. “This [difference] presents a challenge to systematic cross-
cultural comparisons,” they argue, “as researchers must account for differences in scale when
comparing the traits of religious groups” (68). We believe that this concern is unwarranted. An
analyst wishing to focus solely on more clearly defined Religious Groups could simply exclude
from their analysis entries with geographical or temporal ranges above a certain threshold. Broad
entries such as Central Africa Iron Age—which are generally Secondary Source entries pulled
from external data sources7—currently serve in the DRH as placeholders of a sort, providing sub-
optimal coverage of what would otherwise be gaps in the database. The plan is that they will
eventually be supplemented (and, if the analyst desires, supplanted) by more narrowly focused
entries as our contributor base expands.
A separate concern of Watts et al. concerning DRH structure has to do with the variety of our
units of analysis, which gets to the heart of the central challenge for database designers. As
explained above, the DRH began with a single unit of analysis, the Religious Group. From the
very beginning of the project, however, we received feedback from certain experts, primarily
archeologists, that they were uncomfortable working with Religious Group as their analytic lens.
They might, for instance, work on a temple site in a pre-literate culture, with limited ability to
make claims about a purported group that might have used the site. They argued that a different
poll would better suit their subject matter, one that dispensed with certain group-specific
questions that they found difficult or impossible to answer, and that instead added questions
relevant to physical remains that might shed at least indirect light on religious beliefs and
practices.
After several workshops on the topic, this resulted in the introduction of a new unit of
analysis to the DRH, the Religious Place, with its own dedicated poll type
designed to overlap when possible with the Group poll, often with minor wording changes to
better reflect the relevant unit of analysis. In addition, it includes bespoke sections on the built
environment and decoration that are not present in the Group poll, allowing an important
contingent of our contributors to code aspects of the object of their scholarship that are specific
to both its physicality and the concerns of physical archeology. A similar expert-driven process
resulted, in 2020, in a third unit of analysis and poll type, that of Religious Text
to experts who had no interest in speculating about the nature of the group that might have
produced or used this text, or who study texts used by multiple, incompatible religious groups.
Like the Place poll, it was designed to overlap with the original Group poll where possible, again
with appropriate wording changes. Also like the Place poll, it contains bespoke sections on, for
Secondary Source entries are prepared by advanced graduate student or postdoc RAs using existing published
sources. Carleton (2017) was the product of an attempt to incorporate data from Peregrine and Ember 2001. Every
entry in the DRH is tagged with its entry type and, in the case of entries drawn from external sources, the name of
their source. Entries from external sources often possess their own branding (a distinct color and logo) and link to
the original source. Also, analysts dubious about the value of such entries can easily, with the click of a button,
exclude either Secondary Source entries or entries based on a particular external source or both.
instance, audience and production, that allow it to capture distinctive aspects of texts, as opposed
to groups or places.
A separate driver of poll proliferation in the DRH is collaboration with external research
groups. One important function of the DRH is to serve as an open technical platform, one that
makes it easier for other teams interested in the cultural dynamics of religion to gather, analyze
and publish their data. We are well-positioned to provide this service to the field because we
have invested an enormous amount of time and money into our technical stack, and because our
home institution, the University of British Columbia, has committed to providing technical
support to the DRH in perpetuity. In the absence of external funding, UBC will cover DRH cloud
hosting costs and provide in-kind support to keep the website up-to-date and functioning. The
benefit for external research groups, then, is potentially significant savings in both time and
money in not having to build their own, bespoke database, as well as preventing their hard-
gathered data from meeting the all-too-common fate of becoming inaccessible—or simply
disappearing—once current grant funding is exhausted. The benefit for the DRH is becoming
host to new streams of data, albeit typically in the form of new polls tailored to the specific
research interests of the scholars in question.
The first external poll hosted on the DRH, “Practitioners of Mystical Harm”
researcher, Manvir Singh, for a particular research project. We are now in the process of
developing two new more extensive, expandable polls to meet the needs of two larger, ongoing
research initiatives. The New Religious Movements (NRM) poll is based on the DRH Group poll
but includes new sections on charismatic founders, funding mechanisms, relationship to local
legal codes, and other data more specific to NRMs. It is being created in collaboration with the
who specialize in NRMs. Its purpose is both to allow the importation of Inform data into the
DRH and, by responding to concerns of scholars who specialize in NRMs that the existing Group
poll is not ideal for their purposes, facilitate future DRH contributions on this important topic.
We are also in the early stages of collaboration with a team wishing to create a poll on
“Communication with the Supernatural World,” which would zero in on details of prayers,
curses, and divinations, and may become wrapped into a larger, new poll on “Religious Ritual.”
So, in response to both expert feedback and the needs of collaborators, the DRH has ended
up employing multiple units of analysis, all containing core areas of overlap, but each containing
its own distinct information. These distinct polls provide the project with a method for analyzing
religious variables according to different lines of evidence. For instance, we can investigate
which questions are more easily answered by experts who specialize in texts rather than
archaeology. This type of observation is useful for anticipating gaps or areas of missing coverage
when the historical record is imperfectly preserved. At the same time, the analytic coherence of
the DRH—the centripetal force counteracting the centrifugal forces of continually growing poll
types—is ensured through two primary mechanisms: overlap and backend linkage between polls
and a single, shared tagging system.
All DRH polls, including external ones, are designed to possess significant areas of overlap,
especially with regard to questions that tend to be of interest to those testing hypotheses about
cultural evolutionary dynamics. Conceptually identical questions are linked in the database
backend and deliver similar results in searches and analyses. For instance, the Group poll
question, “Is there special treatment of adherents’ corpses?”, is linked to a similarly-worded
question in both the Place (“Is this a place for treatment of the corpse?”) and Text (“Are there
special treatments for adherents’ corpses dictated in the text?”) polls. This means that searching
the Text and Place polls
An analyst interested in the presence of special treatment of corpses will therefore be able to pull
results from across the various polls in the DRH—including subquestions relating to cremation,
mummification, exposure to the elements, etc.—that reflect not only the existence of groups that
are doctrinally committed to such a practice, but also the presence of physical sites where such
practices were carried out or the circulation of texts that advocate such practices. Similarly, the
great deal of overlap between new polls created by outside research teams and the DRH Group
poll will help to grow a shared, core set of data about the history of religion.
A second type of “glue” that holds together the various DRH units of analysis is the
requirement that experts apply to all entries religious tradition tags drawn from a tagging tree
that is shared across poll types.8 An analyst interested, for instance, in “Korean Christianity,” can
instantly pull all entries relevant to that tag or a parent tag (“Korean religion,” “Christianity,”
“Evangelicalism,” “East Asian religions”), whether they are Groups, Places, Texts or external
research team polls. External research groups interested in a particular corner of religious
cultural space, such as New Religious Movements, also play an important role in expanding and
improving our tagging tree.
Finally, the fact that all entry answers are grounded in space and time also creates a different
dimension of order in the DRH dataset: any specific question, regardless of poll type, can be
queried by an analyst whose main focus is a specific geographic area and time range, or by a
researcher interested in a particular topic. In other words, although our analytic unit of analysis
might be a Religious Group, Place or Text, specific cultural traits—discoverable through
keyword searches—can be explored individually, disaggregated from the larger unit of analysis
with which they are associated.
In conclusion, while Watts et al. 2021 portray the promiscuity when it comes to allowable
units of analysis as a structural flaw in the DRH,9 it is, in fact, a design feature—albeit one that
strikes a balance between the ideal desires of cultural evolutionary analysts and the experts from
whom they must get their data. To concede a point to Watts et al., it is fair to say that the
proliferation of poll types in the DRH is not what someone solely concerned with cultural
evolutionary analysis would desire. The DRH began with the Religious Group as its only unit of
analysis, and there is a certain structural elegance and analytic simplicity that would have been
gained by forcing scholars interested in particular sites or texts to shoehorn their characterization
of these aspects of religious culture into a purported group that could have been said to have used
these sites or texts. The problem is simply that scholars of religion do not like to do this. Clicking
radio buttons to convert their qualitative judgements into data is already extremely jarring and
group/3. Experts are allowed, with editor approval, to add new tags, so the tree is always growing, and one editorial
challenge faced by the DRH is maintaining consistency and coherence in the tree. This is one of the areas where top-
down editorial management is required. Tag hierarchies are represented in entry set-up (during the tagging process),
but experts can also pull laterally by simply searching for other relevant tags they might like to apply. Representing
the entire tree in a single hierarchy is extremely challenging considering the various ways in which religions could
be classified (e.g., a form of Chinese Buddhism might be a sub-tag in a tree headed by “Buddhism,” or in a tree
headed by “Chinese religion”; “Buddhism” itself might be classed under “Indic religions”). Our response to this
problem is allowing a plethora of tagging decision-trees and relying on the search feature of the site to pull all
relevant tags in browsing or analyzing. We see the tags as capturing (with editorial oversight) the intuition of
scholars about the relationship between their entry and other entries on the site; generally these intuitions are held
within and between related disciplines representing top-down forms of categorization.
“The variables coded are different across unit categories, limiting the ability to draw comparisons between them”
(67). A perhaps related problem is that Watts et al. 2021 seem to conflate DRH tags (which include regions and
religious traditions) with poll types (“The predefined categories of units in [the DRH] include regions, religious
groups, religious places, places, and polities”; 67).
foreign for them. Forcing them to recharacterize their topics of research would create an even
greater barrier to recruitment.
This is perhaps the most dramatic way in which the basic structure of the DRH has evolved
in response to the desires of our experts, a topic we will return to below. Similarly, requiring
external research groups to use one of our own polls to collect their data would be unappealing to
them and ultimately counterproductive: both external teams and the DRH benefit when we can
meet them halfway, providing the control, authorship and specificity they require to pursue their
research interests while also ensuring enough overlap that—especially combined with the
employment of a shared tagging tree—the expansion of a coherent set of data will be ensured.
The Benefit of Promiscuity: A Comparison of Units of Analysis Across
Cultural Databases
Before moving on to the particular methods and features of the DRH, it would be helpful to
add some flesh to the bones of the rather abstract discussion of units of analysis above.
Imagine an analyst interested in religious cultural evolution in the area corresponding to
modern Vietnam. HRAF contains an entry on “Vietnam: Vietnamese,” covering the full span of
Vietnamese history, from prehistoric archaeology to the modern state. It provides an excellent
short overview of religious history in the region, and notes the co-existence of world religions
like Mahayana Buddhism and Christianity with local animist beliefs, but is of little or no help to
a scholar interested in coding or tracking the development of religious belief and behavior over
time. The SCCS covers two cultures in this region, “Annamese/Vietnamese” (SCCS73) and
“Rade” (SCCS74).10 Both entries are based on ethnographic data gathered in a single time slice
from near-contemporary societies, the former in the 1930s and the latter in 1960s. The entry on
Annamese contains a few codes for religion, identifying the local religion as Mayahana
For the Rade, filtering for religion we find two codes, identifying the local religion as
The Ethnographic Atlas code for “high gods” (EA034) is quite specific and culturally particular,
including the requirement that the supreme being created the world, which might account for
why Mahayana Buddhism is coded as not possessing a high god.
Overall, the data on religious belief and practice is not extensive—not surprising considering
that the focus of the SCCS is not religion in particular—and we only have two, temporarily flat
slices of “culture” in Vietnam. Two deeper problems with databases such as these are expressed
well by Turchin et al. in a forthcoming article (2022: 3):
First, these databases promote a global “ethnographic present” that largely excludes
modern European populations and large-scale complex societies of the past. Many entries
draw exclusively on dated summaries of contact-era accounts, or ethnographic research
conducted with indigenous populations living under colonial rule, strongly influenced by
the scholarly discourse of the mid-twentieth century. Second, synchronic or static
databases, such as the SCCS and the Ethnographic Atlas, cannot tell us how societies
change over time, and thus provide only limited insight into the causal mechanisms at
work in cultural evolution. (Turchin et al. 2022: 3).
A dataset composed exclusively of single snapshots of the “ethnographic present,” however
detailed, will be of limited use in discerning dynamics of cultural evolution over long time
scales.
Turning to the DRH, filtering current coverage using a map of contemporary Vietnam returns
for “A supreme high god is present”
Certain extremely broad groups, with worldwide extent, were excluded.
The earliest entries primarily relate to groups and texts from early and imperial China, when the
north of Vietnam was firmly part of a broader Chinese cultural sphere, heavily subject to Chinese
cultural influence. They also include, however, an early Hindu movement, Pāśupatas (Acri
2018), that originated in India but spread as well to Southeast Asia. Later entries include broadly
circulating texts and widely dispersed groups—Confucian, Daoist, Buddhist and even Christian
(Nestorian Christianity, )—that influenced Vietnamese culture in the medieval period. We also
find two place entries (The Ppo Romé temple-tower complex and Đồng Dương Temple), dating
from 500 CE-1400 CE, that give insight into, respectively, local Buddhist and Hindu sects of the
Cham people, both of which represent distinctive blends of local and world religious traditions.
Finally, a scholar interested in near-contemporary indigenous religion is given two entries,
Raglai (Quang 2019) and Haroi (Quang 2020), local syncretic sects such as Cham Bani and
Cham Ahiér (Noseworthy 2018, 2021)12 that combine elements of Islam, Hinduism and Mahayan
Buddhism (), as well as specifically local forms of Mahayana Buddhism (Buddhism in the
Mekong Valley, Truong 2020) and Christianity (Hmong Christianity, Rumsby 2019)—the latter
of which has traveled with the Hmong diaspora to North America and Europe. It should also be
noted that, although the DRH definition of a supreme high god13 differs somewhat from “high
god” as defined in the EA, the plethora of “Yes” answers in this region should make an analyst
nervous about accepting the SCCS coding on this topic.
Not all of these entries will be relevant given the goals of a given study, and can be easily
excluded from an analysis. As this eclectic mix suggests, however, religious cultural history is
complicated, with multiple strands of indigenous and imported religions evolving, competing,
blending and borrowing from one another with bewildering speed (see, for example, Hansen
2020 and Kitiarsa 2005). Given our still minimal coverage, there are clearly many pieces missing
in the DRH portrayal of religion in Vietnam. However, it is difficult to see how one could
assemble the full mosaic of these cultural evolutionary processes without something very much
like the approach we have adopted: multiple small, focused, detailed accounts of groups, places
and texts, all grounded in space and time, and covering the full course of archeological and
recorded history.
The only other cultural database besides the DRH that addresses the need to provide
diachronic coverage is the Seshat Databank. Seshat does not provide coverage of Vietnam, but
we can move northward to look at their coverage of the Middle Yellow River Valley (MYRV) to
get a sense of the difference in granularity of coverage. As mentioned earlier, Seshat slices the
polities present in their Natural Geographic Areas (NGAs) into roughly 50-200 years slices. In
this region of China, this generally corresponds to distinct dynasties, although longer dynasties
For instance, in the early medieval period the MYRV is divided into four polities in Seshat:
25-219 CE Eastern Han
265-317 CE Western Jin
386-557 CE Northern Wei
For Cham Ahiér, the Group entry is supplemented with a place entry, The Ppo Romé temple-tower complex
(Noseworthy 2019), and a text entry, Dalikal Ppo Klaong Garai (Noseworthy 2022).
“High god” “refers to a supernatural being who is identified by the religious group as qualitatively more important
and powerful than any other supernatural being, even if not all-powerful.”
581-617 CE Sui
For each polity Seshat provides sixteen codes related to “Religion and Normative Ideology,”
some with justifications. Users are also directed to a backing “Moralizing Supernature
Punishment Narratives14 (hereafter “Narratives”) to further understand the coding process.
The Narratives for this period (pp. 106-108) do a nice job of briefly describing what, in
qualitative terms, the situation was with native ways of thought, the introduction of Buddhism,
and the interaction of the various traditions. Turning to the Databank itself, however, it is not
clear how the Narrative relates to the actual codes assigned. For the codes that have justifications
(the first seven, having to do with deification of rulers and normative ideas concerning equity
and prosociality), the codes and coding justifications are identical from the Western Jin to
Northern Wei, an over 350 year period characterized by great religious innovation and upheaval
Western Jin (265-317 CE)
Northern Wei (386-557 CE)
Focusing on one of the sets of codings without justifications, “Moralizing enforcement in
afterlife,” this is coded in the Eastern Han as “absent,” even though the Narratives note that, in
the Eastern Han, Buddhism introduced to China the idea of punishments in the afterlife (106-
107). The Narratives also note that Buddhism was not recognized as an official ideology in the
Eastern Han, which perhaps explains the “absent” coding—since we are getting only a single
code for the period, perhaps by default it is the official ideology. One can see, however, how this
overly simplifies the religious cultural reality on the ground. Entering the Western Jin, this
variable is still coded as “absent,” even though the Narratives identify Mahayana Buddhism,
which certainly endorses moralizing enforcement in the afterlife, as an official state ideology
(107). The coding then switches to “present” for the Sui and Northern Wei, again without
explanation.
that overlap geographically with the Seshat MYRV map. For the sake of simplicity, entries for
earlier groups or texts with long date ranges (such as transmitted classics, e.g., the Book of
Documents or the Analects of Confucius) are not included.
MYRV NGA, as of August 3 2022, excluding circulating texts from earlier periods, and showing
answers to the question, “Supernatural punishments are meted out in the afterlife.”
Here we find a rich mix of folk, Daoist, Confucian, Buddhist and even Christian groups or texts.
An analogous variable in the DRH to the Seshat “moralizing enforcement in afterlife”15 returns a
variety of answers, including a mixture of “yes” and “no” answers even within what we might
think of as monolithic “traditions” like Daoism, Confucianism or Buddhism. This suggests that
the actual situation on the ground with regard to these sorts of religious beliefs is considerably
more complex than the Seshat unit of analysis or coding strategy is able to reflect.
To be sure, current DRH coverage is merely a fraction of what we anticipate it will become
over the next several years. Even these snapshots of two corners of the database, however, give a
sense of how utilizing many small units of analysis (groups, places, texts), all grounded in space
and time, can allow an analyst to build up a picture of cultural evolutionary processes in a given
region of the world in way that preserves the complexity of history and provides real diachronic
depth. This approach also supports the study of historical psychology (Muthukrishna, Henrich,
Slingerland, 2021), reconstructing data from dead minds to understand the historical origins of
present-day psychology, the psychology of the past, and what causes psychology to change over
time. It similarly reconciles high-level, more natural units of analysis with low-level
theoretically-grounded groups of cultural-traits, allowing analysts to apply statistics which have
thus far been limited to contemporary data—such as the calculation of cultural fixation (CFst;
Muthukrishna, et al. 2019; White et al. 2021; Obradovich et al.)—to historical data.
There are certainly costs to an expert-centered approach, not least of which is the extremely
slow and unpredictable nature of the data gathering. The payoff, however, is much greater detail
and nuance than any other existing architecture of which we are aware. It is our firm belief that
there is no way to ensure high-quality and accurate data concerning the cultural historical record
without something like this kind of flexibility in units of analysis combined with fine granularity.
In the Group poll we have two separate questions for afterlife reward and punishment (“Supernatural punishments
are meted out in the afterlife”; “Supernatural rewards are meted out in the afterlife”), with analogous questions in the
The difficulty, of course, is getting humanities experts on board. While challenging, this barrier
is not impossible to overcome, and there are also ways to mitigate the downsides of the expert-
centered approach. We will address both the challenge and mitigation strategies below.
DRH Coding Strategies and Feature Development
In previous publications we have compared expert-based and research assistant (RA)-based
data collection strategies when it comes to constructing cross-cultural databases (Slingerland and
Sullivan 2017, Sullivan et al. 2018). Both approaches have their advantages and disadvantages,
and both can produce (in ideal circumstances) high quality data for later analysis. RA-based
coding is usually performed by full-time personnel directly hired by database directors for the
express purpose of filling out database coverage. Advantages include predictable, targeted data
collection and the ability to impose a clearly-understood and consistently-applied coding rubric
(see Turchin et al. 2020: 46-48, for a description of an RA-based coding method). Downsides
include the need for significant funding for the RAs, as well as coding quality concerns that arise
when RAs are working outside of their domains of expertise (Slingerland et al. 2017, Slingerland
et al. 2020b). This approach is also difficult to scale up, and risks potentially negative reactions
from humanities scholars if they feel that their own expertise is not being taken seriously by the
scientific community.
Expert-based coding provides the highest levels of expertise and nuance, as the decisions
concerning how to convert qualitative judgements into quantitative codes are being made by the
people who best understand the relevant material. A potential downside is idiosyncracies in
interpreting coding rubrics. This can be somewhat mitigated by tight editorial control, as well as
allowing experts access to discussions of particular coding decisions made by previous experts.16
The challenges when it comes to expert-gathered data, however, are much more serious than this.
Humanities scholars not only have little to no interest in providing quantitative codes for their
qualitative knowledge, they are also typically actively and theoretically opposed to doing so,
being suspicious of scientific approaches to the study of culture. There is also currently very little
agreement on the value of digital humanities or digital-native publications, as opposed to
traditional monographs, edited volumes or journal articles in issues of hiring and promotion. This
means that expert coverage accumulates slowly, and is both hard to target and impossible to
accurately predict.
As we will explain below, the principled resistance to coding qualitative data can be at least
partially overcome by emphasizing the more traditionally humanistic functions of the DRH
platform. The other central drawbacks to the expert-based approach—slowness and
unpredictability in data coverage—can, however, not only be surmounted but, ideally,
transformed instead into a strength. If one can successfully create a new scholarly culture within
which contribution to an online platform such as the DRH becomes normative, one can
completely bypass the data-gathering bottleneck inherent to the top-down, RA-based method.
Were this cultural shift to take hold, data gathering could potentially ramp up exponentially as
contributors attract new contributors through word of mouth, publishing a DRH entry on
Inspired by a similar feature in Glottolog (glottolog.org), we are planning to introduce a new feature to the DRH
where experts can click a button on a particular poll question to see guidelines on coding (clear yes and no
examples, borderline cases), as well as any discussion on the topic from previous experts.
religious group X comes to be seen as a badge of expertise on that topic, and DRH publications
on a CV begin to mean something to hiring and promotion committees.
In order to help this cultural shift to happen, we became aware quite early on that it would be
necessary for the DRH to become a useful resource to humanities scholars themselves, for their
own purposes. Partly, this involved emphasizing to humanities scholars that the quantitative
aspect of the DRH was not only useful to scientists studying cultural evolutionary dynamics, but
also to humanities scholars themselves. We have argued (e.g., Slingerland 2019) that scholarly
generalizations in the humanities (“Early Chinese religion did not place a great emphasis on the
afterlife”) have, up to now, been essentially reports of gut feelings about scholarly consensus in
one’s field. Such intuitive judgement may have been adequate when fields were small and
changed slowly, but are no longer able to keep up with the information explosion that every
branch of the university has undergone with the advent of online publications, proliferating
journals, and increased production of high-quality non-English scholarship. The ability of the
DRH to provide an instant overview of scholarly opinion on a given question is thus an
invaluable tool for any humanities scholar or classroom instructor.
In addition to explaining the humanistic importance of the central function of the DRH—
turning qualitative into quantitative—our recognition that we needed to appeal to fellow
humanists has motivated us to create an architecture and technical platform that has, in certain
regards, prioritized humanistic desiderata over what might be desirable from the point of view of
a scientist interested in performing a cultural evolutionary analysis. For instance, APIs, data
download, and analytic features have taken a back seat to visualization functions that can
enhance classroom experiences and bibliographic functions useful to humanities researchers.
Below we note some of this more humanities-friendly functionality, as we believe this sort of
appeal will be crucial to any successful cultural database.
Rich Qualitative Data and DOIs
Early attempts to get entries for the DRH emphasized poll completion as simply clicking a
radio button for each question and moving on to the next. This resulted in shorter entry
completion time, but left both the experts unsatisfied with their experience and the project
without relevant contextual data for each answer. More recently, our guidelines for experts have
emphasized the desirability of writing qualitative comments to contextualize each answer and
including rich-media (images, text, video, audio) alongside their qualitative comments to give
the reader (or analyst) a fuller picture and justification for their choice of quantitative answer.
This emphasis has two purposes. To begin with, the narrative justification is useful for both
analysts and historians interested in understanding the background sources and decision-making
process for a particular coding decision. Secondly, it also allows the historian to express their
fuller understanding of the particular source material, which in turn contributes to their
satisfaction with the entry itself. Additionally, the ability to add rich media allows experts who
have personal photographs or otherwise unpublished material a venue for making this material
available to the wider scholarly community.
Adding qualitative comments throughout means that, when searching the database, the user
will get what are essentially mini-encyclopedia articles on the topic by a wide range of experts,
which can be extremely useful entirely apart from whatever categorical answers might be
attached to them.
body distinction present?”
Aside from the rich qualitative comments and media added by the expert, they do in the end
actually have to come down on a quantitative answer: “Yes”, “No”, “Field doesn’t know”, or “I
don’t know.” Early versions of the database included only the first two, while the latter two were
added over time. These answers options (“Field doesn’t know” and “I don’t know”) provide two
main benefits to the project. The first is purely a psychological benefit for our experts: rather
than leave a question unanswered, and therefore the entry incomplete, they can choose one of
these two options, which has resulted in a much higher rate of completion. These answer options
also provide important data to analysts and future researchers—for instance, a concentration of
“Field Doesn’t Know” answers might help identify promising lines of scholarly investigation.
Digital projects also have to keep in mind the legacy of their data and design sustainability
guidelines for archiving and dissemination. The DRH currently takes completed entries that have
passed through editorial oversight and archives a PDF version of the entry with the UBC library
%20of%20Religious%20History%20(DRH)%22). As part of this process DOIs are minted for
the entries as well, which allow for easier citation and discoverability for the material in the
DRH. The process of minting DOIs and archiving data is one step in an on-going effort to enroll
the DRH in a standard indexing service, a development that will both benefit our experts and
increase the appeal of contributing to the DRH.
Bibliography Function
Previous versions of the DRH allowed experts to add citations to their entries and individual
entries with the rich qualitative comment fields. This was sufficient for capturing the sources and
references used by the expert, but lacked integration with standardized citation tools or
systematic integration within the database. A recently designed feature now allows experts to add
one or more references per answer (and general citations for the entry) through a rich citation
interface. This makes it much easier for experts to add citations (and cite previously mentioned
material). From an analyst’s perspective, since these citations are integrated within the database
and linked to specific answers and entries, they can also be added to existing query methods and
serve as an important data-point for meta-analysis.
This citation-querying ability is not merely a benefit to quantitatively-oriented analysts.
Humanities researchers can also use it to find relevant citations on a per question basis rather
than the traditional top-down search for comporanda (recent encyclopedia entry, secondary
sources, relevant primary work). For example, researchers interested in foodways can find
citations that directly reflect their discrete questions from neighboring (or even global)
perspectives. Similarly, a researcher could look for very recent citations across the database
dealing with particular questions. Within the scope of meta-analysis, this type of data opens up a
wide range of interesting topics, for example: which fields are relying on publications from a
small group of scholars, or which questions lack any recent citations and are therefore likely in
need of more study.
Pedagogical Uses and Supervised Entries
The DRH team has also received separate grant funding to create a suite of pedagogical
resources, in the form of lesson plans and instructor guides, for use in a variety of classrooms
ranging from secondary to post-secondary and graduate level classes. These lesson plans start by
introducing students to the basic concepts at the core of quantifying qualitative information
(falling under the popular pedagogical category of “digital literacy”). Later lessons task the
students with comparing discrete entries in the DRH, visualizing questions across time and
space, and finally using sample data to explore the analytical power of the dataset. All of the
lesson plans and instructor guides are available on the website under Creative-Commons
Additionally, the DRH has created a separate entry type, Supervised Entry, and
accompanying documents for instructors. This entry type is intended to facilitate a collaborative
student experience wherein a single student (or group) works with their instructor to create an
entry based on material relevant to their classroom experience. This introduces the student to
crucial research skills—what resources to explore, how long to search before concluding “Field
Doesn’t Know,” etc.—and students are encouraged to seek the input of an expert to oversee their
work and vet the final product.17 It is important to note that entries created through this process
are clearly labeled in the DRH as such and can be omitted from a data sample if desired.
17 For an example see the entry on Tel Arad by Kristina Shishkova (2022).
Some members of the project also recently published an article in the journal Religions
focused on using the DRH for pedagogy. The piece, Daniels et al 2022, takes core questions
from Religious Studies (namely the existence of supreme high gods) as a starting point and
shows how to visualize results from the DRH with an eye towards having students investigate
these questions in a variety of cultural contexts.
Social Media Strategy and Multilingual Access
The DRH twitter feed is quite active, with our postdocs featuring new entries as they are
published. They are not only able to reach a broad and discipline-specific audience, but can tailor
the thread to feature the sort of information their followers would find interesting. For instance,
postdoc Diana Moreiras posted a thread on one of her own entries on the “Formative Olmec”

Besides garnering multiple likes and re-tweets, and therefore at least indirectly expanding
awareness of the DRH, Moreiras was contacted by several experts in her field who had never
heard of the DRH, but are now interested in contributing entries of their own.
Dr. Moreiras has also translated DRH recruitment documents into Spanish, and is in the
process of translating all of the polls and the interface into Spanish. Spanish will join Chinese,
soon to be followed by an updated French version (to be supervised by new postdoc Dr. Julian
Weideman) and future expansions to Arabic, Japanese and other languages. The ability of
experts to interact with the DRH in their language of preference involves a great deal of both
technical development—we are currently working on a system to organize the various language
versions of the site and the polls—and highly-skilled work. It also entails a certain degree of
analytic risk: the possibility that technical terms in other languages might not be perfect
analogues for English terms, thereby limiting the inter-usability of data gathered in various
languages, is a constant worry. This is one reason we only expand into languages where core
team members, such as postdocs, have both native fluency and knowledge of the scholarly
literature, to ensure that translations are as accurate as possible and to flag potential translation
problems. The payoff is not only the ability to tap into new and extensive pools of international
experts, but also potentially to correct any biases that might result from an over-dependence on
English-language scholarship.
Dual-Use Platforms: The Only Way Forward for Cultural Databases
Turning the DRH into a platform that is intuitive and pleasant to use, useful in the classroom,
and that serves the specific needs of humanities scholars as well as cultural evolutionary
analysts, has involved an enormous amount of development time and expense. We feel that this
sort of investment is not only worth it in the long run, but essential for any successful cultural
database. Projects which attempt to realize only one of these aims will encounter difficulty
succeeding due to lack of funds, audience, and analytic capability. Data-heavy sites can lose the
interest of their humanities constituency and co-partners, RA-based data gathering is dependent
on regular funding and constant oversight, and projects without pedagogical components lose the
important methodological influence of student and classroom-led thinking.
The only way to break out of data-gathering bottlenecks, and to produce a large and
continually-growing cultural dataset, is to tap into the expanding community of experts who
actually study the cultural historical record. The promise is potentially exponential growth, as
experts encourage their colleagues to sign up via social media and word of mouth, and
contributing to the platform becomes a new sort of scholarly norm. The DRH is still some way
from reaching this breakthrough point, which we believe will ultimately require being listed on a
major indexing service (crucial especially to scholars in Europe and Asia) and having our data
used in more scholarly publications in the humanities. There are, however, promising signs that
large bump in Fall 2020, caused by a specific targeted recruitment drive, the rate DRH entry
publication dipped back to historical norms but then began to grow more steadily in winter of
2021 when the project began relying more on incoming postdocs for expert recruitment.
Continuing on this trajectory will give us a critical mass of entries, all deposited with UBC
library and issued DOIs, which in turn should help make the case for our being listed on
scholarly indexes. Once publishing a DRH entry becomes a clear positive on a scholar’s CV,
useful for both promotion and merit purposes, we anticipate a rapid and continuous increase in
our coverage.
Having and Eating of the Cake: Targeted Postdoc Recruitment and the
Standard Religious Cross-Cultural Sample (SRCCS)
In addition to trying to maximize expert recruitment, there are other ways in which the DRH
endeavors to continue to enjoy the benefits of an expert-centered coding strategy while also
adopting strategies to mitigate the downsides, paramount among them the opportunistic and
unpredictable nature of new contributions and the resulting patchy coverage.
Our primary and preferred mode of contribution is the Expert entry, which is completed by
the expert themself and reviewed by an editor before publication. We have also, however,
created other entry types to allow us to engage more targeted data gathering. The Secondary
Source entry is generally created and completed by an RA (an advanced graduate student) using
a variety of secondary sources, or drawing from an external resource—such as another cross-
cultural database. These sorts of entries have allowed us to, in collaboration with Carol Ember of
HRAF, import to the DRH religion-relevant data from that resource. This process has been on-
going over the past several years, with our goal to replicate the SCCS sample of 186 small-scale
cultures. A similar, earlier effort focused on replicating some of the coverage of the Peregrine
and Ember’s Encyclopedia of Prehistory (Peregrine and Ember 2001). In collaboration with the
some of their entries in the DRH with a mix of standard Expert entries and Secondary Source
entries. Another entry type, Expert Source, involves an RA completing an entry on behalf of a
given expert, using their own published works. The expert in these cases is typically a senior
scholar (often one uncomfortable with using digital media), and the RA one of their advanced
graduate students. When the entry is complete it is reviewed, edited and finally approved by the
expert. As with Supervised Entries, all entry types are clearly identified, and analysts concerned
about the usefulness of any given entry type can easily exclude it from their analysis.
More ambitiously, and more recently, we have adopted a targeted postdoc recruitment
strategy. The DRH currently employs six postdocs
geographic and temporal expertise. Over their two to three years of employment with the project,
they first design, in consultation with an external senior scholar in their field, a plan for both
“minimum” and “ideal” coverage in their area of expertise. They are then tasked with completing
this coverage through a mixture of recruitment of colleagues, producing their own entries, target
Expert Source entries, and—as a last resort—Secondary Source entries.
The goal is to, by the end of our current grant funding cycle in 2024, have a diverse set of
regions/time periods across the globe completely covered, which together can serve as a
standardized sample for cultural evolutionary analysts. Analysts can choose to work with one of
what we anticipate will be a series of frozen, time-stamped versions of this sample, or to work
with the latest iteration of what we anticipate will be a constantly-growing dataset. This sample,
the DRH Standard Religious Cross-Cultural Sample (SRCCS), will essentially represent a new
version of the SCCS, but including large-scale societies—where much of the cultural
evolutionary action is to be found—and having infinitely more nuance, detail and geographical
and temporal resolution. The current regions of priority include Yellow and Yangzi River
Valleys (Dr. Hamm), Ancient Egypt (Dr. Arbuckle), Mesoamerica/South America (Dr.
Moreiras), Ancient Greece and Rome (Dr. Canlas), Ancient Near East (Dr. Danielson), Late
Antique/Early Medieval East Mediterranean (Dr. Randall), and Islam in the Middle East and
North Africa (Dr. Weideman).18 We hope to devote our remaining postdoc slots to South Asia,
Subsaharan Africa, North America and/or Oceania.
In addition to providing us with some top-down control and predictability of coverage, this
postdoc strategy will, over time, help to change the culture around large databases in various
circles of the humanities. The postdoc employment calls themselves have greatly enhanced the
visibility of the DRH and piqued widespread interest in the project. Being recruited by a trusted
colleague in one’s field makes it more likely that an expert will get involved. Moreover, as
postdocs cycle off the project, they will ideally become assistant professors at institutions around
the world, training their own generation of graduate students who will use the DRH in their own
research, employ it in the classroom, and create DRH entries themselves.
18 Responsible postdocs, external advisors and coverage plans can be viewed at Public Postdoc
Progress.
Conclusion
The DRH has existed in some form since 2012—in other words, for roughly a decade. It has
only now, in 2021-22, reached the point where it has enough data coverage for at least
preliminary analyses. Our first internal project utilizing DRH data, constructing a bottom-up
religious taxonomy from individual DRH entry answers, is forthcoming in the Journal of the
American Academy of Religion (Monroe et al., forthcoming). Another paper on religion and
ecology is under submission (Spicer et al., submitted), and the first paper from an external
research group drawing on DRH data has recently been published (Wormley and Cohen 2022).
Nonetheless, we are still some years away from providing either a standardized sample set of
data or usefully comprehensive coverage of the globe. Coverage in many ways reflects the
idiosyncratic expertise of the founding director and earlier project postdocs, and outside of our
postdoc-supervised areas is growing in a haphazard and unpredictable manner. Although an
expert-based approach has been, on some measures, slow to accumulate data, a decade is barely
a blip in the thousands of years of data we are parsing, coding, and making available to modern
analysts. We are optimistic about the future, and remain convinced that the database architecture,
analytic ontologies, coding strategies and site features that we have created are the best hope for
the future of cultural historical databases.
The main lesson we feel the cultural evolutionary community needs to internalize is that
quality cultural data gathering—especially when it comes to complex, large-scale societies—
demands time, patience and flexibility. It also requires buy-in from humanities scholars, who are
the only ones able to provide the highest-quality coding. Slowly and consistently building up
trust and interest in various branches of the humanities creates a dynamic that benefits both
scientists and humanities scholars, and ideally makes collaboration across the science-humanities
border more likely.
A decade ago, the DRH technical platform was created by one of us with a shoestring budget
and spare time during graduate school. The first two entries—from prominent scholars of early
Chinese religion—were solicited in person and recorded on paper by another of us, in one case
involving a bribe of specially-selected New York State Riesling. From two people, a tiny amount
of money, and a lot of time and favors, the technical platform, contributing experts, editorial
team, and budget slowly grew. It is difficult to predict with any certainty where the DRH will be
in another decade, but with our team of postdocs, a growing set of technical features, network of
external collaborating teams, and new entries pouring in every day, we hope by then the project
will have grown as dramatically and transformatively as it has over the past decade.
References:
Acri, Andrea. 2018. "Pāśupatas". Database of Religious History, Retrieved September 29, 2022,
Carleton, Chris. 2017. "Central African Iron Age". Database of Religious History, Retrieved
Danielson, Andrew J., Caroline Arbuckle MacLeod, Matthew J. Hamm, Gino Canlas, Ian E.
Randall, Diana K. Moreiras Reynaga, Julian Weideman, and M. Willis Monroe. 2022. "Testing
and Disrupting Ontologies: Using the Database of Religious History as a Pedagogical Tool"
Hansen, Anne. 2020. “Buddhist Religion-making in Colonial Cambodia,” in Liber Amicorum.
Mélanges réunis en hommage à Ang Chouléan, edited by Grégory Mikaelian, Ashley Thompson,
and Siyonn Sophearith, pages 391-411.
Kitiarsa, Pattana. 2005. “Beyond Syncretism: Hybridization of Popular Religion in
Contemporary Thailand.” Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 36, no. 3: 461–87.
Murdock, George Peter. 1967. “Ethnographic Atlas: A Summary.” Ethnology 6, no. 2: 109–236.
Murdock, George P., and Douglas R. White. 1969. “Standard Cross-Cultural Sample.”
Muthukrishna, M., Bell, A. V., Henrich, J., Curtin, C., Gedranovich, A., McInerney, J. & Thue,
B. 2020. Beyond Western, Educated, Industrial, Rich, and Democratic (WEIRD) Psychology:
Measuring and Mapping Scales of Cultural and Psychological Distance. Psychological Science,
31(6), 678-701.
Muthukrishna, M., Henrich, J., & Slingerland, E. (2021). Psychology as a Historical Science.
Annu Rev Psychol, 72, 717-749. doi: 10.1146/annurev-psych-082820-111436.
Monroe, M. Willis, Spicer, Rachel, Arbuckle MacLeod, Caroline, Canlas, Gino , Chilcott, Travis
, Christopher, Stephen , . . . Slingerland, Edward (Forthcoming). On the Category of “Religion”:
A Taxonomic Analysis of a Large-Scale Database. Journal of the American Academy of
Religion.
Noseworthy, William. 2018. "Cham Ahiér". Database of Religious History, Retrieved November
9, 2021. doi:10.14288/1.0373465
Noseworthy, William. 2019. "The Ppo Romé temple-tower complex (Bimong Kalan Ppo Romé,
Tháp Ppo Romé)". Database of Religious History, Retrieved June 2, 2022.
doi:10.14288/1.0385822
Noseworthy, William. (2021). "Cham Bani". Database of Religious History, Retrieved August
10. 2022. doi:10.14288/1.0416064
Noseworthy, William. 2022. "Dalikal Ppo Klaong Garai". Database of Religious History,
Retrieved September 3, 2022. doi:10.14288/1.0416065
Obradovich, Nick, Özak Ömer, Martín Ignacio, Ortuño-Ortín Ignacio, Awad Edmond, Cebrián
Manuel, Cuevas Rubén, Desmet Klaus, Rahwan Iyad and Cuevas Ángel. 2022. “Expanding the
measurement of culture with a sample of two billion humans” J. R. Soc. Interface. vol. 19,
doi:10.3386/w27827
Peregrine, P. N., & Ember, M. (Eds.). 2001. Encyclopedia of Prehistory Volume 1: Africa.
Boston, MA: Springer US.
Prince, Alexandra. 2020. The Oneida Community. Database of Religious History, Retrieved
Quang, Isvan. 2019. "Raglai". Database of Religious History, Retrieved June 15, 2022,
doi:10.14288/1.0391871
Quang, Isvan. 2020. "Haroi". Database of Religious History, Retrieved June 15, 2022.
doi:10.14288/1.0391873
Richerson, Peter, Ryan Baldini, Adrian V. Bell, Kathryn Demps, Karl Frost, Vicken Hillis, Sarah
Mathew et al. 2016. "Cultural group selection plays an essential role in explaining human
cooperation: A sketch of the evidence." Behavioral and Brain Sciences vol 39.
Rumsby, Seb. 2019. "Hmong Christianity". Database of Religious History, Retrieved October 1,
Shishkova, Kristina. 2022. "Temple at Tel Arad". Database of Religious History, Retrieved
Slingerland, Edward. 2019. Body and Mind in Early China: Beyond Orientalism and the Myth of
Holism. New York: Oxford University Press
Slingerland, Edward, Atkinson, Quentin D., Ember, Carol R., Sheehan, Oliver, Muthukrishna,
Michael, Bulbulia, Joseph, & Gray, Russell D. 2020a. Coding Culture: Challenges and
Recommendations for Comparative Cultural Databases. Evolutionary Human Sciences, 1-20.
doi: 10.1017/ehs.2020.30
Slingerland, Edward, Monroe, M. Willis, Sullivan, Brenton, Walsh, Robyn Faith, Veidlinger,
Daniel, Noseworthy, William, . . . Spicer, Rachel. 2020b. Historians Respond to Whitehouse et
al. (2019), “Complex Societies Precede Moralizing Gods Throughout World History”. Journal
of Cognitive Historiography, 5(1-2), 124-141. doi: 10.1558/jch.39393
Slingerland, E., and B. Sullivan. 2017 ‘Durkheim with Data: The Database of Religious History’.
Journal of the American Academy of Religion 85, no. 2: 312–47.
Sosis, R., & Bressler, E. R. 2003. Cooperation and commune longevity: A test of the costly
signaling theory of religion. Cross-Cultural Research, 37(2), 211-239.
Spicer, Rachel , Monroe, M. Willis, Hamm, Matthew, Danielson, Andrew J., Canlas, Gino,
Randall, Ian, & Slingerland, Edward. (Submitted). Religion and Ecology: A Pilot Study
Employing the Database of Religious History. Current Research in Ecological and Social
Psychology.
Stowers, Stanley. 2019. Mediterranean. Database of Religious History, Retrieved August 11,
Sullivan, Brenton, Michael Muthukrishna, Frederick S. Tappenden, and Edward Slingerland.
2018. “Exploring the Challenges and Potentialities of the Database of Religious History for
Cognitive Historiography”. 2015/2017. Journal of Cognitive Historiography 3 (1-2):12-31.
Tappenden, F. S. 2017. ‘The Database of Religious History and the Study of Ancient
Mediterranean Religiosity’. Journal of Cognitive Historiography 3 (1–2): 32–42.
Truong, Trang. 2020. "Buddhism in the Mekong Delta". Database of Religious History,
Turchin, Peter, Brennan, Rob, Currie, Thomas, Feeney, Kevin, Francois, Pieter, Hoyer,
Daniel, . . . Whitehouse, Harvey. (2015). Seshat: The Global History Databank. Cliodynamics:
The Journal of Quantitative History and Cultural Evolution, 6(1).
Turchin, Peter, Hoyer, Daniel, Bennett, James, Basava, Kiran, Cioni, Enrico, Feeney, Kevin, . . .
Whitehouse, Harvey. (2020). The Equinox2020 Seshat Data Release. Cliodynamics: The Journal
of Quantitative History and Cultural Evolution, 11(1).
Turchin, Peter, Whitehouse, Harvey, Larson, Jennifer, Cioni, Enrico, Reddish, Jenny, Hoyer,
Daniel, . . . François, Pieter. (2022). Explaining the rise of moralizing religions: a test of
competing hypotheses using the Seshat Databank. Religion, Brain & Behavior, 1-28.
Watts, Joseph, Jackson, Joshua Conrad, Arnison, Chris, Hamerslag, Elise M., Shaver, John H., &
Purzycki, Benjamin Grant. 2021. Building Quantitative Cross-Cultural Databases From
Ethnographic Records: Promise, Problems and Principles. Cross-Cultural Research, 56(1), 62-
94. doi: 10.1177/10693971211065720
Watts, J., Sheehan, O., Greenhill, S. J., Gomes-Ng, S., Atkinson, Q. D., Bulbulia, J., & Gray, R.
D. 2015. Pulotu: Database of Austronesian Supernatural Beliefs and Practices. In M. van Elk
(Ed.), PLOS ONE (Vol. 10, Issue 9, p. e0136783). Public Library of Science (PLoS).
White, C. J. M., Muthukrishna, M. (equal senior) & Norenzayan, A. 2021. Worldwide evidence
of cultural similarity among co-religionists within and across countries using the World Values
Survey. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118 (37) e2109650118.
Wilson, David Sloan. 1975. “A Theory of Group Selection.” PNAS 72: 143-146.
Wormley, Alexandra S. and Cohen, Adam B. 2022. “Pathogen prevalence and food taboos: A
cross-cultural analysis” in Current Research in Ecological and Social Psychology vol. 3.
Zefferman, Matthew R., and Sarah Mathew. 2015. "An evolutionary theory of large‐scale human
warfare: Group‐structured cultural selection." Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and
Reviews 24, no. 2: 50-61.