Effect of quarantine and trait-anxiety on affect
and decision-making
Avisha Avishaa,1, Akhilesh Tayadea,1, Arjun Ramakrishnana
aDepartment of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur,
UP 208016
1Avisha Avisha and Akhilesh Tayade contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author: Arjun Ramakrishnan
Email: arjunr@iitk.ac.in
Author contributions: A. A., A.T., and A.R. designed research, A.A., and A.T. performed research, A. A.,
A.T., and A.R. analyzed data, A. A., A.T., and A.R. wrote the paper.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Preprint server: The earlier version of the work submitted here was uploaded to OSF on December 2,
2022.
Classifications: Social sciences (major), Psychological and Cognitive Sciences (minor)
Keywords: quarantine, trait-anxiety, affect, social interactions, decision-making
Abstract
Our social environment influences our affective states and decisions, which was quite evident
during COVID-19 pandemic-imposed quarantine. However, little is understood about recovery
from social deprivation, especially for those with high trait anxiety. To understand this, we
gathered ~24000 momentary assessments of affect and social interactions over three days of
isolation followed by seven days of recovery from 116 young adults returning to a university
campus. Quarantine induced a greater desire for social interactions and post-quarantine,
individuals attempted to make up for this in different ways. While individuals with high trait
anxiety experienced greater stress, negative affect, and lower positive affect post-quarantine,
they benefited more in the company of people “close” to them, and experienced greater reduction
in negative affect from positive interactions. In contrast, low trait anxious individuals
experienced less stress and, after quarantine, engaged more with distant companions, leading to
increased positive affect. As an objective measure, we also studied how affective states impacted
decision-making through a virtual patch-foraging task played during and after quarantine.
Affective states reported in the last 24 hours significantly impacted participants' near-optimal
strategies to maximize rewards in the task. Participants with high fluctuation in affective states
tended to over-harvest, while those with high average negative affect tended to under-harvest.
Our results highlight how social deprivation impacts affective states as a function of trait anxiety
and social interactions and their effects on reward-based decision-making.
Sig nificance statement
The COVID-19 pandemic imposed quarantine has been indicated to affect subjective well-being
and decision-making, but the underlying processes during such social deprivation has not been
explicitly studied. This study used momentary assessment to reveal the impact of the social
environment on affective states during and after quarantine. Our analysis revealed the differential
role of social interactions in regulating momentary experience for high and low trait anxiety
individuals. A virtual patch-foraging task played during these constraints uncovered the role of
affective states in decision-making. Our findings highlight the factors governing recovery from
social isolation and lend causal value to our inferences regarding how social environment
impacts momentary experiences, advancing future research aimed at supporting individuals'
well-being during times of crisis.
Introduction
Humans are social animals and have evolved to thrive in environments that foster social
connections and interactions (1–4). While social interactions have a profound impact on
individual behavior, mood (5, 6), and decision-making (7–9), influencing both physical and
mental health, as well as overall well-being (10–15), lack of it can lead to subjective feelings of
loneliness and isolation. Chronic social isolation can even increase the risk of depression and
anxiety. Loneliness is also a significant source of psychological stress that is associated with a
range of negative mental health outcomes, including reduced positive emotions, depression and
suicidal behaviour (16–20). And these conditions were exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic
that disrupted daily routines, led to social isolation due to quarantine regimens and increased
loneliness across all age groups (21–23). Fear of contracting the virus, disruptions in daily
routines, lack of social interactions, and a high level of uncertainty about the future and
educational prospects contributed to increased levels of anxiety and mental health issues in the
population (24–28). This study aims to investigate the impact of quarantine-related constraints
and social deprivation on the emotional well-being of young adults. Specifically, we sought to
answer two key questions: how did social isolation impact the affective states of the participants
during quarantine? And, if so, how did the removal of constraints post quarantine reset their
affective states?
The conventional cross-sectional sampling approach consisting of one sample during quarantine
and one sample post quarantine, could suffer from retrospective bias and neglect temporal
relationships in the affective states. Moreover, these samples may not be able to account for the
dynamic changes in the social environment (29). To this end, we used experience sampling, also
known as ecological momentary assessment (EMA), with the help of smartphone technology.
Furthermore, mental health conditions at the outset, even before quarantine, can profoundly
impact the quarantine and post quarantine experience. We particularly focused on trait anxiety,
assessed using the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory for Adults (30), that profoundly impacts the
affective states. High trait anxious individuals frequently go through negative emotional
experiences and show increased risk of developing depression, anxiety, and related disorders
(31–34). Here we had the opportunity to examine how trait anxious individuals not only handled
the social isolation phase but also how they recovered from it. We hypothesized that even though
individuals with high trait anxiety would experience more negative affect than those with low
trait anxiety, both during quarantine and after quarantine, high anxious individuals may benefit
more from the resumption of social interactions. Quarantine imposition and its subsequent
removal lends some causal value to the inferences.
We were also interested in examining how momentary affective states impacted decision-making
in real-life contexts. A growing body of research has examined the impact of affect, emotions,
and mood on decision-making (35–39). To this end, we used a virtual patch-foraging game,
during and after quarantine, to understand the impact of affective states on decision making (40,
41). Foraging is a naturalistic decision-making process where individuals must balance
exploration for new resources with exploitation of known resources (42, 43). This
exploration-exploitation dilemma has been extensively studied in the context of patch foraging,
where exploiting a known area with preferred food or rewards is typically energy-efficient, but
exploring new areas becomes more efficient when resources become scarce or unreliable. To
remain efficient, foraging requires an adaptive strategy that balances the exploration-exploitation
trade-off. Internal states such as mood-related arousal and valence can impact this trade-off (44,
45). Positive-going mood states have been shown to favour exploratory behaviour (46), while
negative-going mood states potentially result in overexploitation (44). Here, we investigated
whether self-reported momentary affect via EMA surveys prior to game play impacted foraging
decisions.
To address these questions, we recruited young adults who were quarantined on the institute
campus as per the established protocols. Once they tested negative for the COVID-19 virus, they
were allowed to leave and reside in their respective hostels. We monitored their mood and social
interactions during the 3-day quarantine period and the subsequent 7-day post-quarantine period.
During this period, we collected survey data on momentary affect, social interactions, and
stressful and positive events experienced 4 times a day. Participants played the foraging game
once in quarantine and once post release.
Results
Participants
The current study was conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic on college students who
returned to campus after a long lockdown. Upon arrival, they were quarantined for 3-4 days
before being released if they tested negative for COVID virus. Overall, after applying the
exclusion criteria, we investigated the effects of trait anxiety and quarantine on 87 young adults
who reported their mood and social interactions over 21000 momentary assessments over a
10-day period, including the days in quarantine.
Relationship between social interactions and social situations
Previous research has shown that social relationships have a significant impact on individuals’
emotional well-being (47–49). With close companions like family and friends, individuals
experience more positive affect than in the presence of coworkers, acquaintances, strangers, or
others (47, 50–52). Since quarantine essentially deprives individuals of social interactions, we
expected participants to feel a greater desire to interact with others during this period. And, in
order to make up for this post quarantine, we expected an increase in social interactions,
particularly with close companions. As hypothesized, participants' desire to be with others was
significantly higher during quarantine (difference in “need to interact” during quarantine vs post
quarantine: 0.27 ± 0.69, slope: 0.23 ± 0.04, P < .001). However, post quarantine, while the
frequency of interactions with close companions decreased, although not significantly (average
difference: -0.03 ± 0.22, slope: -0.03 ± 0.02, P = .07), their interactions with distant companions
3. These findings indicate that while quarantine did amount to social deprivation, post quarantine
individuals resorted to interactions with more distant companions to make up for the loss of
social stimuli.
Momentary affect across social situations
Next, we examined the emotional well-being of the participants (for positive affect, see
with the increase in social connections as seen earlier, we expected an increase in positive affect
and a decrease in negative affect. Also, as expected, social interactions mediated the change in
affective states: we observed that interactions with both close (average difference: 0.46 ± 0.52,
slope: 0.28 ± 0.04, P < .001, LMM) and distant companions (average difference: 0.19 ± 0.52,
slope: 0.19 ± 0.05, P < .001, LMM) increased positive affect. However, we found no significant
difference in the positive affective states of participants during and after quarantine. This was
because post quarantine the interactions with close companions decreased (average difference:
-0.03 ± 0.22, slope: -0.03 ± 0.02, P = 0.07), mediating the drop in positive affect (mediation for
mean trait anxiety, slope: -0.01 ± 0.01, P = 0.08, 95% MCMC CI: [-0.02, 0.001]), as shown in
Fig. 3c. Nevertheless, total positive affect remained unchanged after quarantine, as distant
interactions increased (average difference: 0.12 ± 0.19, slope: 0.12 ± 0.02, P < .001), mediating
the rise in positive affect (mediation for mean trait anxiety, slope: 0.02 ± 0.01, P < .001, 95%
conditional indirect effects of mediations by close and distant interactions on the associated
positive affect. Notably, we did not observe any effect of these interactions on the negative affect
participants' momentary well-being was also influenced by stressful and positive events. As
anticipated, positive events increased positive affect (slope: 0.01 ± 0.001, P < .001, see
Trait anxiety, social situations and momentary affect
Next, we focused on inter-individual differences: particularly, we were interested in
understanding how trait anxiety levels impacted social interactions and momentary affective
experiences. Previous literature has demonstrated that individuals with high levels of trait
anxiety are associated with lower levels of subjective well-being, heightened vulnerability to
stress, and a greater tendency to experience negative emotions. Our results align with these
findings and revealed that individuals with high trait anxiety had significantly higher negative
affect (slope: 0.32 ± 0.06, P < .001; see Fig. 3b) and lower positive affect (slope: -0.17 ± 0.06, P
< .01) than those with low trait anxiety (see Fig. 2d). They also experienced significantly more
stressful events (slope: 0.06 ± 0.02, P < .01) and thus reported greater overall unpleasantness
(slope: 4.31 ± 1.28, P < .01) evoked from them (see Fig. 2e). Next, we assessed the impact of the
social situation on momentary well-being and stressful experiences, and whether those were
moderated by trait anxiety. During quarantine, individuals with high levels of trait anxiety tended
to experience more stress than those with lower levels of trait anxiety (for +SD trait anxiety
group, slope: 2.19 ± 1.3, P = 0.09, 95% MCMC CI: [-0.36, 4.73], for -SD trait anxiety group,
slope: -1.98 ± 1.31, P = 0.13, 95% MCMC CI: [-4.55, 0.59]). This finding was supported by the
presence of an interaction effect tending to significance between social situation and trait anxiety
on the frequency of stressful events (slope: -0.03 ± .01, F(1, 1905) = 3.28, P = 0.07) and the
unpleasantness (slope: -2.07 ± 0.91, F(1, 1904) = 5.12, P = 0.02) reported from them. However,
the frequency of positive events and pleasantness evoked from them was unrelated to trait
anxiety levels, social situation, and gender.
Trait anxiety and social interactions. While trait anxious individuals had a more negative
quarantine experience, we hypothesized that they would benefit more by the resumption of social
interactions post quarantine. Trait anxiety positively moderated the impact of social interactions
with close companions on positive affect (slope = 0.07 ± 0.05, F(1, 1932) = 2.53, P = 0.11). That
is, high trait-anxious individuals derived greater benefits by interacting with close companions
when compared to the low trait anxious individuals (see Fig. 2f). No such moderation was
observed for how distant companions affected their well-being. Trait anxiety also increased the
effect of positive events mediated reduction of negative affect (slope = -0.001 ± 0.001, F(1,
1937) = 3.32, P = 0.07). These results showed that individuals with high levels of trait anxiety
experienced greater reductions in negative affect in response to positive events that elicited
feelings of pleasantness, as depicted in Fig. 2g.
Interestingly, while low and high trait anxious individuals interacted to a similar extent with
close companions (slope: 0.04 ± 0.02, P = 0.24), we found that individuals with low trait anxiety
interacted much more with distant companions compared to those with high trait anxiety (slope:
0.04 ± 0.02, P = 0.03), see Fig. 2c. Furthermore, the increase in interactions with distant
companions post quarantine period was more pronounced in low trait anxious individuals: the
interaction effect between trait anxiety and social interactions with distant companions tended
towards significance (slope = -0.03 ± 0.01, F(1, 1903) = 3.25, P = 0.07).
Leave-one-subject-out cross-validation
After determining the factors that influenced positive and negative affect, we sought to evaluate
their ability to predict an individual's momentary affect. To this end, we created linear regression
models that included various predictor variables and their combinations as fixed effects. Using
these, we attempted to predict the level of positive or negative affect (between 0-4). We used the
leave-one-subject-out cross-validation method to evaluate the models' predictive performance,
for positive and negative affect separately. First, trait anxiety and pleasantness from positive
events were found to be notable predictors of positive affect. While trait anxiety increased the
accuracy to 33.22% (sensitivity = 0.21, specificity = 0.80), pleasantness from positive events led
to a prediction accuracy of 34.58% (sensitivity = 0.22, specificity = 0.81), see Fig. 3a. The full
model including frequency of close and distant interactions, social context, and unpleasantness,
increased the prediction accuracy to 37.73% (sensitivity = 0.26, specificity = 0.82), even though
these predictors by themselves had a limited effect on positive affect. AIC values decreased from
5376.81 for the trait anxiety model to 5061.55 for the pleasantness model. It further went down
to 4857.25 for the models including trait anxiety, pleasantness, and multiple predictors,
respectively. Additionally, we performed 1000 shuffles-based control experiment for the
prediction of positive affect and found that the accuracy of the full model decreased to 32.18%
(sensitivity = 0.20, specificity = 0.80), indicating that the unshuffled classifier was perhaps
picking up on relevant structures in the data.
Similarly, trait anxiety was a significant predictor of negative affect, with an accuracy of 41.89%
(sensitivity = 0.26, specificity = 0.84), as shown in Fig. 3a. When combined with unpleasantness
of stressful events, the prediction of negative affect improved with an accuracy of 48.02%
(sensitivity = 0.32, specificity = 0.85). However, the full model, which included multiple
predictors such as close and distant interactions, social context, and pleasantness, did not lead to
a drastic improvement in predicting negative affect as compared to the model with the
combination of trait anxiety and unpleasantness: accuracy increased to 48.12% (sensitivity =
0.32, specificity = 0.85). AIC values for the models were 5252.97, 4871.72, and 4874.44 for the
models including trait anxiety, trait anxiety and unpleasantness, and the full model, respectively.
Models that used shuffled samples could only predict negative affect with 24.77% accuracy
(sensitivity = 0.20, specificity = 0.80). Overall, the classifier analysis also reinforced the earlier
results that highlighted the impact of trait anxiety and the social context on momentary
well-being.
Changes in momentary affect and patch-foraging decisions
Patch-level modeling. Next, we tested whether momentary affect influenced decision making.
For this we looked at harvest decisions made in the patch foraging game (see Fig. 4b). First, we
examined whether the travel time between patches affected the number of harvests (Model-patch,
should harvest more per patch, as per the Marginal Value Theorem (Charnov, 1976). As
expected, in this virtual game, participants made more harvests per patch when the inter-patch
distance was 10 seconds as opposed to 3 seconds (Model-patch, slope = 1.24 ± 0.13, P < 2 *
10-16, 95% CI = 0.97, 1.50). Although some subjects engaged with the longer inter-patch travel
time environment first followed by the shorter one (block order ‘longShort’) and the others
engaged with shorter travel time environment first (‘shortLong'), difference in the order of
engagement did not significantly affect the number of harvests (Model-patch, slope = -0.13 ±
0.90, P = 0.88, 95% CI = -1.86, 1.60). Trait anxiety also had no direct impact (main effect) on
the number of harvests (Model-patch, slope = -0.038 ± 0.046, P = .41, 95% CI = -0.050, 0.129).
Going further, to understand the role of affect, we included negative affect and positive affect –
both the average affective state and the variation in affect in the last 24 hours before gameplay
reduced the number of harvests per patch (Model-patch-affect, slope = -0.71 ± 0.22, P = 0.001,
95% CI = -1.13, -0.27), variation in positive affect as well as negative affect increased the
harvest count (Model-patch-affect, : slope = .77 ± .27, P = .004, 95% CI = .24, 1.30; : slope = .80
± .30, P = .007, 95% CI = .23, 1.39). We did not notice any impact of the average positive affect
(Model-patch-affect, slope = -.25 ± .20, P = .20, 95% CI = -.63, .13). However, overall, the
model with affect-related predictors performed better than the model without it (likelihood ratio
suggesting that positive and negative affect influenced the number of harvests. In addition to
affect, we noticed that in general participants made lesser harvests as they visited later patches
(Model-patch-affect, slope = -.05 ± .013, P = 5.69 * 10-5, 95% CI = -.080, -.028).
However, just a change in the number of harvests may not indicate whether the behaviour is
suboptimal. To understand whether affect-based changes in harvest counts led to suboptimal
behaviour, we compared participants’ harvest count with the optimal number as per the Marginal
Value Theorem by also factoring in changes in response times (Model-patch-diff, see
higher travel distance between patches (Model-patch-diff, slope = .24 ± 0.13, P = .08, 95% CI =
-.03, .50). However, deviations of patch-level reward rate from optimal reward rate was actually
lesser in the higher travel time blocks (Model-patch-rate, slope = 0.55 ± 0.018, P < 2 * 10-16,
95% CI = 0.52, 0.60), with deviations being significantly different than the optimal reward rate
(Model-patch-rate, intercept = -1.41 ± .20, P = 8.9 * 10-8, 95% CI = -1.81, -1.02). Again, trait
anxiety and environment order did not seem to affect the participants’ behavior
(Model-patch-diff, trait anxiety: slope = .04 ± .05, P = .41, 95% CI = -.05, .13; environment
order: slope = -.13 ± 0.90, P = .88, 95% CI = -1.86, 1.60). However, as time progressed, there
was also a shift towards leaving earlier than the prescribed optimal (Model-patch-diff slope =
-.06 ± .01, P= 3.12 * 10-5, 95% CI = -.08, -.03).
Next, we included affect-related variables in the model and found that with increase in negative
affect participants left patches earlier than the prescribed optimal harvest counts
decreased with increase in average negative affect (Model-patch-diff-affect, slope = -.71 ± .22, P
= .001, 95% CI = -1.13, -.27). In contrast, deviations from optimal harvests did not significantly
change with change in average positive affect (Model-patch-diff-affect, slope = -.25 ± .20, P =
.20, 95% CI = -.63, .13). However, as the variation in negative and positive affect increased, the
deviation from the optimal harvests also increased (Model-patch-diff-affect, : slope = .77 ± .27,
P = .004, 95% CI = .24, 1.30; : slope = .80 ± 0.30, P = .007, 95% CI = .23, 1.39). Overall, while
negative affect nudged the subjects to harvest less, variation in affect increased the harvest count.
Block-level modeling. However, the effect of positive or negative affect on harvesting decisions
was only significant when we analyzed the behavior at patch-level. At block-level, we did not
see any effect of affective states on average harvests made in a block (see Model-block-affect
complemented by the comparison of block-levels models with and without information about
the optimal number of harvests was predicted by the models without the complete information
In summary, participants’ affective state in the last 24 hours seemed to significantly influence the
number of harvests in the virtual foraging game. While negative affect resulted in earlier patch
leaving, variation in affective states led to overstaying.
Discussion
The present findings illustrate the impact of the environment on the social interactions of
individuals, highlighting the role of social factors in shaping how individuals engage and interact
with others. In this study, we examined 24000 momentary social and affective experiences for 10
consecutive days in 116 young adults, who spent 3-4 days in quarantine and 7 days outside. The
quarantine period significantly impacted their social interactions and led to social deprivation,
which was reflected in the increased need for social interaction. However, after quarantine, there
was a decrease in the desire to socialize. There were fewer interactions with close companions,
while interactions with distant acquaintances increased.
The study provides ecologically valid evidence of expression of trait anxiety in daily lives of
young adults in three important ways. First, the findings replicate and expand on previous EMA
research demonstrating the negative impact of high trait anxiety levels on individuals’ quality of
momentary experience (53). Individuals with high trait anxiety experienced high levels of
negative affect and low levels of positive affect. Further they reported higher stressful events in
comparison to individuals with low trait anxiety. These results corroborate prior research linking
higher levels of trait anxiety with greater exposure and reactivity to social stressors (54–57). It is
interesting to note that work-related events were the most prevalent source of stress for
individuals with both low and high trait anxiety, but this was not the case for other stressors (see
Second, this study provides novel evidence regarding the impact of trait anxiety on social
interactions, a finding that expands upon our current understanding of the relationship between
trait anxiety and social behaviour. Previous research has shown that individuals with high levels
of trait anxiety may experience negative outcomes in social relationships, such as reduced social
support and perceived social connectedness. However, they have suggested little to no effect of
trait anxiety on social interaction frequency (53, 58) and social network size or density (59–66).
Our study revealed that individuals with high trait anxiety had significantly fewer interactions
with distant companions compared to individuals with low trait anxiety. These findings are
relevant and highlight the importance of considering the impact of trait anxiety on social
interactions and well-being. Future research may further explore the relationship between trait
anxiety and social behavior, and how interventions aimed at reducing trait anxiety may positively
impact social interactions and ultimately, mental health outcomes.
Third, the current findings expand the literature highlighting the role of social and interpersonal
processes in emotion regulation of trait anxious individuals (67), emphasizing the importance of
pleasant events and experiences in this process as well. Our study reveals that individuals with
higher trait anxiety heavily rely on their close companions to regulate their distress, evident from
the significant positive affect derived from interactions with close companions depicted in Fig.
2f. This trend strongly aligns with previous studies (47, 53, 68), underscoring the influence of
trait anxiety on individuals' responses to social partners and feelings of connection. Additionally,
our findings highlight the significant role of positive events in effectively alleviating negative
affect for individuals with high trait anxiety, as they experienced a more pronounced reduction in
negative affect associated with the pleasantness of positive events. These insights shed light on
the impact of trait anxiety on momentary experiences, as well as the experiences of positive
events and social interactions in everyday life.
Furthermore, in contrast to the traditional emphasis on understanding and reducing negative
mood states, the current study examines both positive and negative aspects of an individual's
well-being holistically by allowing participants to report both stressful and pleasant daily events
in order to assess their effects on the present moment. Work-related events were a source of both
stress and positive experiences, emphasizing the significance of addressing both aspects to
maintain mental well-being during quarantine.
We also examined the influence of momentary affective states on explore-exploit decision
making by using a patch foraging task. Patch foraging offers an ecologically valid way of
assessing the impact of affective states on decision making (42, 44). While participants were near
optimal in their strategy to maximize reward rate, by engaging in near-optimal number of
harvests per patch, as per the Marginal Value Theorem, their affective states in the last 24 hours
significantly impacted gameplay (see Fig. 4d). Negative affective states reduced the number of
harvests, perhaps because of reduced motivation to engage. Increased fluctuations in affective
states led to overharvesting consistent with earlier work (44, 69). These findings suggest that
momentary affect influenced decision making in ecologically valid settings. The scalability of
this approach offers promising applications in mental health research, as it allows for the
objective tracking of individuals' mental health over time using the decision-making patterns
within the game as a reliable indicator (70).
The present study is not without its limitations. The generalisability of this study is somewhat
limited by the demography of the study participants and social environment: our study
population was primarily post-graduate students aged 22 to 26. Assuming a large sample size
and diversity among participants, it may be reasonable to generalize the findings to other young
adults. In terms of the social environment, the research was carried out during the COVID-19
pandemic, which was a one-time event. The current study aimed to investigate the effects of
quarantine as causal manipulation of social interactions during the COVID-19 pandemic. While
the study examined mood and affective states during and after quarantine, it lacks the data from
the participants in normal everyday life from before quarantine. Moreover, the participants were
students coming back to campus and happy to be back with their friends. The aforementioned
limitations underscore the need for future research to address these issues and to explore the
effects of quarantine on causal manipulation in a more comprehensive and balanced manner.
Methods
This study was carried out during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021, when the cases were on the
decline following its second wave in India. Participants were randomly and independently
recruited via email from students returning to college residence in 7 batches over a 4-month
period after the lockdown (see Fig. 1a). All participants provided informed consent and filled an
online baseline survey administered through Qualtrics. The baseline surveys consisted of Trait
anxiety survey (Y2) from the State and Trait Anxiety Inventory for Adults (30), 50-item IPIP
(International Personality Item Pool) version of the Big Five markers (71), General Self-efficacy
scale (72), Perceived Stress Scale (73), along with other questions assessing sleep quality and
feelings of loneliness in general. In total, we had 116 participants; 79 of them identified as males,
36 as females, and 1 preferred not to disclose their gender. Upon arrival, they were quarantined
for 3-4 days by the institute, and if they tested negative for COVID-19 at the end of quarantine,
they were allowed to move back to their residence hostels1. During the study period we used a
smartphone-based ecological momentary assessment (EMA) to examine the effect of trait
anxiety on mood and interaction dynamics of young adults during and after quarantine in this
study. The study was approved by the IIT Kanpur Institute Human Ethics Committee.
Ecological Momentary Assessments
1 A few people had to stay in quarantine for 5 days because their mandatory COVID test was delayed.
Data collection. Ethica app (Ethica Data Services, Inc.'s proprietary application) was used to
send 50 automated in-app surveys over a 10-day period for ecological momentary assessment
(EMA). The app provided a dashboard where participants could view their pending surveys and
used push notifications to encourage participants to complete the surveys. Participants responded
to four routine surveys (see Fig. 1c for prompt timings) and one sleep quality related survey, a
total of 5 surveys, everyday. Each routine survey was active for 90 minutes. An hour after the
initial notification, the app sent a reminder to the participants if the survey was still pending. The
sleep survey was sent daily at 6 AM and could be completed any time within the following 24
hours. Prior to the study, a training video was shared with participants familiarizing them with
the study procedures and the survey app. They were also instructed on survey frequency and
duration and were asked to enable push notifications for the Ethica app in order to receive survey
notifications on time. Participants were advised to avoid completing the surveys when under the
influence of alcohol. To maximize compliance in the study, a reminder notification to complete
the survey was provided 30 minutes before the deadline. We also provided the participants with a
24/7 technical support number in case they had any questions or concerns. Except participants of
B1, others were compensated with Rs. 30 for filling the baseline survey with the expectation that
it would increase their compliance during the study. Participants in the study could earn up to Rs.
740 as a reward, which depended on completing baseline surveys, EMA surveys and playing
foraging tasks. Participants were paid a fraction of Rs. 290 for answering EMA surveys
depending on their response rate of answering EMA surveys (Rs. 290 * response rate) and an
additional completion bonus of Rs. 150 (90% > response rate >= 70%) or Rs. 250 (response rate
> 90%). Playing the game once as per instructions (i.e., to play the game within the quarantine or
non-quarantine setting) earned them Rs. 70.
Surveys. The sleep survey was 1-2 minutes long and consisted of questions about sleep duration
(“How long did you sleep?”), quality (“How was your sleep last night?”) and whether there
were any breaks or problems in between. The routine survey was 3-4 minutes long and consisted
of questions about social interactions, affect, need to be with others, naps, and stressful events
and positive events. The interactions were assessed using a forced-choice probe, “Who are you
interacting with right now?” which could be answered with one of the following answers:
“someone close to me”, “someone not so close to me”, “I am alone right now”. This was
supplemented with “Are you engaged in face-to-face conversation?” and “Are you engaged in
real-time digital conversation?”. Key components of momentary emotional experience were
rated on a 0 (not at all) to 4 (very) scale, and included probes of positive affect (cheerful, happy,
joyful), negative affect (anxious, nervous, worried), and participants' desire to be with others.
Using a yes/no probe, participants were also asked about the occurrence of any positive and
stressful events. If they answered affirmatively, they were asked about the nature of the event and
the pleasantness/unpleasantness (on a scale of: 0 = not at all to 100 = extremely) experienced
because of the event. On the day of their expected release from quarantine, participants were sent
a separate quarantine survey inquiring about COVID test results and arrival at their residence
hostels.
Pre-registration. The pre-registered sample size for the study was 80-100 participants. In the
1) Participants will spend more time in the company of people they are close to (as
opposed to distant connections) post quarantine.
2) Participants will experience increased negative affect and reduced positive affect
during quarantine and the experience will reverse post quarantine.
3) Sleep quality will deteriorate during quarantine concomitant with increased negative
affect and stress.
4) Participants with high trait anxiety will experience higher negative affect than
participants with low trait anxiety both during quarantine and post-quarantine periods.
5) Female participants as compared to male participants will experience higher levels of
negative affect both during and after the quarantine period.
6) Participants with high trait anxiety will benefit more (as judged by increase in positive
affect, decrease in anxiety) by the resumption of social interactions post quarantine.
7) Increase in stress levels and negative affect during quarantine will reduce patch stay
duration while foraging. Reduction in stress and negative affect post quarantine will
increase the patch stay duration.
Exclusion criteria for EMA analyses. To account for potential exclusions, we recruited a total
of 116 students. We excluded participants who had 1) less than 40% compliance during or both
quarantine and post-quarantine periods, and 2) missing personal information such as gender and
quarantine release date. In the final sample, there were ~21000 momentary observations from 87
young adults (29 females), which captured a sizable portion of the trait-anxiety spectrum, with
standardized scores ranging from -1.61 to 2.51 (raw score range: 29-72). EMA compliance was
also satisfactory (M = 77%, SD = 15%) and unrelated to trait anxiety (slope: -.02 ± .04, P =
0.68), see Fig. 1b.
We examined the momentary experience of the participants for 10 days. They spent the
first 3-4 days of the study in quarantine, which we refer to here as S1. Participants’ measures of
momentary experience in the initial days after release (S2: 4 days after quarantine ended) and
later on (S3: remaining days of the study after S1 and S2) was quite different, as shown in Fig.
2a and 2b. Since we were interested in the immediate effects of quarantine on momentary
experience, we compared S1 with S2 in this study. Thus, in the following sections,
post-quarantine (S2) would refer to the first 4 days after quarantine.
Statistical analyses. All data analyses were conducted in R. All statistical tests were two-sided,
and P < 0.05 were considered statistically significant unless otherwise mentioned. The lmerTest
package was employed to construct linear mixed effects models and evaluate the significance of
model effects using 5000 bootstrap samples (74, 75). The moderation-mediation based
regressions were implemented using the bruceR package, which employs other packages such as
mediate, interaction, and the PROCESS macro (76–78). A Monte Carlo approach with 5,000
samples was used to assess the significance of indirect effects (79) in mediation analyses. The
momentary assessment data was nested within participants, and intercepts could vary between
them. Moment-level predictors were mean-centered separately across participants (80). For
illustrative purposes, conditional effects are depicted for extreme values (±1 standard deviation)
of trait-anxiety. Figures were produced using Python (version 3.8.11) with the help of Matplotlib
(version 3.5.1) (81) and seaborn (version 0.12.2) (82).
The interactive effects of social situation, trait-anxiety and gender were tested on
momentary measures of emotional and social experience using multilevel regression models (see
binary situation variable (S1 = quarantine, S2 = post-quarantine), mean-centered trait-anxiety
score (-1.61 to 2.51) and binary gender variable (1 = female, 0 = male). The momentary
emotional and social experiences were analyzed using 9 outcome measures: affect (positive and
negative), social interaction (close, distant, alone), desire to be with others, events (stressful and
positive), and valence (pleasantness and unpleasantness) of the events. The valence was rated
between 0 and 100, with 0 representing the least pleasant/unpleasant and 100 representing the
most extreme. Valence was 0 in the absence of a stressful or positive event. The dummy
variables close, distant, and alone coded the presence of close interactions, distant interactions
and being alone respectively (1=close/distant/alone, 0=not close/distant/alone). Thus, in models
involving close and distant variables, alone served as the reference category. At the same time,
mediation models were used to explore the mediating role of close and distant social interactions
in the relationship between social situation and momentary well-being (positive and negative
affect). The mediation effect was tested based on the Monte Carlo confidence intervals of
indirect effects (79).
Model validation. We confirmed the applicability of the models through Monte Carlo
simulations of the indirect effects and leave-one-person-out cross-validation (LOOCV). We
tested the statistical significance of each predictor variable in the final moderation-mediation
models of positive and negative affect in a manner similar to mixed stepwise variable selection
(see model equations in the Supplementary Information: Leave-one-out-cross-validation
models). For cross-validation, one participant was set aside as a test set, while the rest comprised
the training set. For this test-training set combination, accuracy, sensitivity, specificity were
calculated. This procedure was repeated 87 times (87 being the total number of participants),
leaving out a different participant from the training set each time. The model's metrics were then
computed by averaging over all repetitions. Finally, this process was repeated for each model,
and their aggregate metrics were used to compare them. However, the dependent variable
consisted of ordinal affect ratings ranging from 0-4, whereas the regression models above
predicted continuous variables. To obtain a new predicted ordinal variable ranging from 0-4, we
rounded the predicted values to the nearest integer. This new predicted variable was used to
compute the aforementioned model metrics.
Foraging game
Paradigm. To understand how momentary affect influences decision-making, we administered a
modified version of the computer-based patch foraging game (see Fig. 4a) (40–42, 83).
Participants were advised to play the game on their computers in the full-screen mode. They
were explicitly told that the berry collection in the game is directly related to the monetary bonus
they would receive at the end of the study, and thus, were instructed to maximize berry collection
in the game. In every trial (see schematic in Fig. 4a), participants could ‘stay’ in a patch to
harvest berries from it or ‘leave’ to move to the next patch. To either harvest the current bush or
move to the next one, participants had to hold the mouse cursor over a hollow fixation square
which appeared at the center of the orange path and wait for 1 sec for it to get filled with green
color to make any decision. If participants moved the pointer out of the square before it turned
green, the square would become hollow again and they had to move the cursor to the fixation
square again to make any decision. Once the fixation square turned entirely green, they could
move the cursor to the current patch or to a hollow square placed horizontally on the opposite
side of the patch to leave the current patch. If the participant chose to stay and harvest again,
reward associated with the berries harvested was displayed near the patch 500 ms after the cursor
reached the patch. If the participant chose to leave for the next patch by selecting the hollow
square after the fixation was successful, the patches moved downwards, mimicking the forward
movement of the participant. Travel time to the next patch was set to 3 sec or 10 sec depending
on the block.
Reward available at the beginning in every patch was 𝑟 = 7 + 𝑁(0, 0. 25).
Subsequent harvests led to rewards, 𝑟 = 𝑟 − 0. 5 + 𝑁(0, 0. 25) . After a certain number of
𝑖 𝑖−1
harvests, participants would eventually deplete a patch and obtain a reward of 0 on all
subsequent harvests in that patch i.e., 𝑟 ≥ 0.
The foraging task consisted of two blocks. Each block lasted for 4 minutes, and these
blocks differed in the inter-patch travel time - the time it took to move from one bush to another.
In the ‘short’ block, travel time was 3 sec and in the ‘long’ block, it was 10 sec. Participants were
not explicitly informed about the time it took to travel from one patch to the next. Total rewards
collected during a block were displayed right after the block ended. Once participants finished
the task, they were asked to fill a short survey that assessed their understanding of the task and
experience playing it.
Participants were asked to play the foraging task twice: once when they were quarantined
vs. when they were out of it (see Fig. 1d). We refer to the first and second game instances as
Game 1 and Game 2, respectively. Participants in batches B1, B2 and B3 played the task where
the ‘short’ block was followed by ‘long’ block (a ‘shortLong’ arrangement) in both quarantine
and non-quarantine setting while those in batches B4, B5, B6 and B7 played the long block first
followed by the short one (a ‘longShort’ arrangement). The task was hosted on AWS and the web
address of the task was provided over email to the participants not earlier than the second and
ninth day of their study duration for Game 1 and Game 2, respectively.
Exclusion criteria for foraging task analyses. For the analysis of patch-foraging behavior, we
used following exclusion criteria in sequential manner that lead to the inclusion of 34
participants out of the 116 participants enrolled in the study:
1. Participants played the game in quarantine as well as non-quarantine settings (n = 64).
2. They made at least 20 decisions in every game block they played (n = 55).
3. They responded to at least 2 EMA surveys within the duration of 24 hrs preceding each
gameplay (n = 41) so that the deviation and average of their affect could be calculated.
4. They played the game on a computer and not on a mobile phone. (n = 40).
5. We further excluded participants from the analysis if their average trial duration in a
‘block - game instance’ pair lied outside the range defined by the average ± 2 standard
deviation of trial duration calculated using all trials from all participants in the given pair.
This resulted in the exclusion of 6 more participants (referred to as outliers here
onwards), resulting in the data of 34 participants.
We defined trial duration ( as the time taken to make a decision when participants reached
a new patch, or the time elapsed between two subsequent decisions in a given patch. This way,
trial duration splits total time spent in a patch into discrete intervals. Prior to applying exclusion
criterion no. 5 described above, we had to correct for the error in the measurement of first trial
durations of Game 1 and Game 2 for all participants as described in the section Foraging Game
in Supplementary Information. The distribution of the average trial duration of the sample
analyzed (n = 34) and of the outliers (n = 6) have been reported in Supplementary Fig. 2.
trial duration of participants that lead to their exclusion from the analysis.
Calculation of optimal reward rate. We calculated the optimal average reward rate for each
block and for each participant by using their minimum trial duration ( in the corresponding
block. The net reward intake rate during a foraging bout where a forager depletes a patch by
harvesting it and makes “a little to no revisitation” to harvested patches can be calculated using
the eq.2 from (84). Since there was no reward cost associated with the time taken to make a
decision in our task, the term that corresponds to energy cost per unit time for searching for a
reward in a patch becomes 0 in the equation. Similarly, as all patches were identical on an
average, it can be assumed that there was only one type of patch in any block. Thus, the
following equation modified from eq.2 in (84) gives the net reward (intake) rate:
∑ ℎ(𝑇)
𝐸 =
𝑛 𝑡 + 𝑇
where ℎ(𝑇) is the reward collected in a patch, 𝑇 is the time spent in the patch and t is the
inter-patch travel time in the block. Since we wanted to estimate an upper bound on the net
reward intake rate participants could achieve in a given block, we used minimum trial duration (
instead of average trial duration to estimate optimal average reward rate. This meant that if a
participant consistently made decisions with exactly the same vigor as they did in the trial with
minimum duration in a block, the resulting average reward rate would be very close to the
optimal reward rate, if not better, because of the stochasticity in reward decrement. For the
simulation, we used a fixed number of harvests (H) as taking each integer value from the closed
interval of 0 to 19. This corresponded to staying in a patch for time . For each harvesting
threshold, the corresponding average reward rate was calculated by harvesting each of 10000
patches for a fixed number of times and averaging over resulting patch reward rates. Patch
reward rate was, in turn, calculated using reward collected during the visit to the patch and time
spent in it. Thus, a particular harvesting threshold (H ) corresponded to a maximum average
max
reward rate (E*) a participant could have achieved in a block over a long-time horizon. We refer
to H as an optimal number of harvests participants could have made in each patch in an
max
rate calculation was done in Python (v3.9.13) using pandas (v1.5.3) and NumPy (v1.24.2).
Statistical analyses. Although we pre-registered the foraging analysis with the aim of
understanding patch stay duration, we modeled the number of harvests at both block- and
patch-level in the study. While the stay duration is related to the number of harvests, the former
was more affected by the changes in response times which accompanied the change in affect and
environment.
Foraging task analysis was carried out with R (version 4.2.2) (85) in RStudio (version
2023.3.0.386) (86). To understand harvesting decisions, we fitted linear mixed effects models to
the number of harvests as well as their deviations from the optimal number of harvests at both
harvests made in each block by considering patches participants could leave before the time
limit of 4 mins was reached (. Similarly, the average deviation from the optimal number of
harvest in each block () was calculated by subtracting the optimal number of harvest estimated
for the block from the actual number of harvests made in each patch and then summing the
calculated difference over all and dividing the sum by . Models were fitted to data using
packages lmerTest (version 3.1-3) (75) and lme4 (version 1.1-33)(74) and figures were produced
using packages ggplot2 (version 3.4.2) (87) and ggpp (version 0.5.1) (88). As suggested in (89),
we have reported the summary of mixed effects models used in patch-foraging analysis in
Data, Materials and Software Availability
Data and code required to reproduce the results have been uploaded to OSF and are available
upon request.
Acknowledgements
This research would not have been possible without funding from the IIT Kanpur start-up grant
(No. 2019/373), the DBT Wellcome Trust IA Fellowship (IA/I/20/2/505204), and the NARSAD
Young Investigator Grant (No. 27649) awarded to AR.