Supplement to the Historiography I:11
Camille Akmut
December 31, 2022
BOOKS
— The Well [cont.]
The Grateful Dead’s major role is discussed at the beginning of ch. 3 :
[conferences are the fundamental organizing blocks of The Well, something
like forums each dedicated to a special topic. Deadheads are fans of the band.]
"Some of The Well’s magic happened when people wandered outside their
usual haunts, when the technical people wandered into the cultural
conferences and the literary people became regulars in the Macintosh
and Unix and Telecom conferences. The Well parlance for this was to
"go over the wall." and at no time did more people go over the wall
than after the Deadheads arrived in the spring of 1986. It was McClure
who first welcomed a trio of Grateful Dead aficionados to start their
own Conference on The Well. David Gans, a local author and musician
recalled: "I came to The Well with Mary Eisenhart and Bennett Falk
to start an online community for Deadheads. We had been discussing
the idea, and Mary suggested that rather than start out with a freestanding
system we try it out on The Well, which was offering free accounts
to people with interesting ideas. The GD conference took off like gangbusters
and we soon forgot all about the idea of taking it to a separate system."
(...)
Every week, Gans went on his radio show, the Grateful Dead Hour
on San Francisco’s KFOG-FM, and said, "If you want to interact with
other Deadheads, join The Well. You don’t have to be a computer person,
just a person with a computer." So a huge new influx of people entered
The Well because of accelerated word-of-mouth, already a longstanding
method for spreading news in the famously nomadic Deadhead community,
whose members were known to travel hundreds of miles to a Dead concert-on
a moment’s notice. They were already hooked together, and The Well
gave them an excuse to be even better connected. Soon their conference
was the busiest on The Well and the biggest revenue producers; in fact,
by 1987, it was responsible for between one-third and one-half of all
Well activity. (...) After McClure left it it was Fig who nurtured
their presence. "I didn’t even really know who the Deadheads were,"
said Fig. "I was a hippie of one style but the Deadheads were hippies
of another style."
Fig, who recalled the windfall as "the first instance of people
going out and getting computers and modems just to get on the Well,"
soon discovered that Deadheads weren’t all necessarily itinerant flower
children (...) They were also professionals from Silicon Valley earning
upward of $60,000 a year. It was natural for people who had come to
The Well because of the Grateful Dead to start appearing in other places
on The Well. And they weren’t necessarily locals. Although long-distance
Well Beings - as Well users often referred to themselves - were a distinct
minority, they were often prolific posters, especially the Deadheads.
(...)
The popularity of the Grateful Dead conference helped give The
Well a financial boost. By December of 1987 The Well had turned a small
profit. The year Fig wrote to the board of directors, convinced "that
a system based almost completely on mutual random interaction can sustain
itself."
Matthew McClure was The Well’s first director, having “left to work at a
computer programming company”. Cliff Figallo his successor was “user Number
12. His log-in was Fig.” [pp. 40-41]
Other conferences of interest are, for example, the ‘Future’ conference started
by Tom Mandel (an SRI employee), the technical conferences, ‘Weird’ conference
etc.
"As word spread of the quality of conversation about technology taking
place on The Well (...) more people arrived. Hackers began their own
Macintosh and Telecom conferences. McClure’s passion was Unix, and
he started a Unix conference. The VAX itself [w]as a Unix machine"
[22]
"Mandel started a conference called "Future". His work at SRI, helping
corporations with scenario planning, was too constraining for him.
His real interest in futurology extended far beyond the utilitarian
role" [21-22]
"Started by John Hoag, whose log-in was Loca, Weird was described variously
as the Well’s id, a more free-form version of The Pub where everything
was permitted. Whatever silliness came into people’s minds was the
next thing they typed. Hoag described it as a performance stage, a
pressure valve, and "a place to post nonsense and profundity without
having to decide which was which." Weird was the Well’s free-fire zone,
and there was nothing anyone could do about it except choose not go
there." [p. 75]
The Well’s Weird “conference” has all the appearance of being an equiva-
lent to a “board” like Random on 4chan, and can be considered a precursor of
/b/ [Hafner’s book’s publication date, just a few years before 4chan, made an
analogy however correct impossible]
Adding even more to the resemblance is that Weird was a conference Mandel
[Well’s hyper-online, heavy poster, drama queen, original member and resident
lunatic] frequently contributed to, and the “nuking” of Weird - by the same
Mandel - during a meltdown after being banned.
"Brand, who had taken notice of the uproar, stepped in (...) Fig called
Mandel to tell him he was imposing a cooling off period, that he was
suspending Mandel’s account for an unspecified period. Curiously, Mandel
sounded almost relieved. He asked Fig if it would be all right if he
took a day to clean out some of his old files. Fig consented.
When Fig next logged onto The Well, he found that not only Mandel’s
posts but the entire Future and Weird conferences had disappeared.
Using his power status and a tool called the "mass scribble," Mandel
had nuked both conferences in their entirety. Years of conversation
had been deleted" [p. 86]
(The obvious differences are the privacy policies, anonymity cultures of 4chan
compared with The Well.)
— John Markoff. 2022. Whole Earth: The many lives of Stewart
Brand. Penguin.
Brand’s Bourgeois origins, combination of old political power and business
elite, are described in chapter 1 :
His great-great-grandfather was “former New York congressman Lorenzo
Burrows”. His grandfather was “Ralph Chase Morley, heir to the Saginaw-
based Morley Brothers wholesalers, ran what by 1892 had become the nation’s
second-largest hardware business, as well as one of the largest horse and buggy
retailers in the country. The business prospered and expanded through World
War I, as the Morley Brothers were major suppliers to the US Army. Soon the
Morleys opened a bank as well.” His father : “a partner in a small advertising
agency.” Brand attended Phillips Exeter Academy and Stanford (like his older
brother).
A half reasonable reader of Whole Earth Catalog, a bizarre creation and
altogether publication mixing personal liberation with mercantilism, knew right
away that Stewart Brand came from that milieu.
Whereelse would a conman come from who promised personal freedom through
consumption? And, perhaps even believe such nonsense. Before there was Steve
Jobs, there was Stewart Brand. If Jobs had come to prominence in the 60s, an
Apple catalog might have looked exactly like Whole Earth... Buy, you’ll be free!
Markoff, no sociologist by any means, explains awkwardly :
“It would be a modest continuing family inheritance from these vari-
ous commercial ventures that would give a young Stewart Brand (...)
the ability to avoid immediately getting a job and the freedom to pur-
sue a variety of potentially sketchy notions throughout the sixties.”
Generational wealth going back multiple centuries and a rentier position at
20 years old, are what enabled Brand to live a bohemian life until he lucked into
success with Whole Earth Catalog after going through experiments and failures
- permitted to happen by that wealth.
For all the talk of Whole Earth being ’alternative’ or even ’revolutionary’ ,
these are just the fantasies of a scion. Whole Earth Catalog is capitalism — in
essence not different from a vacuum cleaner catalog, to which bizarrely enough
cultural criticism pieces would have been added — but sold under the clothes
of hippie culture, survivalism, and at that time new, uncertain and hence po-
tentially liberatory, and certainly onerous computer technology.
Apple marketing ’Think different’ could have been a Whole Earth motto : at
the basis of both brands is an injunction for people to engage in irreconcilable
behaviors and positions : engaging in capitalistic consumption, all the while
pretending that such action extracts them, liberates them from that system.
Brand’s obsession with outdoor gear, camping etc. – found later reflected
in his catalog – come one must assume from spending his summers as a child
in rural Michigan, at a cabin owned by his family. (Also described in the first
chapter.)
Brand’s time at Exeter is described in chapter 1, Stanford in chapter 2.
“At Exeter, he would read Sweet Thursday and Cannery Row, John
Steinbeck’s lightly fictionalized accounts of marine biologist Ed Rick-
etts. (...) Brand was captivated by Steinbeck’s portrait of an icono-
clastic scientist and philosopher. He decided he wanted to be Rick-
etts, or someone very much like him. Reading Steinbeck from rural
New England only intensified the siren call of California.”
Ch. 5 handles his time at San Francisco State, 6 entitled Access to Tools is
about the catalog :
“Brand would later say that his antipathy for the New Left began
when he recoiled in horror in response to the Leninist politics the
San Francisco State students displayed while he worked with them.
(...) [Brand] identified with the “psychedelic side” of the antiwar
movement while Nixon found inspiration in the Cuban and Chinese
revolutions. Nixon wanted to take power while Brand wanted to cir-
cumvent it. In the end their differing philosophies would be the
undoing of their partnership, and their clashes would leave Brand
permanently embittered toward the New Left.”
“Within a couple of years the Catalog became synonymous with the counterculture.”[c 6]
i.e. a sell out hippie, just like we wrote.
James Nixon was “elect[ed] as student body president in the fall of 1966”
at San Francisco State. (He agreed to fund Brand’s cultural projects. Very
authoritarian of him.)
Whole Earth Catalog is, was and remains unmistakably hippie sell-out cul-
ture. No need for biographies, except to confirm the obvious, just read the first
issue.
“Despite Brand’s antipathy to the politics behind the students’ in-
surrection, he would take many of their ideas and their community
organizing approach with him ... to the Whole Earth Catalog” [ch.
5]
Marxism-Leninist organizational power is bad except to further capitalism in
the form of a pitiful, idiotic catalog. He also seems to dabble in ’Zen Buddhism’
- God, what a surprise. Little upper-class dandy prick.