Sociopolitical influences on geographical judgments of locations and distances by
Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots living in Cyprus
Alexia Galati a, Miria N. Plastira b, e, Alinda Friedman c, Marios N. Avraamides b, d, e
a Department of Psychological Science, University of North Carolina at Charlotte,
Charlotte, USA
b Department of Psychology, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus
c Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
d Center for Applied Neuroscience, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus
e CYENS Centre of Excellence, Nicosia, Cyprus
Authors’ note
This material is based upon work supported by EXCELLENCE/1216/0483 from the
Cyprus Research and Innovation Foundation and by a grant from the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada. We appreciate the contributions of
Elisavet Panagiotou in recruitment, data collection, and the development of
questionnaires for assessing attitudes. We’re thankful to Charis Psaltis for sharing
these questionnaires and providing guidance on analyzing the questionnaire data. We
are also thankful to Demetra Spyrou, Cansın Güngör, Ayshe Biyikoglu, Melissa
Mehmet, Maria Diplarou, Anna Papantoni, Christoforos Sialou, Vanessa Vasileva and
Burak Berk Doluay for additional assistance with recruitment, data collection and
stimuli coding. Finally, we are also thankful to Alkan Muhtaroglu for consultation on
the selection of town names for the norming study. Portions of this work appeared in
the proceedings of the 44th annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. The
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Alexia Galati,
Department of Psychological Science, University of North Carolina at Charlotte.
Email: agalati@uncc.edu
Abstract
Many non-geographic factors influence spatial judgments of real-world locations,
which implies that spatial representations are not metrically veridical. We investigated
the influence of social and ethnic factors on geographical judgments in the
geopolitical context of Cyprus – an island divided since 1974 into the Turkish Cypriot
and Greek Cypriot communities in the north and south, respectively. Participants from
each community (249 Greek Cypriots, 322 Turkish Cypriots) indicated their
familiarity with 19 towns (town knowledge task), and estimated the locations of those
towns (location estimation task) and the straight-line distance between them (distance
estimation task). In questionnaires, they also rated their attitudes toward the other
community. Cypriots underestimated distances and contracted the relative locations of
towns within the other community more so than within their own community.
Moreover, Cypriots who were more willing to live together with Cypriots from the
other community (i.e., perceiving less social distance) underestimated distances
between towns, whereas those less willing to live together overestimated distances.
The results support the notion that representations of global-scale environments have
multi-faceted origins, which include social factors (e.g., ethnic identity, political
attitudes) that are not usually associated with spatial representations.
Keywords: cognitive map; geographic knowledge; spatial judgments; interethnic
conflict; ingroup-outgroup bias
Sociopolitical influences on geographical judgments of locations and distances
by Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots living in Cyprus
When people perform everyday tasks–such as estimating distances, coming up
with shortcuts, or planning routes– they are thought to use representations of spatial
knowledge stored in memory. This geographical knowledge comprises both spatial
and nonspatial beliefs. Spatial beliefs include beliefs about the locations of
geographic landmarks such as the poles, continents, and oceans, as well as the
presence of other physical boundaries (e.g., mountains), and hierarchical relations and
adjacencies among spatial regions. Non-spatial geographical beliefs include, for
example, beliefs about average weather temperatures, administrative and political
borders (Friedman & Brown, 2000a, 2000b; Friedman, et al., 2005; Hirtle & Mascoli,
1986; Maki, 1981), politics, religions, ethnicities, and so on. Following a plethora of
evidence, we can anticipate that both spatial and nonspatial components of
geographical beliefs influence, and often bias, geographical judgments (Friedman &
Brown, 2000a, 2000b; Friedman, et al., 2002; Montello & Friedman, 2006).
Friedman, Brown, and their colleagues developed a plausible-reasoning
framework to account for how people represent and make judgments about
geographical information (Friedman & Brown, 2000 a,b; Friedman et al., 2002). In
general, coordinating and weighing different kinds of information, both spatial and
non-spatial, results in systematic biases when making what are seemingly “purely”
spatial judgments. For example, people might be biased to think that New York City
is located further north than Athens, Greece based on beliefs about their respective
climates, when in fact the two cities are at about the same geographical latitude
(Friedman et al., 2002; see also Tversky, 1981). Similarly, Friedman, Kerkman,
Brown, and colleagues (2005) found that Canadians, Americans, and Mexicans all
judged that most Mexican cities were located at the equator, presumably because the
equator is an important global landmark with respect to all cities in North America.
By providing an account of how people retrieve geographic knowledge and integrate
it with other sources of information, the framework captures the idea that conceptual
information can systematically bias the inferences people make about spatial
dimensions.
In the present research, we used the plausible-reasoning framework to make
predictions about how geographic estimates are influenced by social attitudes
associated with ethnic identity, as well as by the semantic clustering of regions based
on ethnic and political factors. There is already evidence that the influence of a
politically-driven spatial boundary can be moderated by non-spatial factors, such as
social attitudes. In particular, Carbon and Leder (2005) found that Germans in
contemporary reunified Germany were more likely to overestimate the distance
between cities when these were on different sides of the former border between East
and West Germany, compared to when the cities were on the same side of the former
border. Importantly, this effect held more strongly for individuals who had negative
attitudes towards reunification, suggesting that social factors moderated estimates of
spatial distance.
Here, we examined the joint influence of political and social factors on spatial
reasoning in the unique geographical, political, and social environment of Cyprus: an
island that continues to be divided, with inhabitants of each side belonging to distinct
ethnic communities, who have varying levels of contact with the spatial environment
and the inhabitants of the “other” side. We leveraged this context by having
participants from each ethnic community complete spatial judgment tasks involving
towns from the two communities. Participants also answered questionnaires about
their social and political attitudes. To our knowledge, this study is unique in its
examination of spatial judgments by participants from two ethnic communities with
longstanding and continued interethnic conflict.
The unique test case of Cyprus
Cyprus presents a unique test case for examining the contribution of spatial
and non-spatial factors to the geographical knowledge that Greek Cypriots and
Turkish Cypriots have of Cyprus. Like Carbon and Leder (2005), we examine the
effect of politically-enforced physical boundaries on spatial judgments, and the
moderating effect of social attitudes on those judgments. However, in contrast to
present-day Germany, Cyprus still has a physical boundary between regions (the UN
buffer zone) and the inhabitants of the divided regions belong to ethnically distinct
groups. This unique situation allowed us to explore the effect of a number of relevant
demographic factors (e.g., the participant’s age and their status as an internally
displaced person), as well as the amount of contact they had with members and
locations in the other community.
Since 1974, Cyprus has been divided in two parts, each of which is inhabited,
for the most part, by distinct ethnic communities: Greek Cypriots in the south and
Turkish Cypriots in the north. From 1963 to 1967, there were increasingly tense
intergroup conflicts between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots. During that time
thousands of Turkish Cypriots fled their homes to enclaves with Turkish Cypriot
majorities, facing violence from Greek Cypriot paramilitaries that sought unification
with Greece (Enosis). These events were followed by a Greek-backed coup d’état led
by Greek Cypriot nationalists on July 15, 1974 and the subsequent military invasion
by Turkey on July 20th and August 14th 1974, which resulted in the division of the
island. During these intergroup conflicts, people from both communities were
internally displaced either to the south or north. The geographic south of Cyprus
comprises the areas under the de facto sovereign control of the Republic of Cyprus,
where most Greek Cypriots reside. The geographic north of the island comprises the
areas of the “Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus” (or “TRNC”, legally recognized
only by Turkey), where most Turkish Cypriots reside. The two communities are
separated by a UN buffer zone, known as the “green line”, which passes through
Nicosia–the last divided capital in the world.
There had been virtually no contact among the members of the two
communities for nearly three decades, until 2003, when crossing restrictions across
the UN buffer zone were lifted. This lift resulted in natural variation in Cypriots’
experience with the other community: some individuals have never crossed the buffer
zone to visit the other side, some have crossed only a few times, others cross and
interact with members of the other community regularly. Similarly, the attitudes of
Cypriots towards the other community and toward reunification vary considerably.
The natural variation in experience and attitudes affords an opportunity to examine
biases in judging spatial distance as a function of both spatial and sociopolitical
factors.
Study Overview and Predictions
We assessed the geographic knowledge of participants from both Cypriot
communities through a series of tasks. Participants rated their familiarity with a
number of selected towns in Cyprus, they estimated the locations of these towns
(location estimation task), and the distances between pairs of towns (distance
estimation task). Additionally, they completed self-report questionnaires used to
assess their attitudes toward and contact with the other community.
We predicted greater overestimation of distances between locations across the
UN buffer zone than within either community. This is in line with previous work
demonstrating that physical boundaries increase subjective distance estimates, such
that distances of locations are overestimated when they are categorized as belonging
to a different hierarchy (Hirtle & Jonides, 1985; McNamara, 1986).
Additionally, consistent with Carbon and Leder (2005), we predicted that the
differentiation between these hierarchical spatial regions would depend on individual
attitudes and experience with the other community. For example, people with more
negative attitudes toward the other community should overestimate distances across
the UN buffer zone to a greater extent than people with more positive attitudes.
Because participants made location and distance judgements about towns in
both the ethnically populated region in which they resided and in the “other” group’s
region, we also expected to obtain reference point effects (e.g., Holyoak & Mah 1982,
Friedman et al. 2012, Maki 1981). A geographical reference point is usually close to
where a participant is located, and generally affords increased discriminability of
spatial locations in its region. For example, Holyoak and Mah (1982) showed that
Californians rated the magnitude of the difference in east-west distance between two
cities close to the Pacific Ocean to be greater than that between cities closer to the
Atlantic, even though the distances were actually equal. Similarly, Friedman, Mohr,
and Brugger (2012) found that western Canadians estimated the distance between
cities in the west to be larger than distances between cities in the east, whereas eastern
Canadians did the opposite. Thus, if there are reference point effects in the present
study, the location estimates of cities in participants’ “own side” should be more
distant, on average, from each other compared to cities on the “other side” (where
location estimates would be more contracted).
Method
Participants
We collected data from 263 residents of the geographic south and 342 residents of the
geographic north of Cyprus. Since we wanted to focus on ethnic Greek Cypriots and
Turkish Cypriots, we excluded from analysis data from residents of other ethnicities
or nationalities. The final dataset (N= 571) included 249 Greek Cypriots (159 female,
90 male) and 322 Turkish Cypriots (163 female, 156 male, 3 did not report their
gender). The two samples were similar in terms of key demographics. The mean age
of Greek Cypriots was 31.00 (SD = 15.64, range: 18-89) and of Turkish Cypriots
33.30 (SD = 13.37, range: 18-84).
Participants were recruited through announcements across the University of
Cyprus, social media pages, and using a snowball sampling technique. Greek Cypriots
were recruited from all 5 districts under the de facto sovereign control of the Republic
of Cyprus (Lefkosia/Nicosia: N = 122, Lemesos/Limassol: N = 22, Paphos: N = 27,
Larnaca: N = 54, Ammohostos/Famagusta: N = 24). Turkish Cypriots were recruited
from 5 of the 6 districts of the “TRNC" (Lefkoşa/Nicosia: N = 231,
Gazimağusa/Famagusta: N = 24, Girne/Kyrenia: N = 44, Güzelyurt/Morphou: N =
16, Iskele/Karpasia: N = 7, Lefke: N = 0).
The study was described to potential participants as being about people’s
geographical knowledge of Cyprus and their social attitudes. Participants had the
option to receive 10 Euros as compensation for their participation. Eligibility
requirements were being over 18 years old and permanently living in Cyprus for at
least 5 years.
9.2% of Greek Cypriots and 8.1% of Turkish Cypriots reported being
internally displaced people. Additionally, 49% of Greek Cypriots and 51.9% of
Turkish Cypriots had at least one parent who was internally displaced during the
1963/1974 incidents.
In terms of their political orientation, among the 468 participants who
provided a response (on a 7-point Likert style scale: 1= far left to 7 far right), Turkish
Cypriots (M = 2.86, SD= 1.14) were more left-leaning than Greek Cypriots (M = 3.50,
SD = 1.51), t (317.96) = 4.97, p < .001. Of the remaining 103 participants, 98
indicated they did not wish to respond (63 Greek Cypriot and 35 Turkish Cypriot) and
5 participants had missing responses.
The predominant religion among Greek Cypriots was Orthodox Christianity
(80.3%); an additional 2.8% reported that they did not follow a religion and 16.9%
did not report their religion. The predominant religion among Turkish Cypriots was
Islam (41.9%), with 1.6% reporting Deism as their religion, 17.7% reporting that they
did not follow a religion, and 38.8% not reporting their religion.
Tasks and Materials
Participants completed three computerized tasks examining their spatial knowledge of
Cyprus (Town Knowledge Task, Distance Estimation Task, and Location Estimation
Task), along with a questionnaire for obtaining demographic information and
assessing social attitudes. The three spatial knowledge tasks were implemented and
administered using the OpenSesame software (Mathôt, Schreij, & Theeuwes, 2012).
Selection of towns for spatial knowledge tasks
To select the stimuli of the main tasks, we first conducted a pilot study to assess the
degree of familiarity of Cypriots (N= 120; 86 Greek Cypriots, 34 Turkish Cypriots)
with the names and locations of 51 Cyprus towns. Some towns in Cyprus are known
by a variety of names due to the distinct languages predominantly spoken in the two
communities (Cypriot varieties of Greek and Turkish) and historical changes to town
names (e.g., some towns were renamed after 1974). We selected 19 towns with
relatively high ratings of familiarity in terms of both their name and location. Of
these, 1 town spanned both communities (Nicosia, the capital of the island), 9 were in
Since one of the tasks involved estimating the distances between towns, we took into
consideration the distances between different types of pairs (North-North, South-
South, and North-South pairs; within vs. across community pairs). We describe in
on our OSF repository for the project.
Map of Cyprus indicating the 19 towns selected for the experimental tasks based on a
survey of Cypriots’ familiarity with the name and location of towns.
Note. Towns in the Turkish Cypriot community are shown in red and those in the
Greek Cypriot community in blue (the town in light blue was excluded from
analysis). The capital Nicosia, which is part of both communities, is in black. The
blue lines in the middle of the island indicate the UN buffer zone separating the north
and south.
Town Knowledge Task
In this task, adapted from Uttal, Friedman, Liu and Warren (2010), participants were
presented with the name of each town one-by-one on a computer display, and were
prompted to rate their knowledge about it. They entered their response in an open text
field using a 10-point scale ranging from 0 to 9 (0= absolutely no knowledge to 9=
excellent knowledge of the town).
Distance Estimation Task
Participants were asked to estimate the aerial distance between pairs of towns (e.g.,
Wender, Wagener-Wender, & Rothkegel, 1997). On each trial, a pair of town names
appeared on the screen as text and participants had to estimate their aerial distance,
defined as “the straight-line distance, as the crow flies” between the two towns in
kilometers, without taking into account the roads connecting the towns or the
elevation. There was no time limit to make this judgment. The actual straight-line
distances between towns were obtained from Google Maps.
Across participants, the order of the trials was randomized and the placement
of the town names of a given pair (Town 1 – Town 2) on the left and right side of the
screen was counterbalanced to control for any unobserved non-commutativity of
distances (Cadwallader, 1979). Half of the participants from each community viewed
a given pair in the Town 1 – Town 2 order and the other half viewed the same pair in
the Town 2 – Town 1 order.
For the data analyses, we excluded 18 trials with Nicosia, which is located in
both communities, consistent with Carbon and Leder’s (2005) exclusion of Berlin.
We also excluded an additional 17 trials with a town in the south (Peristerona) whose
reference turned out to be ambiguous (there was a town with that name in another
district). Therefore, from the 171 trials completed, we analyzed 136 trials: 36 North-
North, 28 South-South, 72 North-South pairs. These categories were re-coded relative
to the participant’s community, such that a trial involved a judgment about towns
“across communities” (the 72 North-South pairs), “within one’s own community” or
“within the other community”.
For each trial, we computed two dependent measures of error: (a) the
proportion of signed error ((estimated - correct distance) / correct distance), which
indicates whether the participant overestimated or underestimated the distance
between a pair of towns (i.e., positive or negative error), and (b) the proportion of
absolute error ( | (estimated - correct distance) | / correct distance), which indicates the
deviation from accurate responding without considering the direction of the bias.
Location Estimation Task
Participants indicated the location of each town one-by-one. They viewed a blank
computer display containing only two visual cues: two vertical lines on the left and
right side of the screen indicating the length of the island (East to West). They were
asked to imagine the map of the island spanning the length marked by the two vertical
lines. On each trial, the name of a town appeared in the bottom center of the screen
and the participants’ mouse cursor was reset to be at the center of the screen.
Participants were asked to use their mouse cursor to click on the location they thought
the town was at. Each town name appeared once. The order in which each town
appeared was identical to the randomized order in which town names appeared for
that participant in the Town Knowledge Task. The estimated locations given by the
participants were recorded in pixel units.
Spatial distortion on the location estimation task was quantified using
bidimensional regression analysis (Friedman & Kohler, 2003), which involves a
Euclidean transformation of the set of dependent A-B points (the participant’s
placement of the towns) to match the fixed independent X-Y points (the veridical
coordinates of the towns). The dependent measures we focus on are: (a) the
bidimensional correlation coefficient squared (r2), which captures the proportion of
variance in the spatial configuration of the participant’s placement of towns that can
be explained by the actual configuration of the towns, and (b) the scale parameter (φ),
which indicates the magnitude of contraction or expansion relative to the actual
locations. We again excluded from analyses the town whose referent was ambiguous
(Peristerona). We computed these parameters for the entire island, as well as for the
subsets of towns in the North (N = 9) and the South (N = 8).
Demographics and Social Attitudes Questionnaire
To assess social attitudes, we used items from a larger survey developed to examine
intergroup relations in Cyprus (Lytras, Psaltis, Chapman, & Ioannou, 2011). The
questionnaire was initially developed in Greek and was later translated to English and
Turkish.
The questionnaire included basic demographic questions, questions about
participants’ contact with the other community (7 items on a 5-point Likert scale),
their feelings of warmth toward the other community (rated on a Feeling
Thermometer scale with 10° increments, where 0° indicated feeling “very cold or
negatively” and 100° “very warm or positively”), their perception of cultural distance
from the other community (5 items rated on a 5-point scale from the Cultural Distance
Index; Babiker, et al., Miller, 1980), their perception of social distance from the other
community (6 items on a 4-point scale from the Bogardus Social Distance Scale;
Bogardus, 1947), their perception of symbolic and realistic threats toward their own
community (5 items rated on a 4-point scale based on Stephan and Stephan 2000), and
their attitudes towards solving “the Cyprus problem” (5 items rated on a 10-point
scale).
We performed Principal Component Analysis on participants’ Likert scale
responses, which revealed the following factors: Factor 1: willingness to live
together/social distance, Factor 2: threat concerns/symbolic and realistic threats,
Factor 3: quantity of friendly relationships/contact, Factor 4: proximity between the
two sides/cultural distance, and Factor 5: intergroup trust. We examined these factors
as predictors of biases in spatial estimates. We provide an overview of the
questionnaire items and the results of the PCA analysis in Supplement B on our OSF
Procedure
Participants provided informed consent and were offered the option to complete the
study in Greek, Turkish, or English. All participants completed the Town Knowledge
Tasks first. Next, they completed the Location Estimation and Distance Estimation
Tasks in a counterbalanced order across participants. Finally, participants completed
the questionnaire on demographics and social attitudes.
Participants were debriefed and remunerated for their participation if they
participated for monetary compensation. The experimental sessions took place at
locations convenient to participants, such as their homes, university premises, quiet
coffee shops, and local social clubs.
Sessions lasted approximately 45 minutes. The data collection in the North
and South was performed by experimenters from that community, who spoke Turkish
or Greek, respectively, and typically interacted with participants in the local language
variety (Cypriot Turkish or Cypriot Greek, respectively). The computer-based tasks
were self-administered and performed on the laptops that were provided to
participants by the experimenters. The questionnaire was administered as a hard copy
and participants responded in writing. Older adults were given the option to have the
instructions and questions read to them, in which case the experimenters entered the
responses in the questionnaire on behalf of the participants. Data collection took place
between June of 2018 and March of 2020. The study received approval from the
Cyprus National Bioethics Committee.
Data and code sharing
includes our study materials (including stimulus lists and questionnaires used),
OpenSesame scripts for the experimental tasks, de-identified raw data files, and code
(for preparing the data, specifying planned contrasts, and testing the statistical
models). We also include supplementary material on stimuli selection, the results of
the PCA applied to questionnaire items, and exploratory and control analyses. The
study was not preregistered; when we designed this study in 2015, preregistration was
not yet a standard practice in our labs.
Results
Distance Estimation Task
Data Processing and Modeling Approach
As noted, we excluded from data analyses trials with the divided capital
Nicosia and Peristerona whose reference was ambiguous. Using the
outlierKD
function (Dhana, 2018) in R, we removed outliers that were over 1.5 times the
interquartile range for each of the two dependent variables; that was 6.72% of the
observations for signed error and 7.26% absolute error (5217 and 5639 of 77656
trials, respectively). Visual inspection of the data suggested that the data were
normally distributed after outliers were removed.
For each dependent measure, we fitted linear mixed effects models using the
function from the package (Bates, Mächler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015) in
lmer lme4
R (R Core Team, 2016). We modeled participants’ community (Greek-Cypriot vs.
Turkish-Cypriot), the location of the towns relative to the participant (within the
participant’s community, within the other community, across communities), and their
interaction as fixed effects. Random effects were the participants’ identity and the
identity of town pairs in a given trial (e.g., Town 1 - Town 2, without regard to their
order in the left - right arrangement on the screen). The order of town names in a trial
was counterbalanced across two lists, so we did not include “list” as a fixed effect in
order to not over-parameterize the models.
Model fit was assessed by the conditional R2 and Akaike’s Information
Criterion (AIC). The conditional R2 (Nakagawa and Schielzeth, 2013) captures the
amount of variance explained by both fixed and random factors. Our model selection
approach involved starting with the full model – that included all fixed effects – and
comparing it against reduced models. We selected the model that improved the model
fit sufficiently and that included predictors with significant effects. For all reported
analyses, the best model was the two-predictor model with fixed effects for
participant’s community and pair type (without their interaction). All models included
by-participant and by-item random intercepts, by-participant random slope for the
type of town pair, and by-item random slope for the participant’s community, which
was the maximal random effect structure in the design.
To calculate the significance of the overall effect of each predictor in the
models, we used the Type III Wald Chi-square test through the function of the
anova
package (Fox & Weisberg, 2018). For significant main effects, we performed
car
post-hoc pairwise contrasts using the function of the package.
emmeans emmeans
We computed the effect sizes for the ANOVA Type III effects and their 95%
confidence intervals using the package (Ben-Shachar, et al., 2020).
effectsize
number of follow-up analyses, including: (i) supplementary analyses about the
participants’ familiarity ratings in the Town Knowledge task, (ii) analyses controlling
for the effect of town knowledge on distance estimates and (iii) on location estimates,
(iv) analyses controlling for experience with the other community (frequency of
visiting the other side) on distance and location estimates, (v) analyses controlling for
the distance between towns, (vi) exploratory analyses on the effect of topographic
factors (mountain ranges) on distance estimates, (vii) exploratory analyses on the
effect of demographic and individual characteristics (gender, age, internal
displacement status), and social and political attitudes (political orientation, ethnic
identification, attitudes towards a solution of the Cyprus problem) on distance and
location estimates, and (viii) exploratory analyses with whether participants were
residents of Nicosia city as a predictor. None of these analyses change the conclusions
we draw from the findings below. We refer to key results from these exploratory and
control analyses as relevant.
Distance Estimation Task Results
We examined whether the presence of a physical boundary (the UN buffer
zone) would influence Cypriots’ distance estimates. Specifically, we had predicted
that participants would overestimate distances across the buffer zone (a border effect)
and would underestimate distances in the other community due to these being less
discriminable than in their own community (a reference point effect).
There was no evidence of a border effect. Instead of finding distance
overestimation (larger signed errors) for trials involving towns across communities,
we found distance underestimation between towns in the other community (see
hoc contrasts revealed that the proportion of signed error differed significantly for
town pairs in one’s own community and pairs in the other community (unstandardized
regression coefficient B= .16, SE = .02, z = 7.51, p < .0001). No other pairwise
differences were significant (across vs. within one’s own: B = - .08, SE = .05, z = -
1.71, p = .20; across vs. within other: B= .08, SE = .05, z = 1.64, p = .23). The
participants’ community did not significantly influence the proportion of signed error
The pattern of results for the proportion of absolute error was similar to that of
within the other community involved the largest proportion of absolute error and
estimates between towns within their own community involved the smallest
proportion of absolute error. The type of town pair was a significant predictor of the
of town pair showed that all pair types differed significantly from one another (across
vs. within one’s own: B = .03, SE = .01, z = 3.00, p < .01; across vs. within other: B =
- .06, SE = .01, z = -5.19, p < .0001; within one's own vs. other: B = - .09, SE = .01, z
= -10.14, p < .0001). As with the proportion of signed error, the participant’s
community did not have a significant effect on the proportion of absolute error of
distance estimates.
Importantly, as we report in control analyses (in Supplement C on our OSF
repository), the effect of town pair was not due to familiarity with the towns or due to
the actual distances between towns. Entering the town knowledge ratings
(specifically, the lowest rating of a town in a given pair) as a covariate did not
eliminate the effect of town pair on either the proportion of signed error or absolute
error. Additionally, the same pattern of results persisted when the analyses focused on
a subset of 42 trials (14 triplets of North-North, South-South, and North-South trials)
that were matched for distance, in order to control for distance-dependent effects.
Means (and SDs) of the proportion of signed error and absolute error (in km) across the two communities (Greek Cypriot vs. Turkish
Cypriot) and the three types of town pairs (Within Own, Within Other, and Across Communities) in the distance estimation task
Signed Error
Community Within Own Community Within Other Community Across Communities
Greek Cypriots .024 (.525) -.171 (.570) -.077 (.528)
Turkish Cypriots -.030 (.517) -.197 (.560) -.119 (.539)
Total -.010 (.520) -.184 (.565) -.101 (.535)
Absolute Error
Community Within Own Community Within Other Community Across Communities
Greek Cypriots .408 (.307) .503 (.310) .431 (.295)
Turkish Cypriots .409 (.307) .499 (.307) .450 (.298)
Total .408 (.307) .501 (.304) .441 (.297)
(2) the proportion of absolute error in the distance estimation task as dependent variables.
Absolute error
Signed error
R2 = . 558 R2 = .183
AIC = 69742.2 AIC= 21397.7
Fixed Effects df ! ! p ω2 95% CI ! ! p ω2 95% CI
Intercept 1 3.17 .07 - - 4696.22 <.001 - -
Participants’ Community (GC vs TC) 1 3.42 .06 .003 [.00, .02] .07 .79 -.0001 -
Type of Town Pair 2 56.35 <.001 0.26 [.14,.36] 104.36 <.001 .37 [.26, .47]
(across communities, within own community,
within other community)
Note. The Type III Wald Chi-square test was used to calculate the significance of the overall effect of each predictor on the models. Each dependent measure is
modeled as a function of the centered and contrast coded predictors Community (Greek-Cypriot = -.5, Turkish-Cypriot= .5), and type of trial (simple coded with
“across communities” as the reference level). For each fixed effect and interaction, we report the Analysis of Deviance results, the probabilities of significance of the
type III Wald chi-square tests, the estimated effect size, and its 95% confidence interval. For each model, we report the Akaike’s Information Criterion (the model
with the lowest AIC score has the best fit to the data) and the conditional variance captured by the model (R2) explained by fixed and random effects.
Location Estimation Task
Data Processing and Modeling Approach
We applied bidimensional regression analysis (Friedman & Kohler, 2003) to
the responses of each participant. Briefly, a bidimensional regression is a two-
dimensional spatial correlation between, for example, actual and estimated latitudes
and longitudes for a given set of locations. It provides two parameters that are of
particular interest to the present study. The first is the bidimensional correlation itself,
whose squared value (r2) is an estimate of the degree to which the configuration of
estimated x-y locations is influenced by the configuration of the actual x-y locations.
The second is the scale parameter, (φ), which indicates the magnitude that the
estimated configuration of towns is either contracted or expanded with respect to the
actual configuration. For each participant, these parameters were computed for their
entire model of Cyprus (18 towns, including Nicosia), as well as for the two subsets
of towns in the North (9 towns, excluding Nicosia) and in the South (8 towns,
excluding Nicosia).
We then built linear mixed effects models to examine whether spatial
distortion (in the North, the South, and the entire island) differed by community
(Greek Cypriots vs. Turkish Cypriots). For each dependent measure, the model
included fixed effects for the participant’s community, the subset of towns (towns in
the south vs. north), and the interaction of these factors; participants were modeled as
a random effect.
Location Estimation Task Results
Performance on the location estimation task provided converging findings with the
distance estimation task: Cypriots exhibited more distortion for towns located on the
location of towns in the other community (in the north) more so than their own (in the
south), by contracting their relative locations. And similarly, Turkish Cypriots
exhibited higher distortion and contraction of towns in the other community (in the
south vs. the north). This is illustrated in the means of both r2, capturing distortion,
effects models documented a significant interaction between participants’ community
and the subset of towns we considered (in the south vs. north), for both r2 (χ2(1) =
1136.89, p <.0001, ω2 = .66, 95% CI [.63, .70]) and φ (χ2(1) = 933.40, p <.0001, ω2 =
.62, 95% CI [.58, .66]). The location estimates of Greek Cypriots and Turkish
Cypriots were comparable: there was no effect of community (for r2: χ2(1) = .02, p
=.88; for φ: χ2(1) = 1.67, p =.20). Additionally, participants’ estimates for towns in
the south were generally more distorted and contracted than towns in the north, as
indicated by a main effect of the subset of towns (for r2: χ2(1) = 17.23, p < .0001, ω2 =
.03, 95% CI [.01, .06]; for φ: χ2(1) = 39.64, p < .0001. ω2 = .06, 95% CI [.03, .11]).
Control analyses reported in Supplement C on our OSF repository show that
entering town knowledge as a covariate did not eliminate the significant interaction
between the participants’ community. This indicates that Cypriots distorted the
placement of towns in the other community regardless of their knowledge of towns in
that community.
The 17 towns (indexed A - Q) used for analyses in the Knowledge, Location, and
Distance Estimation tasks. Towns in the Greek Cypriot community are in blue and in
the Turkish Cypriot community in red.
Note. Top panel shows actual locations, bottom two panels show the estimated locations for
the 9 north and 8 south Cyprus cities by Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots in the location
estimation task. As shown, Greek Cypriots contracted the relative locations of towns in the
north, and Turkish Cypriots contracted the relative locations of towns in the south. The
notation for towns is: A = Lefka (Λεύκα, Lefke), B = Morphou (Μόρφου, Güzelyurt), C =
Lapithos, D = Kyrenia, E = Kythrea (Κυθρέα, Değirmenlik), F = Lysi (Λύση, Akdoğan), G =
Trikomo (Τρίκωμο, Yeni İskele), H = Famagusta (Αμμόχωστος, Gazimağusa), I =
Rizokarpaso ( Ριζοκάρπασο, Dipkarpaz), J = Polis (Πόλης /Πόλη Χρυσοχούς), K = Pafos (
Πάφος, Baf / Gazibaf), L = Platres (Πλάτρες), M = Kakopetria (Κακοπετριά), N = Limassol
(Λεμεσός), O = Lefkara (Λεύκαρα), P = Larnaca (Λάρνακα), Q = Paralimni (Παραλίμνι)
Means (and SDs) of the bidimensional regression coefficient squared r2 and the scale parameter (φ) across the 2 communities and 2
subsets of towns (south vs. north) in the Location Estimation Task
Bidimensional regression coefficient squared (r2)
Community Towns in South Towns in North All Towns
Greek Cypriots .749 (.243) .403 (.258) .598 (.213)
Turkish Cypriots .352 (.293) .795 (.173) .565 (.219)
All Cypriots .526 (.336) .624 (.289) .579 (.217)
Scale parameter (φ)
Community Towns in South Towns in North All Towns
Greek Cypriots .863 (.297) .534 (.290) .698 (.336)
Turkish Cypriots .475 (.316) .974 (.250) .724 (.379)
All Cypriots .644 (.363) .782 (.346) .717 (.212)
The effect of attitudes towards and experience with the other community on
spatial estimates
Factors derived from applying dimensionality reduction to questionnaire items
To examine the extent to which attitudes toward the other community biased
spatial estimates, our first approach was to enter the factors that emerged from
applying PCA analyses on the questionnaire data as covariates to separate linear
mixed effects models with the same parameters and random effect structure described
in the previous sections. Only Factor 1, which broadly captures social distance (the
responders’ willingness to live together with the other community) was significantly
associated with some aspects of spatial performance, specifically the signed error of
willing to live together with people from the other community (higher values in
Factor 1) perceived town pairs as being closer than they actually were: this
underestimation is indicated by the negative values for the proportion of signed error.
In contrast, Cypriots who were less willing to live together overestimated distances
between towns (indicated by the positive values of the proportion of signed error).
Factor 1 was not a significant predictor of the proportion of absolute error (see
of the other factors emerging from PCA were significant predictors of any of these
dependent measures.
Feelings of warmth toward the other community
Converging findings came from a questionnaire item measuring feelings of
warmth, which was not an item included in the PCA analyses. Warmth was assessed
through the Feeling Thermometer (Converse & Presser, 1986; “How do you feel
toward Greek-Cypriots/Turkish-Cypriots in general?”), with participants responding
on a 0° (very cold or negatively) to 100° (very warm or positively) scale with 10°
increments. This measure was entered as a continuous covariate in the model.
Warmth of feelings was a significant predictor of signed error in the distance
estimation task (χ2(1) = 5.55, p = .019; ω2 = .008, 95% CI [.00, .03]). Similar to the
effect of perceived social distance (Factor 1), those with warmer attitudes
2b). Similar to Factor 1, feelings of warmth were not associated with absolute error
(χ2(1) = .86, p = .35). For location estimation, warmth was a significant predictor of
the scale parameter φ (χ2(4) = 6.08, p = .014, ω2 = .008, 95% CI [.00, .03]), but not of
r2 (χ2(4) = 2.77, p = .10). Those with warmer attitudes made overall more accurate
location judgments (contracting the relative distances between towns less) compared
to those with colder or more negative attitudes.
Attitudes toward a resolution of the Cyprus problem
We considered two questionnaire items that assessed participants’ attitudes
toward a resolution of the Cyprus problem. The first item asked participants to what
degree they wished that the negotiations between the two communities would result in
a mutually acceptable solution. Participants responded on a 1 (“I wish the negotiations
lead nowhere”) - 10 (“I wish the negotiations lead to a resolution”) scale. The second
item asked participants about how they would vote on a future referendum for the
settlement of the Cyprus problem. Participants responded on a 1 (Definite No vote) to
5 (Definite Yes vote) scale.
In the distance estimation task, the wish for a solution was a significant
predictor of signed error (χ2(1) = 4.34, p = .04; ω2= .005, 95% CI: [.00, .02]) and
absolute error (χ2(1) = 5.13, p = .02; ω2=.007, 95% CI: [.00, .03]). Those with the
greatest wish for a mutually acceptable resolution made smaller proportions of signed
and absolute error in their distance judgments. Participants’ intended vote on a future
referendum was not predictive of their proportion of signed error (χ2(1) = .63, p = .43)
or absolute error (χ2(1) = 2.33, p = .13).
In the location estimation task, wish for a resolution was a significant
predictor of how much participants distorted the placement of towns (r2: χ2(1) = 4.34,
p = .04, ω2= .006, 95% CI: [.00, .02]). Those who wished for a resolution to a greater
extent produced more accurate configurations of the towns. Wish for a resolution did
not significantly influence how much participants expanded or contracted the relative
locations of towns (φ: χ2(1) = 3.24, p = .07), but there was a tendency for greater
accuracy (less contraction) as wish for a resolution increased. Participants’ future vote
on a referendum predicted how much participants distorted their placement of towns
(r2: χ2(1) = 13.10, p < .001, ω2= .02, 95% CI: [.00, .05]) and how much they expanded
or contracted the relative locations of towns (φ: χ2(1) = 8.88, p = .003, ω2= .01, 95%
CI: [.00, .04]). As participants’ inclination to vote “Yes” increased, the more accurate
and less contracted their town placements were.
Contact with the other community
We also explored the effect of contact with the other community on spatial
estimates. We focused on a specific item from the Social Attitudes Questionnaire
(Q10.1, also not included in the PCA), which asked participants how frequently they
visited the other side since the opening of the UN buffer zone in 2003.
Cypriots’ frequency of visits to the other community was not associated with
their performance on the distance estimation task, however, it was associated with
performance on the location estimation task. Cypriots who visited the other side more
frequently produced more accurate configurations of town locations, in terms of both
r2 (χ2(4) = 20.56, p < .0001, ω2= .03, 95% CI: [.00, .05]) and the scale parameter φ
(χ2(4) = 12.16, p = .016, ω2= .01, 95% CI: [.00, .03]). Despite this effect of contact,
Cypriots still distorted the placement of town locations in the other community more
so than in their own (i.e., the interaction between participants’ community and the
subset of towns remained significant).
The proportion of signed error in the distance estimation task plotted against Factor
captures perceived social distance and the “thermometer” rating capturing feelings
a.
b.
distance underestimation and negative values (less willingness to live together) were associated with
“very cold or negatively” to 100°, indicating “very warm or positively”; the scale had 10° increments.
As shown, higher values on the thermometer scale were associated with distance underestimation.
Uncertainty for the trajectory of the expected values of the proportion of signed error is depicted with a
95% confidence interval band (in gray). We used the emmeans() function to compute 95% confidence
intervals around the fitted values of the lme4 model (using the Kenward-Roger method.)
(2) the proportion absolute error in the distance estimation task as dependent variables and Factor 1 from the PCA as a covariate.
Signed error Absolute error
R2 = .559 R2 = .184
AIC = 69736.5 AIC = 21378.6
Fixed Effects df ! ! p ω2 95% CΙ ! ! p ω2 95% CΙ
Intercept 1 3.36 .07 - - 4685.88 <.001 - -
Participants’ Community (GC vs TC) 1 1.20 .27 .0003 [.00, 0.01] .18 .68 -.001 -
Type of Town Pair 2 58.03 <.001 .26 [.15, .37] 103.16 <.001 .37 [.25, .46]
(across communities, within own community,
within other community)
Factor 1 (willingness to live together) 1 10.42 .001 .02 [.00, .04] .43 .51 -.0009 -
Note. The Type III Wald Chi-square test was used to calculate the significance of the overall effect of each predictor on the models. Each dependent measure is
modeled as a function of the centered and contrast coded predictors Community (Greek-Cypriot = -.5, Turkish-Cypriot= .5), and type of trial (simple coded with
“across communities” as the reference level). For each fixed effect and interaction, we report the Analysis of Deviance results, the probabilities of significance of the
type III Wald chi-square tests, the estimated effect size, and its 95% confidence interval. For each model, we report the Akaike’s Information Criterion (the model
with the lowest AIC score has the best fit to the data) and the conditional variance captured by the model (R2) explained by fixed and random effects.
Summary of results
Cypriots exhibited systematic distortions in their geographic estimates. In the
distance estimation task, the type of town pair they made judgments about mattered.
Cypriots made smaller errors (in terms of the proportion of signed and absolute error)
when estimating town distances in their own community than in the other community.
Cypriots underestimated distances in the other community, and this was not due to
their familiarity with the towns or the actual distances between towns. Similarly, in
the location estimation task, Cypriots exhibited more distortion when estimating the
locations of towns in the other community, contracting the relative location of towns.
In both tasks, performance was similar for Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots.
We found no evidence of a “border effect”. Although Cypriots made overall
larger proportions of absolute error when estimating the distances of towns between
the two communities (compared to towns within their own community), these errors
were in the direction of underestimation, rather than the expected overestimation, as
indicated by the proportion of signed error.
Cypriots’ attitudes toward and contact with the other community influenced
spatial judgments. Those who perceived less social distance from the other
community and had warmer feelings toward the other community underestimated the
distances of towns more, while those who perceived greater social distance
overestimated distances more. Those with the greatest wish for a mutually acceptable
resolution made smaller proportions of signed and absolute error in their distance
judgments and produced more accurate configurations of the towns. Additionally,
those who visited the other community more frequently and those who were more
likely to vote “yes” on a future referendum for a solution were overall more accurate
in estimating the location of towns. Importantly, these factors did not eliminate the
bias to distort the placement of town locations in the other community (vs. in one’s
own).
Discussion
We documented that Cypriots’ spatial judgments were influenced by ethnic
factors associated with how the two communities are distributed physically across the
island and by psychological factors concerning Cypriots’ attitudes toward the other
community. Specifically, we found that Cypriots’ spatial estimates were less accurate
when making judgments about towns in the other community than their own. In the
distance estimation task, Cypriots underestimated distances of towns within the other
community compared to distances within their own community. And similarly, in the
location estimation task, Cypriots distorted and contracted the estimates of locations
in the other community more so than in their own. These spatial biases were not due
to lack of familiarity, as we ruled this out in analyses that took the participants’ town
knowledge into account. We also ruled out the possibility that the underestimation of
distances in the other community was due to spatial factors (such as the actual
straight-line distance between towns) and topographic factors (whether there was a
mountain range between the towns vs. not).
Two regions, but no traditional “border” effect
Our findings confirm that Cypriots represent Cyprus as comprising two
psychological regions corresponding to the two areas where the two main ethnic
communities reside, evidenced by the distinction in judgments about one’s own vs.
the other community. However, we did not find evidence for a traditional “border
effect” for the UN buffer zone. In contrast to previous work demonstrating that
physical boundaries increase subjective distance judgments (Hirtle & Jonides, 1985;
McNamara, 1986; Carbon & Leder, 2005), we found no evidence for distance
overestimation for judgments of towns across the UN buffer zone: distances between
towns across communities were not overestimated compared to distances within a
community.
One possible explanation for the lack of a border effect is that Greek Cypriots
and Turkish Cypriots may reject the division imposed by the UN buffer zone. For
example, Greek Cypriots generally do not refer to the UN buffer zone as a “border”.
Even if they have positive attitudes toward Turkish Cypriots, Greek Cypriots
generally do not recognize the “Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus” as a legitimate
entity, commonly referring to the “TRNC” in Greek as “the pseudostate” (“το
ψευδοκράτος”). Although we did not have an item about the legitimacy of the
“TRNC” in our questionnaire, given that it was designed for use in both communities,
we have indirect evidence for Greek Cypriots’ nonacceptance of “TRNC” and of
future steps that could legitimize a federal state in the north. Whereas 65% of Turkish
Cypriots would (“probably” or “definitely”) vote “yes” on a referendum that reunified
the two communities under joint governance, only 22% of Greek Cypriots would do
so. Also, Greek Cypriots wished to lesser degree for intercommunal negotiations to
reach mutually acceptable solution1. The notion that Cyprus is already “whole”,
despite the UN buffer zone, is reflected in Greek Cypriot cultural artifacts, such as the
flag of the Republic of Cyprus, which depicts Cyprus as an undivided island. In
official maps of the Republic of Cyprus, the buffer zone is represented as a faint,
dotted line.
The distribution of responses to the question of the Social Attitudes Questionnaire on a future
referendum vote, across the 5 response options (Definitely No, Probably No, I’m not sure, Probably
Yes, Definitely Yes), was significantly different between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots, χ2(4) =
127.78, p < .001. Greek Cypriots (M = 7.76, SD = 2.62) and Turkish Cypriots (M= 8.70, SD = 2.28)
also differed significantly in the degree to which they wished for the negotiations to result in a
mutually acceptable solution t(490.26) = 4.48, p < .001). See Supplement C on OSF for more details.
Turkish Cypriots may also reject the division, albeit for different reasons, and
may focus on their Cypriot identity. The majority of Turkish Cypriots (63%)
identified as either completely or mostly Cypriot and only 2% identified as
completely Turkish2. A focus Cypriot (vs. Turkish) identity can be contextualized by
tensions resulting from demographic changes in the north since 1974 due to an influx
of Turkish settlers, who are generally more politically conservative and more
religious than the highly secular Turkish Cypriots. Indeed, in our sample, Turkish
Cypriots were overall progressive: more left-leaning politically and less religious than
Greek Cypriots. Altogether, although Cypriots represent the areas in which the two
ethnic communities reside as distinct psychological regions, they do not seem to
represent the dividing boundary of these regions as a conventional “border”.
Distance underestimation: Reference point or outgroup homogeneity effects?
Instead of finding overestimation across the UN buffer zone, we documented
the underestimation of distances (and the contraction of relative locations) in the other
community. We had predicted such underestimation because it is consistent with
reference point effects found by Maki (1981) and others (e.g., Friedman et al., 2012;
McNamara, 1986): people have increased discriminability for the locations that are
closer to them than farther away from them. However, we recognized after the fact
that this finding is also reminiscent of the outgroup homogeneity effect (e.g.,
Quattrone & Jones, 1980, and many others). If we were to apply this effect to spatial
reasoning, locations in the outgroup’s region (rather than characteristics of the
outgroup) are perceived as more similar / closer to one another compared to locations
in the ingroup's region.
2 The feelings of ethnic identification of Greek Cypriots were similar. 59% of Greek Cypriots identified
as either completely or mostly Cypriot and only 2% of Greek Cypriots identified as mostly or
completely Greek. See Supplement C on OSF for more detail.
The unique situation in Cyprus allowed us to distinguish between these two
possibilities in our dataset by considering the spatial judgments of participants from
the two communities who lived in Nicosia city (vs. not). According to the reference
point effect, when considering the whole sample, Greek Cypriots should select
geographical reference points close to their residence in the south, whereas Turkish
Cypriots should select a reference points close to their residence in the north, such
that their judgments about locations in the other community (which, on average, are
farther away from their location) are less accurate due to lower discriminability.
However, Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot Nicosia residents, who are in close
proximity, should select reference points around their area, in the middle of the island.
For Nicosia residents of both communities, the discriminability of town locations
should be worse as distance increases from their current location in both the north and
south direction. Therefore, compared to non-Nicosia city residents, Nicosia city
residents should show less underestimation of the distances between towns in the
other community (vs. their own).
We did not find evidence that the underestimation of distances in the other
community was due to a reference point effect (see these follow up analyses with
Nicosia city residence as a categorical predictor in supplement C on OSF). There was
no evidence that Nicosia residents made smaller underestimation errors than non-
Nicosia city residents when estimating the distance between towns in the other
community. This means that a purely cognitive bias (the reference point effect) cannot
account for the observed underestimation of distances in the other community, and
that social identity and its link to geographic regions needs to be taken into account.
The effect of social factors
Cypriots’ attitudes toward the other community were associated with
systematic biases in their spatial judgments. Cypriots with greater feelings of warmth
toward the other community underestimated distances more (higher proportions of
signed error in the distance estimation task) and were more accurate in terms of how
much they expanded or contracted the relative locations of towns (scale parameter
closer to 1 in the location task). Cypriots who had a greater wish for a mutually
acceptable solution to the Cyprus problem also made smaller proportions of signed
and absolute error, and distorted distances less. Similarly, Cypriots who were more
inclined to vote “Yes” on a future referendum distorted and contracted town locations
less. And those with greater willingness to live together with the other community
(perceiving less “social distance” with the other community) underestimated distances
more, whereas those less willing to live together overestimated distances more.
This latter finding partially replicates Carbon and Leder (2005), who found
that Germans with more negative attitudes toward reunification exhibited
overestimation. However, in Carbon and Leder (2005), overestimation was specific to
pairs that spanned across the former east-west border in Germany. In contrast, here,
where we found no evidence for a border effect, we document these biases across the
board, for all town pairs (whether within or across communities). One possible
explanation is that, in the case of Cyprus, those perceiving less social distance with
members of the other community consider all Cypriots to be part of the same group
and underestimate distances regardless of the presence of the UN buffer zone. As we
have noted, the majority of participants from each community (64% of Turkish
Cypriots and 59% of Greek Cypriots) identified as mostly or completely Cypriot, with
only a small proportion identifying as completely Turkish (2%) or as completely
Greek (2%).
Some aspects of Cypriots’ experience and their individual differences
mattered. In exploratory analyses, we found that those who visited the other side more
frequently produced more accurate configurations in the location estimation task.
Those who were displaced persons – and therefore had previously lived in the other
community – were also more accurate on both the location and distance estimation
tasks. Older participants who may have had more opportunities to visit the other
community prior to 1974 performed more accurately in both tasks. Nevertheless, none
of these factors (frequency of visits, internally displaced status, or participants’ age)
eliminated the biases documented (e.g., the reduction of scale) when making
judgments about towns in the other community (see Supplement C on OSF).
Conclusion
Consistent with the plausible-reasoning framework (Friedman & Brown,
2000a), the way geographic knowledge is formed and used is multiply determined by
factors that include social identity, social attitudes (such as those associated with
ethnic identity), and the semantic clustering of regions based on ethnic and political
factors. Both Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots used representations of the two
categorical psychological regions stemming from the sociopolitical context of Cyprus,
for plausible reasoning in the spatial estimation tasks. The distance estimation and
location estimation paradigms provided complementary evidence abou how Cypriots
represented geographical information. Future research should further probe into the
extent to which previously documented effects, such as the border effect, generalize
across different ecologically valid settings. Here, we did not document a border effect
and did not find support for the idea that town distances in the other community were
underestimated due to a reference point effect. This suggests that in some contexts
social factors are weighted more heavily such that they override the influence of basic
cognitive factors.
Altogether, our findings are in line with previous work showing that spatial
representations have multi-faceted origins, including social and ethnic factors that are
not usually associated with spatial representations. This study sheds light on how
spatial and non-spatial factors are weighted and coordinated when making spatial
judgments. It is not surprising that the interplay of these factors varies from one
geopolitical context to another (e.g., from Germany to Cyprus). This variation
underscores the importance of studying cognition–including spatial cognition–in
varied geopolitical contexts. Examining such variation systematically can shed light
on the effect of intercommunal relations on how people represent and reason about
their environment in regions experiencing conflict or division.