Employing Dissemination and Implementation Science to Promote Mental Health Equity
for Transgender Youth
Price, Maggi A.*.1,2, Barnett, Miya L.3, Cerezo, Alison4, Broder-Fingert, Sarabeth5, Matsuno,
Em6
1 Affirm Lab, Boston College, School of Social Work, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA.
2 Harvard University, Psychology Department, Cambridge, MA, USA.
3 PADRES Lab, University of California, Santa Barbara, Department of Counseling, Clinical,
and School Psychology, Santa Barbara, CA, USA.
4 Social & Health Equity Lab, University of California, Santa Barbara, Department of
Counseling, Clinical, and School Psychology, Santa Barbara, CA, USA.
5 University of Massachusetts, Chan School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics and Eunice
Kennedy Shriver Center, Worcester, MA USA.
6 EMpowerment Lab, Arizona State University, Counseling and Counseling Psychology,
Temple, AZ, USA.
* Correspondence:
Maggi A. Price, Ph.D.
maggiprice1@gmail.com
Keywords: transgender youth, evidence-based practice, dissemination and implementation
science
This submission is currently under review. Please do not copy or cite without the authors’
permission.
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 2
Abstract
Background
In recent years, the United States has witnessed increased transphobic rhetoric and legislation
aimed at restricting the rights of transgender youth, ranging from banning transgender youth
from school sports, to denying access to gender-affirming care. This climate has a detrimental
impact on the mental health of transgender youth - a community that already experiences
profound mental health risks due to their exposure to transphobia across multiple levels and in
myriad settings. To combat transphobia and its negative effects on transgender youth’s mental
health, scientific studies and methods addressing multiple levels and forms of transphobia are
needed.
Discussion
We review research on negative impacts of multilevel transphobia on transgender youth mental
health, the benefits of gender-affirming psychotherapy practices, and argue that these practices
should be re-defined as evidence-based practices (EBP). We then describe how dissemination
and implementation (D&I) science—the scientific study of multilevel strategies and methods that
facilitate the uptake of EBP —can be used to promote the mental health of transgender youth.
We call for increased D&I research to support the mental health needs of transgender youth. We
recommend two broad domains of D&I research: (1) identify, test, and scale EBPs for
transgender youth and (2) address contextual barriers to implementing these EBPs - specifically,
state-level laws/policies, and lack of access to gender-affirming psychotherapy. Methodological
recommendations and example studies are included in each domain.
Conclusions
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 3
To enhance mental health equity for transgender youth, we must leverage D&I science to
identify, test and scale EBPs for transgender youth, which we define as practices that have been
shown to be effective and acceptable for transgender people based on qualitative data,
observational research, and/or pilot studies. These research efforts must also address law/policy
barriers through advocacy and policy dissemination research, and overcome lack of access to
appropriate care via online/mobile interventions.
Contributions to the Literature
• Transgender youth face a disproportionately high risk for serious mental health problems
because of transphobia across multiple levels and settings.
• Transphobic laws/policies represent an urgent threat to transgender youth’s rights and
wellbeing.
• Dissemination and implementation science is well-positioned to address the profound
mental health needs of transgender youth.
• Gender-affirming therapy practices - which are tailored to meet the needs of transgender
people - have been shown to effectively improve transgender youth’s mental health, and
should be redefined as evidence-based practices.
• Several specific research domains and methods are suggested for increasing availability
of gender-affirming therapy practices, such as community-engaged research methods,
hybrid-effectiveness research, and policy dissemination research.
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 4
Employing Dissemination and Implementation Science to Promote Mental Health Equity
for Transgender Youth
Transgender youth (whose gender identity differs from their birth-assigned sex; e.g.,
transgender girls, nonbinary youth) are 2-3 times more likely to be diagnosed with depression or
anxiety,1 3 times more likely to consider suicide,2 and 6 times more likely to attempt suicide3
compared to cisgender youth (whose gender identity aligns with their birth-assigned sex).
Indeed, the mental health of transgender youth has been identified as a critical health concern by
the NIH,4 IOM,5 and CDC.3 In this paper, we review research indicating that these inequities are
driven in part by structural transphobia (defined below). Next, we review research on gender-
affirming psychotherapy practices, which recognize, support, and address the distinct and diverse
experiences of transgender people.6,7 We argue that gender-affirming psychotherapy practices
should be redefined as evidence-based practices (EBP). We then describe dissemination and
implementation (D&I) science, defined as the scientific study of multilevel strategies and
methods that facilitate the uptake of EBP by practitioners and policymakers.8 We conclude with
two recommended domains for future research which leverage D&I science to reduce structural
transphobia and its effects: (1) identify and scale EBPs for transgender youth and (2) address
contextual implementation barriers. Specific methods and examples are provided.
Structural Transphobia Contributes to Mental Health Inequities for Transgender Youth
Mental health inequities for transgender (vs. cisgender) youth are largely attributable to
transgender youth’s exposure to transphobia, defined as prejudice towards individuals who do
not conform to societal gender expectations and/or who are, or are perceived as, transgender.9
Transphobia exists across three levels: structural, interpersonal and internal. Structural
transphobia refers to restrictive laws/policies/ordinances and/or prejudicial attitudes at the
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 5
geographic level (e.g., a state banning gender-affirming medical services for transgender youth)10
or institutional level (e.g., prohibiting transgender youth from playing on sports teams aligned
with their affirmed gender).11–13 Interpersonal transphobia involves transphobia enacted between
people, such as discrimination, harassment, and assault (e.g., gender-based bullying).3,14–17
Internalized transphobia refers to the internalization of prejudicial messages (e.g., a transgender
youth believing they are inherently bad because of their gender).18
Studies demonstrate that transgender people living in places with more (vs. less) levels of
structural transphobia face higher risk for interpersonal stigma19 and worse mental health.10
Research also suggests that transgender youth living in areas with high structural transphobia are
less able to access appropriate care,20 which may help explain why over 50% of transgender
youth seeking mental health services do not receive them.21–23 Structural barriers to care are
likely heightened for many transgender youth with multiple stigmatized identities (e.g.,
transgender youth of Color).24 Research on other populations with multiple marginalized
identities suggest that multiple forms of structural stigma interact to worsen exposure to
discrimination,25 health risk,26 and access to care.27 Importantly, structural transphobia including
restrictive laws/policies is worsening as more states propose harmful legislation for transgender
youth, with some restricting access to potentially life-saving health interventions.11,28 The recent
proliferation of structural barriers to proven and life-saving health interventions for transgender
youth necessitates an urgent response from social scientists and practitioners.
Redefining Evidence Based Practice (EBP) for Transgender Youth
EBPs, historically defined in mental health as practices demonstrating efficacy relative to an
active control group in at least two randomized controlled trials (RCTs),29 are needed to address
transgender youth’s pressing mental health needs. However, the implementation of EBPs is
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 6
limited by the dearth of research on effective practices for transgender youth, as RCTs have
historically failed to assess for gender identity.30,31 To overcome this limitation, a recent study
using a proxy item to measure gender identity found that across four EBP RCTs, transgender
youth experienced worse treatment outcomes and less treatment satisfaction.32 This study adds to
research elucidating the many difficulties transgender youth and their families face when they
engage in mental health services (e.g., untrained providers) and their need for more tailored
supports.33,34 Taken together, it is possible that existing mental health treatments, including
EBPs, are not by themselves sufficient for addressing the needs of transgender youth.
Fortunately, recent research on gender-affirming psychotherapy practice, which recognizes
and addresses the distinct and diverse experiences of transgender people,6,7 demonstrates
promising outcomes for transgender youth. Specifically, EBPs adapted for transgender and
sexual minority youth (i.e., who do not identify as heterosexual; e.g., lesbian, bisexual)
evidenced positive effects in pilot trials.35,36 In contrast, psychotherapy that is not gender-
affirming is associated with lower treatment satisfaction,37 worse therapeutic alliance,38 and
psychotherapy termination.34 Finally, RCTs examining adapted EBPs using similar affirming
practices for sexual minority youth demonstrate preliminary efficacy in several RCTs,39–42 and
are associated with treatment engagement.43
While the above research highlights the benefits of gender-affirming psychotherapy
practices for transgender youth, this body of work is primarily observational, qualitative, and/or
based on pilot trial data.6 These potential limitations are largely due to historical lack of funding
and support for intervention research with transgender and other stigmatized populations44 and
the ethical drawbacks of withholding helpful care from a population with urgent needs. Indeed,
the only mental health intervention RCT with transgender people that we are aware of compared
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 7
two different types of gender-affirming psychotherapies with transgender adults, and both were
effective.45 Research on gender-affirming medical interventions is similarly hamstrung46,47
despite a large body of work demonstrating effectiveness. For example, puberty-blockers have
been safely and effectively for decades48 and studies suggest they may be life-saving for
transgender youth.49
Despite the demonstrated benefits of gender-affirming psychotherapy and medical practices
for transgender youth, several state policymakers50–55 are working to stop their provision, citing
the paucity of RCT data as rationale. To counteract these threats to the health and wellbeing of
transgender youth, our field must redefine EBP for transgender youth to encompass practices
based on non-randomized clinical trials, rich and rigorously analyzed qualitative data, and
observational research. In other words, given the link between gender-affirming practices and
improved mental health for transgender youth, we argue that gender-affirming practices are
EBPs, and D&I science is the ideal approach to scale them up for broad accessibility and use.
A Call for D&I Science to Promote Health Equity for Transgender Youth
D&I science can and should be leveraged to address the widening gaps between
laws/policies and EBPs for transgender youth. Scholars have recently called on the field to center
social justice, health equity, and antiracism in D&I science,56–59 including a recent commentary
specific to sexual minority and transgender health inequities.31 D&I science examines how
characteristics of providers, interventions, organizations, and policies impact every phase of
implementation - from identifying an EBP to making it a routine part of practice.60 One of the
major foci of D&I science is to improve the process of implementing effective practices, such as
gender-affirming psychotherapy practices, and scaling up their spread.61 In this section, we
describe two D&I research domains: (1) identify, test, and scale EBPs for transgender youth and
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 8
(2) address contextual barriers to EBP implementation. Within each, we highlight research
methods and provide examples of their application with transgender youth.
Recommendation 1: Identify and Scale EBPs for Transgender Youth
To enhance equity in EBP access and acceptability for transgender youth, we call for
increased research focused on identifying and scaling up existing EBPs (i.e., gender-affirming
psychotherapy practices) for transgender youth using community-engaged methods and
transdisciplinary partnerships. Below, we briefly describe these methods and provide examples
of their application.
Community-Engaged Research Methods. Since its inception, D&I research has
systematically involved the communities it seeks to help, including patients, providers, and other
key stakeholders (e.g., administrators, policymakers).62 In other words, D&I research often
incorporates community-engaged methods, defined as the involvement of community members
throughout the development, refinement, and testing of a practice, policy, or program.62 Specific
community-engaged methods frequently employed by D&I scientists include human-centered
design63 and community-based participatory action research,62 among others. Efforts to improve
the quality and implementation of EBPs for transgender youth should employ community-
engaged research methods to ensure that interventions and implementation plans are informed by
transgender youth, their caregivers, and other key community members (e.g., gender-affirming
care expert providers).1,64,65
Example of Community-Engaged Research. The application of community-engaged
research methods for identifying an EBP needing tailoring for transgender youth was illustrated
through a recent qualitative study. Family Navigation is an EBP focused on disparity reduction,
in which community health workers help families overcome barriers to care by coordinating
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 9
different systems of care (e.g., medical and mental health services).66(p) To understand the
experiences of families of transgender youth receiving Family Navigation, we conducted
qualitative interviews with transgender youth, their caregivers, and community health workers
(referred to as “family navigators”) involved in the program. Our findings suggested that Family
Navigation may be a good fit for transgender youth given their need to navigate multiple
systems, including medical, school, and mental health services. However, family navigators
reported low self-efficacy in serving transgender youth and families, and communicated a need
for additional training. For example, they wanted to learn terminology, and how to ask about
pronouns and discuss gender with parents of transgender youth. In addition, transgender youth of
Color and their caregivers shared that working with family navigators from their own cultures
helped them connect with culturally appropriate resources.67 Accordingly, the original Family
Navigation training program for community health workers is being adapted to address the needs
of these stakeholders.
Transdisciplinary Partnerships. D&I research is transdisciplinary and not limited to
any specific field. Instead, it incorporates perspectives from health services research, medical
anthropology, psychology, social work, public health, economics, and systems engineering,
among others.68,69 Research teams including multiple disciplines are ideal for addressing mental
health inequities for transgender youth given their cross-sector care needs (e.g., medical
interventions, legal support), and the multifaceted barriers to care they face.70 Researchers with
specializations in health policy, pediatrics, social work, and psychology bring important
perspectives to enhancing equity for transgender youth and their families and could contribute to
D&I research to enhance mental health equity. For instance, the development of an integrated
care model for transgender youth might involve psychologists contributing expertise on
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 10
intervention development, pediatricians providing insight on health care models and medical
interventions, social workers developing systems to aid families in identifying services and
financial supports, and community health workers who help link families to services.
Example of transdisciplinary research. Though we are not aware of a completed
implementation study specific to transgender youth that employed an interdisciplinary approach,
scholars in this domain are developing resources based on the combined wisdom of community
members and transdisciplinary professionals. For instance, Katz et al.71 developed parenting
guidelines to support transgender children based on input from a relatively large sample (N=121)
encompassing transgender youth, their parents, medical professionals, researchers, and mental
health care providers. In other words, this study employed community-engaged research
practices by systematically incorporating feedback from the transgender youth and their
caregivers and providers representing multiple specialties central to the provision of care for
Future studies should consider identifying optimal dissemination strategies for these guidelines
given their utility for multiple parties, such as parents, providers, and policymakers.
Recommendation 2: Address Contextual Implementation Barriers
Context is critical in D&I science.8 Both the outer context (i.e., the environment external
to the institution providing the EBP) and inner context (i.e., characteristics within an institution)
impact implementation processes.60,72 Context influences whether and which EBPs are adopted,
whether they are implemented with fidelity, and whether their implementation is sustained.
Structural transphobia encompasses both outer context barriers (e.g., state-level policies banning
affirming care), and inner context barriers (e.g., lack of inclusive gender identity options on
intake forms). We highlight two barriers - state-level policy and lack of access to gender-
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 11
affirming support - and identify solutions to each.
Barrier: State-level laws/policies.
Laws and policies inhibiting the rights and wellbeing of transgender youth are rapidly
expanding in their reach (i.e., states are increasingly passing transphobic bills) and breadth (e.g.,
affecting school practices and health care). Reviews of these laws/policies are provided
elsewhere (e.g., see Kuper et al.73 for a recent review). We add to these reviews by highlighting
how laws/policies that do not explicitly focus on transgender youth can still harm them,
particularly for those with multiple marginalized identities (e.g., transgender youth of Color). We
then conclude this section with solutions to these barriers - through political advocacy and
rigorous D&I research.
Example of two recently passed bills in Florida. On March 9, 2022, the governor of
Florida signed an anti-immigrant policy into law (Senate Bill 168),74 which requires law
enforcement to work with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) when processing
any domestic or criminal activity. This law diminishes undocumented peoples’ ability to report
crime and/or seek law enforcement protection for fear that they will be reported to ICE and
deported from the U.S. On March 28, 2022, the governor also signed House Bill 1557,75
commonly referred to as the “Don’t Say Gay or Trans Bill.” Together, these bills restrict the
rights of transgender immigrants, especially transgender immigrant youth, from protection from
law enforcement and full participation in school.
Solution: Disseminate research and resources to policymakers and the public
The growing scientific evidence supporting the positive effects of gender-affirming practices for
transgender youth, alongside the tumultuous policy landscape, necessitate (1) political advocacy
participation by researchers and providers, and (2) studying policy implementation.
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 12
Political advocacy. Political advocacy participation is needed at the federal, state, and
local (e.g., school district) levels and should involve sharing scientific findings and standards of
care with policymakers. Policies that target transgender youth both explicitly and indirectly
should be targeted. For example, non-exclusionary discipline policies (e.g., referring to in-school
supports, such as counseling) should be promoted, as they are associated with fewer disparities in
suspensions for sexual minority, transgender youth, and/or youth of Color relative to more
punitive policies.61 For a comprehensive review of methods to advocate for and support
transgender youth, including political advocacy, please see Kuper et al.73
Example of political advocacy. Dr. Christy Olezeski, a Clinical Psychologist and
Associate Professor at Yale University, and her mental health care, medical, and legal
colleagues, have disseminated research within public testimony to successfully pass or prevent
state-level policies and laws relevant to transgender youth. For instance, Connecticut Bill
HB6695,76 which sought to ban conversion therapy, was successfully passed in 2017 after the
team submitted public and written testimony citing research on its detrimental effects.77,78
Olezeski and her colleagues also provided public testimony to prevent the passage of laws
restricting the provision of gender-affirming medical care for transgender youth in Texas,
Alabama,79 and Florida.80,81 Such efforts required the team to stay abreast of local and national
legislative activities. Because the proposed policies in each of these three states were similar, the
team cited the same or similar research in each of their testimonies - making their efforts more
efficient. We encourage readers to review their rebuttal statements, which are available online
(see references). We also highlight a fact sheet developed by the Biden administration (also
referenced) outlining steps and policies to counter state-level legislation discriminating against
transgender youth, which can be shared or adapted for policymakers.82
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 13
Policy dissemination research. Beyond political advocacy by individual providers and
scholars, D&I research has begun identifying optimal methods for influencing policy. “Policy
dissemination research” examines policy makers' decision making, such as what types of
evidence and factors (e.g., political party affiliation) influence their decision making processes.61
Youth mental health intervention research on dissemination strategies (i.e., the development and
distribution of materials about issue- or intervention-specific materials) suggests that materials
should be brief, include economic evaluation data, be specific to the locale of the policymaker,
and tailored to the priorities, party affiliation,83 and beliefs84 of the specific policymaker.85 As we
are not aware of policy research specific to transgender youth, we suggest that these findings be
leveraged to develop and test strategies for influencing policymakers who can influence
laws/policies affecting transgender youth. For example, dissemination strategies should be
tailored for politically conservative policymakers, who may have more transphobic beliefs,
compared to more socially liberal policymakers.
Barrier: Lack of access to gender-affirming supports
Adequate mental health care for transgender youth is limited across the country due in
part to the dearth of mental health providers trained in gender-affirming practices.86–88 This
problem is worse in places with higher (vs. lower) structural transphobia. In fact, a recent study
demonstrates that in states with more transphobic laws and policies, there are significantly fewer
mental health providers who work with transgender youth.20 To overcome this barrier, we
recommend the development, testing, and widescale implementation of online/mobile
interventions that help transgender youth directly, and improve the ability of adults in their lives
(e.g., therapists, parents) to support them.
Solution: Online/mobile interventions for transgender youth and their support systems
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 14
Online/mobile interventions (i.e., mHealth interventions) represent a promising
implementation strategy to overcome barriers to care for transgender youth living in locations
with more structural transphobia. These interventions provide private and remote access to
psychological services or training (e.g., for providers) on a computer and/or mobile device and
can be offered for free or at low cost.89 Moreover, preliminary research suggests that they are
effective in enhancing identity affirmation, self-efficacy, and coping skills for racially diverse
sexual minority and transgender youth.90,91 Similarly, an online intervention was developed to
help parents learn supportive behaviors for their transgender children which parents found highly
relevant and helpful.92
Example of online/mobile intervention. To address the widespread need for training in
gender-affirming psychotherapy practices for mental health providers, Price93 is developing an
online training program for mental health providers in gender-affirming practices. The training is
being developed based on an extensive review of clinical and research literature and community-
engaged research practices (e.g., working with transgender youth, their parents, and expert
providers using human-centered design methods). To meet the needs of busy mental health
providers, the intervention will be online and self-paced (i.e., asynchronous) and draws on
behavioral science (e.g., targeting mechanisms known to result in behavior change) to be
maximally effective. Moreover, it employs hybrid effectiveness-implementation methods, which
allow for the simultaneous examination of intervention effectiveness and implementation
processes and outcomes.94 Hybrid studies can speed up the implementation process, and are ideal
for addressing the dearth of research on EBPs for transgender youth and the complex
implementation challenges posed by structural transphobia.
Conclusion
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 15
This commentary provides an overview of multilevel transphobia, emphasizing structural
transphobia, and its associations with mental health inequities for transgender youth. We paper
review research on effective mental health care practices for transgender youth and argue that
EBP be redefined to include gender-affirming practices. We conclude with two recommended
research domains for D&I science to promote mental health for transgender youth. The first
domain focuses on the development, testing, and scaling-up of EBPs (i.e., gender-affirming
practices) for transgender youth. Within this domain, we recommend the use of community-
engaged research methods and transdisciplinary partnerships and provide examples. The second
recommended D&I research domain involves identifying and addressing contextual barriers to
implementing EBPs for transgender youth: harmful laws/policies, and limited access to care. We
propose solutions for overcoming each barrier, including political advocacy, policy
dissemination research, and online/mobile interventions.
Our recommendations for the field of D&I science to promote mental health equity for
transgender youth embrace two realities that can at times feel in conflict. First, researchers must
focus on the feasibility of scaling up when they design, adapt, and test EBPs for transgender
youth and their families. At the same time, we recognize that contextual barriers can make
implementing these interventions challenging. Accordingly, we include recommendations for
advocacy and research work to influence policy. We hope this commentary inspires readers to
pursue D&I research and advocacy to address the urgent needs of transgender youth.
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 16
List of abbreviations
D&I: Dissemination and implementation
EBP: Evidence-based practice
NIH: National Institute of Health
IOM: Institute of Medicine
CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
RCT: Randomized control trial
ICE: U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate. Not applicable.
Consent for Publication. Not applicable.
Availability of Data/Materials. Not applicable.
Competing Interests. The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence
of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict
of interest.
Funding. No grants were used to support the open access fee for this article. NIMH grant R01
MH117123-02S1 was used to support the time, effort, and ideas outlined in this paper for Drs.
Barnett & Broder-Fingert. Dr. Price’s time and effort are supported by NIMH grant
K23MH124670.
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 17
Authors’ Contributions. All authors contributed to the conception and design of this paper. MP
wrote the first draft of the introduction and MB wrote the first draft of the discussion. AC, SBF,
and EM wrote sections of the manuscript. All authors contributed to manuscript revision, and
read and approved the submitted version.
Acknowledgements. The authors thank Moumina Khan, Shuai (“Eddy”) Jiang, and Kara
Johansen for their help with formatting references and copy editing, formatting, and submitting
the manuscript.
D&I SCIENCE AND TRANSGENDER YOUTH 18