LGBTQ Visibility Online 1
LGBTQ Visibility Measured Consistently and Persistently in US
Twitter Bios from 2012 through 2023
Abstract
LGBTQ visibility is an often discussed but rarely quantified concept. Here we operationalize
visibility as the prevalence of active social media accounts with an LGBTQ signifier in the profile bio and
measure the prevalence of such accounts consistently and persistently at daily resolution over twelve
years in the United States. We found that prevalence for all LGBTQ signifiers increased. The term ‘gay’
grew most rapidly. Accounts with LGBTQ signifiers were especially visible on days corresponding to
political or violent events. The rainbow flag emoji also increased in prevalence, including a notable
ratchet each June (Pride Month). This work is a case study in ipseology. Social scientists should
embrace ipseology as a new opportunity to observe how people describe their selves to a public audience.
Introduction
LGBTQ visibility is an often discussed but rarely quantified concept. Here we operationalize
visibility online as the prevalence of active social media accounts with an LGBTQ signifier in the profile
bio. This affords unique opportunities. First, it allows precise measurement at high temporal resolution.
Our methods estimate prevalence from about 200,000 observations per day. Second, with this
operationalization, we can define and estimate the frequency of change events. Specifically, each day we
count how many individuals add or remove an LGBTQ signifier from their profile bio. These methods
have a name – ipseology – that we will discuss in more detail below. We implore social scientists
interested in identity to follow the example of the current work: measure consistently, persistently and
precisely with concise operationalization.
LGBTQ Visibility
Historically, those with LGBTQ identities have been shunned, persecuted, and marginalized
(Noga-Styron, et al., 2012). In recent history, in the United States, however, the stigma has begun to
dissipate. Public attitudes toward homosexuality have been decreasingly negative for decades (Gallup
Inc., 2022). Broader recognition of civil rights for LGBTQ citizens has proceeded fitfully (Geidner,
2019).
As the stigma has lessened, the proportion of the US population that identify as LGBTQ has
increased (Jones, 2022). Some in the LGBTQ community have advocated for increasing LGBTQ
“visibility.” At the individual level, visibility varies from keeping one’s identity secret – being closeted –
to identifying openly, frequently and publicly (Lasser & Tharinger, 2003). In a pamphlet titled
“Transgender Visibility – A Guide to Being You,” the Human Rights Campaign Foundation strongly
encouraged transgender individuals to express that identity (Human Rights Campaign Foundation, 2014).
In the text, being visible was associated with “the joy of living an open, honest life and engaging in
relationships as a whole and authentic person.” The pamphlet concluded with a message from the
President of the Foundation in which it is stated, “Progress toward equality is made when we choose to
share our lives with others. This simple yet profound step is the greatest political action any of us can
take.”
LGBTQ Visibility Online 2
Those outside the community have also affirmed the importance of visibility. On March 31,
2022, US President Biden stated, “To everyone celebrating Transgender Day of Visibility, I want you to
know that your president sees you.” (The White House, 2022). On that day, the Biden-Harris
administration noted that over 14 percent of their appointees identified as LGBTQI+ and announced new
efforts for “advancing visibility for transgender Americans.” (Biden-Harris Administration, 2022)
In academic research, many have studied LGBTQ individuals' visibility management practices
(Dewaele et al., 2014; Lasser & Tharinger, 2003; Twist et al., 2017). As originally defined, visibility
management is “the ongoing process by which GLB adolescents make careful, planned decisions about
whether they will disclose their sexual orientation, and if they decide to disclose, to whom and how they
disclose, and how they will monitor the presentation of their sexual orientation” (pg. 237, Lasser &
Tharinger, 2003). As Kitzie (2017) and others have noted, individuals must contend with the affordances
and constraints of platforms as they manage their visibility online. For instance, on Twitter, the free text
format of a profile biography allows individuals to choose any set of signifiers for self-expression, but the
phenomenon of context collapse (Marwick & Boyd, 2011) means these self-expressions are widely
visible to others. In digital space, these kinds of negotiations present specific challenges; public facing
visibility may be attractive to some, yet the risk of a disclosure to the wrong audience remains.
Ipseology
The methods described here are one manifestation of ipseology. Ipseology is the study of human
identity using large datasets and computational methods (Jones, 2023). Ipseology refers to the study of
ipseity - selfhood, individuality and the elements of identity - at scale. Signifiers (i.e. the words, phrases,
abbreviations and emojis) found within personally expressed identity text are the objects of study.
Prevalence of use is the primary measure. Prevalence allows comparison across time and space. Using
data at scale allows for precise, consistent and persistent measurement.
Ipseology requires diachronic corpora of self-authored self-descriptions. In other words, the
targets of study are timestamped observations of the language individuals chose to describe themselves.
Social media bios are a fecund source of self-descriptive text generally, and are especially appropriate for
the current purpose: quantitative estimation of online LGBTQ visibility.
Benefits of Ipseological Measurement of Online LGBTQ Visibility
Here we present a method and results for measurement of LGBTQ visibility online in the United
States. Our measure of LGBTQ visibility online is deliberately simple: in the population of observed
individuals, we estimate the prevalence of those using an LGBTQ signifier to describe themselves. The
observed individuals in our data were US Twitter users. We argue the current method has strong
construct validity (i.e. it measures what it purports to – LGBTQ visibility online). The measurement also
offers other advantages.
First, the operationalization is concise and precise. We expect that human raters would be in high
agreement if they were presented the task: read this text and indicate whether it contains the word gay or
not. A computer program can complete this task with the benefit of formal definitions of "contain" and
"the word gay." The program will also complete the task millions of times with exactly the same results.
Second, it provides a consistent and persistent measure. The method can be applied with no changes to
past, present and future data. It is unobtrusive and privacy-preserving. The method is applied only to
publicly released data, and the measurements produced contain no individually identifying information.
Further, the measurements produced have strong external and temporal validity. We discuss each of these
in turn.
LGBTQ Visibility Online 3
The method provides external validity, i.e. generalization outside a research context. Here we
apply the method to users of Twitter likely within the United States. Analysis of self-authored social
media profile text has the advantage of observing actual, public self-descriptions rather than lab- or
interview-acquired responses. No item needed to be contrived or implemented by the researchers.
Rather, millions of individuals responded to the prompt: Describe yourself in 160 characters or less. The
current work makes use of Twitter because of data availability, but the method could be generalized
equally well to any online platform or any collection of self-authored self-descriptive text.
Temporal validity – despite its importance – is nearly universally neglected in social science
(Munger, 2019). Research results have temporal validity if they generalize across time. Because people
and societies change, any knowledge generated about them necessarily decays over time. This is an
inconvenient truth for social science. Most studies are conducted in one limited moment, but the
expectation imparted by training and culture in the social sciences is that one should claim universal and
final knowledge. A popular strategy is to ignore time (or summarize over it) and not speak of temporal
validity.
Here we take the opposite approach by placing time at the center of our analysis. Specifically, we
examined temporal trends in the way active US Twitter users described themselves. To begin, we
sampled self-authored biographies from online profiles at high frequency. We did this to study the
choices people made when describing themselves with words. Call the output of this act: personally
expressed identity. It is personal – the individual is describing themselves. It is expressed – these are
words the individual chooses to write, where others might see them. And it describes identity – the
explicit purpose of the text is description of the author. From such samples, compiled for many users
(multiple millions of US Twitter users in the present work) one can draw inferences about temporal trends
in aggregate personally expressed identity in a population. Personally expressed identity text is the target
of ipseological inquiry.
Previous Work and the Current Study
Ipseological research has mostly seen use in the study of US politics. It has been documented
that from 2015 through 2018, Americans increasingly used political words to describe themselves
(Rogers & Jones, 2021). Subsequently, Eady et al. (2022) observed that Americans removed words
associated with Donald Trump and the Republican party from their bios in response to the January 6,
2020 attack on the US Capitol. A dramatic increase in identity activism was evident in US bios following
the Russian invasion of Ukraine (Hare & Jones, 2023). Essig and Dellaposta (2024) characterized the
words that distinguished "liberal" and "conservative" bios in the US in 2019.
Any set of signifiers can and should be studied, however. Here we focus on signifiers of LGBTQ
identities. LGBTQ signifiers were any of: lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, queer. We take this set of words
to be self-evident. They are the most straightforward, least ambiguous words an individual could use to
be visible as an LGBTQ individual.
Methods
Code and Data Availability
Observing Personally Expressed Identity Data with Online Profile Biographies
In this manuscript, we examined personally expressed identity text. Personally expressed identity
text is self-authored, self-descriptive language that has been published where others might see. The
LGBTQ Visibility Online 4
source of this text was Twitter profile biographies. A bio appears on the user’s profile page just under
their photo and name. A bio is limited to 160 characters maximum. About 15% of US users leave their
bios empty. We do not exclude empty bio users, because choosing to leave one’s self-description blank is
a valid choice, and this in itself tells us something about how people choose to present themselves within
digital space.
As a source for bios, we chose to use the random sample of 1% of all tweets that was provided
through the Twitter API. Although the tweet stream was the initial source, we wish to be clear that we
always count unique users and never tweets. Here we used a daily-resolution, cross-sectional sample of
US users filtered from the tweet stream.
First, tweets from users with non-US locations were filtered out. The geocoding function used to
locations with a low false positive rate and to be understandable to anyone with Python and regular
expression experience. The function takes as input the profile location text provided by the user. Based
on this, it marks likely non-US locations (e.g. “Afghanistan”, “Scotland”) and likely US locations (e.g.
“Cleveland, OH”, “Staten Island”). The logic for defining US location patterns was developed by
iteratively comparing the ways in which Twitter users described their locations and the output of the
Second, one and only one profile observation per user was randomly selected per day. In the
tweet stream, each tweet was accompanied by a snapshot of the author’s profile at the moment of writing
the tweet. In one day of tweets, when a user was observed tweeting more than once, we grouped their
profiles into a set and chose exactly one observation at random. Thus, the denominator in every
prevalence calculation contains the count of unique users observed tweeting that day – whether they were
observed tweeting once or 100 times. Similarly, the numerator contains the count of unique users whose
bio contained a signifier of interest.
Operationalization of LGBTQ Visibility
We defined LGBTQ visibility on the Twitter platform as the prevalence of unique tweet authors
with an LGBTQ signifier within their bio. We used a short list of signifiers – namely, lesbian, gay,
these five signifiers. Specifically, we counted users whose bio matched the regular expression
\blesbian\b|\bgay\b|\bbisexual\b|\btrans\b|\bqueer\b. This pattern matched text where any of the five
signifiers was present as a whole word. The requirement to match the whole word increased specificity.
For instance, “transportation” and “queers” did not count as matches.
For each individual signifier, we counted users whose bio contained the signifier as a token. We
obtained tokens by splitting each bio on each instance of whitespace or word boundaries. It should be
noted that we always counted unique users and not the tokens themselves. For instance, a bio that read
“gay, gay, gay” would count as one match, not three. Emoji signifier prevalence was operationalized in
the same manner.
Operationalization of Visibility Relative to Expectation
For each prevalence series, we fit a loess model to the daily estimates. The model predictions are
for each day. (Note that this is not the same usage for “expected value” one might see elsewhere.) In
other words, we defined the model output for each day as the prevalence one would observe if all trends
(local and longer-distance) continued without deviation.
LGBTQ Visibility Online 5
We compared expected prevalence values to observed prevalence values by taking the ratio of
observed to expected. If the value was 1.0, the observed prevalence matched exactly the model
prediction. If the value was less than 1.0, we took this as an indication that the day’s observed prevalence
was below what one should expect. Values above 1.0 indicated an overabundance beyond expectation.
Operationalization of Add and Delete Events
Note that we only sought to observe how prevalence on the platform changed over time. Our
cross-sectional daily estimates were sufficient for this task. However, we would not blame the reader for
asking the next logical question: Was there evidence for within-individual change, or could observed
trends reflect only changes in the relative activity level of static subsets of the user pool? Thankfully, our
data is rich and voluminous enough to allow longitudinal analysis.
Rogers and Jones (2021) demonstrated increasing politicization of Twitter bios in both annual
cross-sectional and annual longitudinal samples. The longitudinal sample consisted of those users
observed in each and every year. The current work employed daily samples, however, and attrition would
drop the size of the sample to zero if we required an observation each and every day. Instead, we swept
forward through our daily samples in search of Add and Delete events.
Add and Delete events are defined this way: "Events are tallied when a bio is observed at two
time points. An Add event occurs when the token of interest is not present at the first moment and is
present at the second moment. A Delete event occurs when the token of interest is present at the first
moment and not present at the second moment." (Jones, 2023) To observe Add and Delete events, we
used the following procedure: We swept through each daily sample from 2012-01-01 through 2023-05-
10. Each observed bio was stored in memory. If a previous bio was available in memory, we compared
its set of signifiers with the presently observed bio and recorded Add and Delete events. Then, the
presently observed bio replaced the previous bio.
Add and Delete events were thus observed and tallied at the first available observation that
indicated an event, but not necessarily the date of revision. This was not ideal, but the best one can do
without full observation of the entire population (which is and was not possible for anyone, except
perhaps some inside the Twitter corporation). Nevertheless, we believe the daily incidence of Add and
Delete events is valuable, because it provides a (noisy) signal of when and if LGBTQ prevalence changed
due to users' bio revisions.
Results
The prevalence of users with LGBTQ identity signifiers within their bio increased greater than
2012, we estimate 34 had a self-description containing an LGBTQ signifier. In 2023, we estimate the
number as 158 per 10,000. These estimates are based on an average of 261,239 users per day in 2012 and
159,215 in 2023; a t-test indicated a significant difference, p < 0.001.
LGBTQ Visibility Online 6
and whose bio contained one or more LGBTQ identity signifiers. LGBTQ identity signifiers were
lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, queer. The blue line is a loess smoothed curve.
than queer in 2012, but queer grew rapidly in visibility relative to lesbian. Queer increased in prevalence
at a rate of 3.4 per 10,000 per year. For reference, per (Jones, 2021), tokens change in prevalence at a
mean annual rate of zero with a standard deviation of +/-3 per 10,000. Trans also increased quickly
relative to other signifiers in this period: +3.7 per 10,000 per year. Even faster growth is apparent for gay
(+4.8 per year). Some individuals choose different words (e.g. transgender rather than trans) to express
their identity and others express identities not included here (e.g. asexual). Figures A1, A2, A3, A4 and
A5 in the Appendix explore some alternatives.
LGBTQ Visibility Online 7
estimates of the prevalence (per 10,000) of US Twitter users who tweeted that day and whose bio
contained that particular signifier. Each day, about 200,000 unique US Twitter users were observed
tweeting.
speculative attributions for each. Every unexpectedly low estimate is temporally aligned with a high-
profile professional sports event. One observes a denominator effect in each case. By denominator
effect, we mean that the total number of active users was unusually large, and the number of LGBTQ
active users did not increase by the same magnitude. For instance, on February 7, 2016, an unusually
large number of users were observed as active: 285,610 as compared to 208,795 the day before and
231,600 the day after. The number of active users with LGBTQ signifiers in their bio increased as well,
but not as much as the total.
Ratio of Observed Date Attribution
Prevalence to Expected
0.81 2020-01-26 NBA Star Kobe Bryant dies in a helicopter crash.
0.86 2016-02-07 NFL Super Bowl 50
0.87 2015-04-30 First Day of NFL Draft, 2015
0.87 2021-02-07 NFL Super Bowl LV
0.87 2016-06-19 NBA Finals (Cleveland Cavaliers First Championship)
1.14 2019-06-01 Colorado bill banning conversion therapy for minors and
first day of Pride Month
1.16 2016-01-02 Occupation of the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge
1.18 2017-08-12 Unite the Right march in Charlottesville, Virginia
1.18 2017-01-21 Womens’ March following the Inauguration of US
President Donald Trump
1.37 2016-06-12 Pulse Nightclub Shooting
Every one of the top five days with higher-than-expected LGBTQ prevalence coincided with a
high-profile political or violent event. Users with an LGBTQ signifier were unusually likely to be
observed tweeting on the day of the Pulse Nightclub Shooting, in which a gunman killed 49 people at a
gay nightclub in Orlando. They were also more likely to be observed tweeting on the day of the 2017
Womens’ March.
are frequently used either to identify as LGBTQ or to express support for others who do. Of the emojis,
the Rainbow Flag has reached greatest prevalence. The prevalence appears to ratchet with each June
(Pride Month). The Transgender Flag has increased in prevalence sixteen-fold from 2019 to 2023.
LGBTQ Visibility Online 8
(per 10,000) of US Twitter users who tweeted that day and whose bio contained that particular
signifier. Minor breaks correspond to July 1 each year; note that the rainbow flag emoji appears to
ratchet up in June in many years.
Figures 1-3 illustrate our primary observation: LGBTQ visibility within Twitter bios increased.
However, we imagine some readers will wonder if the increase was due primarily or entirely to new users
signing up for the platform. To address this, here we present daily Add and Delete Event incidence
of Add events matched or exceeded Delete events.
LGBTQ Visibility Online 9
series). Green lines depict Add incidence and red lines Delete incidence. On most days, for most
signifiers, the number of Add events matched or exceeded the number of Delete events.
smoothed series filtered to the 2020 calendar year, with the addition of points depicting each day's
observed count. The 2020 peaks occurred near in time to late May and early June. In the US, this
moment followed the killing of George Floyd on May 25, 2020.
series. Add counts are green; Delete counts are red. Each series contained a peak of activity near in time
to late May / early June, 2020.
Discussion
Consistent, persistent measurement should be the standard method of social science now and in
the future. Here we have demonstrated it can be done: LGBTQ visibility online was estimated from
random, high-frequency samples of Twitter activity. We estimated prevalence at daily resolution with
hundreds of thousands of observations per day and ultimately millions in total. LGBTQ signifiers
represent but one element of identity. Nowcasting (Bok et al., 2018) of all aspects of personally
expressed identity could be achieved through modest investment in research infrastructure.
There are several points that should be made to avoid misinterpretation of these estimates. First,
the current work is not an attempt to estimate how many Americans have LGBTQ identities. Nor is it to
estimate that proportion within US Twitter users. Instead, we have estimated the prevalence of US
Twitter accounts with a public expression of LGBTQ identity within the profile bio. This fulfills our
promise to measure LGBTQ visibility online.
Additionally, the authors are all too aware there is no one-to-one mapping of Twitter accounts to
human beings. There exist “bot” accounts that are not human but rather automated scripts (Varol et al.,
2017). There exist “sockpuppet” accounts (Kumar et al., 2017) – the same person controls multiple
LGBTQ Visibility Online 10
profiles – which would affect both numerator and denominator of prevalence estimates in unknown ways.
“Inauthentic” accounts may present as individuals who do not exist (Gurajala et al., 2016). Each of these
is a source of measurement error, but measurement error is an unavoidable cost of performing social
science generally and big data analysis specifically (Salganik, 2019). The advantages – precision,
temporal resolution and scale – vastly outweigh the disadvantages.
We re-emphasize that we aimed to measure visibility. Our daily samples of users derived from
random samples of tweets. Thus, we are estimating prevalence within the daily active, tweeting
subpopulation. We did this purposely, because the goal was measurement of visibility, and these
accounts (tweet authors) were most visible. We measured explicit, self-provided signifiers in the bio,
because these are unambiguous signals meant to be seen. Being seen is the salient point; even if these
signals were sent from inauthentic users, they would still reach the many more users who read online than
post online. Frequently, we are asked to “validate” this measure, but continue to resist these calls. It
would be neither possible (see Hays et al., 2023), nor appropriate to the aim of the endeavor to adjudicate
which accounts are “real” or which accounts are properly LGBTQ. That is to say nothing of the ethics of
deciding who counts and for what. Researchers who doubt the trends presented here are free to compare
to other sources of data or to collect samples of authentic accounts (by their definition).
The current data complement and extend survey data. Consider the General Social Survey (GSS).
In 2012, the GSS sexual orientation post-stratified population estimates were 1% for "gay, lesbian,
homosexual" and 2% for "bisexual" (NORC at the University of Chicago, 2024). These increased to 3%
and 6% respectively in 2022. The American National Election Studies estimated the proportion of total
respondents choosing "Homosexual or gay or lesbian" at 1.99% in 2012 and 2.3% in 2020. "Bisexual"
moved from 1.8% to 2.86%. Similar multifold increases were present in the GSS and the visibility series
we derived from Twitter data. However, the Twitter series offered consistent, persistent estimation at
finer temporal resolution (daily), finer signifier resolution (gay and lesbian could be estimated separately)
and with vastly more precision (millions of observations rather than a few thousand). In their current
forms, these surveys could never provide longitudinal daily event results.
While not the primary focus of the current work, analysis of longitudinal events (i.e. Adds and
Deletes) points to exciting opportunities for future work. To illustrate, in the Appendix, we present an
observational replication and extension of Eady et al., 2023. Among tweet authors, we observed that the
prevalence of Trump, MAGA and republican signifiers decreased following the January 6, 2021 attack on
the US Capitol. Further, we found that Delete events outnumbered Add events for Trump but not Biden
in this period. Our results match the previous findings. We expect that following these trends into 2024
would be fascinating. Whichever identity signifiers one is interested in, there exists more than a decade's
worth of data on prevalence and temporal trends at both population and individual levels.
The current work is based on the assumption that language choices reveal much about the minds
of authors and the collective consciousness of the societies in which they are embedded. Many have
adopted this idea and applied it to the language of published books (e.g. Michel et al., 2011). The
surprisingly broad successes of word embeddings and large language models hint that analysis of text
alone (at scale) can provide deep understanding (Bubeck et al., 2023). Thus, we urge other scientists to
apply their own research questions to personally expressed identity text. One can obtain estimates of the
prevalence of thousands of signifiers for many countries over many years (Handzlik et al., 2024). Our
work here examined only a handful of signifiers in one nation, and yet we argue we have found clear
evidence of remarkable trends.
LGBTQ Visibility Online 11
Social scientists should embrace the new opportunity to observe how people describe their selves
to a public audience (Jones, 2021, 2023). Further, they should challenge themselves to confront the issue
of temporal validity. Instead of the historical custom of one-shot, small sample studies that purport
universal, eternal discovery of truth, they should instead adopt consistent, persistent measurement. We
offer an analogy: astronomy slowly developed over millennia of watching the stars; so too should a
science of humans be built upon perduring observation of selves. With the current work, we present an
early – perhaps crude, but effective – telescope for gazing upon the universe of personally expressed
identity.