RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 1
A Person-Centered Approach to Resilience and Vulnerability in Emerging Adulthood:
Predictions From Parenting and Personality in Adolescence
Donna A. de Maat
Nicole Lucassen
Rebecca Shiner
Peter Prinzie
Draft version 17/05/2022
This paper has been published in Development and Psychopathology.
Published version openly available:
Please cite as:
De Maat, D., Lucassen, N., Shiner, R., & Prinzie, P. (2022). A person-centered
approach to resilience and vulnerability in emerging adulthood: Predictions from
parenting and personality in adolescence. Development and Psychopathology, 00, 1–
Department of Psychology, Education, and Child Studies, Erasmus University Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Colgate University, Hamilton, New York,
United States.
Corresponding author information: Donna A. de Maat, Burgemeester Oudlaan 50, 3000
DR Rotterdam, the Netherlands, demaat@essb.eur.nl, ORCID: 0000-0002-7096-2606.
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 2
Abstract
In this person-centered study, we identified different profiles of resilience and vulnerability in
emerging adulthood in response to previously experienced stressful life events. Additionally,
we examined whether mothers’ and fathers’ parenting and participants’ personality traits in
adolescence predicted these profiles. Data from the Flemish Study on Parenting, Personality,
and Development (N = 346 families) were used. At T1 (2004; M = 11 years), T2 (2007),
age
and T3 (2009), mothers and fathers reported on their parenting and their child’s personality.
At T4 (2018; M = 25 years), emerging adults retrospectively self-reported the occurrence
age
and impact of 22 stressful life events and rated current behavior problems and subjective
well-being. Latent profile analysis revealed three profiles: Competent (71%; low stress, low
behavior problems, high subjective well-being), Vulnerable (21%; average stress, high
behavior problems, low subjective well-being), and Resilient (9%; high stress, average
behavior problems, average subjective well-being). Emerging adults in the Resilient profile
had experienced higher levels of maternal positive parenting and were less emotionally stable
and conscientious than those in the Competent profile. Furthermore, emerging adults in the
Vulnerable profile were less emotionally stable than their peers in the Competent profile.
These findings reveal new insights into the heterogeneous patterns of emerging adults’
adaptation following stressful life events.
Key words: resilience, emerging adulthood, parenting, personality traits, person-centered
approach
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 3
A Person-Centered Approach to Resilience and Vulnerability in Emerging Adulthood:
Predictions From Parenting and Personality in Adolescence
The experience of stressful life events in childhood can have long term adverse
effects. Stressful life events are described as discrete experiences, such as the death of a
family member, parental separation, or a romantic break up, that are likely to disrupt an
individual’s usual activities and cause readjustment (Holmes & Rahe, 1967; Carlson, 2014).
Children exposed to stressful life events are at increased risk for negative developmental
outcomes including a variety of emotional and behavioral problems as they enter adolescence
and adulthood (e.g., Burt & Masten, 2009; Cohen, Murphy, & Prather, 2019; LeMoult et al.,
2020; Luecken & Gruess, 2010; March-Llanes, Marqués-Feixa, Mezquita, Fañanás, & Moya-
Higueras, 2017). Yet, many children growing up in conditions of stress do not experience
such negative outcomes and show positive development. These individuals are said to show
“resilience” to stress (Masten, 2011). Resilience reflects the dynamic process of positive
adaptation despite exposure to risk or adversity. Hence, two components should be present to
identify resilience in young people: exposure to risk that increases the probability of negative
outcomes and relatively positive adaptation that is better than expected, given exposure to the
risk being studied (Infurna & Luthar, 2018; Masten, 2018; Rutter, 2012).
Theoretical frameworks of resilience suggest that both contextual and individual
factors may contribute to the relative positive adaptation in the context of stress (e.g., Infurna
& Luthar, 2018; Masten & Cicchetti, 2016). Resilience theorists emphasize the need to
identify specific contextual and individual resources that are potentially modifiable in
interventions. One contextual factor that is malleable and that has been considered central to
children’s resilience for many decades is parenting (Masten, 2018; Masten & Palmer, 2019).
From the start of research on resilience, researchers also recognized the potential importance
of children’s personality as an individual resource factor (e.g., Garmezy, 1985; Masten &
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 4
Tellegen, 2012; Werner & Smith, 1982). Given increasing evidence indicating that
personality traits can change both naturally and through intervention (e.g., Borghuis et al.,
2017; Roberts et al., 2017; Shiner, Van den Berg, Van Aken, & Laceulle, 2021), it is
particularly worthwhile to study what specific personality traits are important for building
resilience.
Although previous work examined the contributions of parenting and personality
characteristics to resilience in childhood and adolescence (e.g., Fritz, De Graaff, Caisley, Van
Harmelen, & Wilkinson, 2018; Masten, 2018; Zolkoski & Bullock, 2012), less is known
about how these resource factors are related to resilience in the transition to adulthood,
characterized as “emerging adulthood” (Arnett, 2000, 2014). Identifying antecedents of
resilience in emerging adulthood is essential, as this developmental period is marked by
unique challenges and strengths emerging from normative life transitions (Arnett, 2000,
2014; Masten, Obradović, & Burt, 2006). For example, emerging adults begin to establish
romantic relationships, engage in the workforce, and explore their identity. The increase in
freedom and autonomous functioning during this transition period opens a window of
opportunity for positive change, but can also result in adaptational problems, such as mental
health problems (Burt & Paysnick, 2012; O’Connor et al., 2016). Therefore, it is important to
identify resource factors that promote positive development in emerging adulthood,
especially for those at risk for negative outcomes.
Even though research on the antecedents of resilience in the period of emerging
adulthood has accelerated in the past decades (e.g., Chen et al., 2020; Donnellan et al., 2009;
Ehrlich et al., 2021; Farell, Simpson, Carlson, Englund, & Sung, 2017; Feldman, Conger, &
Burzette, 2004), many questions remain (Leung, Chan, & Ho, 2020; O’Connor et al., 2016).
First, previous studies mostly focused on either internal, individual assets (e.g., personality
traits) or external, contextual resources (e.g., social support) as potential protective factors.
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 5
Yet, to get a more comprehensive picture of the pathways to adulthood resilience, it is
essential to consider both individual and contextual factors, as both can facilitate resilience
(Fritz et al., 2018; Zolkoski & Bullock, 2012). Second, research examining family level
protective factors such as parenting often only includes mothers’ parenting, whereas many
children in Western societies are raised by both a father and a mother (United Nations, 2019).
Third, there is limited information on individual patterns of resilience and vulnerability in the
context of stress. Originally, variable-centered studies have clarified relations between
resource factors and specific domains of adjustment in the context of stress, overlooking
individual, naturally occurring patterns of adjustment that can be elucidated by person-
centered approaches (Masten, 2001). An advantage of a person-centered approach is that it
enables the examination of resilience as a multidimensional construct within the individual,
rather than through associations between variables within a given sample. This allows
researchers to identify subgroups of resilient individuals and to scrutinize what characterizes
these particular subgroups (Miller-Lewis, Searle, Sawyer, Baghurts, & Hedley, 2013). The
available person-centered studies on resilience in emerging adulthood used a priori
classifications based on cutoff scores on adversity and adaptation to create subgroups of
individuals (Masten et al., 1999; Masten et al., 2004; Shiner & Masten, 2012). Applying these
a priori classifications does not allow for identification of unobserved subgroups who may
present with heterogeneous patterns of adaptation across multiple developmental domains.
Latent profile analysis (LPA) enables the identification of such hidden profiles, and,
moreover, can handle missing data and offers model fit statistics (Lanza & Cooper, 2016).
Hence, person-centered approaches such as LPA provide a useful statistical method for
addressing the claim that, in studying resilience, adaptation in one domain of functioning
only gains meaning in relation to the individual's functioning in other domains (Infurna &
Luthar, 2018; Russotti, Warmingham, Handley, Rogosch, & Cicchetti, 2020).
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 6
In the current person-centered study, we aimed to identify profiles of resilience in
emerging adulthood and to examine how these profiles are related to multiple parenting
behaviors and personality traits assessed in adolescence. This study may shed more light on
how emerging adults adapt after stress exposure and why some emerging adults show more
resilience than others, which is beneficial for theory building on the etiology of resilience. In
addition, examining the protective role of relatively malleable factors as parenting behaviors
and personality traits can provide valuable targets for intervention strategies aimed at
promoting resilience in the transition to adulthood.
Parenting and Resilience in Emerging Adulthood
At the contextual level, positive and effective parenting is among the most robust
predictors of resilient adaptation in the face of stress (Masten, 2018; Masten & Palmer,
2019). Supportive parent-child relationships, in addition to close relationships with peers,
may be an important resource during difficult times in adolescence and emerging adulthood
(Burt & Paysnick, 2012). By providing warmth, support, and a safe environment to explore
emotions, parents may facilitate healthy communication and coping in adolescents, and
subsequently support emotional well-being in adulthood (Dumas et al., 2009).
Positive parenting and other potential resources have been differentiated into two
broad categories: Promotive factors that generate positive effects independent of the level of
risk, and protective factors that only benefit children with high levels of risk, mitigating the
effects of risk in an interactive fashion (Masten & Tellegen, 2012; Sameroff, 2000). With
respect to the beneficial effects of parenting, empirical findings demonstrate that higher
levels of positive parenting (e.g., warmth, support, involvement) and lower levels of negative
parenting (e.g., hostility, psychological control, coercive control) during adolescence were
generally related to better adjustment in adulthood, including lower levels of anxiety,
depression (Yap, Pilkington, Ryan, & Jorm, 2014) and risk-taking behavior (Aquilino &
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 7
Supple, 2001), and higher academic attainment (Loeb, Kansky, Tan, Costello, & Allen, 2021)
and subjective well-being (Aquilino & Supple, 2001). Likewise, in a person-centered study
by Masten et al. (2004), emerging adults characterized by resilience (high stress, good
adaptation) and by competence (low stress, good adaptation) had received higher levels of
positive parenting (i.e., warmth, closeness, structure) in childhood than those characterized by
maladjustment (high stress, poor adaptation). In the same longitudinal cohort, it was found
that individuals that showed consistently high adaptation from adolescence to adulthood were
distinguished by higher levels of childhood positive parenting (Obradović, Burt, & Masten,
2006). These findings suggest that effective parenting in childhood and adolescence can
promote positive adaptation in emerging adulthood, regardless of the level of stress exposure.
In addition, parenting can act as a protective factor by buffering the negative impact
of adversity on developmental outcomes in emerging adulthood. For example, more
nurturant-involved parenting and less angry or hostile parenting in adolescence weakened the
link between economic stress and less competent functioning in emerging adulthood (Conger
& Conger, 2002; Masarik & Conger, 2017). Likewise, parental positivity and positive
parenting behaviors fostered resilience among emerging adults in times of economic stress
(Neppl, Jeon, Schofield, & Donnellan, 2015). Positive parenting in childhood has also been
associated with increased resilience in adulthood following exposure to childhood
maltreatment, protecting these at-risk children from mental health problems (Collishaw et al.,
2007; Lind et al., 2018). Such findings imply that positive, supportive parenting may also act
as a protective factor for emerging adults exposed to high levels of stress or adversity.
Surprisingly, research on the role of parenting in resilience often solely examined
parenting behaviors of mothers (Cabrera, Hennigar, Alonso, McDorman, & Reich, 2021).
When fathers were included in research, mothers’ and fathers’ parenting behaviors were
either not analyzed independently (e.g., Collishaw et al., 2007; Lind et al., 2018) or not
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 8
included simultaneously in one model (e.g., Conger & Conger, 2002; with the exception of
Neppl et al., 2015). Yet, evidence clearly indicates that fathers are also important to
children’s problem behavior and positive outcomes (e.g., Day & Padilla-Walker, 2009;
Salgado, González, & Yáñez, 2021) and that fathers’ positive parenting complements the
effects of mothers’ parenting (e.g., Cabrera et al., 2021; Lansford, Laird, Pettit, Bates, &
Dodge, 2014). Given the independent contributions of mothers and fathers to their children’s
development, it is essential to consider both parents when analyzing links between parenting
and positive adaptation in emerging adulthood.
Personality and Resilience in Emerging Adulthood
At the individual level, children’s personality is one of the most well-studied child
characteristics that can promote positive outcomes and resilience. Personality refers to an
individual’s typical patterns of thinking, feeling, and behaving and can be conceptualized
according to the comprehensive Big Five framework (Caspi & Shiner, 2006; McCrae &
Costa, 1999). Specifically, the Big Five personality traits are extraversion (i.e., sociability,
expressivity), agreeableness (i.e., empathy, consideration of other’s needs), conscientiousness
(i.e., impulse control, planfulness), emotional stability (vs. neuroticism, i.e., low negative
emotionality and high self-esteem), and openness to experience (i.e., intellect, autonomy,
imagination).
Empirical findings indicate that children’s personality traits can directly shape
positive development. For example, higher levels of Big Five personality traits in childhood
and adolescence have been related to positive outcomes in adulthood, such as higher
subjective well-being (Anglim, Horwood, Smillie, Marrero, & Wood, 2020; Gale, Booth,
Mõttus, Kuh, & Deary, 2013), self-efficacy (Deutz et al., 2021), and academic and social
competence (Shiner & Masten, 2012) as well as lower internalizing and externalizing
problems (Van Eldik, De Haan, Arends, & Prinzie, 2020). In person-centered analyses
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 9
(Shiner & Masten, 2012), emerging adults characterized by resilience (high stress, good
adaptation) showed higher childhood conscientiousness, agreeableness, openness, and
emotional stability than those characterized by maladjustment (high stress, poor adaptation).
Yet, personality traits did not differ between the Resilient and the Competent group (low
stress, good adaptation), suggesting that personality might be a promotive factor, with
positive effects on development independent of the level of adversity.
Additionally, children’s personality may counteract the impact of adversity on
developmental outcomes. That is, personality traits may influence the reactions and support
that children evoke from others, their interpretation of negative life experiences, and their
ability to cope with stress (Connor-Smith & Flaschbart, 2007; Hughes, Kratsiotis, Niven, &
Holman, 2020; Shiner et al., 2021). Although research on personality and resilience in
emerging adulthood is scarce, the available studies showed that higher levels of childhood
conscientiousness and agreeableness buffered the link between childhood adversity and poor
adaptation in emerging adulthood (Carlson, Oshri, & Kwon, 2015; Masten, Obradović, &
Burt, 2006; Shiner & Masten, 2012). Hence, children’s personality traits may function as
protective factors in the face of stress, contributing to resilience over time.
The Current Study
In the current study, we aimed to (1) identify different profiles of resilience and
vulnerability in response to stressful life events among emerging adults; and (2) examine to
what extent the identified profiles were related to contextual factors (i.e., mothers’ and
fathers’ positive and negative parenting) and individual factors (i.e., personality) assessed in
adolescence. We extended research on resilience in several ways. First, in contrast to most
studies that relied on cross-sectional or short-term longitudinal designs to investigate positive
adaptation in emerging adulthood, we employed a long-term longitudinal, prospective design
to identify pathways to resilience over time. Specifically, we examined whether parenting and
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 10
personality in adolescence (M = 11–16 years) predicted profiles of adaptation in emerging
ages
adulthood (M = 25 years). More insight into longitudinal predictors of positive adaptation
age
in emerging adulthood can offer valuable insights for intervention strategies to promote
positive development and resilience. Second, we examined the role of both mothers’ and
fathers’ parenting as resource factors for resilience to better match the reality of most
children’s lives, expanding previous work in which often only mothers were included. Third,
we used a multi-informant design, including parent-report of adolescents’ personality traits
and parenting behaviors in combination with emerging adults’ self-report of stress and
(mal)adaptation, to avoid shared rater bias. Fourth, we focused on a wide range of outcomes,
since broad and multifaceted measures better approximate the general notion of resilience
than do narrower, unidimensional outcomes (Infurna & Luthar, 2018; Klika & Herrenkohl,
2013) and resilience may depend on the outcome studied (Fergus & Zimmerman, 2005;
Zolkoski & Bullock, 2012). In the current study, we examined both adaptive and maladaptive
outcomes in emerging adulthood, in contrast to previous person-centered resilience studies
that included either maladaptive (Miller-Lewis et al., 2013) or adaptive outcomes (Masten et
al., 1999; Masten et al., 2004; Shiner & Masten, 2012) or a single indicator of global health
(Moreno, García-Moya, Rovera, & Ramos, 2016). More specifically, we examined subjective
well-being (i.e., life satisfaction and positive affect) as an indicator of emerging adults’
adaptation. This fits previous literature in which positive adaptation in emerging adulthood is
described as positive social and psychological adjustment, with life satisfaction as one of its
key dimensions (Hawkins et al., 2009; O’Connor et al., 2016). The transition to adulthood is
characterized by potential for both positive development and problem outcomes such as risk
behaviors and mental health problems (Arnett, 2014; Smart & Sanson, 2005). Consequently,
researchers on emerging adulthood emphasize that it is important to study adaptive outcomes
in combination with maladaptive outcomes, such as depression, alcohol abuse, or delinquent
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 11
behavior (Oesterle, Hill, Hawkins, & Abbott, 2008; O’Connor et al., 2012, 2016). Therefore,
we additionally examined multiple types of behavior problems (i.e., anxious/depressed
behavior, withdrawn behavior, somatic complaints, aggressive behavior, rule-breaking
behavior, and intrusive behavior) as indicators of maladaptation. As evidence suggests that
adaptation and maladaptation in emerging adulthood are separate but correlated constructs
(e.g., O’Connor et al., 2012, 2016), it is essential to consider both to obtain a more complete
picture of emerging adults’ functioning.
With respect to aim 1, we expected to identify multiple profiles of resilience and
vulnerability among emerging adults based on indicators of stressful life events, behavior
problems, and subjective well-being. More specifically, in line with previous person-centered
studies (Masten et al., 1999; Masten et al., 2004; Miller-Lewis et al., 2013; Moreno et al.,
2016; Shiner & Masten, 2012) we hypothesized that there would be at least a profile
characterized by resilience (high stress, good adaptation), a profile characterized by
maladjustment (high stress, poor adaptation), and a profile characterized by competence (low
stress, good adaptation). However, no hypotheses regarding the exact number or type of
profiles were posited, given that previous studies have not established the profiles using LPA.
Regarding aim 2, we hypothesized that emerging adults in profiles characterized by resilience
(high stress, good adaptation) and by competence (low stress, good adaptation) experienced
higher levels of positive parenting and lower levels of negative parenting by mothers and
fathers in adolescence than emerging adults in a profile characterized by maladjustment (high
stress, poor adaptation). Concerning personality traits, we hypothesized that emerging adults
in profiles characterized by resilience (high stress, good adaptation) and by competence (low
stress, good adaptation) would show higher extraversion, conscientiousness, agreeableness,
and emotional stability in adolescence than emerging adults in a profile characterized by
maladjustment (high stress, poor adaptation). Group differences in openness were
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 12
exploratively examined, due to inconsistent findings in previous work on the association
between openness and (mal)adaptation (e.g., Anglim et al., 2020; Kotov, Gamez, Schmidt, &
Watson, 2010; Malouff, Thorsteinsson, & Schutte, 2005).
Method
Design and Study Population
Our study hypotheses, design, and analysis plan were preregistered on the Open
longitudinal Flemish Study on Parenting, Personality, and Development, which started in
1999 and consists of nine waves of data collection so far. The recruitment and sample
characteristics of the study have been described in detail elsewhere (Prinzie et al., 2003). A
proportional stratified sample of elementary-school-aged children and their families in
Belgium was randomly selected. Parents of 682 (85.3% response rate) children agreed to
participate in the study. Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants and
the board of the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven approved the study.
We used data from the fourth (T1; 2004), fifth (T2; 2007), sixth (T3; 2009) and ninth
(T4; 2018) measurement waves, as these waves comprised the period of adolescence (M
age T1
= 10.82 years; M = 13.82 years; M = 15.82 years) and emerging adulthood (M =
age T2 age T3 age T4
24.82 years). A total of 561 families still participated during adolescence, i.e., at T1, T2,
and/or T3, and hence were eligible for the current study (82.3% retention rate). Families were
included in the identification of resilience and vulnerability profiles (study aim 1) if data were
available on at least one profile indicator of stressful life events, behavior problems, or
subjective well-being in emerging adulthood. Of the 561 families that participated in
adolescence, 346 families had available information on at least one profile indicator in
emerging adulthood (n = 215, 38.3% lost to follow-up). For the analysis of profile differences
regarding parenting and personality (study aim 2), we included families with data on at least
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 13
one profile indicator and data on at least half of the parenting (i.e., two out of four) and
personality (i.e., three out of five) constructs (see Measures). For the same 346 families data
were available on at least half of the parenting and personality constructs. Thus, these 346
families comprised the final sample.
Families in the final sample (n = 346) did not differ from families that were not
included (n = 215) regarding the age of children (t (558) = -0.75, p = .455), the age of
mothers (t (537) = -0.57, p = .567) and fathers (t (524) = 0.54, p = .589), the education level
2 2
of mothers (χ (3) = 3.33, p = .343) and fathers (χ (3) = 6.77, p = .080), and internalizing and
externalizing problems of children at ages 6, 7 and 8 years (t (530–539) = -0.004–1.38, ps =
.169–.997). However, the final sample contained relatively more girls compared to the
excluded sample (χ (1) = 12.53, p < .001).
children were girls. All parents were native Belgians and most were married or lived together
(85%). The majority of the mothers (64%) and fathers (57%) had pursued either non-
university higher education (vocational or professional degrees, comparable to U.S.
“college”) or university education (bachelor’s or master’s degrees).
Measures
Indicators of Resilience and Vulnerability Profiles: Emerging Adulthood (T4)
Stressful Life Events. At T4, emerging adults retrospectively reported on the lifetime
occurrence of stressful events (e.g., illness of a loved one, parental separation, being bullied,
Supplementary Material for an overview of items), as we needed a relatively short
questionnaire that covers the entire lifetime and measures the perceived stress caused by the
events, given that the impact of life events on psychological outcomes may depend on
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 14
perceived event characteristics (Luhmann, Fassbender, Alcock, & Haerhner, 2021). We
therefore selected concrete events that are typically perceived as negative or undesirable from
established scales that consider lifetime stressful events and show good psychometric
properties, i.e., the Questionnaire of Stressful Life Events (Butjosa et al., 2017), the Stressful
Life Events Screening Questionnaire (Goodman, Corcoran, Turner, Yuan, & Green, 1998),
and the Social Readjustment Rating Scale (Holmes & Rahe, 1967; Scully, Tosi, & Banning,
2000). Two different stress scores were created to assess both the objective number of life
events experienced and the subjective impact of events. First, participants were asked to
indicate whether a stressful life event had occurred (0 = no, 1 = yes) and at what age this
happened. We computed a total score by summing the number of life events that occurred
before 16 years of age, i.e., no later than the assessment of our resource factors at age 11, 14,
and 16 years. Higher scores represented exposure to more stressful life events (theoretical
range: 0–22). Second, for each life event that was experienced, participants retrospectively
rated the perceived stress (“How much stress did this event cause you?”; from 0 = no stress to
10 = a lot of stress). A total stress score was computed by summing the amount of stress
caused by the life events that occurred before 16 years of age. Higher scores indicated more
perceived stress (theoretical range: 0–220).
Behavior Problems. Current behavior problems were assessed by emerging adults’
ratings on the Adult Self Report (ASR; Achenbach & Rescorla, 2003). The six syndrome
scales underlying the internalizing and externalizing broadband scales were used:
anxious/depressed behavior (17 items; α = .92), withdrawn behavior (9 items; α = .78),
somatic complaints (12 items; α = .80), aggressive behavior (15 items; α = .78), rule-breaking
behavior (14 items; α = .71), and intrusive behavior (6 items; α = .72). All items were
answered on a 3-point scale (0 = not true, 1 = somewhat or sometimes true, 2 = very true or
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 15
often true). We computed six problem scores by summing the relevant item scores, with
higher scores indicating more problems.
Subjective Well-Being. Emerging adults reported on their life satisfaction using the
Satisfaction With Life Scale (SWLS; Arrindell, Meeuwesen, & Huyse, 1991; Diener,
Emmons, Larsen, & Griffin, 1985) and on their positive affect using the positive affect
subscale of the Positive Affect and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS; Peeters, Ponds, &
Vermeeren, 1996; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988). The five items of the SWLS (α = .84)
were answered on a 7-point scale (1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree). A total score
was computed by summing all item scores, with higher scores indicating higher life
satisfaction. Concerning the positive affect subscale of the PANAS (α = .89), emerging adults
rated the extent to which they had experienced ten positive mood states during the past week
on a 5-point scale (1 = very slightly or not at all to 5 = extremely). We computed a positive
affect score by summing all item scores, with higher scores indicating higher levels of
positive affect.
Resource Factors: Adolescence (T1, T2, and T3)
Positive Parenting. Mothers and fathers reported on their positive parenting
behaviors using the warmth/involvement (11 items) and reasoning/induction (6 items)
subscales of the Parenting Practices Questionnaire (PPQ; Robinson, Mandleco, Frost Olsen,
& Hart, 1995; Schalenbourg & Verschueren, 2003). Answers on the PPQ are given on a 5-
point scale (1 = never to 5 = always). We computed three scores for warmth/involvement at
T1, T2, and T3 (α = .83–.87; α = .85–.86) and three scores for reasoning/induction
mothers fathers
at T1, T2, and T3 (α = .82–.91; α = .85–.89) for mothers and fathers separately by
mothers fathers
summing the relevant item scores. Higher scores represented more positive parenting.
Negative Parenting. Likewise, mothers and fathers reported on their overreactive
parenting as a representation of negative parenting behavior, using the Parenting Scale (PS;
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 16
Arnold, O’Leary, Wolff, & Acker, 1993; Prinzie, Onghena, & Hellinckx, 2007). The nine
items tapping overreactivity describe discipline encounters (e.g., “When my child
misbehaves…”) followed by two options that act as opposite anchor points for a 7-point
scale, on which 1 indicates a high probability of using a more positive discipline strategy
(e.g., “I speak to my child calmly”) and 7 indicates a high probability of using a more
negative, i.e., overreactive, discipline strategy (“I raise my voice or yell”). We computed
three overreactivity scores at T1, T2, and T3 (α = .77–.79; α = .75–.81) for mothers
mothers fathers
and fathers separately by summing the item scores. Higher scores represented more
overreactive parenting.
Personality. Mothers and fathers reported on their adolescent’s Big Five personality
traits using the Hierarchical Personality Inventory for Children (HiPIC; Mervielde & De
Fruyt, 2002). The HiPIC consists of 144 items that are answered on a 5-point Likert scale (1
= almost not characteristic to 5 = very characteristic). The five personality traits of the
HiPIC are: Extraversion (32 items), Benevolence (similar to Agreeableness; 40 items),
Conscientiousness (32 items), Emotional stability (16 items), and Imagination (similar to
Openness; 24 items). For each personality trait, we computed three scores for mothers at T1,
T2, and T3 (α range = .90–.95) and three scores for fathers at T1, T2, and T3 (α range = .89–
.95) by summing the relevant item scores.
We estimated latent constructs to form stable indicators of the levels of positive
parenting, negative parenting, and personality traits across adolescence. Positive parenting
constructs for mothers and fathers were modelled, using warmth/involvement and
reasoning/induction scores at T1, T2, and T3 as indicators. Likewise, negative parenting
constructs for mothers and fathers were modelled with overreactivity scores at T1, T2, and T3
as indicators. Additionally, we modelled five personality constructs (i.e., extraversion,
agreeableness, conscientiousness, emotional stability, and openness), using mothers’ and
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 17
fathers’ ratings of the corresponding personality traits at T1, T2, and T3 as indicators.
Missing data were handled by full information maximum likelihood (FIML) estimation.
Confirmatory factor analyses indicated good model fit for all latent constructs, range χ² (1–3)
= 0.07–3.62, p = .306–.787; CFI = .999–1.00, TLI = .997–1.01, RMSEA = .00–.02, SRMR =
.00–.02 (Byrne, 2012). Model fit of the latent constructs of negative parenting could not be
evaluated, since these were saturated models.
Covariates
As prior research indicates that child age, child sex, and parental education may be
associated with the experience of stressful life events as well as with behavior problems and
subjective well-being (e.g., Hatch & Dohrenwend, 2007; Lucas & Gohm, 2000; World
Health Organization, 2016) we considered the inclusion of these demographic characteristics
as covariates in the analyses. Parents reported on their highest level of educational attainment
(1 = primary school, 2 = secondary school, 3 = non-university higher education (“college”), 4
= university) in middle childhood (M = 7.82 years). We used the level of the parent
age child
with the highest education level as our measure of family education attainment.
Statistical Analyses
Missing Data
The amount of missing data on profile indicators ranged between 0.0% and 26.9% (M
= 3.4%) and on parenting and personality constructs between 0.0% and 2.9% (M = 0.7%) in
the final sample (N = 346). In nearly all families (n = 335, 96.8%) both mother and father
reports on parenting behaviors and personality traits were present. For a small number of
families, only mother reports (n = 10, 2.9%) or only father reports (n = 1, 0.3%) were
available. We tested patterns in missing data by performing Little’s MCAR test (Little, 1988).
Since the data were completely missing at random (χ (131) = 141.13, p = .257), multiple
imputation was performed in Mplus to handle missing data after the parenting and personality
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 18
constructs were created. We employed multiple imputation instead of FIML as was originally
preregistered, since FIML was not compatible with our statistical analyses (Asparouhov &
Muthén, 2021). More specifically, missing data on profile indicators, parenting constructs,
and personality constructs were imputed using 10 imputed datasets and 100 iterations. We
used information on profile indicators, parenting and personality constructs, and auxiliary
variables (i.e., emerging adults’ age and sex, and family educational level) as predictors in the
multiple imputation model (Asparouhov & Muthén, 2021).
Main Analyses
First, we checked the data for the assumption of multivariate normality and
multivariate outliers. Second, we calculated descriptive statistics and correlations between the
study variables. Third, we performed LPA using the recommended three-step approach
(R3STEP command; Asparouhov & Muthén, 2014; Vermunt, 2010) in Mplus 8.5 (Muthén &
Muthén, 1998-2017) to identify underlying profiles of adaptation in emerging adulthood and
to examine whether the profiles differed on maternal and paternal positive and negative
parenting and personality traits. In Step 1 of the three-step approach, the latent profiles were
evaluated. We used the indicators of stress (i.e., number of life events, stress caused by life
events), behavior problems (i.e., anxious/depressed behavior, withdrawn behavior, somatic
complaints, aggressive behavior, rule-breaking behavior, and intrusive behavior), and
subjective well-being (i.e., life satisfaction and positive affect) as profile indicators.
Standardized values (z-scores) of the profile indicators were used, as this increases
interpretation of the latent profiles and may help model convergence (Spurk, Hirschi, Wang,
Valero, & Kauffeld, 2020). In Step 2, the individuals were assigned to their most likely
profile using the posterior profile probabilities. In Step 3, associations between external
variables (i.e., positive and negative parenting and personality traits) and the profiles were
examined by performing multinomial logistic regression (MLR) analyses. This method
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 19
accounted for the average uncertainty in profile assignment, by using the estimated average
classification errors for each profile (Asparouhov & Muthén, 2014; Vermunt, 2010). We
tested two MLR models with profile membership as outcome variable, including the four
parenting behaviors (Model 1) and the five personality traits (Model 2) as predictors. To test
our hypotheses, we used a profile characterized by resilience as the reference group, so that
this profile was compared against the other identified profiles. If the hypothesized profiles
characterized by resilience, maladjustment, or competence were not identified or if profiles
characterized by other patterns were identified, we would exploratively test differences in
parenting behaviors and personality traits by comparing all identified profiles to each other.
rd th
Additionally, we computed the percentages of behavior problems in the borderline (93 –97
th
percentiles) and clinical (>97 percentile) range per profile, based on the norms for the ASR
problem scales (Achenbach & Rescorla, 2015; not preregistered).
A one-profile model was evaluated first. Subsequently, we increased the number of
profiles one by one, examining whether the addition of each profile resulted in statistically
and conceptually superior solutions. Relative model fit was assessed by the Akaike
information criterion (AIC; Akaike, 1987), the Bayesian information criterion (BIC;
Schwarz, 1978), the sample size adjusted BIC (SSABIC; Sclove, 1987), and entropy. The
lower the values of the AIC, BIC, and SSABIC, the better the model fit (Tein, Coxe, &
Cham, 2013). Entropy indicates how well a model categorizes individuals into profiles, with
better categorization for values closer to 1 (Celeux & Soromenho, 1996). To compare
models, the Vuong-Lo-Mendel-Rubin (VLMR) likelihood ratio test and the adjusted Lo-
Mendell-Rubin (adjusted LMR) likelihood ratio test were used with p-values < .05 indicating
that the estimated model fits the data better than a model with one profile less (Tein et al.,
2013). As recommended by Nylund-Gibson and Choi (2018), we considered statistical fit
indices, entropy values, and the substantive interpretability and utility of profiles (Do profiles
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 20
contain a decent number of individuals, i.e., at least 5% of the sample? Do the profiles
theoretically make sense?). A common procedure is to accept the model with the largest
number of profiles, smallest BIC value, and an adjusted LMR with p < .05, in conjunction
with the theoretical interpretability and utility of the profiles (Nylund-Gibson & Choi, 2018).
In all analyses, we used significance levels of p < .05. As the predictors in the MLR
were standardized, odds ratios (OR) could be used as indices of effect size for individual
predictors. Effect sizes were defined as very small (OR < 1.68 or inverted > 0.60; equivalent
to Cohen’s d < 0.20), small (1.68 or inverted 0.60; Cohen's d = 0.20), medium (OR 3.47 or
inverted 0.29, Cohen's d = 0.50), or large (OR 6.71 or inverted 0.15, Cohen's d = 0.80; Chen
2 2
et al., 2010; not preregistered). Additionally, McFadden’s pseudo R -values (ρ ; McFadden,
1974) were computed to indicate the total variance explained in the profiles by the set of
predictors.
We tested whether the proposed covariates should be included in the MLR models.
The age and sex of emerging adults and the family educational attainment were included as
covariates if these sociodemographic variables were related (p < .05) to latent profile
membership in the final LPA model (Asparouhov & Muthén, 2014).
Results
Preliminary Analyses
Results of assumption checking indicated that the study variables were normally
distributed, except for somatic complaints (skewness = 2.2; kurtosis = 6.8). Therefore, a
maximum likelihood estimator with robust standard error was used in all analyses (Byrne,
2012, pp. 99–100). No outliers were detected in the data. Means and standard deviations of
individuals experienced 1.82 out of 22 stressful life events (range: 0–8 events). Most
individuals (72.0%) reported to be exposed to 0 (23.1%), 1 (25.2%) or 2 (23.7%) life events.
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 21
The occurrence per stressful life event ranged from 0.3% (n = 1; “Have you ever had alcohol,
drug, or addiction problems?”) to 29.2% (n = 101; “Have you ever been bullied?”). The
perceived stress levels caused by a life event ranged from 1 to 10, with average stress levels
per event ranging from 1.50 (“Have you ever been suspended or expelled from school?”) to
7.00 (“Have you ever had alcohol, drug, or addiction problems?”). Bivariate correlations
indicated that exposure to a higher number of stressful life events was weakly correlated with
higher levels of behavior problems and lower levels of positive affect and life satisfaction in
emerging adulthood. Most of the behavior problems were negatively correlated with levels of
positive affect and life satisfaction (small to large effects). The correlations between all
behavior problems, between all personality traits, and between all maternal and paternal
parenting behaviors were in the expected directions, representing small to large effect sizes.
Furthermore, positive parenting behaviors were positively correlated with all personality
traits and negative parenting behaviors correlated negatively with most of the personality
traits (small to medium effects).
Latent Profiles of Resilience and Vulnerability in Emerging Adulthood
Fit indices resulting from the latent profile models containing one through five
entropy value, and VLMR and adjusted LMR tests (p < .05), a three-profile model was
retained as the best model to fit the data. In addition, the smallest class contained more than
5% of the sample and the profiles were supported by theory. Although the four-profile model
displayed lower values on the AIC, BIC and SSABIC statistics, this model did not show a
better fit to the data than the three-profile model based on the VLMR and adjusted LMR
tests. Moreover, the smallest class size in the four-profile model was too low (< 5% of
sample). Finally, we tested a five-profile model, however, this model did not show a better fit
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 22
to the data than the four-profile model and two out of five profiles were theoretically difficult
to interpret. As such, the three-profile model was preserved as the statistically and
conceptually superior solution.
Description of the Three-Profile Solution
The means and standard deviations of the indicator variables in each profile are
characterized by emerging adults with lower levels of stress, lower levels of behavior
problems, and higher levels of subjective well-being. Following the labeling in previous
studies on resilience profiles (e.g., Masten et al., 1999; Masten et al., 2004; Miller-Lewis et
al., 2013; Moreno et al., 2016; Shiner & Masten, 2012), this group was labeled “Competent.”
profile ranged from 0.0% (aggressive behavior) to 1.6% (intrusive behavior). Profile 2
(20.5%, n = 71) consisted of emerging adults with average levels of stress, higher levels of
behavior problems, and lower levels of subjective well-being. This profile was referred to as
“Vulnerable.” For emerging adults in this profile, scores in the (borderline) clinical range on
behavior problems ranged from 8.4% (intrusive behavior) to 46.5% (anxious/depressed
behavior). Profile 3 represented the smallest proportion (9.0%, n = 31) of emerging adults in
the sample. This group was typified by higher levels of stress, average levels of behavior
problems, and average levels of subjective well-being and was labeled “Resilient.” In this
profile, scores in the (borderline) clinical range on behavior problems ranged from 0.0%
(aggressive behavior) to 6.5% (rule-breaking behavior and somatic complaints).
Post hoc comparisons (z-tests) indicated that emerging adults in the Resilient profile
reported a greater number of stressful life events and more perceived stress than their peers in
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 23
and Vulnerable profile experienced more behavior problems in emerging adulthood than
those in the Competent profile. Moreover, individuals in the Vulnerable profile reported
lower levels of subjective well-being than their peers in the Resilient and Competent profile.
Concerning demographic variables, results showed that only family educational attainment
was related to profile membership (Resilient vs. Competent: B = -1.36, SE = 0.37, p < .001;
Resilient vs. Vulnerable: B = -1.33, SE = 0.40, p = .001; Vulnerable vs. Competent: B = -
0.03, SE = 0.21, p = .874). Family educational attainment was lower for emerging adults in
the Resilient profile compared to those in the Competent (p < .001) and Vulnerable (p = .001)
profiles. The identified profiles did not differ concerning emerging adults’ mean age (ps
range: .336– .934) or sex distribution (ps range: .645 – .886). Therefore, we included only
family educational attainment as a covariate in the MLR models.
Associations of Resource Factors With Latent Profiles
Results of the MLR models revealed few differences in resource factors across the
showed that emerging adults in the Resilient profile had experienced higher levels of positive
parenting by mothers compared to those in the Competent profile (B = 0.84, p = .038, OR =
2.33). This difference reflected a small effect size. No other differences in parenting
behaviors by mothers or fathers were found (ps range: .100– .969). About 6% of the total
variance in the profiles was explained by the four parenting behaviors.
Regarding personality traits, emerging adults in the Resilient profile had lower levels
of conscientiousness as compared to the Competent profile (B = -1.40, p = .042, OR = 0.25),
indicating a medium effect. Moreover, emerging adults in the Resilient (B = -1.33, p = .028,
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 24
OR = 0.26) and the Vulnerable (B = -1.14, p = .004, OR = 0.32) profile were less emotionally
stable during adolescence than those in the Competent profile. These differences represented
medium and small effect sizes, respectively. The profiles did not differ on levels of
extraversion, agreeableness, and openness (ps range: .071– .956). Finally, about 9% of the
total variance in the profiles was explained by the five personality traits.
Discussion
This study aimed to identify different profiles of resilience and vulnerability in
response to stressful life events in a community sample of emerging adults. In addition, we
examined to what extent parenting behaviors and personality traits assessed in adolescence
were related to the identified profiles. Results of LPA with stressful life events, behavior
problems, and subjective well-being as indicators revealed three distinct profiles: A
Competent profile (70.5%; low stress, good adaptation), a Vulnerable profile (20.5%; average
stress, poor adaptation), and a Resilient profile (9.0%; high stress, good adaptation).
Emerging adults in the Resilient profile had experienced higher levels of positive parenting
by mothers compared to those in the Competent profile. With respect to personality traits,
emerging adults in the Resilient and Vulnerable profile tended to be less emotionally stable
during adolescence than those in the Competent profile. Furthermore, emerging adults in the
Resilient profile were less conscientious than their peers in the Competent profile.
The identification of the three profiles was partially in line with previous person-
centered work on resilience. We used the same labelling as in prior work, in order to build a
more cumulative science and to avoid the “jangle fallacy” (Kelley, 1927) in which similar
constructs are given different names. More specifically, similar Competent and Resilient
groups were identified in childhood and adolescence (Miller-Lewis et al., 2013; Moreno et
al., 2016) and in emerging adulthood (Masten et al., 1999; Masten et al., 2004; Shiner &
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 25
Masten, 2012) by previous studies using traditional a priori classifications. Interestingly, in
our study the Resilient group experienced more behavior problems than the Competent
group, whereas when groups are created a priori by using cutoff scores, these groups have the
same level of behavior problems by definition. This finding raises questions and fits the
ongoing debate concerning the conceptualization of resilience: What is resilience and how
does it present? (Infurna, 2020; Masten, 2011). Perhaps the effects of stress were still
noticeable in our Resilient group, although they were doing “better than expected” based on
the high level of stress experienced. Moreover, this result supports the longstanding
recognition that resilient people are not invincible but rather may have some circumscribed
areas of difficulty (Masten, 2001, 2018; Rutter, 2012).
In contrast to our expectations and to the previously mentioned person-centered
studies, we did not find a profile characterized by Maladjustment (high stress, poor
adaptation). However, a Vulnerable profile (average stress, poor adaptation) was identified in
this sample, representing emerging adults who seemed to experience elevated behavior
problems and relatively low subjective well-being with only normative levels of stress. This
finding was surprising, as in most previous studies (e.g., Masten et al., 1999; Masten et al.,
2004; Shiner & Masten, 2012) this vulnerable group was too small for statistical analyses.
Such individuals are likely to be underrepresented in community samples, also described as
the “empty cell” phenomenon (Masten et al., 1999; Masten & Tellegen, 2012). An
explanation for the identification of a Vulnerable but not a Maladjusted profile in the current
study might be related to characteristics of our study sample. That is, on average, the
emerging adults in this community sample in Belgium experienced relatively low levels of
stressful life events. Whereas there was sufficient variability in the number of stressful life
events and the stress caused by these events, few individuals experienced extremely high
levels of adversity. In addition, we included other types of stressors than used in the previous
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 26
person-centered studies among emerging adults (Masten et al., 1999; Masten et al., 2004;
Shiner & Masten, 2012). That is, those studies included relatively more chronic adversity
(e.g., living with a violent alcoholic parent in chronic poverty) whereas we primarily focused
on discrete stressors (e.g., parental separation). Hence, it might be that we did not capture
chronic adversity in the configural profiles, which may have reduced the ability to identify
certain profiles such as a Maladjusted group. Overall, the results of our LPA indicate that
emerging adults show heterogeneous patterns of adaptation after stressful life events and
highlight the fact that some individuals are more vulnerable, while others are more resilient to
life stress.
When examining the associations between mothers’ and fathers’ parenting and the
identified profiles, we found little support for parenting behaviors as resource factors for
resilience in emerging adulthood. Fathers’ parenting behaviors were not related to the profiles
of resilience and vulnerability, in contrast to earlier work indicating that fathers’ parenting
behaviors may foster resilience in emerging adulthood in the face of economic stress (Conger
& Conger, 2002; Masarik & Conger, 2017; Neppl et al., 2015). However, our results
suggested that mothers’ parenting behaviors may be a resource factor for later resilience.
Specifically, emerging adults in the Resilient profile had experienced higher levels of positive
parenting by mothers in adolescence compared to those in the Competent profile. This result
conflicts with previous findings by Masten et al. (2004) showing that emerging adults in the
Resilient group were similar to those in the Competent group regarding mothers’ positive
parenting (i.e., warmth, closeness, structure) assessed in childhood, despite their differences
in stressful life experiences. It is possible that, in the current study, maternal warmth and
involvement helped Resilient emerging adults to adapt well despite exposure to life stress,
while their low-risk, Competent peers perhaps did not need this resource factor to show
positive adaptation. Hence, our finding supports the notion that positive and supportive
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 27
parenting may be a protective factor in the face of risk for some emerging adults (Masten,
2018; Masten & Palmer, 2019).
With respect to Big Five personality traits, our results showed that emerging adults in
the Competent profile were more emotionally stable during adolescence than those in the
Vulnerable profile. This finding is in line with previous work suggesting that greater
emotional stability in youth is related to a variety of positive outcomes in adulthood,
including lower levels of internalizing and externalizing problems (e.g., Van Eldik et al.,
2020) and higher levels of subjective well-being and self-efficacy (e.g., Anglim et al., 2020;
Deutz et al., 2021; Gale et al., 2013). Even at low levels of stress, emotional stability seems
to be an important individual trait acting as a promotive factor for positive outcomes.
Moreover, emerging adults in the Resilient profile were less emotionally stable and
less conscientious compared to those in the Competent profile. This result is somewhat
surprising, given that individuals with higher levels of emotional stability and
conscientiousness tend to use more effective coping strategies that may foster resilience
(Barańczuk, 2019; Connor-Smith & Flaschbart, 2007; Hughes et al., 2020). In previous
person-centered studies, individuals in the Resilient group generally did not differ from those
in the Competent group in personality traits (Shiner & Masten, 2012) or other personal assets
(i.e., self-control, self-concept; Miller-Lewis et al., 2013). The differences we found in the
current study might be explained by the bidirectional interplay between personality and
stressful life events that has been posited by dynamic personality theories (Endler & Parker,
1992; Magnusson, 1990; Roberts, Wood, & Caspi, 2008). For example, individuals who are
more emotionally stable and conscientious, like those in the Competent profile, may have a
lower risk to experience certain life events, such as a romantic break up or academic failure.
Also, evidence indicates that exposure to stressful life events might influence personality
development, for example, by decreasing youth’s level of emotional stability,
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 28
conscientiousness (Bleidorn, Hopwood, & Richard, 2018; Jeronimus, Riese, Sandermann, &
Omrel, 2014; Shiner, Allen, & Masten, 2017), or self-control (Blair, 2010; Laceulle, van
Aken, Ormel, & Nederhof, 2015; Ong, Hong, Tsai, & Tan, 2018). It is possible that the
relatively high amount of stress experienced by those in the Resilient profile may have had
negative effects on their emotional stability and conscientiousness. Future studies are needed
to increase our understanding of the complex processes through which individuals’
personalities and their stressful life events affect their development over time.
The finding that emerging adults in the Resilient profile were distinguished by a
combination of positive parenting of mothers and lower emotional stability and
conscientiousness might seem puzzling. However, this pattern of findings aligns with the
growing understanding that parenting behaviors and children’s personalities interact in
predicting developmental outcomes, exacerbating or buffering their effects (e.g., Loginova, &
Slobodskaya, 2021; Pascual-Sagastizabal, del Puerto-Golzarri, & Azurmendi, 2021; Rioux et
al., 2016). More specifically, in our study positive parenting behaviors of mothers may have
buffered the potential negative effects of lower emotional stability and lower
conscientiousness in the Resilient group. In other words, despite their more vulnerable
personality, these adolescents may still have developed well because of their warm and
supporting mothers. These complex findings point to the importance of considering both
individual and family level resources and their interactive effects in resilience research. As
argued by several resilience frameworks (e.g., Infurna & Luthar, 2018; Masten & Cicchetti,
2016; Ungar & Theron, 2020), resilience is not merely the result of one factor in an
individual’s life, but rather is facilitated by multiple dynamic, interacting individual level
systems (e.g., psychology, genes, neurobiology), which are embedded in larger
environmental systems (e.g., family, culture, policy). Consequently, disentangling the
underlying mechanisms that lead to resilience and how to best foster it requires
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 29
multidisciplinary research that accounts for the multiple systems involved in resilience
(Ungar & Theron, 2020).
Practical Implications
Our findings underscore that youth may respond differentially to the experience of
stressful life events. Some individuals may develop behavior problems after life event
exposure and may need help, while others seem to adapt well despite the experience of
multiple stressful events. Since stressful life event exposure was not a universal risk factor for
all individuals in this study, it is valuable to focus on strengthening individual and contextual
characteristics that may promote adaptive coping and successful development in the face of
stress. The higher levels of emotional stability and conscientiousness of individuals in the
Competent profile, who showed best overall functioning, suggest that strengthening these
personality traits in adolescence can optimize behavioral outcomes in emerging adulthood.
Therapeutic interventions, such as mindfulness interventions and social-skill training, have
been shown to be effective in increasing emotional stability and conscientiousness (Roberts et
al., 2017). Given that maternal positive parenting was a protective factor in the context of
stress, preventative parenting interventions focused on parental warmth and involvement may
help children in high-stress environments to avoid negative adult outcomes (Yap et al., 2016;
Sandler et al., 2015).
Strengths, Limitations, and Suggestions for Future Research
The present study builds upon previous work on resilience in emerging adulthood by
using statistically advanced person-centered analyses to identify individual, naturally
occurring patterns of stress and (mal)adaptation across multiple developmental domains. We
adopted a prospective, longitudinal design with a large time interval from adolescence (age
11–16 years) to emerging adulthood (age 25 years) to investigate potential resource factors at
both the contextual level, i.e., paternal and maternal parenting, and the individual level, i.e.,
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 30
personality traits, to obtain a more comprehensive picture of the resources and assets that
may promote resilience.
The strengths of the current study should be interpreted in consideration of some
limitations. First, the study design was not fully prospective given that the occurrence of
stressful life events and their perceived impact were retrospectively reported in emerging
adulthood. Despite findings indicating that retrospective reports of major, easily defined
adverse childhood experiences have acceptable psychometric properties and similar
associations with adult outcomes as prospective assessments (Hardt & Rutter 2004; Reuben
et al., 2016), it is unknown to what extent individuals’ ratings of stress in the current study
were affected by recall bias. It is recommended that future studies use prospective measures
of stressful life events (e.g., by caregiver report) in addition to retrospective reports to test the
robustness of our findings. Likewise, we constructed a new stressful life event scale instead
of using an existing scale, as we aimed to assess both the lifetime occurrence of events
typically seen as undesirable, and the perceived stress caused by these events. Future research
is needed to investigate the psychometric properties of this life event scale.
Second, although we used a multi-informant design with reports of mothers, fathers,
and their children, we relied on questionnaires due to the relatively large sample size of the
present study. It can be worthwhile to use a combination of assessment methods (e.g.,
combining questionnaires with behavioral observations of parenting) to minimize the
influence of parents’ and children’s social desirability tendencies and mood states on their
ratings (Podsakoff et al., 2012). Further, it is unclear to what extent parents’ judgments
regarding their child’s personality traits correspond to adolescents’ own perceptions. In future
work, it would be interesting to consider both parent-reports and adolescents’ self-reports of
their personality traits. However, the availability of resources plays a critical role in the
selection of research instruments and methods.
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 31
Third, caution should be exercised with generalizing these findings to other samples
given that our study consisted of predominantly White, European families from middle-class
backgrounds. Families in our sample were characterized by relatively high levels of
education and low levels of stress, and thus could be considered low risk. Patterns of
resilience and vulnerability as well as the relevance of certain parenting and personality
characteristics for development are potentially different in higher-risk or culturally different
samples (Fergus & Zimmerman, 2005; Zolkoski & Bullock, 2012; Valentino et al., 2012). To
generalize our results to other settings, it is essential that future studies examine patterns of
resilience and the role of protective factors across families in varying contexts.
Fourth, despite the already mentioned advantages of LPA, this analysis technique has
limitations as well. Although LPA is well suited for revealing meaningful patterns of stress
and adaptation simultaneously within individuals, person-centered analyses such as LPA may
be unduly influenced by features of the sample or by the nature of the selected indicators
(Spurk et al., 2020). Therefore, the current inductive findings warrant replication in other
samples. In addition, LPA makes several statistical assumptions, such as local independence
(i.e., all indicator variables are uncorrelated within each latent profile) and variance
homogeneity (i.e., all indicator variable variances are constrained to equality across profiles),
which are reason for careful interpretation of the current results (Peugh & Fan, 2013; Spurk et
al., 2020).
Fifth, since we found limited evidence for parental overreactivity and (paternal)
warmth as family resource factors, it is likely that other parenting and family aspects are
involved in the development of resilience in emerging adulthood. It would be valuable to
examine the role of other parenting behaviors, such as helicopter parenting (i.e., parents being
overly involved and protective in their children’s life), which has been related to emerging
adults’ self-efficacy and well-being (Reed, Duncan, Lucier-Greer, Fixelle, & Ferraro, 2016;
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 32
Schiffrin et al., 2019). Additionally, future studies could consider other potential individual
resource factors that may be malleable and responsive to intervention efforts, such as
adolescents’ mindset and coping strategies (Compas et al., 2017). A more nuanced
understanding of what resource factors in childhood and adolescence promote resilience can
guide possible targets for interventions before youth enter the emerging adulthood period.
Such early intervention strategies may help young people to strengthen their abilities and
skills so that they are ready to tackle the challenges of emerging adulthood.
Conclusion
The current study provides new insights into the heterogeneous patterns of emerging
adults’ adaptation after stressful life events. We identified three latent profiles characterized
by competence, vulnerability, and resilience, demonstrating that some individuals are more
vulnerable, whereas others are more resilient to life stress. Additionally, the profiles were
associated with maternal warmth and with the personality traits emotional stability and
conscientiousness assessed in adolescence. Our findings suggest that maternal warmth is an
important protective factor in the context of stress, possibly having the potential to buffer the
effects of vulnerable personality traits. In intervention strategies, it is essential to take into
account that youth may respond differentially to the experience of stressful life events.
Finally, further research into malleable resource factors such as parenting and personality
characteristics is needed to guide interventions that help youth better deal with stress, thereby
optimizing their development into emerging adulthood.
RESILIENCE AND VULNERABILITY IN EMERGING ADULTHOOD 33