Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
Initiative apathy trait underlies individual differences in the
ability to anticipate and expend cognitive effort in cost-
benefit decision-making tasks
Authors
Giulia Lafond-Brina (1) (2)
Bich-Thuy Pham (1)
Anne Bonnefond (1) (2)
(1) INSERM, Unité 1114, Strasbourg, France
(2) University of Strasbourg, France
Corresponding author
Giulia Lafond-Brina
E-mail: lafond.brina@gmail.com
Laboratoire INSERM U1114
Pôle de Psychiatrie
1 Place de l'Hôpital
67000 Strasbourg
France
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
Abstract
Initiative apathy is the most disabling form of apathy, prevalent both in neuropsychiatric
pathologies and in the healthy population. This apathy has been specifically associated with
functional abnormalities of the anterior cingulate cortex, a key structure underlying effort-based
decision-making. The main aim of the present study was to explore, for the first time, the
cognitive and neural effort mechanisms of initiative apathy, by distinguishing the steps of effort
anticipation and effort expenditure and the potential modulating effect of motivation. We
conducted an EEG study in 23 subjects with specific subclinical initiative apathy and 24 healthy
subjects with no apathy. The subjects had to compete two effort tasks. The analysis of
behavioral choices, CNV, and mPFC theta power highlighted that initiative apathy is
associated with effort avoidance and impairments of effort anticipation and effort expenditure
that suggest effort-based decision-making deficits. Better knowledge of these impairments
should aid the development of new, more targeted therapeutic interventions necessary for
reducing the debilitating consequences of initiative apathy.
Keywords
Avolition
EEG
Executive control
Motivation
Self-esteem
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
Introduction
Effort-based decision-making is a vast field of research in neuroscience, that tries to
understand people’s willingness to work for rewards and achieve a goal-directed behavior. A
goal-directed behavior is one that will only be completed if the action is motivating (the goal
reward is valuable enough) and does require too much effort (the goal seems possible to
achieve) (Shenhav et al., 2017). The effort needed to reach a goal can also be rewarding in
itself (Inzlicht et al., 2018). Effort-based decision-making can be broken down into two main
steps: (1) anticipating the effort exertion, including effort- and reward-based evaluation and
decision-making and, (2) expending the effort (Zhang & Zheng, 2022). Effort anticipation is
translated by a proactive allocation, whose most consistent electrophysiological correlate is
the contingent negative variation (CNV), a negative-going slow wave with a central distribution.
The CNV amplitude is higher when completing effortful and rewarding tasks, and the amplitude
is positively correlated with better accuracy and faster responses to the task (Frömer et al.,
2021). Frontal-midline theta activity reflects the second step of cognitive effort mobilization, as
there is a higher theta power in tasks requiring higher mental effort (Domic-Siede et al., 2021;
McFerren et al., 2021; Smit et al., 2005).
A deficit in goal-directed behavior characterizes initiative apathy, a disabling symptom
(Robert et al., 2018). Clinically, this form of apathy is often described as mental emptiness and
an inability to think of new things or be spontaneous, which results in behavioral inertia.
Initiative apathy is prevalent in many neurological, neurodegenerative, and psychiatric
pathologies (Quang et al., 2021; Radakovic et al., 2016; Raffard et al., 2019) but also present
in 2.5% of the healthy population (Lafond-Brina & Bonnefond, 2022). At a subclinical level, i.e.,
at mild degrees of dysfunction, initiative apathy has even been reported to be present in about
6% of the general population and associated with difficulties tied to daily life (Ang et al., 2017;
Lafond-Brina & Bonnefond, 2022). Interestingly, fMRI studies have highlighted that initiative
apathy is specifically associated with functional abnormalities of the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC) (Le Heron et al., 2018; Pagonabarraga et al., 2015). The ACC is a key structure notably
underlying effort-based decision-making, and it has been suggested that effort-based decision
making is likely to be altered in initiative apathy (Cléry-Melin et al., 2011). Indeed, ACC is
involved in effort anticipation, with a higher BOLD signal in the ACC before a high compared
to a low effort in a rewarded task (Kurniawan et al., 2013). It has been reported that many
apathetic patients suffering either from depression or neurological or neurodegenerative
diseases had ACC dysfunctions (Touroutoglou et al., 2019 for a review). In accordance with
this hypothesis, a neuropsychological study conducted with Alzheimer’s disease patients
showed that only patients with initiative apathy present non-optimal decision-making choices
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
(inducing monetary loss rather than gain) in the Iowa Gambling task (Bayard et al., 2014). In
addition, one fMRI study with healthy subjects suffering from initiative apathy showed a specific
link between initiative apathy and increased effort sensitivity in an effort-based decision-
making task. It also demonstrated a correlation between the severity of initiative apathy and
decreased structural and functional connectivity in the ACC (Bonnelle et al., 2016).
The main aim of the present study is to better understand the mechanisms underlying
initiative apathy. To do that, we explored neural correlates of effort anticipation and effort
expenditure during the realization of two effort tasks in two groups of healthy young people,
one with a specific subclinical initiative apathy and one group with no apathy. The combined
use of these two effort-related decision-making tasks allowed us to investigate the potential
modulating effects of motivation on these two steps and how effort- and reward-related
information are accounted for when making a choice.
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
Materials and Methods
Subjects
In a previous, non-experimental study, an online survey on the prevalence and consequences
of multidimensional apathy was conducted among the student population of a French
university (see Lafond-Brina & Bonnefond, 2022, for more details). This exploratory survey,
conducted on about 4000 young adults, allows us to define the cut-off for each form of
subclinical apathy in the healthy young population. Indeed, subjects completed the three
subscores of the Dimensional Apathy Scale (DAS) (Radakovic & Abrahams, 2014). The DAS
is a 24-item scale assessing the severity of executive, emotional, and initiative apathy. Items
are scored on a 4-point Likert scale based on the frequency of the occurrence of apathy
symptoms in the previous month (1 = “hardly ever”, 4 = “almost always”). Three cut-offs of
subclinical apathy were defined based on these subscores: initiative score above the cut-off of
14, executive score above 16, and emotional score above 12. Interestingly, the stability of the
DAS subscores measured at one-year intervals suggested that the subclinical apathy
measurement was not state-dependent but rather a trait measurement.
In the present study, 47 right-handed subjects participated. They were selected based on their
responses to the online survey using the DAS. The initiative apathy group was composed of
23 participants presenting the initiative form of subclinical apathy (initiative score above the
cut-off of 14), and having scores for the two other forms below the cut-offs for the general
population (executive and emotional scores below the respective cut-offs of 16 and 12). The
24 participants composing the control group did not present any form of apathy (subscores
below the cut-offs for the general population).
Participants with a history of neurological, metabolic, sensorial, psychiatric disorders or
psychiatric disorders in first-degree relatives, who consumed psychoactive drugs and/or
cannabis in the last three months, and/or had general anesthesia in the past three months
were excluded. Moreover, subjects with mild or severe depressive symptoms as determined
by the Beck Depression Inventory II (BDI-II; score ≥16) were excluded (Beck et al., 1996).
groups.
The study protocol was approved by the local ethics committee (University review board:
UNISTRA/CER/2020-13), and the selected subjects were paid for their participation.
given as the mean (standard deviation in parentheses) (DAS: Dimensional Apathy Scale; BDI-
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
II: Beck Depression Inventory II; SES: Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (Rosenberg, 1965);
TEPS: Temporal Experience of Pleasure Scale (Gard et al., 2006); digit span task from the
WAIS-III (Wechsler, 1997)).
Control group Initiative apathy group p-value
Age (years) 21.95 (1.73) 20.74 (2.22) p<.04
Sex (M/F) 10 /14 7 / 16 p<0.45
DAS executive 8.63 (3.79) 11.61 (3.47) p<.01
Cut-off: 16
DAS emotional 6.25 (2.59) 6,13 (2.98) p<.90
Cut-off: 12
DAS initiative 7.45 (2.95) 15.04 (1.36) p<.001
Cut-off: 14
BDI-II 4.21 (4.27) 8.48 (4.53) p<.002
Rosenberg SES 29.38 (4.92) 26.43 (2.87) p<.02
TEPS Anticipatory 45.08 (6.60) 41.57 (6.04) p<.07
pleasure
TEPS Consummatory 37.38 (5.33) 36.96 (4.66) p<.80
pleasure
Digit span task forward 6.25 (1.15) 6.52 (1.41) p<.50
Digit span task 4.96 (1.12) 5.17 (1.37) p<.60
backward
Tasks and behavioral measures
The participants completed the Induced Effort (IE) task and the Effort-based Decision-Making
(EDM) task in a counterbalanced order. These tasks were adapted from the Demand Selection
Task (McGuire & Botvinick, 2010) and the Door Choice Effort task (Reddy et al., 2015). Both
tasks lasted about 30 minutes and were divided into three blocks of, respectively, 40 and 60
trials each, separated by short breaks. A training of a few minutes preceded the completion of
each task, in which the participants had to achieve success in six consecutive trials.
Concretely, subjects first see a cue indicating the level of difficulty of the following sequence
(two different levels: easy, difficult). This cue has the shape of a thermometer, sparsely filled
in the case of the easy level and almost full in the difficult one. For each block, the two types
of cues are presented in a random order and in similar proportions (50% each). Then, a
sequence of five numbers is presented. For each sequence, subjects had to say if the number
presented is odd/even (press left for odd, right for even) if the background color was blue, or
higher/lower than the number 5 (press left for lower, right for higher) if the background was
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
yellow. The easy level corresponds to a sequence in which the background color is the same
for the five numbers (same cognitive activity), while the difficult level requires a switch between
the two activities. At the end of each sequence, positive feedback (symbolized by a green disc)
appeared on the screen in case of one or no error, and negative feedback (a red disc) was
given if more than one error has been made.
The efficiency, i.e., the ratio between the mean number of accurate responses per sequence
and the mean of reaction time per sequence, was calculated.
Presentation of an easy trial (on top) and a difficult trial (at the bottom).
The CNV is the electrophysiological correlate of effort anticipation, observed before the
sequence begins. The mPFC theta power spectrum calculated during the sequence reflects
the effort expenditure.
The EDM task is a decision-making task that manipulates both cognitive effort and motivation
proposes two cues indicating the level of difficulty (similar to the IE task) and the possible
reward (two different levels: low, high). The reward cue is represented with a Euro symbol: one
Euro sign in the case of the low reward, and three Euro signs for the high reward. In each
block, all choice combinations are presented in a random order and in similar proportions. First,
subjects must choose between the two options presented (press left for the left option, right
for the right one). Then, a sequence of five numbers is presented with the same design as in
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
the IE task. At the end of each sequence, feedback based on the performance (similar to that
of the IE task) and the reward earned (one Euro sign for a low reward, three Euro signs for a
high reward) is presented.
types of choices were studied: choices for effort (with constant reward), choices for reward
(with constant effort), choices for optimality (where optimal choices propose a higher reward
for the easiest effort), and choices for preference (work harder for more reward or milder for
The percentages of each type of choice, time taken to choose, and efficiency were calculated.
Presentation of a choice for preference, with the sequence induced by choosing the easy low-
reward option (on the left) and the difficult high-reward option (on the right).
The CNV is the electrophysiological correlate of effort anticipation, observed before the
sequence begins. The mPFC theta power spectrum calculated during the sequence reflects
the effort expenditure.
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
The four types of choices were presented to participants in similar proportions (25% each). For
each choice, the options were randomly presented on the right and on the left. The choices for
effort (easy, difficult) had a constant reward. The choice for reward (low, high reward) required
constant effort. For the choices for optimality, optimal choices proposed a higher reward for
the easiest sequence, whereas non-optimal choices offered a lower reward for a more difficult
sequence. For choices for preference, one option was to work harder for a higher reward (high
reward difficult), whereas the other option was to work less for a lower reward (low reward
easy).
Electrophysiology
1) Electrophysiological preprocessing
Electroencephalograms (EEGs) were recorded using 64 Ag/AgCl BioSemi ActiveTwo System
electrodes mounted on an elastic cap according to the standard 10-10 system and with a 0.01-
500 Hz band-pass filter. Brain-Vision Analyzer 2.1 software was used to analyze the data
sampled at 512 Hz. A 0.5 Hz off-line high-pass filter, a 40 Hz off-line low-pass filter, and a 50
Hz notch filter were applied. EEGs were re-referenced to the average of the two earlobes.
Blinks and horizontal eye movements were removed using a regression algorithm (Gratton et
al., 1983). The noisy scalp channel was defined as having an amplitude exceeding ±100 µV
throughout the recording and was interpolated by the average of the four nearest spatial
electrodes.
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
For the IE task, the EEG was segmented from -250 to 11,000 msec relative to the onset of the
effort cue. For the EDM task, the EEG was segmented from -250 to 11,500 msec relative to
the onset of the choice cue. All EEG data were visually inspected for artifacts using a semi-
automatic procedure. The EEG segments were rejected based on the following criteria: a
maximum voltage difference of less than 0.5 µV within 100 msec intervals; a voltage step of
more than 50 µV between sample points; a maximum of 100 µV; a minimum of -100 µV; and
a voltage difference of 100 µV within a given trial. Additional artifacts were identified visually.
2) Event-Related Potential (ERP) analysis: the CNV
In both tasks, the ERP were averaged separately for each trial and were baselined to a pre-
stimulus interval of -200 to 0 msec. The EEG data was then transformed using current-source
density (CSD) analysis. The CNV parameters chosen for the analyses were determined by
referencing the literature and the study data. The CNV was extracted at the electrode with the
maximum amplitude and was scored using time-window averages. In the IE task, the CNV was
computed at Cz, in the time range between 1,100 and 1,350 msec after the effort cue. In the
EDM task, the CNV was computed at Cz, in the time range between -100 and 0 msec before
the choice response.
3) Power spectrum analysis
The theta power spectrum (4–8 Hz theta band) was extracted from the 7.5 s of the sequence
of five numbers. The theta power spectrum was computed in the medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC) electrodes, with a cluster of the four electrodes where the maximum amplitude was
observed for each subject.
The beta power spectrum (13–21 Hz and 22- 30 Hz beta band) was extracted from the 7.5 s
of the sequence of five numbers. The beta power spectrum was computed in the central and
medial frontal cortex electrodes, with a cluster of eight electrodes (Fz, FCz, Cz, CPz, C1, C2,
C3, C4) for each subject.
Statistical analysis
A two-tailed significance level of 0.05 and a trend level of 0.10 were used for all tests. Effect
sizes were calculated using a partial eta square (η 2).
In the IE task, ANOVAs were performed for behavioral data, the CNV amplitude, and the mPFC
theta power, including the within-subject factor Effort cue (easy, difficult) and the between-
subject factor Group (control, initiative apathy).
In the EDM task, for behavioral data, four types of choices were dissociated: Choice for reward
(low, high), Choice for effort (easy, difficult), Choice for optimality (optimal, not optimal), and
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
Choice of preference (high reward difficult, low reward easy). First, the percentage of choices
was subjected to a one-sample Student’s t-test with a reference of 0.50 to test the randomness
of the choices. Then, the percentage of choices per type was subjected to one-way ANOVA’s,
with the between-subject factor Group (control, initiative apathy). Finally, behavioral data
(efficiency and time to choose) were subjected to ANOVA’s, including one of the within-subject
factor Type of choices and the between-subject factor Group (control, initiative apathy).
ANOVAs were performed for the CNV amplitude, the mPFC theta power, and the centro-
median beta power, including the within-subject factor Effort (easy, difficult), the within-subject
factor Reward (low, high) and the between-subject factor Group (control, initiative apathy).
Pearson correlational analyses were performed between the DAS initiative apathy subscore,
the DAS executive and emotional subscores, the validated scales and the behavioral and ERP
measures.
ANCOVA with age and depressive symptoms was conducted due to the difference between
the two groups. We found that no difference in age or depressive symptoms could explain any
of the results (p>.05).
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
Results
1) IE task
1- Behavioral results
The ANOVA performed on efficiency revealed a main effect of effort cue (F(1,45)=196.68,
p<.001; η2=.81) and a trend for a main effect of group (F(1,45)=3.73, p<.06; η2=.08). Efficiency
was lower for difficult than easy cues (p<.001) and tended to be lower in the initiative than in
(in green) and difficult (in blue) trials in the IE task: ** p<.01; ͳ p<.06. The control group is
represented in solid colors and the initiative group in striped colors.
2- Effort anticipation
The ANOVA performed on CNV amplitude revealed an effort cue x group interaction
(F(1,45)=8.56, p<.005; η2=.16). Bonferroni post-hoc comparisons revealed that the CNV
amplitude after a difficult cue was lower in the initiative than the control group (p<.02). In the
initiative group, the CNV was lower after a difficult cue than after an easy cue (p<.02), whereas
Pearson correlational analyses revealed a negative correlation between CNV amplitude after
a difficult cue and DAS initiative score (r=-.29, p<.05) in the sample (both groups). The more
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
Pearson correlational analyses also revealed a positive correlation between CNV amplitude
after an easy cue and TEPS anticipatory score (r=.20, p<.05) in the sample.
groups during the IE task: * p<.05. The analyzed time window is represented in orange. The
effort cue appears at 0 msec.
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
initiative apathy (r=.-29, p<.05). The control group is represented in blue and the initiative group
in orange.
3- Effort expenditure
The ANOVA performed on mPFC theta power revealed an effort cue x group interaction
mPFC theta power after a difficult cue than an easy cue only in the control group (p<.003),
while no such difference was observed in the initiative group (p>.90). Moreover, after an easy
cue, the initiative group had a trend of a higher mPFC theta power than the control group
(p<.06).
Pearson correlational analyses revealed that in the sample (both control and initiative groups),
there was a positive correlation between mPFC theta after an easy cue and DAS initiative
score (r=.40, p<.05), and a negative correlation between mPFC theta after an easy cue and
self-esteem score (r=-.35, p<.05). The more severe the initiative apathy trait and the lower the
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
in the control and initiative groups during the IE task: ** p<.01; ͳ p<.06.
score of initiative apathy (r=.40 p<.05). The control group is represented in blue and the
initiative group in orange.
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
2) EDM task
1- Behavioral results
For both groups, all types of choices were different from random, except for the choices for
rewards (all p<.05, except choices for reward p>.20).
The ANOVA performed on the percentage of difficult choices revealed a main effect of group
(F(1,45)=4.10, p<.05, η2=.08). The initiative group made less difficult choices than the control
group (15% vs 35%, respectively). The ANOVA performed on the percentage of high reward
choices revealed no effect of group (F(1,45)=1.36, p<.25, η2=.03). The ANOVA performed on
the percentage of optimal choices revealed a main effect of group (F(1,45)=4.23, p<.05,
η2=.09). The initiative group made fewer optimal choices than the control group (1% vs 16%,
respectively). Pearson correlational analyses revealed that in the sample (both groups), there
was a negative correlation between the percentage of optimal choices and the DAS initiative
difficult choices revealed no effect of group (F(1,45)=.85, p<.35, η2=.02).
The ANOVA performed on the time taken to make a choice revealed a main effect of reward
(F(1,44)=8.30, p<.01; η2=.16), with more time taken for high reward than low reward. The
ANOVA performed on the time taken to make a choice revealed a main effect of optimality
(F(1,12)=4.60, p<.05; η2=.28), with more time taken for optimal than non-optimal choices.
There was no effect of group (p<.25) and no reward x group interaction (p<.20).
The ANOVA performed on efficiency revealed an effort x group interaction (F(1,41)=5.07,
p<.03; η2=.11) but no motivation x group interaction (F(1,44)=.53, p<.55; η2<.01). Bonferroni
post-hoc comparisons revealed that the initiative group was less efficient after a difficult choice
than the control group (p<.05). The initiative group was also less efficient after a difficult than
an easy choice (p<.001).
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
severity of the DAS score of initiative apathy (r=-.22, p<.05). The control group is represented
in blue and the initiative group in orange.
2- Effort anticipation
The ANOVA performed on CNV amplitude revealed a trend for a main effect of effort
(F(1,44)=3.20, p<.08; η2=.07), with a higher CNV amplitude after a difficult than an easy cue.
No other effect was observed. Bonferroni post-hoc comparisons revealed that there is a trend
for a higher CNV amplitude after a difficult cue than an easy cue only in the control group
(p<.09). Pearson correlational analyses revealed that in the sample (both groups), there was
a positive correlation between CNV amplitude after a difficult low reward cue and TEPS
consummatory score (r=.44, p<.05).
3- Effort expenditure
The ANOVA performed on mPFC theta power revealed an effort x reward x group interaction
(F(1,39)=8.19, p<.01; η2=.17). Bonferroni post-hoc comparisons revealed a higher mPFC theta
power after a difficult high reward choice than all the other choices in the control group (difficult
low reward p<.03; easy high reward p<0.02; easy low reward p<0.06). The initiative group had
a lower mPFC theta power after a difficult high reward choice than an easy high reward choice
(p<0.01) and a trend for a lower mPFC theta power after a difficult high reward choice than
after a difficult low reward choice (p<0.07). The control group also had a trend for a higher
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
10).
Pearson correlational analyses revealed that in the control group, there was a negative
correlation between mPFC theta after an easy low reward choice and DAS initiative score (r=-
.49, p<.05). Instead, in the initiative group, the analyses revealed a positive correlation
between mPFC theta after an easy low reward and after a difficult low reward choice and DAS
initiative score (respectively, r=.42 and r=.51, p<.05). The more severe the initiative apathy
trait, the higher the mPFC theta power in the easy low reward choices. In the initiative group,
the more severe the initiative apathy, the higher the mPFC theta power in the difficult low
reward choices. Moreover, Pearson correlational analyses revealed that in the sample (both
groups), there was a negative correlation between mPFC theta after a difficult high reward
choice and DAS initiative score (r=-.35, p<.05). The more severe the initiative apathy trait, the
the control and initiative groups during the EDM task: ** p<.01; * p<.05, ͳ p<.07.
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
EDM task and DAS score of initiative apathy (r=-.35, p<.05). The control group is represented
in blue and the initiative group in orange.
Following the mPFC theta results obtained, we analyzed the beta power spectrum by
distinguishing two frequency bands: the 13–21 Hz low beta band, reflecting the normal
activating network, and the 22–30 Hz high beta band, reflecting the over-stimulation network
(Demerdzieva, 2011; Díaz M. et al., 2019).
The ANOVA performed on low beta power revealed a trend of a main effect of effort (p<.10)
on the power, with a higher low-beta-band power after a difficult than an easy high reward
choice. No other effect was observed. Bonferroni post-hoc comparisons revealed a lower low-
beta-band power after a difficult high reward choice than an easy high reward choice in the
initiative group (p<.04), but not in the control group (p<.75). The ANOVA performed on high
beta power revealed no effect of effort (p<.36) and no effect of group (p<.40) on the power.
Furthermore, there was no interaction (p<.60).
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
Discussion
The main aim of the present study was to further the understanding of the cognitive and
neural effort-based mechanisms underlying initiative apathy. Using two tasks - an imposed
effort task and a free choice effort-based decision-making task - and an EEG recording, we
explored electrophysiological correlates of effort anticipation and effort expenditure and their
potential modulation by motivation in healthy subjects with a subclinical level of initiative
apathy. Our results, highlighted both by contrasting the initiative and healthy control groups
(extreme-group approach) and by linking the results more directly to the level of initiative
apathy (individual differences approach), showed effort avoidance and effort expenditure
impairments that suggest that subjects with initiative apathy have effort-based decision-making
deficits.
First, our behavioral results suggest that people with a subclinical level of initiative
apathy are more sensitive to cognitive effort. Indeed, in the Effort-based Decision-Making
(EDM) task, subjects with initiative apathy are less willing to choose trials that require greater
effort, with this group making 50% fewer difficult choices than healthy control subjects. The
avoidance of cognitive effort aligns with Bonnelle and colleagues’ (2016) findings that a group
with a similar trait of initiative apathy avoids physical effort (Bonnelle et al., 2016). Both
illustrate well the significant decrease in effort and productivity that characterizes the initiative
form of apathy described in various neurological and psychiatric pathologies (Marin & Wilkosz,
2005). Interestingly, the analysis of electrophysiological data in the Induced Effort task, which
imposes the level of trial difficulty, revealed that subjects with initiative apathy do not even
prepare themselves for difficult trials. Indeed, subjects with initiative apathy not only show a
smaller CNV amplitude in difficult trials compared to easy trials but also a smaller CNV
amplitude in difficult trials compared to control subjects. Subjects with initiative apathy do not
anticipate that they will need to expend mental effort. They do not proactively modulate
attentional resources as a function of the expected effort, a specificity which could be directly
related to the reduced activation in the dorsal ACC and supplementary motor area (SMA), the
two main regions altered in initiative apathy (Pagonabarraga et al., 2015). Indeed, previous
studies conducted on healthy subjects showed that reduced activity in the ACC and SMA was
linked to impaired ability to anticipate, evidenced by a smaller CNV (Gómez et al., 2003; Nagai
et al., 2004). A decreased structural and functional connectivity between the ACC and SMA
has been correlated with increased initiative apathy and the lower willingness to engage in an
effort (Bonnelle et al., 2016). Moreover, by highlighting the link between the severity of
subclinical initiative apathy and effort anticipation (whereby the higher the initiative apathy trait,
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
the lesser the effort anticipation), the study results allow us to further the understanding of
individual differences in the ability to anticipate effort. It must be underlined that motivation,
manipulated in the present study through low and high rewards, did not show any effect on the
effort anticipation, both for subjects with and without initiative apathy. It may be the case that
incentives were not rewarding enough to lead subjects to modulate their preparation according
to the value of the reward (Bonnelle et al., 2015; Green et al., 2015).
Interestingly, cognitive effort avoidance and effort anticipation impairments have been
related to inefficient cognitive effort expenditure in depressed people (Berwian et al., 2020;
Tran et al., 2020). In relation to these findings, our results concerning the effort expenditure
provide some explanations for previous specificities highlighted in subjects with initiative
apathy. Indeed, while completing the trials in the Imposed Effort task, subjects with initiative
apathy have the same mPFC theta power in easy and difficult trials, and this power is
equivalent to that of control subjects in difficult trials. Thus, contrary to healthy subjects whose
mPFC theta power increases as a function of difficulty, as previously shown (Mussel et al.,
2016; Smit et al., 2005), subjects with initiative apathy do not display evidence of such effort
expenditure modulation. Moreover, they are able to perform this task less efficiently. Taken
together, these two results suggest that subjects with initiative apathy have an impaired effort
expenditure, possibly due to the alterations evidenced in the ACC (Domic-Siede et al., 2021;
McFerren et al., 2021). Moreover, as for the results on anticipation, our results shed light on
the link between the severity of subclinical initiative apathy and the allocation of effort
expenditure (the higher the initiative apathy trait, the higher the effort expenditure on easy
trials). Therefore, people with high initiative apathy trait do not modulate their effort expenditure
according to a context only defined by effort. It is still unknown how these subjects modulate
effort expenditure in a task that combines effort and motivation.
In the Effort-based Decision-Making task (EDM task), if mPFC theta power is
modulated by motivation, as previously shown in healthy people (Cohen et al., 2007; Gruber
et al., 2013), in the sense that the highest mPFC theta occurs in a difficult sequence with high
reward, such modulation does not exist in subjects with initiative apathy. Subjects with initiative
apathy seem unable to strategically modulate their effort expenditure since they stop investing
effort only when the potential reward is higher. Therefore, contrary to healthy subjects, subjects
with initiative apathy seem unable to compute effort costs and motivational benefits, i.e.,
calculate when they need to work harder to obtain a reward that justifies investing the effort
(Kurzban, 2016; Shenhav et al., 2017). Moreover, correlations between the severity of initiative
apathy and the lack of modulation of effort expenditure for difficult trials with low and high
rewards confirm that individual differences in initiative apathy trait could modulate the capacity
to compute effort and reward information during periods of effort expenditure.
It is difficult to interpret our effort expenditure results because effort-based decision-
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
making paradigms in the literature only compare low-reward low-effort conditions with high-
reward high-effort ones. Studies usually conclude by finding an effort discounting, where high-
demand effort can discount reward to obtain it (Bogdanov et al., 2022; Chong et al., 2017;
Westbrook & Braver, 2015). In the present study, the same amount of effort is valuated
differently according to the reward: the effort is willingly exerted only for a small reward but not
a large reward. Instead of effort discounting, these abnormal effort expenditure results might
be explained by a deficit of incentive motivation secondary to a distortion of performance
judgments (Cléry-Melin et al., 2011; Green et al., 2015). Following this hypothesis, people with
initiative apathy may guess that they should perform better for difficult high-reward trials but
feel unable to fulfill this expectation. These defeatist beliefs could prevent them from engaging
more effortfully in effortful trials with potentially high rewards. However, our study did not ask
participants about their anxiety or defeatist beliefs. A first but tenuous argument in favor of this
hypothesis could be that subjects with initiative apathy present a modulation of beta power
activity assumed to reflect a hypo-arousal that has been linked to lower cognitive resources
and anxiety (Díaz M. et al., 2019; Micoulaud-Franchi et al., 2021). Indeed, people with initiative
apathy tend to present a lower beta power only after being presented with a difficult choice
with a potential high reward compared to other choices, whereas healthy subjects present no
modulation of beta power when presented with all choices. Moreover, this beta result could be
linked to the fact that the higher the severity of initiative apathy, the lower the self-esteem and
the higher the allocation of the effort expenditure for imposed easy trials in the IE task. Lastly,
healthy people usually will undertake effortful behaviors when the consequences of their
behaviors are under their direct control (i.e., when they choose the consequence), relative to
when they follow someone else’s decision (i.e., the consequence was imposed on them)
(Chambon et al., 2020). Studies have already shown that people with subclinical anxiety,
defeatist beliefs, and aberrations in decision-making have a diminished preference for free
choices compared to imposed choices (Zorowitz et al., 2020, 2021). Therefore, a distortion of
performance judgements, maybe underlined by lower self-esteem and/or higher anxiety, could
lead to abnormal effort expenditure in initiative apathy.
Finally, our results all point towards abnormal effort anticipation and expenditure when
situations are experienced more difficult, suggesting specific effort impairments in initiative
apathy. This finding aligns with what is usually observed in clinical descriptions: mental
emptiness in daily life with difficulties in engaging in complex goal-directed behaviors. In effort-
cost theories, people who are effort-avoidant and unable to anticipate and strategically
modulate their effort expenditure could present abnormal cost-benefit computations. Indeed,
healthy cost-benefit decision-making weighs the potential rewards conferred by effort
expenditure against its effort costs. A healthy subject will be motivated to expend effort to
obtain a high reward and be unwilling to exert a higher effort for a low reward (Bogdanov et
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
al., 2022; Kool & Botvinick, 2018; Westbrook & Braver, 2015). In contrast, abnormal cost-
benefit decision-making implies an inability to optimize the effort choice in response to the
reward information in the environment. Indeed, in the EDM task, apathetic participants made
fewer than 1% of optimal choices, in terms of maximizing rewards for less effort, suggesting
that the few times they chose effortful options, they did not make strategic choices but did so
for choices with lower rewards. Their non-optimal decision-making does not seem to be
explained by a comprehension difficulty since any participant randomly chooses their effort
options. Furthermore, in all the sample, the fewer optimal choices the participants make, the
higher their initiative apathy trait is, suggesting that the initiative apathy trait might govern
someone’s efficacy in combining effort and reward information to make a free choice. In
practical terms, this link between the severity of initiative apathy and non-optimal effort-based
decision-making could explain some clinical behaviors seen in patients with initiative apathy.
Indeed, whether they have a neurological, neurodegenerative, or psychiatric disorder, these
patients are often described as finding it difficult to initiate an action but being able to complete
this action when someone helps them start (Levy & Dubois, 2006). Therefore, any therapy that
aims to alleviate their apathetic symptoms needs to start with external guidance that naturally
overrides the decision-making stage of the action process. Further studies need to explore
these psychological difficulties that initiative apathy subjects face and its consequences for
effort-based decision-making in daily life.
To conclude, this study sheds light on the specificities of effort-based decision-making
in initiative apathy, which induces a cognitive effort avoidance similar to the clinical descriptions
of these patients. These specificities could be explained by an abnormal modulation of the
effort expenditure. Indeed, people with a high initiative apathy trait do not seem “less able”
than healthy subjects with a low initiative apathy trait to produce an overall effort. However,
they seem unable to optimize the anticipation and expenditure of effort in response to the
reward information in the environment. This inability could be underpinned by abnormal cost-
benefits computations. Moreover, these abnormal effort mechanisms could be specific to this
form of apathy since only the initiative apathy trait in the normal population is related to
individual differences in the ability to anticipate and expend effort according to the context.
Since initiative apathy is the most disabling form of apathy and is prevalent in the population,
but patients are often left without any support, it seems crucial to conduct additional studies
that further the understanding of the mechanisms underlying this symptom and can help
propose new and efficient targeting treatments.
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy
Acknowledgements
We thank the staff of the Unit 1114 of the French Institute of Health and Medical Research
and of the Strasbourg University Hospital, and especially Julien Krieg for his assistance with
the tasks.
Funding: This research was supported by the French Ministry of Higher Education and
Research grant (to G. L-B).
Competing Interests Statement: None. The authors declare no competing interests to report.
Ethical standards: The authors assert that all procedures contributing to this work comply
with the ethical standards of the relevant national and institutional committees on human
experimentation (Research ethics committee of the University of Strasbourg -
UNISTRA/CER/2020-13) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2008.
Authors Contributions: G. L-B and A. B designed the study. G. L-B and B. P realized the
acquisition of the data. G. L-B did the statistical analysis and wrote the first draft of the
manuscript. All the authors were involved in the writing of this draft.
Mechanisms_Initiative_Apathy