12/31/2022
Eugenics in China through the lens
of cultural additivity
Ruining Jin
China University of Political Science and Law
December 31, 2022
“One man’s trash is another man’s treasure” is what we often use to describe the value
discrepancy of a subject when possessed by different owners. Likewise, in cultural studies
and sociology, a society’s trash could also be other societies’ treasure, and Eugenics is a
vivid example.
As a theory that was partly responsible for starting World War II (WWII), the notorious
Eugenics refers to a set of controversial beliefs and practices that were developed with the
intention of enhancing the genetic quality of a human population [1].
Eugenics has been a forbidden discipline in the West because it led to catastrophic and
humanitarian crises, such as the Holocaust during WWII. It is now negatively associated with
many deplorable terms, such as colonialism, racial oppression, nationalism, white
supremacy, etc. [2-5]. Nonetheless, in East Asia Spheres, such as China and Japan, Eugenics
survived and thrived in different eras of the 20th century through various regimes, parties,
and political figures with various ideologies and political claims.
Chung [6] presented the history of Chinese Eugenics from the Qing Dynasty to the current
Communist regime, demonstrating how it was intertwined with national character, the
national body, and national survival via social movements and political campaigns. The
most recent revitalization of Eugenics in China, as the author noted, was during the 1980s
when the Party-State tried to advance the controversial “One Child Policy” [6]. In this
campaign, Eugenics was once again propagated as the goal of the government’s population
control measure in Communist China and the justification of government-led endeavors,
such as forced abortion for rural women and sterilization of the mentally disabled.
However, it is quite strange to see Eugenics’s vitality in China, where Confucianism is deep-
rooted in the people’s beliefs, influencing their thinking and behaviors. Specifically,
Confucius’s doctrine “There are three kinds of unfilial piety, no offspring is the worst” entails
people having more offspring, especially boys, to show filial piety to the family.
A possible explanation for this is the cultural additivity concept, which indicates that
“people of a given culture are willing to incorporate into their culture the values and norms
from other systems of beliefs that might or might not logically contradict with principles of
their existing system of beliefs” [7]. The high level of cultural additivity among Chinese
people might give them a high resilience toward the induction of conflicting values.
/20210409A09Z2N00.html)
Usually, information (or values) that are in direct opposition to one another are frequently
excluded from the thinking process [8]; however, there are still situations in which both
types of information (or values) can coexist [9]. This occurrence takes place when the
individual’s multi-filtering system deems both kinds of information (values) as beneficial to
the individual. On the one hand, the Chinese are aware of the repercussions of having no son
and how it served as a contempt for filial piety. On the other hand, they still accept Eugenics
as their population control measure focused on increased family happiness through