Assessing the value of civic crowdfunding:
Goteo.org social impact calculator
Enric Senabre Hidalgo [1,2]*, Ricard Espelt [1], Rubén Bagüés Vicente [3], Olivier Schulbaum [2,4]
1. Dimmons Research Group, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya
2. Platoniq Foundation
3. Heres Social SCCL
4. Europeana Impact Assessment Steering Committee
* Corresponding author: esenabre@uoc.edu
Abstract
Although fintech and collaborative funding platforms have evolved into sophisticated information
and interaction systems, it is still complex to measure their social impact, especially when it comes
to public value-driven platforms such as civic crowdfunding. Addressing this problematic question,
at both the conceptual and technical levels, in this article we present a novel dynamic system
framework and implementation for assessing the social impact of crowdfunding campaigns through
the Goteo.org platform. Our contribution derives from an interdisciplinary team effort led by the
non-profit Platoniq Foundation (founder and main promoter of the Goteo platform) in which social
researchers and software developers worked together in order to improve the accuracy and
visibility of crowdfunding campaigns in relation to their social impact. This approach for calculating
and visualizing social impact, as a proof-of-concept, is based on a methodological framework
inspired by previous advancements in the non-profit and social responsibility sectors, integrating
user-generated data and external data sources and indicators. As a recently launched system, in
its current implementation on Goteo it integrates the first version of a virtual calculator embedded
in the campaign design interface. This new digital affordance allows project promoters to better
estimate monetary and non-monetary-related impact regarding social value, public return of
investment and other specific concepts related to their initiative if successfully crowdfunded.
Results of this social impact calculator, which translates diverse value variables and proxies into
economic estimations, is also made visible to all users as potential campaign donors, and operates
in connection with previously implemented SDGs indicators and social, democratic and ecological
footprints in the Goteo system.
1. Introduction
Until date, there have been limited ways to measure the social impact of crowdfunding. Given the
expansion in recent years of this popular type of collaborative funding and other similar digital
social innovations (DSI) and civic technologies (Certomà & Corsini, 2021), this represents a
missing opportunity for developing useful, actionable knowledge in our current context of
socio-ecological emergencies and challenges (Davison et al., 2022). Social impact assessment
constitutes both a conceptual and a technical challenge for the development of civic technologies
or “civic tech”, which can be understood as emergent collectivistic forms of DSI (Bonina et al.,
2021). In this paper we present the work developed so far regarding a novel approach to social
impact assessment by one leading civic crowdfunding platform, Goteo.org, which integrates
previous system implementations for open data visualizations and for the estimation of campaigns’
monetary and non-monetary impact. For this, we first provide a contextual summary about the
current development of civic tech, relating to crowdfunding in this area, and afterwards we present
previous work developed by Goteo for impact assessment, and what in our understanding have
been recent advances for assessing social impact in different fields. In this introduction we also
present what guides our research and development process, which is an ongoing collaboration
between civic tech practitioners and academic researchers. Secondly, we outline our
methodological approach adapting previous studies in the field of social impact assessment for
organizations, and the details of several criteria and indicators for an integral calculation of social
value in civic crowdfunding campaigns. Apart from providing, as an example, the results of such
calculation in a hypothetical Goteo campaign, we also present the derived technical work
implemented so far based on the previous, which already allows to partially use the social impact
calculator in the mentioned digital platform. Finally, we conclude by reflecting further questions for
the specific implementation of our approach, not only in the Goteo platform but also in other similar
digital tools, promoting an open standard to assess the social impact of civic crowdfunding under
an open knowledge prism.
1.1 Civic tech and civic crowdfunding
In parallel to open government initiatives and other DSI advancements, the current landscape of
civic tech is represented by a long trend of community-led tools and platforms, developed and used
by social movements, NGOs, solidarity economy organizations and open source contributors,
which usually share similar democratic, Commons-oriented goals and philosophy (Certomà, 2021).
In this sense, scholars establish a basic distinction between government-centric (“top-down” digital
solutions created by public institutions) and citizen-centric civic tech (where its development and
use are led by civil society), and regarding the latter connecting with wider perspectives for the
co-creation of public value (Meijer & Boon, 2021). Skaržauskienė and Mačiulienė (2020), in this
sense, identify a recent increase in civic tech solutions to address social issues and concerns
implemented by civil society organizations and local communities. Saldivar et al. (2019), on the
other hand, show how regardless of who is behind a given civic tech project, these have been
mainly adopted locally and situated at city scales and in specific community contexts, followed by
region and country levels. Another key consideration for our understanding of civic tech and its
social impact has to do with a broader conceptual perspective, by which these platforms should be
studied not as mere technological tools but also as complex “socio-technical systems” with an
evident political dimension (Deseriis & Vittori, 2019). In this respect, Poblet and Plaza (2017)
highlight the complexity of scaling up civic participation by mere technological progress, and the
need for integral approaches where trade-offs between institutional and public involvement should
address other values beyond digital participation per se. In front of this, as another relevant
perspective, Foth and Brynskov (2016) argue how action research –that is, outcomes of research
which can be implemented in practice by participants– constitutes a needed paradigm for the study
and development of civic tech. Taking these perspectives into consideration, a paradigmatic
example of civic tech is “civic crowdfunding”, which has received increased interest as platforms for
collaborative fundraising that enable local initiatives by citizens and civil society organizations
(Charbit & Desmoulins, 2017). In contrast to other crowdfunding models, they allow alternative
modes of participatory budgeting and social cohesion, stimulating civic participation and
community involvement while providing validation of urgent needs as perceived by citizens
(Passeri, 2019).
One of the most relevant examples and studied cases of civic crowdfunding at the European level
is Goteo.org, an open source platform led by the Platoniq Foundation non-profit organization,
which allows for additional modes of support beyond monetary funding ‒like services,
infrastructures and microtasks (Senabre Hidalgo & Fuster Morell, 2018). Goteo, which represents a
paradigmatic example of civic tech for the Social and Solidarity Economy (ESS), is an open source
crowdfunding platform with currently more than 290,000 users and 1,788 projects funded since
2011, with an above-average percentage of successfully funded initiatives in the crowdfunding
sector (83%)1, and which has a radical approach to transparency and openness via digital tools2.
Among its more relevant characteristics as a civic tech infrastructure, in line with other non-profit
Barcelona-based platforms like Decidim (Aragon et al., 2017), is that Goteo also operates at the
intersection between social movements, NGOs and public institutions. Adopted by a broad
diversity of Social and Solidarity Economy (SSE) projects beyond Barcelona, Goteo is
characterized by an average user of highly educated female participants, close to the cause being
co-funded and with previous participatory experience in the social and political spheres (González
Cacheda, 2021). One of the advances regarding civic-public participation through Goteo is the
regular deployment of match-funding campaigns by diverse types of organizations (like coops, city
councils, universities and other institutions), which focus on specific social needs and areas,
multiplying civic society’s donations through specific calls (Senabre Hidalgo et al., 2020). Results
from these and other key social and digital dynamics in Goteo are already providing open
knowledge about the social and solidarity connections, for example, between match-funding
initiatives connecting urban and rural areas in Spain3.
1.2 Previous approaches for assessing the impact of crowdfunding
The impact of crowdfunding campaigns has been a topic of increasing interest among information
systems researchers in recent years. This is due in part to the growing popularity of crowdfunding
platforms in the last decade, which have enabled a wide range of individuals and organizations to
raise funds for a variety of projects and causes. One overall approach so far, for measuring
crowdfunding impact, has been to consider the volume of money raised and the number of donors
who contributed to crowdfunding campaigns, but that hardly provides a proxy of a project’s reach
and popularity through its fundraising process (De Luca et al., 2019). Another line of work has
been to try to assess the social impact of institutions and organizations behind campaigns –for
example, if a campaign was raising money for a charitable organization, trying to measure the
social impact of that organization's work on the community it serves (Ba et al., 2022). The limitation
with that approach, however, is that such post hoc assessment tends to be disentangled from the
details of the crowdfunding campaign itself, which usually concentrate on specific resources and
activities rather than the organization as a whole. More specifically, other studies have looked at
the impact of crowdfunding campaigns on the development of new technologies or digital projects,
and found that funded initiatives tended to have a positive impact on innovation and job creation
(Brem et al., 2019). However, this approach has been usually limited to study specific projects with
external available data for evidence, and not departing from structured information provided by
crowdfunding platforms.
In line with this need for better visibility, awareness and identification of social value in civic tech, in
recent years Goteo has developed diverse content-oriented system implementations in its core
content and functionalities for a better impact assessment approach. As an open knowledge
inspired resource and a digital tool under constant development and improvement following open
source practices4, the more relevant contributions to this area from Goteo have been twofold. On
the one hand, the platform has developed and implemented since 2018 its own triple system of
civic impact areas regarding (1) Social, (2) Democratic and (3) Ecological “Goteo Footprints”,
which project promoters define while designing their crowdfunding campaigns –in parallel to
specific topics of civic concern they address, or the project outcomes for the wider community and
society. This has allowed to already estimate and define potential areas of influence of projects, in
case of being funded, and also allowed for alternative navigation of crowdfunding campaigns by
potential donors or researchers5. On the other hand, in order to allow third parties to access and
use crowdfunding open data from civic crowdfunding, in 2019 Goteo started to publish open
datasets connecting the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)6 with its core activity data,
disseminating the importance of such an approach for DSI (Qureshi et al., 2021) among other
crowdfunding platforms and the wider civic tech research community (Fuster Morell et al., 2020).
Regardless of these developments, and other significant efforts based on scraped data from
platforms like Kickstarter (Mollick, 2016) or mapping the added value of crowdfunding for small and
medium enterprises (Kukurba et al., 2021), attempts to measure the social impact of crowdfunding
still lack systematic ways to determine the connection between specific funded goals and the
derived, specific social impact of these, not only during the fundraising period but especially once
the project or initiative has been implemented. On the other hand, the expected social impact of
crowdfunding should (ideally) also play a role in the preliminary key stages of campaign design, in
which promoters could estimate the impact of their initiatives at the moment of determining needs,
costs and goals –and backers could afterwards donate motivated by visualizing such value-related
calculations.
Considering all the previous, and its connection with Platoniq Foundation’s goals of increasing
open knowledge practices around civic technologies (Gagliardia et al., 2021), the main objective of
this project was the development and application of a tool to measure the social impact of
individual crowdfunding campaigns, tailored to its specifics during the design phase but also
afterwards, once the derived project has been implemented. Developing this impact calculator
would allow, more concretely, to: (1) Sensitize the promoting teams behind each crowdfunding
campaign by "budgeting" the potential social impact that their initiative will have, if funded, with a
global vision taking into account all interested parties and stakeholders; (2) Give more context and
motivation to potential donors, and in particular to “matchers” (campaign multiplier organizations
and public institutions in match-funding schemes), to understand in a measured way the potential
social impact of the campaigns they support; and (3) Create a pioneering tool that can be of
reference for other crowdfunding platforms, and that can also be adapted to them, this way
promoting the social impact of civic crowdfunding as a standard model –rather than for an unique
platform. Moreover, we consider that civic crowdfunding communities, and especially those from
the SSE sector, are in need of better digital affordances to measure their social impact and
stakeholder engagement (Barrett et al., 2016), which requires imaginative and innovative
approaches since no crowdfunding platform to our knowledge measures this type of impact.
1.3 Relevant frameworks for measuring social impact
In the non-profit, SSE and third sector fields, as well as in social responsibility practices from
diverse types of companies and organizations, being able to calculate the social impact of funded
initiatives and economic activity represents a challenging question, both conceptually and
technically. Advances in the growing SSE in Catalonia, for example, have so far provided joint
efforts for impact assessment of cooperatives and community-owned SMEs like the Social Balance
led by the Xarxa d'Economia Solidària (XES, Solidarity Economy Network), an organization formed
by almost 500 members from SSE organizations. The Social Balance is a tool for self-evaluation
and continuous improvement, which identifies a series of specific characteristics that respond to
the needs, questions and indicators focused on evaluating the community impact of initiatives.
More concretely, it addresses the following five areas: economic progress and profit policies;
iInternal equity and democracy; environmental sustainability; social commitment and cooperation;
and labor quality (Romero Carrillo, 2022). Following this line of work, recent advances at
measuring the impact derived from digital platforms has also been developed paying attention to
polymeric frameworks of value in the context of digital platforms, for example considering
dimensions like its democratic qualities (Fuster Morell et al., 2021a) or its connection with the
SDGs (Fuster Morell et al., 2021b).
On the other hand, in the corporate and social responsibility sector, beyond classic economic
impact assessments, approaches like Social Return of Investment (SROI) or Social Impact Rating
(SIR) are being devised to better capture the non-monetary effects of several types of initiatives, as
well as the relevance for society of their related objectives. However SROI, as a framework aiming
to measure the social, environmental and economic outcomes of a given investment or intervention
–in order to provide a more holistic view of its overall impact– is still complex and can be difficult to
implement in practice (Arvidson et al., 2010). Also in contrast to traditional financial metrics, which
often focus narrowly on financial return and ignore the broader social and environmental impact of
an investment, SIR aims to provide a more comprehensive evaluation of the impact of an
investment (Wisebrod, 2007). SIR assesses the social and environmental performance of a funded
project and provides investors with a numeric indication of its potential positive impact. In addition
to general social and environmental performance, SIR also includes criteria specific to each type of
investment, such as workforce diversity, corporate governance or environmental stewardship.
Another approach that originated from the field of environmental assessment, towards an
integrated evaluation process including social values and indicators, is the Social Impact
Assessment (SIA), as originally proposed by Vanclay (2003). As a promising tool based on an
integrated assessment, SIA approach considers the biophysical and social impacts of projects,
programs and policy initiatives, which it tries to have equally acknowledged and evaluated
(Dendena & Corsi, 2015). However, although social scientists and SIA practitioners generally
understand the diverse dimensions of social impact, not all stakeholders are involved and
understand the complex ways projects are deployed and affect local issues and communities
(Vanclay, 2020).
More recently, an alternative but concrete methodological proposal for addressing and displaying
the social value generated by organizations has been developed with a process model analysis
and calculation named “SPOLY methodology”7, based on previous work for monetizing and
visualizing social value (Retolaza et al., 2015; Retolaza et al., 2016) and social accounting based
on evidence (Retolaza & San-Jose, 2021). Departing from a polyhedral model of social value for
stakeholders, this approach proposes a standard system capable of valuing, in an objective and
comparable way, the overall social value generated by any type of organization. The SPOLY
methodology aims to reflect not only the value generated by shareholders, but also the value
generated by and for other stakeholders or interested parties, such as suppliers, customers, public
administrations, society, etc. More concretely, what’s interesting regarding this model for social
impact assessment is that other specific impact calculation perspectives –like the SROI, SIR and
SIA– are presented in an integrated way across three main value ecosystems: (1) social value
generated though economic activity; (2) associated socio-economic return generated for public
administrations; and (3) specific value generate for diverse groups of stakeholders. More
2).
This formula offers, with some key modifications and adaptations for crowdfunding projects instead
of organizations –as we will see below in the methodology section–, a clear, flexible but concrete
framework that can be adapted to the specific case of social impact assessment in civic
crowdfunding, and therefore as a proper conceptual basis for its system implementation in the
Goteo platform at an experimental level.
7 For more information on the GEAccounting and SPOLY see (in Spanish)
2. Methodological approach
The approach chosen for the development of a social impact calculation tool for crowdfunding
campaigns, as mentioned, is based on the SPOLY social value calculation methodology, which
represents a solid base and point of departure for the required system development within the
Goteo platform. It represents a standard system that is capable of valuing, in an objective and
comparable way, the overall value generated, or destroyed, by any type of organization, reflecting
not only the value generated by shareholders, but also that generated by other stakeholders or
interest groups, such as suppliers, customers, public administrations, society, etc. This
methodology originally, as mentioned, was designed for its application to organizations, but in our
case, it had to be adapted to civic crowdfunding campaigns, especially regarding two core
questions. On the one hand, an adaptation needed to be made regarding original variables
referring to the "social value of economic activity", which in the original model were extracted from
the accounting of an organization, and in this case were oriented to the accounting and diverse
economic and non-economic details of crowdfunding campaigns. On the other hand, and in a
similar way, it was necessary to adapt the variables relating to the return to public administrations,
focusing on the characteristics of crowdfunding campaigns and projects instead of companies and
organizations. Finally, due to this adaptation and criteria for integrating the framework in
crowdfunding, instead of “consolidated social value” we adopted the concept of “integrated social
value” (ISV), in line with recent advances in measuring social impact of the SSE sector (Lazcano et
al., 2019).
For implementing the methodology, and following the recommended process of the SPOLY
approach, the research and development team around this implementation project proceeded
sequentially by a series of steps which helped to focus, identify, plan and test the corresponding
calculations and technical implementations in the platform:
1. Setting the team and schedule. An interdisciplinary research team, under the umbrella
project Crowdcoop8, was composed by the Platoniq Foundation, Heres Social SCCL and
Facto Cooperativa, which led the analysis and systematization process, establishing a
schedule and a frame of reference which later on incorporated researchers from the
Dimmons.net group (Internet Interdisciplinary Institute, UOC).
2. Identification of the organization's interested parties or stakeholders. In parallel to
developing a stakeholder map around the community of users, supporters and beneficiaries
of Goteo, a series of brainstorming and co-creation meetings allowed to clearly identify key
actors and criteria for social impact in the specific context of crowdfunding projects.
3. Identification of value variables –that is, the aspects in which projects generate value for
third parties. This phase was implemented in dialogue with the different stakeholders, and
included in a short survey to 130 Goteo users to identify many of the variables. In this
variable identification we obtained two types: emotional values –not easy to define as an
indicator– and non-emotional values –where it is easier to define indicators, as we explain
next.
4. Monetary values of outputs. A fourth stage required an extensive effort to define how to
quantify the outputs linked to each value variable, first defining indicators to measure de
added value identified, and secondly, through proxies to “translate” results in monetary
values. Being aware of the difference that intangibles are much more complex to agree on
than tangibles, each proxy represented a challenge when not directly related to budgeting
in crowdfunding campaigns.
5. Calculation and visualization of the integrated social value. On the one hand, prior to
the system implementations and platform improvements required with the Goteo social
impact calculator, we defined a series of calculations following four areas of core data and
indicators (presented in next section) and applied in a series of spreadsheets (Annex 1)
allowing to see the results of example calculations for each stakeholder (section 2.2). On
the other hand, the visualization of some of the key areas and calculations, as mentioned,
are being implemented in the system (presented in section 2.3).
6. Feedback and continuous improvement process. As part of a wider effort in the Catalan
SSE sector and beyond, for the impact assessment of civic initiatives and alternative
economy models, the process described here and the derived implementations in existing
digital systems can only work with constant updates, for which our work is a preliminary
step that still requires refinement, discussions and improvements.
3. Results of the research and development process
In this section we present the results of the research and development process described above in
three main sections. Firstly, we show the tables of values that guide each of the predefined impact
areas, justifying in detail the variables and data for each of them. In the following subsection we
offer a sample example of how these social impact calculations are applied to an existing
crowdfunding campaign on Goteo. Thirdly, we finally show the details of implementations in
progress on the platform, which include the interfaces for designing campaigns and donations in
relation to social impact assessment.
3.1 Core data and indicators for assessing social impact
The specification of four sets of variables for measuring the social impact in civic crowdfunding
needs to be calculated both before the crowdfunding campaign and ideally also afterwards
–concretely one year after funding–, in order to refine the calculation and improve its estimates,
based on real data after the project implementation. More concretely, these four areas key for the
social impact calculation are:
● SVEA: Social Value of Economic Activity, with calculation variables derived from the
budget and economic impact of the crowdfunding campaign itself.
● RPA: Return to Public Administrations, with calculation variables related to a return
either in the form of taxes generated by the campaign or performing tasks normally
managed by public administrations.
● SSV: Specific Social Value, with variables resulting from the analysis of stakeholders
composition and the value crowdfunding campaigns have generated for them. This part is
the most enriching step of the calculation, because it is not usually measured in economic
or monetary variables, and with our approach allows for an integral perspective on a broad
range of areas (with specific proxies for each one).
● EMVA: Emotional Value, is an additional criteria (not always covered in the SPOLY model)
which defines another set of additional variables with the result of a post hoc survey to
donors and participants of the crowdfunding campaign, and which can work as a multiplier
or reducer in the final impact calculation.
Regarding the data required for the social impact assessment guided by the above criteria, as
mentioned it has two key moments:
● PRE-Crowdfunding data: Data before starting the campaign, with a "social impact budget"
that the promoting team must fill in with an impact estimation, taking into account that a
minimum of donations is reached. It is important to emphasize that for some data an
estimate will have to be made as realistic as possible. This pre-crowdfunding data is the
one presented here as implemented.
● POST-Crowdfunding data: User-generated data collected approximately one year after the
campaign is funded, and which must be entered by the promoting team. These data can
generate and show more refined results about the campaign and derived project social
impact, against which the promoting team can compare estimations and final results. This
post-crowdfunding data is not presented in detail in this article, being currently under further
conceptualization and development to be implemented progressively as well.
In the next sections we explain in detail each of the four key areas of the calculation, as well as
the type of derived results, which in the majority of cases departs from previously defined data
about the crowdfunding budget, goals and needs –as defined for the design phase of Goteo
campaigns.
3.1.1 Social Value Economic Activity (SVEA)
To calculate the social value generated by an entity, in this case by a crowdfunding campaign, all
the variables derived from accounting management must be taken into account. In our model,
these economic data have been divided into two typologies:
a) Direct Social Value of the Campaign (DSVC-D): These are data that can be related to the
generation of wealth and impact directly connected to the realization of the project derived from the
crowdfunding campaign: collected funds, derived salary wages, taxes linked to employees,
Variable Data
Economic volume collected with the campaign Sum of the total gross value collected with the
Goteo campaign
Salaries of people hired as a result of the Sum of net salaries
campaign during the first year
Social security for workers linked to the Sum of company social security + employee social
campaign during the first year of activity security (we estimate 30% of the base salary) and
calculated with respect to the total wages
IRPF of workers Income tax deduction for employees (we estimate
15%)
Other taxes generated by the campaign Sum of taxes
VAT VAT generated - VAT passed on
Economic result in case of exceeding the Pre-tax profits generated by the campaign
crowdfunding goal
b) Indirect Social Value of the Campaign (ISVC-D): Here we also refer to data with economic
origin, but in this case is generated indirectly if the crowdfunded project is implemented. These
data are basically related to the purchase of services or products, generating wealth and impact in
two aspects: (a) volume of purchases made, and (b) VAT generated as return to public
Variable Data
Purchase from SSE and/or local economy Total purchase sum made from SSE and/or local
suppliers suppliers (without VAT)
Purchase from other suppliers Total purchase sum made from other types of
suppliers (without VAT)
Purchase from suppliers Total purchase sum made to suppliers (without
VAT)
VAT Purchases from SSE / local suppliers 21.00%
10.00%
4.00%
0.00%
VAT Purchases from other suppliers 21.00%
10.00%
4.00%
0.00%
Added Value SSE / local economy With a repercussion index of added value of 0.60
Added value other suppliers With a repercussion index of added value of 0.50
It is important to highlight that there is a key distinction made for suppliers linked to the SSE and/or
local economy, with a slight differentiation favoring them instead of other types of suppliers –so we
can also integrate the impact on this type of alternative economy consequently.
3.1.2 Return to Public Administrations (RPA)
Another relevant source of information for the assessment of social impact in this case is the
calculation of return to public administrations (RPA) that crowdfunding campaigns generate. To
make this calculation, the system collects data from fields from already existing economic
Variable Data
Return of social value from Direct
economic activity of the campaign
Indirect
Savings for public administrations Volunteering for the project linked to the campaign, in activities
that otherwise would be carried out by public administrations
Acquisition of specific knowledge (training, information, etc)
Contribution activating donations and money to compensate
effects of the socio-economic crisis (inequalities)
Contribution activating donations and money to promote
cultural activities
Contribution activating donations and money to promote SSE
and alternative economy models
Contribution activating donations and money to develop and
implement environmental sustainability
Contribution activating donations and money to boost the rural
economy or disadvantaged areas
We divide the calculation into two main sections, the first one "Return of social value from
economic activity of the campaign" has a direct link to the previous calculation of SVEA,
specifically to data about direct and indirect impact. These represent taxes and tributes that return
to public administrations, and therefore to be transformed into social improvements for citizens.
The second part of RPA is fed by information from the SSV (Specific Social Value, as defined in
next section) which, among other variables and indicators, determines concepts that represent a
specific social value in some area that, under normal conditions, can be developed by public
administrations, but which instead is developed for the project linked to the campaign, and
therefore represents a "saving” for public administrations.
3.1.3 Specific Social Value (SSV)
This is the most complex set of variables and required significantly more work and effort for the
creation of the social impact calculator. Due to its definition and non-market original value, a wide
diversity of perspectives on social value could be applied, so an ad hoc study was necessary with
more than 130 people and entities linked to the crowdfunding campaigns in Goteo, where they
were asked about the added generated for them through their participation in specific campaigns.
The question was not at all simple, since Goteo covers a wide diversity of civic-related topics like
ecology, education, culture, social movements, SSE coops, etc., but fortunately, the precision of
the responses obtained helped to tabulate and define a number of distinct and complementary
specify that as another core characteristic of Goteo –similar to other NGOs and social sectors–
users beyond monetary donations can also confirm their support in specific defined tasks for each
campaign.
Variable Data
Volunteering for the project linked to the Total hours of people developing tasks for the
campaign, in activities that otherwise would be funded project on a voluntary basis
carried out by public administrations
Crowdfunding rewards Number of defined rewards in the campaign
Acquisition of specific knowledge (training, Number of training hours * Number of people
information, etc) participating in the training
Re-sale and/or distribution of the products / Number of products / services (as rewards) sold to
services generated thanks to the crowdfunding distributors
campaign
Connection with other initiatives (network Number of entities / organizations / public
creation) administrations that collaborate in the campaign
Contribution activating donations and money to % of the money collected (part of the collection)
compensate effects of the socio-economic directed to activities linked to helping in
crisis (inequalities) socio-economic crisis situations
Financial savings for beneficiaries receiving the Number of people benefited by the activity or
product or service developed thanks to the product developed
campaign (not donors)
Contribution activating donations and money to % of the money collected (part of the collection)
promote cultural activities directed to activities linked to the promotion of
culture
Contribution activating donations and money to % of the money collected (part of the collection)
promote SSE and alternative economy models directed to activities linked to promote SSE and
alternative economy models
Raising awareness of people about the social, Number of unique visits to the campaign page
solidarity and cooperative economy
Contribution activating donations and money to % of the money collected (part of the collection)
develop and implement environmental directed to activities linked to develop and
sustainability implement environmental sustainability
Contribution activating donations and money to % of the money collected (part of the collection)
boost the rural economy or disadvantaged directed to activities linked to the promotion and
areas implementation of alternatives in the rural economy
or disadvantaged areas
Donations made to Platoniq Foundation outside Volume of "tips" or direct donations made right after
the crowdfunding campaign, to continue Goteo contributing to a given crowdfunding campaign
activity
The complexity of this part of the calculation has been to find "proxies" as reference values that
allow making a monetary, numeric translation of the indicators linked to each specific value
generated. To define these calculations, we based as reference the standard market values that
are recognized in other economic areas and activities.
3.1.4 Emotional Value (EMVA)
In results from the survey to Goteo users, the majority of individual and institutional respondents
determined a series of specific non-measurable values, closely related to "emotional values" such
as: satisfaction, motivation, belonging and solidarity. Converting this emotional value to monetary
value is also relatively complex due to the wide diversity of factors and concepts that can be taken
into account. For its implementation, we adopted the SERVQUAL framework from Parasuraman et
al. (1985), which helps measure the perception and expectations of a given service. Applying an
adaptation of SERVQUAL to our calculator, we can in the future incorporate a multiplier factor,
which should be based on the results of a specific survey at the end of the crowdfunding campaign
Variable Data
Satisfaction level for participating in the campaign Score between 1 and 5
Level of motivation that this campaign has generated for the Score between 1 and 5
donor
Level of community feeling around the campaign Score between 1 and 5
Level of solidarity generated in the donor by participating in the Score between 1 and 5
campaign
More concretely, the multiplication factors for each variable and score would be, in our proposal:
1. Value 1 Implies a factor of 0.5
2. Value 2 Implies a factor of 0.75
3. Value 3 Implies a factor of 1
4. Value 4 Implies a factor of 1.25
5. Value 5 Implies a factor of 1.5
Therefore, the value obtained by this fourth set of criteria is a translation of survey results to a
multiplier factor of the total result of ISV that goes from 0.5. That is, subtracting the impact if we
generate a negative emotional value, or as a multiplier up to a factor of 1.5 maximum –which
represents a maximum level of satisfaction regarding these 4 emotional variables.
3.2 Integrated Social Value (ISV) in an example project
The above criteria and detailed integration of variables, in the majority of cases directly related to
the data facilitated by the promoting team when designing their crowdfunding campaign, results in
what we have defined as Integrated Social Value (ISV). ISV presents results of all the calculations
made by combining the data collected for each of the variables, showing on the one hand the
overall result. In this case we provide a guiding example with data from a specific campaign for the
project Climática (Annex 1), for supporting this pioneer independent and professional newspaper in
In this case the campaign, which took place from November 2020 to January 2021, raised 67,281
euros from a total of 1,403 backers (one of them as a match-funder, donating 1,000 euros) and
received confirmation of non-monetary contributions from 8 volunteers for translation and
dissemination related tasks.
Climàtica campaign data, as well as other details as defined in the previous sections across the
four sets of variables. This social impact calculation exercise, as an illustrative example, covers
from an estimation of SSV favoring mainly contributions to develop and implement environmental
sustainability (60%) to other related to SVEA regarding the number of people hired over a year
(estimated with 2 people part-time) or purchases from SSE / local suppliers (defined here in ). Also,
for illustrating the additional calculation regarding retrospective data for our proposal of EMVA, we
have defined it as 5 in this case, as the maximum value for each of the four emotional variables
(therefore multiplying per 1,5). Here we show the resulting value in detail concerning “Society” as a
whole, and not about the rest of specific stakeholders in our model (introduced and reflected below
Results by concepts (based on estimation) Value for society
(not specific
stakeholders)
Direct social value of economic activity derived from the campaign 17,880 €
Indirect social value of economic activity derived from the campaign 5,000 €
(suppliers in general)
Indirect social value of economic activity derived from the campaign (SSE / local 3,200 €
suppliers)
Indirect social value of economic activity derived from the campaign (other 1,500 €
suppliers)
TOTAL SOCIAL VALUE DERIVED FROM ECONOMIC ACTIVITY (SVEA) 22,880 €
SPECIFIC SOCIAL VALUE (adding SSV) 162,205 €
GROSS INTEGRATED SOCIAL VALUE (adding RPA) 185,085 €
Public financing of the project object of the campaign? (If the same project has 2,000 €
received public funding in another way: subsidy, grant, etc)
NET INTEGRATED SOCIAL VALUE (ISV) 183.085 €
Overall rate of social return (for every € contributed to a campaign…) 2,72 €
INTEGRATED SOCIAL VALUE WITH EMOTIONAL VALUE (adding EMVA) 274.627 €
Overall rate of social return (for every € contributed to a campaign…) 4,08 €
adding emotional value: Emotional multiplier factor x 1,5
As the calculation details, on the one hand we can obtain a series of monetary estimations as a
quantification of social impact derived from economic activity (SVEA), while on the other one a
wider estimation based on specific values of social activity (SSV) and in relation to public
administrations (RPA), and finally the additional emotional criteria (EMVA) in this case with a
multiplicator effect.
What’s also important regarding this final calculation, covering the goal of providing information to
users as potential donors, is that during the design of the campaign the data generated (prior to
adding data for emotional factors) already generates an overall rate of social return for every euro
contributed via crowdfunding or match-funding schemes (in this case social return of 2,72 € for
every euro donated). If we add the final calculation of EMVA, favorable in this example, this
increases the emotional value for the overall rate (now 4,08 € for every euro donated).
Apart from the overall results as defined above for “Society” considering it a general stakeholder (a
general one covering the results added by each concrete stakeholder), in a polyhedral model as
suggested by Retolaza et al. (2016) the Goteo social impact calculator considers the following
actors and types of users, for which additional estimations are made in parallel:
● Public Administrations (as already defined)
● Supporters (users who contribute disseminating but not donating)
● Promoting team (behind the crowdfunding campaign)
● Matcher (institutions or individuals multiplying donations vai match-funding campaigns)
● Provider (from the crowdfunded project, once in development)
● Person or entity benefited (specific receivers of a given social initiative)
● Volunteer (users donating tasks, time-related and other non-monetary resources)
● Community (specific communities or networks around the project)
● Individual donor (the most usual type, 90% of users in civic crowdfunding)
● Donor organization (in the case of civic crowdfunding, around 10%)
● Platoniq Foundation (as intermediary, can receive “tips” as parallel donations)
distributed and assigned depending on these types of stakeholders, which contains
non-subtractable numeric estimations for the specific social impact “received” in each case.
Some additional factors that influence in this polyhedric ISV result (which does not include EMVA)
are for example number of rewards in the Climàtica campaign (with 12 in this case, the SSV
calculation considers significant benefits for Supporters and Community in general), the
participation of an individual Matcher (with a significant donation and derived implication) or direct
donations as “tips” to Platoniq Foundation (300 euros in this case).
3.3 Current technological implementation and development
The current implementation of the described system in the Goteo digital platform, which in some
areas is still under implementation at the moment of writing this, allows users to define the required
additional information about estimated social impact while designing the crowdfunding campaign.
On the other hand, it allows to integrate a series of additional information for users which are
potential campaign donors or match-funders, in order to add wider context regarding the expected
impact of any given project.
Regarding the information facilitated by promoting teams, it allows to integrate such data as impact
the three Goteo footprints (Ecological, Social, Democratic), in which SVEA estimations like job
creation are informed in detail –in this case as derived from the Spanish Statistic National Institute
(INE) calculation of average cost of a full-time employee in euros per year.
The same SVEA calculation is integrated in the campaign design interface when defining specific
costs, which can be refined indicating different typologies of contribution, like in this case job
Regarding how this information is displayed to Goteo users, in the current implementation of the
social impact calculator, it is on the one hand informed when accessing a specific section regarding
creation, volunteering or people trained).
Finally, another way to display social impact-related information for each crowdfunding donor is
activated once they select a donation amount (here with 100 € as an example), in a pop-up window
that displays the corresponding destination of impact by job creation and people trained, in parallel
Regarding how the integration of our described approach to impact assessment by ISV can
determine new possibilities for visualizing the social values and opportunities behind civic
crowdfunding campaigns, another integration under development at the Goteo platform (which will
be also available as open source code, once stable) has to do with new ways to present projects
impact displays (bottom area)
In the example above, at the inferior part of the page regarding an existing campaign, the new
integration of social impact aspects is threefold: (1) A series of estimations regarding the Social
footprint (left) about estimated job creation, hours of volunteering and people trained if the project
archives the defined funding; (2) A impact calculator for user’s donations (center), which allows to
asses in detail the derived impact of every euro donated; and (3) Most relevant SDGs related to
the campaign aims and expected impact (right), which builds on previous work developed by the
platform, as described above.
4. Implications and discussion
The conceptual and technical work we have described, in which through the specific affordances
and characteristics of a civic crowdfunding platform a series of social impact variables are
calculated, as well as displayed within its digital system, has several implications for both practice
and research. On the one hand, regarding practical implications for the design and implementation
of Goteo, our novel work offers a complete framework attentive to several dimensions of monetary
and non-monetary impact regarding crowdfunding data, which are in our approach transformed
into numeric estimations –in parallel to other intangible factors like emotional value or specific
social impact, usually at local levels. Regarding this first development, and our illustrative example
of a specific crowdfunding campaign, the development of this social impact calculator allows to
clearly and visually determine –beyond the impact assigned for each stakeholder– an estimation of
the overall rate of social return for every euro contributed to a campaign, which represents per se
an additional motivational factor to display in a crowdfunding platform interface. Regarding this, the
current implementation of the main algorithms and coding required for embedding the calculator
within the system, as described, already allow for users to identify key impact information following
the Goteo footprints (Ecological, Social, Democratic), and additionally the connection to SDGs in
informative navigation terms. For us, this is a way of enriching not only the user experience of a
civic tech affordance, but for designing platforms for public value in coherence with social impact
via open knowledge and as democratic innovation (Gilman & Peixoto, 2019). At the technical and
conceptual levels, several implementation limitations have been identified through the process.
Firstly, the challenge of developing a new serie of criterias within an existing and highly
user-populated system like the Goteo platform, after 10 years of operation, required as described
to incorporate feedback from 130 users (via an ad hoc survey) but also to take design decisions to
embed the calculator progressively, as a software development and refinement process still in
progress. Secondly, the complexity of implementing EMVA related to emotional value via a post
hoc survey to campaign donors, as well as a review of the data introduced by the promoting team
after one year of the crowdfunding, in order to refine results, represents another challenge for
implementation and communication, for which further work needs to be done beyond
conceptualisation. Finally, regarding the calculation of SSV and its "proxy origin", where the origin
sources of the proxies are defined, it's important to acknowledge that these must be updated
regularly to reflect broader local and national economic indicators, and more so in the current
situation of inflation –which could have influenced the values reflected in the calculations, originally
defined between 2020 and 2021.
Regarding implications for research, on the other hand, what we envision and aim with the
described development is a wider standard for assessing impact in civic technology, and more
concretely in civic crowdfunding –which due to its eminently economic dimensions, represent an
ideal type of DSI for monetary and quantitative-related calculations. In this sense, we consider that
future development and implementation, which constitutes in our opinion the right approach for
action research in this field (Foth & Brynskov, 2016), requires a continuous provision from relevant
platforms of both activity data and source code. Unfortunately, apart from Goteo and other
exceptions like Catarse10 or Open Collective11, this is still not the case and especially problematic
regarding big leading platforms like Kickstarter or Indiegogo, which could provide significant value
and information about their social impact adopting open knowledge practices. In a context of
constant advances of open science modes of empirical enquiry, with this research and
implementation process we claim the impact of open data for addressing current societal
challenges, where direct collaboration between citizens and public institutions –among a myriad of
other potential stakeholders in the case of SSE– in a transparent mode of social impact
assessment can represent another building block for deeper democratic processes in participatory
budgeting (Escobar, 2021) and new crowdsourced modes of citizen science (Hecker et al., 2018).
5. Conclusion
In this work, we have presented a novel framework to measure and calculate social impact of
crowdfunding projects in a civic tech initiative, following the characteristics of the Goteo platform.
Through the specific affordances of digital civic crowdfunding, we have proposed a strengthened
methodology connecting –in a quantitative mode– monetary and non-monetary variables that allow
to determine the integrated social impact (ISV) of crowdfunding campaigns, integrating a series of
estimation algorithms, variables and parameters. The development has been implemented as an
in-platform calculator, progressively accessible to users through the Goteo interface. As a work in
progress, further alternative models and development should be compared and implemented on
this and other platforms, to conveniently ascertain the most appropriate approach for calculating
and assessing social return of crowdfunding dynamics in more sustainable futures. At the same
time, our work theoretically contributes to previous discussions around other impact assessment
frameworks, and even citizen science initiatives, as well as their current implementation status.
Moving forward, this type of research and development process requires a close collaboration
between citizens, public institutions and other stakeholders, as well as a constant adoption of open
data meta-standards –in order to gain more insights from the increasing emergence of DSI
initiatives
6. Acknowledgements
The research and development work described in this manuscript is the result from a joint effort of
Platoniq Foundation, Heres Social SCCL, Facto Cooperativa y Dimmons.net in the context of the
development of the Crowdcoop Project, a Digital Platform for the creation, promotion and
consolidation of cooperatives in Catalonia in 2020. From Platoniq Foundation, Javier Carillo has
been responsible for extraction and analysis of the Goteo platform data for this research and
Susana Noguero has been contributing to the design of the impact data model.
Regarding funding, the Goteo social impact calculator received support from the the Social
Economy “Singulars” program of the Generalitat de Catalunya, financed by Spanish Ministry of
Education in its design and analysis phase (2019-21) and funds from the spanish Ministry of Labor
and Social Economy (2022) in its technical development phase.
7. References
Aragón, P., Kaltenbrunner, A., Calleja-López, A., Pereira, A., Monterde, A., Barandiaran, X. E., &
Gómez, V. (2017, September). Deliberative platform design: The case study of the online
discussions in Decidim Barcelona. In International conference on social informatics (pp.
277-287). Springer, Cham.
Arvidson, M., Lyon, F., McKay, S. & Moro, D. (2010), The ambitions and challenges of SROI ,
Document de travail 49, Third Sector Research Centre, University of Birmingham.
Ba, Z., Zhao, Y. C., Song, S., & Zhu, Q. (2022). Does the involvement of charities matter?
Exploring the impact of charities’ reputation and social capital on medical crowdfunding
performance. Information Processing & Management, 59(3), 102942.
Barrett, M., Oborn, E., & Orlikowski, W. (2016). Creating value in online communities: The
sociomaterial configuring of strategy, platform, and stakeholder engagement. Information
Systems Research, 27(4), 704-723.
Bonina, C., López‐Berzosa, D., & Scarlata, M. (2021). Social, commercial, or both? An exploratory
study of the identity orientation of digital social innovations. Information Systems Journal,
31(5), 695-716.
Brem, A., Bilgram, V., & Marchuk, A. (2019). How crowdfunding platforms change the nature of
user innovation–from problem solving to entrepreneurship. Technological Forecasting and
Social Change, 144, 348-360.
Certomà, C. (2021). Representation: The Social Imaginaries of Digital Social Innovation. In Digital
Social Innovation (pp. 65-101). Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.
Certomà, C., & Corsini, F. (2021). Digitally-enabled social innovation. Mapping discourses on an
emergent social technology. Innovation: The European Journal of Social Science Research,
34(4), 560-584.
Charbit, C., & Desmoulins, G. (2017). Civic Crowdfunding: A collective option for local public
goods? In OECD Regional Development Working Papers.
Davison, R. M., Majchrzak, A., Hardin, A., & Ravishankar, M. N. (2022). Special issue on
responsible IS research for a better world. Information Systems Journal.
De Luca, V. V., Margherita, A., & Passiante, G. (2019). Crowdfunding: a systemic framework of
benefits. International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research.
Dendena, B., & Corsi, S. (2015). The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment: a further step
towards an integrated assessment process. Journal of cleaner production, 108, 965-977.
Deseriis, M., & Vittori, D. (2019). Platform Politics in Europe| Platform Politics in Europe: Bridging
Gaps between Digital Activism and Digital Democracy at the Close of the Long
2010s—Introduction. International journal of communication, 13, 11.
Escobar, O. (2021). Transforming lives, communities and systems? Co-production through
participatory budgeting. In The Palgrave Handbook of Co-Production of Public Services and
Outcomes (pp. 285-309). Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.
Foth, M., & Brynskov, M. (2016). Participatory action research for civic engagement. Civic media:
Technology, design, practice, 563-580.
Fuster Morell, M., Espelt, R., & Renau Cano, M. (2021a). Cooperativismo de plataforma: Análisis
de las cualidades democráticas del cooperativismo como alternativa económica en
entornos digitales. CIRIEC-España, revista de economía pública, social y cooperativa,
(102).
Fuster Morell, M., Espelt, R., & Senabre Hidalgo, E. (2021b). Data for Sustainable Platform
Economy: Connections between Platform Models and Sustainable Development Goals.
Data, 6(2), 7.
Fuster Morell, M., Senabre Hidalgo, E., & Rodríguez, E. (2020). Goteo. org civic crowdfunding and
match-funding data connecting Sustainable Development Goals. Scientific data, 7(1), 1-10.
Gagliardia, D., Niglia, F., Misuraca, G., & Pasi, G. (2021). Civic engagement innovation: How ICTs
shape the relationship between state and citizens. In Perspectives for Digital Social
Innovation to Reshape the European Welfare Systems (pp. 139-158). IOS Press.
Gilman, H. R., & Peixoto, T. C. (2019). Digital participation. In Handbook of democratic innovation
and governance. Edward Elgar Publishing.
González Cacheda, B. (2021). Una aproximación a las limitaciones participativas del civic
crowdfunding. IDP Revista de Internet Derecho y Política.
Hecker, S., Haklay, M., Bowser, A., Makuch, Z., Vogel, J., & Bonn, A. (2018). Innovation in open
science, society and policy–setting the agenda for citizen science. In Citizen Science:
Innovation in open science, society and policy, 1-23. UCL Press.
Kukurba, M., Waszkiewicz, A. E., Salwin, M., & Kraslawski, A. (2021). Co-created values in
crowdfunding for sustainable development of enterprises. Sustainability, 13(16), 8767.
Lazcano, L., San-Jose, L., & Retolaza, J. L. (2019). Social accounting in the social economy: a
case study of monetizing social value. In Modernization and accountability in the social
economy sector (pp. 132-150). IGI Global.
Meijer, A., & Boon, W. (2021). Digital platforms for the co-creation of public value. Policy & Politics,
49(2), 231-248.
Mollick, E. R. (2016). Containing multitudes: the many impacts of Kickstarter funding. Available at
SSRN 2808000.
Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V. A., & Berry, L. L. (1985). A conceptual model of service quality and
its implications for future research. Journal of marketing, 49(4), 41-50.
Passeri, F. (2020). Lessons Learned from Civic Crowdfunding and Match-Funding Schemes in
Europe. In Crowdasset: Crowdfunding for Policymakers (pp. 211-255).
Poblet, M., & Plaza, E. (2017). Democracy models and civic technologies: Tensions, trilemmas,
and trade-offs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.09015.
Qureshi, I., Pan, S. L., & Zheng, Y. (2021). Digital social innovation: An overview and research
framework. Information Systems Journal, 31(5), 647-671.
Retolaza, J. L., & San-Jose, L. (2021). Understanding social accounting based on evidence. SAGE
Open, 11(2), 21582440211003865.
Retolaza, J. L., San-Jose, L., & Ruíz-Roqueñi, M. (2016). Polyhedral Model: Social Value Model for
Stakeholders. In Social Accounting for Sustainability (pp. 37-51). Springer, Cham.
Retolaza, J. L., San-Jose, L., & Ruiz-Roqueñi, M. (2015). Monetarizing the social value: theory and
evidence. CIRIEC-España, revista de economía pública, social y cooperativa, (83), 43-62.
Romero Carrillo, A. (2022). The Social Balance: measurements for improvement. Doctoral
Saldivar, J., Parra, C., Alcaraz, M., Arteta, R., & Cernuzzi, L. (2019). Civic technology for social
innovation. Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), 28(1), 169-207.
Senabre Hidalgo, E., & Fuster Morell, M. (2018). Match-funding as a formula for crowdfunding: a
case study on the Goteo.org platform. In Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium
on Open Collaboration (p. 23). ACM.
Senabre Hidalgo, E., Fuster Morell, M., de Alborán, C. M., & Schulbaum, O. (2020).
Match-Funding Calls for Open Crowdfunding: The Experience from Goteo. Org in New
Policies for Crowdvocacy. In Crowdasset: Crowdfunding for Policymakers (pp. 129-152).
Skaržauskienė, A., & Mačiulienė, M. (2020). Mapping international civic technologies platforms. In
Informatics (Vol. 7, No. 4, p. 46). MDPI.
Vanclay, F. (2003). International principles for social impact assessment. Impact assessment and
project appraisal, 21(1), 5-12.
Vanclay, F. (2020). Reflections on Social Impact Assessment in the 21st century. Impact
Assessment and Project Appraisal, 38(2), 126-131.
Wisebrod, J. M. (2007). Social impact ratings: How to make responsible investment appealing.
Finance Bien Commun, 27(2), 29-40.