PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES
Perceptions of Physical, Sexual, and Psychological Violence Stories: A Registered Report
Brianna C. Delker, Paige K. Michel, Kit Turner, and Kate C. McLean
Department of Psychology, Western Washington University
**Preprint Copy** Version Date: May 22, 2022
This paper has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication in Collabra: Psychology.
Author Note
This registered report study was funded by a Collaborative Research Project award from
Western Washington University’s Center for Cross-Cultural Research (#CRC_IPV) awarded to
principal investigators B.C.D. and K.C.M. We have no conflict of interests to disclose.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Brianna C. Delker,
Western Washington University, Department of Psychology, 516 High Street, Bellingham, WA
98225. Email: delkerb@wwu.edu
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 2
Abstract
Survivors of sexual violence have shared their stories with the public through social media in
growing numbers. Recent research shows that sexual violence (versus other, less stigmatizing
trauma) stories are perceived as more difficult to tell, and their storytellers less likeable. This is
true even when stories have redemptive endings, contradicting an established U.S. cultural
preference for redemptive stories. However, it is unknown if sexual violence perceptions
generalize to different types of interpersonal violence (IPV) and if audience perceptions vary
across 3 major types of IPV (sexual, physical, psychological). This pre-registered replication and
extension study investigates these questions with a vignette-based experimental design modeled
after 2 published studies by the first and last authors. Broadly, we hypothesized that cultural
invalidation of sexual violence stories would extend to any IPV story (vs. non-IPV traumas such
as natural disasters), and that within the realm of IPV, cultural invalidation would be more
pronounced for psychological violence stories (vs. sexual/physical). Three samples of U.S. adult
participants (N=1,045), 2 Nationally Representative and 1 University-based, were randomly
assigned online to read 1 of 12 first-person trauma story vignettes and complete self-report
surveys of story and storyteller perceptions in a 6 (trauma story: IPV [k=3], non-IPV [k=3]) x 2
(ending: negative, redemptive) between-subjects design. Support for our hypotheses was mixed.
IPV (vs. non-IPV) stories were perceived as more difficult to share (η2 = .068) and their
storytellers as having less positive personality traits (η2 = .043), even when stories ended
redemptively. However, among the 3 IPV types, psychological violence storytellers were not
robustly more stigmatized, and sexual violence stories were recognized as particularly difficult to
disclose. IPV survivors face obstacles to telling their stories that may hamper both personal
recovery and collective momentum for systemic change.
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 3
Keywords: interpersonal violence, cultural stigma, redemption, trauma, psychological
abuse, psychological violence, narrative identity, master narrative, sexual violence, sexual
assault, physical violence, intimate partner violence, physical abuse
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 4
Perceptions of Physical, Sexual, and Psychological Violence Stories: A Registered Report
The international #MeToo movement has generated a surge of public storytelling about
interpersonal violence, with sexual traumas foregrounded in social media posts. Yet, even with
this surge of public storytelling, emerging research shows that audiences are less receptive to
sexual violence survivors’ stories than to stories of other less stigmatizing traumas, such as
natural disasters (Delker et al., 2020). Even when sexual violence stories end with redemption—
a culturally valued narrative structure (McAdams, 2006; McLean et al., 2020)—these stories are
perceived as more difficult to tell and less likely to be told, and their storytellers less likeable
(Delker et al., 2020). The question of which storytellers are valued and validated is core to
trauma recovery and prevention. If stories are not told, or not received affirmatively by
audiences, survivors face yet more obstacles to recovery. Without validation of survivor
experiences, there can be little rationale or urgency to transform systems where preventable
harms occur and recur. As such, understanding cultural receptivity to stories of interpersonal
violence has practical implications for intervention at individual, institutional, and cultural levels.
Although the unfavorable reception of sexual violence narratives has robust empirical
support (Delker et al., 2020), questions remain about whether this pattern extends to physical and
psychological violence, as well. Stories of sexual violence, and to a lesser extent, physical abuse
by intimate partners, receive greater public attention and media coverage than stories of
psychological violence (Sims, 2008). Cultural understanding and recognition of psychological
abuse as a harmful experience is presumably compromised by the invisibility of these stories,
relative to high-profile cases of sexual violence. Thus, the purpose of the present replication and
extension study is to compare the degree of cultural invalidation both between trauma types
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 5
(interpersonal violence versus less stigmatizing traumas such as natural disasters) and within
interpersonal violence traumas (sexual and physical versus psychological).
Stories of Interpersonal Violence and the Problem of Psychological Violence
Interpersonal violence (IPV) refers to abuse committed within an ongoing relationship.
Such abuse can be sexual, physical, or psychological. Psychological abuse, the least-studied form
of IPV (Jewkes, 2010; Mountjoy et al. 2016), consists of a pattern of deliberate, non-physically
aggressive relationship behaviors that are emotionally or mentally harmful, controlling, and/or
threatening (Breiding et al., 2015). These acts may be overt (e.g., name-calling, humiliation,
threats of physical or sexual violence, expressing anger in a way that seems dangerous) or covert
and manipulative (e.g., exploitation of a victim or perpetrator’s vulnerability such as immigration
status, or excessive monitoring of a partner’s whereabouts or personal communication; Breiding
et al., 2015; Doherty & Berglund, 2008).
We hypothesize that relative to the other types of IPV, psychological abuse stories and
their storytellers will be least-favorably received by audiences, for several reasons. First, unlike
the discrete events that comprise acts of sexual and physical violence, psychological abuse is
more diffuse. Psychological abuse represents an accumulation of controlling, degrading actions
over time. Any single incident of psychological aggression, such as a single act of name-calling,
does not have the narrative weight of a single incident of rape or physical assault. As such,
psychological abuse may be harder for survivors to succinctly and impactfully narrate in a
“story,” failing to evoke the cumulative emotional weight of the experience for audiences.
Second, although all types of IPV within ongoing relationships tend to happen behind
closed doors, physical and sexual violence have the potential to leave objective physical, and at
times, visible, evidence. Without leaving objective and/or visible evidence, psychological abuse
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 6
may be viewed as less credible (Candela, 2016). This perception is belied by evidence that
psychological abuse can have an even more severe impact than physical or sexual abuse in the
long term (Dutton et al., 2006; Follingstad et al., 1990). Ambiguity creates more leeway for
bystanders to dismiss psychologically abusive events as a misunderstanding or victim
overreaction, or to minimize the severity of the events. As such, when a psychological (versus
sexual or physical) abuse survivor tells their story, simply explaining the events may expose
these survivors to more negative personal judgments.
The Promise and Limits of Redemption in Storying Trauma
One way that survivors of various forms of trauma evoke audience support and
acceptance is to redeem their stories. In a redemptive narrative, the storyteller overcomes initial
adversity by attaining personal growth, liberation, or recovery. Redemption projects personal
strength and resilience, fitting within a culturally valued narrative framework (McAdams, 2006;
McLean et al., 2020: McLean & Syed, 2015). In an extension of Delker et al. (2020), however,
we anticipate that redemption will be less available to survivors of psychological violence
compared to survivors of sexual and physical violence. In particular, we predict that the ability of
redemption to boost storyteller likeability will be overshadowed by stigmatizing responses to
psychological (relative to sexual and physical) abuse survivors. That is, audiences will respond
to psychological (versus sexual and physical) abuse storytellers with less empathic concern,
greater desire for personal distance, and more negative attributions about their personalities, even
when stories end redemptively.
Additionally, although we anticipate that differences among the three types of IPV will
shape varying reactions to the three types of stories, all types of IPV share a core commonality:
they are more stigmatizing than traumas caused naturally (e.g., natural disaster) or by people
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 7
accidentally (e.g., vehicle collision). That is, when survivors of IPV disclose their traumatic
experiences in personal and professional settings, they tend to be met with more negative
reactions such as disbelief and victim-blame (Dworkin et al., 2019; Kennedy & Prock, 2018),
though this research has tended to focus on sexual and physical, rather than psychological,
violence. As such, we anticipate that, when compared en masse to non-IPV traumas, all types of
IPV traumas and their storytellers will be perceived less favorably, replicating and extending
Delker et al. (2020).
Present Study
In this vignette-based, experimental Registered Report study, participants were randomly
assigned to read and evaluate a narrative from a set of first-person trauma narratives which
varied along two dimensions: type of trauma story (IPV vs. non-IPV) and ending (redemptive vs.
negative). This study was a conceptual (rather than direct) replication and extension of McLean
et al. (2020) and Delker et al. (2020), across several dimensions. First, this study examined
audience perceptions of three major types of IPV, whereas the previous studies focused on
sexual violence only (in comparison to non-IPV traumas). Second, whereas the story of adult
sexual violence in the previous studies depicted a case of acquaintance rape, the present study
depicted cases of sexual, psychological, and physical violence in the context of ongoing
relationships. As all three IPV stories occur in adult relationships, we also changed the chronic
illness non-IPV story from a child to adult protagonist for this study. Finally, in this study, to
assess audience perceptions more comprehensively, we added measures of empathic concern and
stigmatizing attitudes toward the storytellers.
As in the prior studies, the gender and other demographic characteristics of the survivor-
storytellers were not explicitly stated, though audiences may infer that the storytellers were
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 8
female based on gendered assumptions about bodies and relationships. For instance, in the
chronic illness story, the narrator describes experiencing breast cancer, and in the IPV stories, the
presumptively female narrator uses he/him/his pronouns to describe the actions of the unnamed
perpetrator. This male-female perpetrator-victim pairing in the IPV stories reflects broader
societal patterns and gendered inequalities in which the majority of IPV perpetrators are men,
and the majority of IPV victims are women (Black et al., 2011). In the case of sexual violence,
for instance, approximately 1 in 5 women (18.3%, or 22 million women) versus 1 in 71 men
(1.4%, or 1.6 million men) report experiencing rape in their lifetime (Black et al., 2011). The
IPV story protagonists in this study are gendered accordingly, as an empirical starting point that
reflects the most common, numerous populations of who is victimized (and who victimizes
others) across the Americas (Bott et al., 2019) and around the world (World Health Organization,
2018). However, we want to wholeheartedly acknowledge the reality of relationship-based
violence faced by cisgender men and sexual and gender minority populations (Coulter et al.,
2017; McCauley et al., 2018), and to invite further research that can speak to the additional
layers of cultural stigma that these survivors face in telling their stories.
Hypotheses
The first set of hypotheses compare reactions to IPV versus non-IPV trauma stories.
Hypothesis 1a. We predicted that, compared to non-IPV stories with negative endings,
IPV stories with negative endings would be perceived as more difficult to tell and less likely to
be told; their storytellers as less likeable and having less positive, socially desirable personality
traits; and audience responses would involve less empathy and more stigmatizing attitudes
(including victim-blame).
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 9
Hypothesis 1b. We predicted that narrative redemption would moderate the effect of
trauma story type (IPV vs. non-IPV) on story perceptions, such that redemptive story endings
would enhance the positivity of audience perceptions of non-IPV trauma stories only (vs. IPV
traumas).
The second set of hypotheses compare reactions to the three types of IPV.
Hypothesis 2a. Compared to sexual or physical violence stories with negative endings,
we predicted that psychological violence stories with negative endings would be perceived as
more difficult to tell and less likely to be told; their storytellers as less likeable and having less
positive personality traits; and audience responses would involve less empathy and more
stigmatizing attitudes (including victim-blame).
Hypothesis 2b. We predicted that narrative redemption would moderate the effect of
IPV trauma type (sexual, physical, psychological) on story perceptions, such that redemptive
story endings would enhance the positivity of audience perceptions of sexual and physical
violence stories to a greater degree than psychological violence stories. However, consistent with
Hypothesis 1b, we anticipated that overall positivity of IPV story perceptions, even with
redemptive endings, would not exceed that of non-IPV stories with redemptive endings
For both hypotheses 2a and 2b, we left as exploratory whether there would be differences
between physical and sexual violence in perception of stories.
The covariates for the analyses in this study were the same as the covariates in McLean et
al. (2020) and Delker et al. (2020): personal characteristics connected to trauma exposure,
specifically participant gender and participant trauma history. We included these covariates in
our analyses due to the possibility that greater personal experience with and/or lifetime risk for
the IPV traumas being described might influence perceptions of the storytellers.
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 10
Methods
We administered this study online to adult participants in the United States. As a
Registered Report, the proposed study methodology and analysis were pre-registered as a
Registered Report Protocol on the Open Science Framework (OSF) following Stage 1 peer
review and in-principle acceptance from this journal, and prior to data collection (OSF Link:
study protocol described below were peer-reviewed prior to any research being conducted.
Sample Characteristics
Three samples (N = 1,045) consisted of U.S. adults recruited via a Northwestern public
university student participant pool (University Sample n = 360) and via Prolific, a crowdsourced
online labor platform, census-matched for age, race, and gender (Nationally Representative
Sample 1, n = 342 and Sample 2, n = 343). A descriptive summary of participant demographic
characteristics of the two Nationally Representative samples reflect U.S. census data (U.S.
Census Bureau, 2021), with the majority (about three-quarters of the total sample) self-
identifying as white. The University sample was majority (about 65%) female and more diverse
in terms of gender expansiveness and sexual identity, with more than 40% of the sample not
identifying as heterosexual. The number of Latinx individuals in this study was consistent with
U.S. census data for one nationally representative sample (19%), but lower than census estimates
for the other two samples.
Sample Size Determination
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 11
Based on anticipated effect sizes (medium effect sizes for Hypotheses 1a and 1b and
small-to-medium for 2a and 2b), alpha at .05, and a priori power at .90, the planned sample size
for this study was N = 342 (n = 30 participants per 12 conditions), per each of the three samples.
Due to a programming error in the study randomization process discovered after data
acquisition was complete, we did not reach the planned n per condition across all 12
experimental conditions in the initial round of data collection. Although participants were
randomly assigned to experimental conditions, the randomization did not occur evenly. Due to
research funding limits, we could not collect additional data to reach the planned n = 30 per
condition in Nationally Representative Sample 1 (n = 20-34) nor 2 (n = 22-33). We were
range range
able to collect additional data in the University setting to reach the planned n = 30 per condition
in that sample. More information documenting the process of additional data collection can be
found in our Laboratory Log on OSF. In the Analysis Plan section below, we explain how we
addressed statistical power for the planned analyses.
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Inclusion criteria were U.S. adults age 18 and over with English proficiency to complete
the English-language surveys. Additionally, we proposed that if participants did not pass our
validity checks, their data would be excluded from the analysis and replaced with the data of
additional participants who passed the validity checks (complete study in one sitting, do not
complete study too quickly, i.e., 3 or more standard deviations below the mean completion time).
Consistent with prior vignette-based online research by our team (McLean et al., 2020) and with
national estimates of careless responding in survey-based online research (Meade & Craig,
2012), we anticipated needing to replace the data of approximately 12% of our starting N.
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 12
After data acquisition, we discovered that while the mean time to study completion was
consistent with our expectations, the standard deviation was such that operationalizing “too
quick” completion as three or more standard deviations below the mean completion time would
be a negative number. As such, we were not able to exclude cases from the data based on that
criterion, though we did exclude the data of cases who did not complete the study in one sitting
(n = 10 across the three samples). Instead of using the metric of standard deviation for time to
complete, we excluded those who completed the study in under 3 minutes (n = 8 in the
University Sample; none were under 3 minutes in the Prolific samples). Three minutes was
chosen post-hoc based on what the research team determined, after trial-running the study, to be
an excessively quick reading time.
Experimental Procedures
Our university’s Research Compliance Organization approved the study protocol
(#4369EX21). Participants completed the study on Qualtrics.com. Individuals in all samples
signed up to participate in the study titled “Evaluating Stories.” Participants from Prolific
received financial incentive upon valid completion of the surveys. University students were
recruited through a university-based online research management system and received course
credit for study participation (alternative avenues for course credit were available). All
participants provided informed consent electronically when they agreed to participate.
This approximately 10-minute study used a 6 (trauma story: IPV trauma [k = 3], non-IPV
trauma [k = 3]) x 2 (ending: negative, redemptive) design. The three IPV trauma stories were
sexual, physical, and psychological violence. The three non-IPV trauma stories were vehicle
collision, natural disaster, and life-threatening illness (cancer). Participants were randomly
assigned to read 1 of 12 (6 x 2) stories and then complete the study questionnaires.
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 13
Materials
Trauma Stories
Each of the 12 narratives described a traumatic experience from the first-person
perspective of an anonymous author (see Text S1). Narratives were written with a consistent
level of detail, in a similar style, in a conversational tone, and at a 5th-grade reading level
(Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level = 5.45). Narratives were approximately 225 words each.
We designed the IPV narratives based on research and theory on components of IPV
(Breiding et al., 2015; Herman, 2015; Snyder, 2019; Strauchler et al., 2004), along with public
survivor stories from advocacy organizations such as the Rape, Abuse and Incest National
Network (RAINN, 2020). We adapted the non-IPV narratives (car accident, natural disaster, life-
threatening illness) from McLean et al. (2020) and Delker et al. (2020), expanding their length
and emotional intensity to match that of the IPV narratives. As the IPV storytellers are adults, we
also changed the life-threatening illness storyteller from a child to an adult.
The two possible trauma story-ending types were negative and redemptive. These endings
manipulated whether the storyteller was still negatively impacted by their trauma, or if they had
experienced personal redemption. One negative and one redemptive ending was used for all three
IPV traumas, whereas non-IPV events were distinct enough that negative and redemptive
endings were uniquely tailored to each.
In Stage 1 of this Registered Report, we presented the results of a pilot study testing the
12 narratives adapted for this study. The pilot study with the 12 vignettes served as a
manipulation check that trauma stories with negative (vs. redemptive) endings were perceived to
end significantly more negatively, for both IPV (d = 3.54) and non-IPV (d =1.20) traumas. In this
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 14
Stage 2 Registered Report, pilot study results can be found in the Supplementary Materials (see
Text S2).
Participant Perceptions of Trauma Story and Storyteller
A full list of scales, items, and response options for assessing participant perceptions of
fixed order.
Participant Self-Reported Trauma History
Trauma history was indexed as number of types of traumatic events that participants self-
report having experienced and/or witnessed. All items on the 17-item Life Events Checklist
(LEC-5) that participants selected Happened to me and/or Witnessed it were summed to yield a
traumatic event history total score for each participant (range=0-17; LEC-5). LEC-5 items
represent events defined as traumatic by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association 2013).
Analysis Plan
Analyses were conducted separately by sample, using the software program SPSS (v28.0;
IBM Corp, 2021). To test the study moderation hypotheses (1b and 2b), we employed the Hayes
PROCESS macro (v4.0) for SPSS program to estimate bootstrapped indirect effects (Hayes,
2018).
Mega-Analytic Approach
For replication purposes, we proposed in our Stage 1 Registered Report to conduct a
meta-analytic summary of the statistical results representing tests of our hypotheses across the
three samples, using the R package metafor (v.2.1, Viechtbauer, 2010). In the time that elapsed
between Stage 1 and the completion of study data collection and data cleaning, we determined
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 15
that a mega-analytic approach would be preferable for methodological and practical reasons.
First, given that we have the raw data available, a mega-analytic approach is preferred over a
meta-analytic approach that estimates a population-level effect size from sample-level effects
(Costafreda, 2009; Gonzalez et al., 2021). Second, with a mega-analytic approach that pools the
raw data into a single sample and controls for the source of the data (University Sample 1,
Nationally Representative Sample 1, Nationally Representative Sample 2) in our statistical
models, we could generate more stable estimates of effect size than if we used the underpowered
(due to uneven randomization) single samples.
To streamline the presentation of results in this registered report, we summarize the
statistical findings within each of the three samples in the Supplementary Materials (see Text
S3), and we summarize the pooled mega-analytic results below.
Data Cleaning and Coding
All data cleaning and coding steps undertaken below were pre-registered in our Stage 1
Registered Report. Dependent variables for each pre-registered statistical model below were
indices of perceived difficulty of telling, perceived likelihood of telling, storyteller likeability,
storyteller positive personality traits (operationalized as high Extraversion, Agreeableness,
Conscientiousness, and Openness, and low Neuroticism), empathy toward storyteller, and
stigmatizing attitudes (Y -Y ). In our revised Stage 1 Registered Report, we proposed measuring
1 6
participant victim-blame of the storyteller (Y ), but due to a data collection error, this survey was
not included in the final version of the study.
For each dependent variable, we combined the corresponding item variables into a single
composite variable if Cronbach’s α >.60 for the corresponding items, or if r > .5 for the inter-
item correlations of 2-item indices. All reliability statistics met the above criteria for
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 16
acceptability, with the exception of the storyteller likeability items (n = 5) in the University
items
Sample (α = .56) and the perceived likelihood of telling items (n = 2) in all 3 samples (r =
items
.33, .38, .35). Additionally, the correlation of the perceived difficulty of telling items (n = 2), was
near to being below the proposed cutoff in each of the 3 samples (r = .60, .58, .58). To address
the poor internal consistency reliability of the above scales, we adjusted our data analysis
approach in the following ways: (1) We dropped storyteller likeability as a dependent variable in
the University Sample analyses (see Text S3); (2) we dropped University Sample participants
from the mega-analytic test of our hypothesis about storyteller likeability; and (3) instead of
using 2-item indices of perceived difficulty of telling and perceived likelihood of telling, we
indexed each dependent variable with 1 item only: It would be emotionally difficult for the
author to share their story (perceived difficulty) and The author is likely to share this story with
others (perceived likelihood), each measured on a 5-point Likert-type scale.
Prior to conducting inferential tests of our hypotheses, data were inspected for normality
and outliers. No extreme outlying values >|3| SD from the mean were present in the data, and no
variable distributions were significantly skewed or kurtotic; thus, per our pre-registered plan, no
variables needed to be transformed.
Covariates for all statistical models below were participant gender (C ) and self-reported
trauma history (C ). For statistical analysis, participant gender was dummy-coded along a binary
of 1 (man) and 0 (all gender identities ≠ man). Two additional covariates were added to the
models for the mega-analysis to control for Sample (k = 3). The first dummy variable (C ) was
coded to compare the effect of Sample 1 (University Sample) versus Samples 2 and 3 (the
Nationally Representative samples). The second dummy variable (C ) was coded to compare the
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 17
effect of Samples 2 versus 3 (the two Nationally Representative samples).
Hypothesis 1a Model Specification
We specified a factorial ANOVA model with one main factor (trauma type: X = IPV
stories with negative endings; X = non-IPV stories with negative endings), C C C and C
2 1, 2, 3, 4,
predicting Y -Y .
1 6
Hypothesis 1b Model Specification
We specified a moderation model representing the interaction between the two dummy-
coded categorical variables, trauma type (X =I PV; X = non-IPV) and story ending (W =
1 2 1
redemptive; W = negative), in predicting Y -Y , controlling for C C C and C .
2 1 6 1, 2, 3, 4
Hypothesis 2a Model Specification
We specified a factorial ANOVA model with one main factor, IPV trauma type (X =
psychological violence story with negative ending; X = sexual violence story with negative
ending; X = physical violence story with negative ending), C C C and C predicting Y -Y . In
3 1, 2, 3, 4 1 6
the factorial ANOVA model, IPV trauma type (X) will be contrast-coded as follows:
psychological violence (X ) versus sexual and physical violence (X ); sexual violence (X )
1 2-3 2
versus physical violence (X ).
Hypothesis 2b Model Specification
We specified a moderation model representing the interaction between the two dummy-
coded categorical variables, IPV trauma type (X = psychological; X = sexual; X = physical) and
1 2 3
story ending (W = redemptive; W = negative), in predicting Y -Y , controlling for C C C and
1 2 1 6 1, 2, 3,
C . Consistent with Hypothesis 2a, the predictor variable, IPV trauma type, will be dummy-
coded in PROCESS as follows: psychological violence (X ) versus sexual and physical violence
(X ); sexual violence (X ) versus physical violence (X ).
2-3 2 3
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 18
Effect Size
To estimate the magnitude of effects of our focal predictors in the factorial ANOVA
models, we used partial eta-squared (η2 ), a commonly used measure of effect size for models
with more than one independent variable (Fritz & Morris, 2018). Partial eta-squared describes
the “proportion of variability associated with an effect when variability associated with all other
effects is excluded from consideration” (Fritz & Morris, 2018, p. 607). In keeping with Cohen’s
guidelines for psychological research, η2 = .01 is considered a small effect, η2 = .06 is
p p
considered medium, and η2 = .14 is considered large.
Constraints on Generality (COG) Statement (Simons et al., 2017)
The experimental stimuli in this study consisted of brief written personal accounts, about
the length of several Tweets. We expect our results to generalize to situations in which
participants read or view similar personal accounts of trauma by survivors. We also anticipate
that results will be reproducible if the exact phrasing, content, and stylistic choices of the written
trauma narratives vary, as long as the stories are consistent with psychological definitions of
what makes events traumatic. The degree to which audience reactions to survivor stories may
vary based on storytelling medium (e.g., written vs. audiovisual) or physical proximity of the
storyteller (e.g., online or in-person; Fields et al., 2020) are empirical questions that can be
addressed with conceptual replication studies.
As stated in the introduction, the survivor-storytellers in this study were gendered as
women and the perpetrators in the IPV stories as men, presenting a potential limit to the
generalizability of findings to the case of traumas experienced by women (and IPV traumas with
male perpetrators and female victims). We felt that our experimental design would be
obstructively complex if, in addition to experimentally manipulating trauma type and story
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 19
ending, we had varied the genders and sexual identities of the protagonists. This would expand a
6x2 design with 12 conditions to a (at minimum) 6x2x2x2 design with 48 conditions. However,
replication research can proceed incrementally, accounting for how additional layers of cultural
stigma such as heteronormativity, homophobia, biphobia, transphobia, and cisgendernormativity
might influence perceptions of survivor IPV (vs. non-IPV) stories.
The target population for our study was adults in the United States. We anticipate that a
replication with any sample of adults in the United States would constitute a direct test of the
same effects.
We have no reason to believe that the results depend on other characteristics of the
participants, materials, or context.
Results
Descriptive statistics for participant perceptions of trauma stories by trauma type, IPV
H1A IPV Stories (versus Non-IPV Stories) with Negative Endings
We hypothesized that IPV stories with negative endings (versus non-IPV stories with
negative endings) would be perceived as more difficult to share and less likely to be shared; their
storytellers as less likeable and having fewer positive personality traits; and participant responses
would be less empathetic and higher in stigmatizing attitudes towards the storyteller. Factorial
Our hypothesis was supported for perceived difficulty sharing (η2 = .068), likelihood of
sharing (η2 = .201), and storyteller positive personality traits (η2 = .043). Participants rated IPV
p p
(versus non-IPV) stories with negative endings as more difficult to share, less likely to be shared,
and the storytellers as having fewer positive personality traits.
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 20
There were no statistically significant differences between IPV and non-IPV stories with
negative endings in perceived storyteller likeability and in participant empathy for the storyteller.
Contrary to our hypothesis for stigmatizing attitudes toward the storyteller, participants reported
less stigmatizing attitudes toward IPV (versus non-IPV) storytellers with negative endings (η2 =
.015).
Sample was a statistically significant predictor of perceived likelihood of sharing and
empathy for the storyteller. Specifically, the Nationally Representative samples rated the
storyteller as being significantly more likely to share their story (η2 = .044) and endorsed
significantly more empathy toward the storyteller (η2 = .038) than did the University sample.
Participants’ own self-reported history of traumatic life events was not a statistically significant
predictor of any storyteller ratings or story perceptions. Male-identified participants reported
significantly less perceived difficulty in telling the trauma story (η2 = .014) and significantly less
empathy for the storyteller (η2 = .025) than those identifying as women, non-binary, or gender-
queer, regardless of trauma story type.
H1B Effect of Trauma Type Moderated by Story Ending
We hypothesized that narrative redemption would moderate the effect of trauma story
type (IPV vs. non-IPV) on story perceptions, such that redemptive story endings would enhance
the positivity of audience perceptions of non-IPV trauma stories only (vs. IPV traumas).
Our moderation hypothesis was partially supported for perceived difficulty sharing (see
non-IPV stories more than they reduced the perceived difficulty of sharing IPV stories. There
was also a significant effect of sample, such that participants in the second Nationally
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 21
Representative sample rated stories as significantly more difficult to tell than did participants in
the first Nationally Representative sample, regardless of trauma type or ending.
Our moderation hypothesis was partially supported for perceived likelihood of sharing
IPV and non-IPV stories, but the effect of redemptive ending was stronger for IPV (vs. non-IPV)
stories, opposite of our hypothesized direction of effect. Regarding covariates, those identifying
as men rated stories as significantly less likely to be told than those of other self-identified
genders. There was a significant main effect of participant lifetime trauma history; as participant
self-reported trauma history increased, they rated the storyteller as more likely to share the story.
Finally, participants in the two Nationally Representative samples rated the stories as
significantly more likely to be told than participants in the University sample.
There was no interaction between trauma type and story ending in predicting storyteller
likeability. Instead, there was a main effect of story ending, such that storytellers who told stories
with redemptive endings were rated as more likeable than those who told stories with negative
endings, regardless of trauma type. No covariates were statistically significant predictors of
storyteller likeability.
Our moderation hypothesis was partially supported for storyteller positive personality
non-IPV storytellers as having more positive personality traits, but the effect of redemptive story
endings was weaker for IPV stories. In other words, redemptive endings did not increase
perceived positive personality traits of IPV storytellers as much as they increased perceived
positive traits of non-IPV storytellers. There was a significant main effect of participant lifetime
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 22
trauma history; as participants self-reported trauma history increased, they rated the storyteller as
having less positive personality traits.
Our moderation hypothesis was not supported for empathy towards the storyteller (see
towards the storyteller, and there were no main effects of trauma type or story ending on
empathy. Across all experimental conditions, the average strength of self-reported empathic
emotions for the storyteller was about 5.35 on the 7-point scale from 1 (not at all) to 7 (very
much). Consistent with the covariate effects in the tests of H1a, those identifying as men reported
significantly less empathy for the storyteller than those identifying as other genders, and
participants in the two Nationally Representative samples reported significantly more empathy
for the storyteller than participants in the University sample.
Our moderation hypothesis was not supported for stigma towards the storyteller (see
Consistent with the results of H1a, there was a main effect of trauma type, such that participants
reported less stigmatizing attitudes toward IPV storytellers than non-IPV storytellers, regardless
of story ending. Regarding covariates, there was a significant main effect of participant lifetime
trauma history; as participant self-reported trauma history increased, they endorsed less stigma
toward the storyteller. There was no effect of sample or male gender identity on stigma.
H2A Psychological (versus Sexual or Physical) Violence Stories with Negative Endings
We hypothesized that audiences would perceive psychological (versus sexual or physical)
violence stories with negative endings as more difficult to be shared and less likely to be shared;
their storytellers as less likeable and having fewer positive personality traits; and participant
responses would be less empathetic and higher in stigmatizing attitudes towards the storyteller.
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 23
To test this hypothesis, the IPV story (with negative ending) variable was coded as 1 =
psychological, 2 = sexual, 3 = physical, with a Helmert contrast comparing levels 1 vs. 2 and 3,
and levels 2 vs. 3. Factorial ANOVA results for the test of this hypothesis in the combined
Our hypothesis was supported for participant empathy for the storyteller (η2 = .024).
Specifically, participants endorsed significantly less empathy for the psychological violence
storyteller with a negative ending, than the sexual or physical violence storyteller with a negative
ending (M = -0.32, SE = 0.15, p = .037, 95% CI [-0.61, -0.02]). Our hypothesis was not
D D
supported for perceived difficulty sharing, likelihood of sharing, storyteller likeability, storyteller
positive personality traits, or stigmatizing attitudes toward the storyteller.
The sample was a statistically significant predictor of perceived likelihood of sharing,
where the Nationally Representative samples (versus the University sample) rated the IPV
storytellers as significantly more likely to share their story (η2 = .039), as was the case for the
test of Hypothesis 1a. Consistent with the test of Hypothesis 1a, participants’ own self-reported
history of traumatic life events was not a statistically significant predictor of any IPV storyteller
ratings or IPV story perceptions, and male-identified participants endorsed significantly less
empathy for the storyteller (η2 = .028) than participants of other self-identified genders,
regardless of IPV story type.
Planned Exploratory Analysis
We left as exploratory whether there would be differences between how audiences
perceived sexual violence stories with negative endings versus physical violence stories with
negative endings. The only statistically significant difference in audience perceptions of sexual
(versus physical) violence stories with negative endings was for perceived difficulty of sharing.
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 24
Audiences perceived sexual violence stories with negative endings as significantly more difficult
to share than physical violence stories with negative endings (M = 0.27, SE = 0.11, p = .020,
D D
95% CI [0.04, 0.49]).
Post-Hoc Exploratory Analysis
The pattern of results across our planned tests of how story perceptions would differ for
psychological, sexual, and physical violence stories with negative endings suggests that the
greatest differences in perception are between sexual versus psychological and physical violence
stories—not, as we had hypothesized, between psychological versus sexual and physical
violence stories. As such, we performed a data-driven, post-hoc exploratory analysis of H2a, this
time with the IPV story (with negative ending) variable coded as 1 = sexual, 2 = psychological, 3
= physical, with a Helmert contrast comparing levels 1 vs. 2 and 3, and levels 2 vs. 3. All post-
hoc exploratory analyses in the combined sample continued to control for sample, participant
lifetime trauma history, and participant gender identity.
Post-hoc contrasts revealed that participants rated sexual violence stories with negative
endings as significantly more difficult to share (η2 = .039, M = 0.31, SE = 0.07, p < .001, 95%
p D D
CI [0.17, 0.45]) and less likely to be shared (η2 = .012, M = -0.24, SE = 0.10, p = .015, 95%
p D D
CI [-0.44, -0.05]) than psychological and physical violence stories with negative endings.
Additionally, participants reported more empathy for sexual violence storytellers, versus
psychological and physical violence storytellers (M = 0.39, SE = 0.10, p < .001, 95% CI [0.19,
D D
0.59]), and psychological violence storytellers as significantly less empathetic than physical
violence storytellers (M = -0.22, SE = 0.11, p = .049, 95% CI [-0.44, -0.001]; η2 = .036).
D D p
H2B Effect of IPV Type Moderated by Story Ending
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 25
We hypothesized that narrative redemption would moderate the effect of IPV trauma type
(sexual, physical, psychological) on story perceptions, such that redemptive story endings would
enhance the positivity of audience perceptions of sexual and physical violence stories to a greater
degree than psychological violence stories (we left as exploratory the contrast between sexual vs.
physical violence stories). To test this hypothesis, the IPV trauma story variable was coded as 1
= psychological, 2 = sexual, 3 = physical, with a Helmert contrast comparing levels 1 vs. 2 and 3,
and levels 2 vs. 3.
Contrary to our prediction, narrative ending did not moderate the effect of IPV trauma
were main effects of IPV trauma type and story ending on perceived difficulty of sharing the
story. Participants rated sexual violence stories as significantly more difficult to share than
physical violence stories, regardless of story ending (this was a planned exploratory contrast).
Participants also rated IPV stories with negative endings as significantly more difficult to share
than IPV stories with redemptive endings, regardless of IPV trauma type. Finally, participants in
Nationally Representative Sample 2 rated stories as significantly more difficult to share than did
participants in Nationally Representative Sample 1.
Instead, there was a main effect of IPV story ending (redemptive vs. negative) on perceived
likelihood of sharing the story. Participants rated IPV stories with redemptive endings as
significantly more likely to be told than IPV stories with negative endings, regardless of IPV
type. Moreover, participants in Nationally Representative samples 1 and 2 rated stories as
significantly more likely to be told than did participants in the University sample.
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 26
more likeable, but this effect was particularly pronounced for sexual and physical violence
storytellers. In other words, redemptive story endings enhanced the likeability of sexual and
physical violence storytellers significantly more than psychological violence storytellers. No
covariates, including sample, were statistically significant predictors of storyteller likeability.
There was weak support for our moderation hypothesis for storyteller positive personality
endings enhanced the likeability of sexual and physical violence storytellers more than for
psychological violence storytellers. Averaged across IPV type, there was a main effect of story
ending, such that participants rated IPV storytellers as having more positive personality traits
when the stories ended redemptively (versus negatively). No covariates were statistically
significant predictors of storyteller likeability.
storyteller, such that redemptive endings boosted participant empathy for sexual and physical
violence stories to a greater degree than for psychological violence storytellers. Visual inspection
of the graph (confirmed by post-hoc follow-up analyses) suggests that this effect was driven by
sexual violence storytellers with redemptive endings garnering particularly empathic responses
from audiences. Regarding covariates, there were no effects of sample or participant lifetime
trauma history on empathy for the storyteller, but those identifying as men reported significantly
less empathy for storytellers, regardless of IPV type or story ending.
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 27
Our moderation hypothesis was not supported for stigmatizing attitudes towards the
stigmatizing attitudes were stronger in response to stories with negative (vs. redemptive)
endings, regardless of IPV type. Regarding covariates, there was a significant main effect of
participant lifetime trauma history; as participant self-reported trauma history increased, their
stigmatizing attitudes toward storytellers decreased, regardless of IPV type or story ending.
Moreover, on average, participant stigmatizing attitudes were greater in the Nationally
Representative samples than in the University sample.
Planned Exploratory Analysis
We left as exploratory whether there would be differences between audiences’
perceptions of sexual versus physical violence stories. There were no statistically significant
differences in audience perceptions of sexual versus physical violence stories, nor any
statistically significant interaction of sexual vs. physical violence stories with story ending, with
regard to perceived likelihood of sharing, storyteller likeability, storyteller positive personality
traits, empathy, or stigmatizing attitudes towards the storyteller. However, as reported above,
there was a statistically significant main effect of sexual versus physical violence story type in
predicting difficulty of sharing.
Post-Hoc Exploratory Analysis
The pattern of results across our planned tests of how IPV story perceptions would differ
for psychological, sexual, and physical violence stories suggests there were differences not
only—as hypothesized—between psychological versus sexual and physical violence stories, but
also between sexual as compared to psychological and physical violence stories. As such, we
performed a data-driven, post-hoc exploratory analysis of H2b, this time with the IPV story
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 28
variable coded as 1 = sexual, 2 = psychological, 3 = physical, with a Helmert contrast comparing
levels 1 vs. 2 and 3, and levels 2 vs. 3. All post-hoc exploratory analyses in the combined sample
continued to control for sample, participant lifetime trauma history, and participant gender
identity.
Post-hoc contrasts revealed that participants rated sexual violence stories as significantly
more difficult to share than psychological or physical violence stories, though this effect did not
IPV type (psychological vs. physical) and story ending on ratings of storyteller likeability. The
effect of story ending on storyteller likeability ratings was particularly pronounced for physical
ending made physical violence storytellers particularly disliked (compared to psychological
violence storytellers), while having a redemptive ending made physical violence storytellers
particularly liked (compared to psychological violence storytellers). The visual pattern of results
for storyteller positive personality traits was similar to the likeability findings, but the
moderation effect was only marginally significant. However, there were main effects of both
story ending (redemptive vs. negative) and IPV type (psychological vs. physical), such that
psychological violence storyteller personalities were rated more positively than physical violence
storyteller personalities. For empathy toward the IPV storyteller, there were significant main
effects of both story ending (redemptive vs. negative) and IPV type (sexual vs. psychological and
physical). Participants reported significantly more empathy for the sexual (vs. psychological and
physical) violence storyteller, regardless of story ending.
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 29
There were no differences between sexual (vs. psychological and physical) or between
psychological versus physical violence stories in perceived likelihood of sharing or stigmatizing
attitudes toward the storyteller.
Overall Summary of Study Findings
For ease of reference, Tables 11 and 12 present at-a-glance summaries of all study
findings.
Discussion
The adult participants in this vignette-based experimental study rated stories of
interpersonal violence (IPV), versus non-IPV, as more difficult to share and less likely to be
shared, and their storytellers as having less positive personality traits. Effect sizes were medium-
to-large. This core finding on perceptions of IPV versus non-IPV stories replicates and extends
the generalizability of research by McLean et al. (2020) and Delker et al. (2020), who showed
more stigmatizing audience reactions to stories of sexual violence (adult sexual assault and
childhood sexual abuse) versus impersonal, accidental traumas. Further replicating the prior
work, audiences consistently rated trauma stories and their storytellers more favorably when the
stories ended with personal redemption. Contrary to our hypotheses about IPV story perceptions,
psychological violence did not emerge as a consistently or robustly more stigmatized form of
IPV than sexual or physical violence. Instead, audiences expected that sexual violence stories
would be particularly difficult and unlikely to share. Below we review the results of our study in
more detail, and we consider practical implications for trauma storytellers, along with
methodological suggestions for future research on cultural stigma surrounding IPV.
IPV versus non-IPV Trauma Hypotheses
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 30
Redemption is a culturally valued way to conclude a story of adversity (e.g., McAdams,
2006; McLean et al., 2020), but we had anticipated that redemptive endings would enhance
favorable responses only to non-IPV stories, given the pervasive cultural stigma surrounding
IPV. Our results provided partial support for this prediction: redemptive endings boosted the
perceived ease of telling all trauma stories and the perceived positive personality traits of all
trauma storytellers, but the boosting effect was stronger for non-IPV (versus IPV) storytellers.
These findings conceptually replicate the findings of Delker and colleagues (2020) with—in the
present study—longer, more detailed trauma stories, all focused on adulthood, and with the three
major types of IPV rather than sexual violence only. Despite the culturally valued story structure
of a positive ending to adversity characterized by personal resilience, the stigma of experiencing
harm within a trusted ongoing relationship (as opposed to experiencing impersonal traumas)
seems to stick to IPV storytellers (Adams-Clark et al., 2020; Delker, 2021). We use the term
‘stigma’ with intention here, in that the more negative, culturally devalued personality traits
attributed to the IPV (versus non-IPV) storytellers represent a mark on or devaluation of the
person herself, in consequence of having certain experiences. Contrary to our hypothesis in this
study and to prior findings by Delker et al. (2020), redemptive endings boosted the perceived
likelihood of sharing IPV stories more than they boosted the perceived likelihood of sharing non-
IPV stories. Given that these findings contrast with those of our prior study with similarly
representative samples (Delker et al., 2020), we are reluctant to interpret this without further
decisive testing. A study design that asks open-ended questions of participants, such as a
qualitative interview-based study or focus group design, could start to unpack the more nuanced
reasons why audiences perceive stories with redemptive endings to be more or less likely to be
shared.
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 31
Several additional predictions about IPV versus non-IPV storytellers were unsupported.
First, participants did not differ in their empathy or liking for IPV versus non-IPV storytellers,
regardless of ending. An explanation of the unexpected null finding for empathy is that
participant and sample characteristics outweighed our experimental manipulation of trauma type
in explaining empathic reactions to storytellers. In our mega-analytic tests of hypotheses 1a and
1b, the only statistically significant predictors of empathy were participant gender (males
reported significantly less empathy for the storytellers, a small-to-medium effect size) and study
sample (the two nationally representative samples reported significantly more empathy for
storytellers than did the university student sample, a small effect size). The gender finding is
consistent with survey-based research on dispositional empathy that has found less self-reported
expression of empathic concern among more masculine identities, though far more research is
needed to understand the nature, extent, and potential malleability of men’s empathy for trauma
survivors (Burris et al., 2016; Osman, 2011). The finding of higher empathy among the two
nationally representative samples may be explained by the softening effect of their broader life
experience (average age in middle adulthood) compared to the university sample (average age in
emerging adulthood) or to the prevalence of rape myth acceptance on college campuses (Holland
et al., 2020; Rich et al., 2021). Future research on trauma story perceptions might be able to
detect effects of trauma stories on empathy with stronger, more visceral experimental
manipulation of trauma stories, or more complex, multi-modal measurement of empathic
concern (Dawtry et al., 2020).
Types of IPV Trauma Hypotheses
Support was mixed for our hypothesis predicting more negative perceptions of
psychological (versus sexual and physical) violence storytellers. In partial support of the
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 32
hypothesis, redemptive endings boosted participant liking of and empathy toward all IPV
storytellers, but the boosting effect was more pronounced for sexual and physical (versus
psychological) violence storytellers. In addition, compared to sexual and physical violence
storytellers, psychological violence storytellers garnered the least empathy from participants
overall, regardless of story ending. However, these empathy findings are qualified by the
relatively strong effect of participant/sample characteristics on empathy (summarized in the
previous section), and by ceiling effects in the measurement of empathy: across all trauma types,
participant responses averaged above a 5 on a 7-point scale for feeling empathic emotions (from
1, not at all to 7, very much).
Our hypothesis predicting more negative perceptions of psychological (versus sexual and
physical) violence storytellers was not supported for perceived difficulty sharing, perceived
likelihood of sharing, storyteller positive personality traits, nor stigma toward the storyteller.
Instead, post-hoc exploratory analyses showed that sexual (versus psychological and physical)
violence stories were perceived as less likely to be shared and more difficult to share, with small-
to-medium effect sizes. Post-hoc analyses also showed that the trend for less participant empathy
toward psychological violence storytellers was driven by the particularly high degree of empathy
for sexual (versus psychological and physical) violence storytellers, a medium effect size. We
had anticipated that the more diffuse, invisible nature of psychological violence—which tends
not to leave overt, concrete evidence of harm—would spur particularly negative audience
reactions to these storytellers. Instead, it is possible that the very features of psychological
violence that enable bystanders to minimize its harmfulness in real time may explain dampened
participant reactions to psychological violence storytellers in this study, such as lower participant
empathy and null effects for perceived difficulty of sharing the psychological violence story.1
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 33
Pronounced participant reactions to sexual (versus psychological and physical) violence
storytellers in this study might be explained by the outsized influence of the #MeToo movement
on mainstream discourse about IPV. As a result of absorbing approximately five years of
#MeToo stories shared across social media and other public platforms, the adults in this study
may be more sensitized to the difficulties of telling sexual violence stories and to the many
understandable barriers to disclosing or formally reporting an experience of sexual violence
(Lorenz et al., 2019; Onwuachi-Willig, 2018; Stubbs-Richardson et al., 2018). If this were the
case, participants may have drawn on an availability heuristic of sorts in their recognition of how
hard it is to share a sexual violence story, relative to psychological and physical violence stories,
which have been largely absent from public discourse about IPV. Whereas we had anticipated
that features of the IPV itself (i.e., the overt physical harm of choking and forced vaginal
penetration, versus the covert harm of psychological violence) would spur differential audience
reactions across IPV types, our findings allude to the possibility that mainstream, dominant
cultural representations of IPV trauma in the U.S. have the greatest influence on audience
reactions to IPV storytellers.
Unsupported Hypotheses for Storyteller Likability and Participant Stigmatizing Attitudes
The overall trend across our four hypotheses was a null effect of trauma stories on
participant ratings of storyteller likability and stigmatizing attitudes toward the storyteller. The
only modest exceptions were the small moderation effect of redemptive endings on storyteller
likability for the IPV stories, discussed above, and a small effect of IPV (versus non-IPV) trauma
type on lower stigmatizing attitudes, contrary to the hypothesized direction of effects. The null
effect of trauma stories on perceived storyteller likability deviates from the results of McLean et
al. (2020) and Delker et al. (2020), but so too did the internal consistency reliability of the
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 34
storyteller likability items in the present study, which was adequate but surprisingly low
compared to the aforementioned studies.
One intriguing explanation for the above findings on likability and stigma is a possible
cohort effect in this study driven by the global COVID-19 pandemic. Over the past two years,
the contagiousness of the virus, social distancing and quarantine requirements, and work and
school closures have had an enormous impact on social life and perceptions of risk in everyday
interactions. Yet the published likability and stigma measures used in this study, which were
designed prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, tap into respondent willingness to interact with the
storyteller in social settings and at work (e.g., “work closely on a job with the author of this
story”). Indeed, the published stigma self-report measure used in this study operationalizes
stigma as desired social distancing from the protagonist. Given that two of the three non-IPV
vignettes mention hospital stays for the sick/injured storyteller, it is perhaps not surprising that
participants in this study reported stronger social distancing (stigma) responses toward the non-
IPV storytellers, than the IPV storytellers.
Limitations, Implications, and Future Directions
Despite the strengths of our well-tested trauma story vignettes and varied samples of U.S.
adults, we consider several methodological and practical limitations to this work. First, we
measured the story perception variables (perceived difficulty and likelihood of sharing) with one-
item measures. There is a precedent for using one-item measures in large-scale survey-based
research on face-valid constructs (e.g., Cheung & Lucas, 2014), but future research can explore
more varied dimensions of story perceptions with expanded or multi-method measures. Second,
as explained above, measurement challenges in accurately assessing storyteller likability and
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 35
stigmatizing attitudes in this COVID-19-era study point to the need for additional research
before firm conclusions can be drawn about how trauma type influences these reactions.
The third issue represents an inherent practical challenge to highly controlled
experimental research on trauma storytelling (Syed, 2021). We carefully designed the
experimental manipulation of IPV trauma type in this study, to make each of the three IPV
stories identical (except for the description of the traumatic events themselves). But
psychological violence is an inherently more diffuse form of IPV, one whose emotional and
existential harm perhaps cannot be captured adequately in as few words as can the acute harm
and horror of a sexual or physical assault. As such, by prioritizing internal validity in our
experimental design process and presenting equivalently structured stories of psychological,
sexual, and physical violence, we may have asked audiences to compare apples to oranges. This
conundrum for experimentalists points to the need for descriptive and observational research on
psychological violence storytelling that explores survivor experiences in trying to put words to a
more diffuse and less culturally recognized form of harm. Follow-up studies can employ
“structural-psychological” research methods that are sensitive to how individual self-
understanding and storytelling processes are intertwined with dominant cultural values and
power structures (Syed & McLean, 2021, p. 1). Event narratives, conversation analysis, focus
groups, in-depth interviews, life-script analysis, and participatory methods such as digital
storytelling are among the promising mixed-method and qualitative forms of inquiry into IPV
storytelling experiences (Fish & Syed, 2021; Syed & McLean, 2021, p. 1)
Before empathy toward psychological violence survivors can be evoked and momentum
for systemic change sustained, perhaps broader awareness and understanding are needed—and a
depiction the length of several Tweets will not accomplish this understanding. Broader
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 36
understanding of IPV is important for many reasons, but we follow Salter and Hall (2020) to
highlight how greater understanding and cultural validation could serve as a dignifying antidote
to the shame and humiliation of gender-based violence. Trauma healing/recovery is often framed
as an individual psychological journey for survivors, but to heal from profound shame and injury
(and to prevent long-term, complex posttraumatic stress conditions), survivors would benefit
from environments that are better sensitized to the inherent “value and vulnerability of all living
things” (Salter & Hall, 2020, p. 7)—and better equipped to recognize the dynamics of IPV.
Overall, this study is part of growing awareness and empirical attention paid toward the
challenges of storying particular types of events, and toward the role that social perceptions,
cultural stigma, and dominant cultural expectations play in the storytelling process. Contrary to
mainstream American ideology that uplifts personal agency and autonomy in self-authorship, our
approach highlights structural constraints to self-authorship. We hope that this approach will
inspire more work to tease apart how these multiple factors work together to silence or validate
particular stories and particular people.
PERCEPTIONS OF INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE STORIES 37