IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
Research Proposal
“WEAK BIO-PHOTON EMISSION REVEALS GATEWAY TO THE PAST”
A study into the application of quantum social learning or QSL.
Prepared by: Carlo G. Monsanto, Andreea G. Petruse, and Lokesh Agrawal
April 18th, 2023
DOI: 10.31219/osf.io/q7u2d
Page 1 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
ABSTRACT 4
THE EMERGENCE OF QUANTUM SOCIAL LEARNING 5
Interpretations of quantum theory 5
Quantum social learning 5
Subjective vs objective temporality 6
This proposed study 7
A LIVING LANGUAGE FRAMEWORK 8
Linguistic skills 8
Attuning to subtle experiences 8
Active adaptation 9
Functional circuits 11
Maladaptation, reactance, and conductivity 12
Conductivity, impedance, and sensation 13
Weak biophoton emission and maladaptation 14
QSL and distribution of biophoton emission 15
The dynamics of observing 16
QSL, realist and operationalist 17
The role of conscious awareness 18
Time direction & time compartmentalization 18
Guiding toward the eternal present 19
THE STUDY 20
What we investigate 20
The educational intervention 20
The study design 21
Page 2 of 26
ORGANIZATION 23
Team members 23
Budget range 23
REFERENCES 24
PREVIOUS STUDY 25
BIOS 25
Carlo Giovanni Monsanto 25
Andreea Georgiana Petruse 25
Lokesh Agrawal 26
CONTACT 26
Carlo Giovanni Monsanto 26
COPYRIGHT 26
Page 3 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
“WEAK BIO-PHOTON EMISSION REVEALS GATEWAY TO THE PAST”
A study that tests the use of quantum social learning to reveal, embody and resolve past
experiences.
Authors: Carlo G. Monsanto1,2, Andreea Petruse1, Lokesh Agrawal1,3
Reviewer: Sunil Kumar Vimal1
1. IOLEE Ecosystem Inc. (USA)
2. Ronin Institute (USA)
3. Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology (Japan)
ABSTRACT
Our team has spent over 20 years gathering observational data from citizen scientists and
conducting research and development to create a new approach to learning called "quantum
social learning" or QSL. QSL focuses on the most subtle aspects of human experience, known
as qualia, which include intuitions, thoughts, feelings, sensations, and perceptions. Our
interpretation of quantum theory is centered around studying these qualia and understanding
them as the basis of social interaction. Through our transdisciplinary framework, called "inside
out learning experience ecosystem" or IOLEE, we aim to help learners extend their language
skills to include both the visible and invisible aspects of reality, simultaneously from the
subjective and the objective. Quantum social learning involves a continuous process of self-
reflection, evaluation, and testing to improve the learner's capacity to restore the most natural
inclusive flow, individually and collectively.
Page 4 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
THE EMERGENCE OF QUANTUM SOCIAL LEARNING
Interpretations of quantum theory
Realizing that conventional neural network models alone cannot describe how qualia or
phenomenal experience is generated by brain activity - the “hard problem” - researchers
started investigating the quantum correlations of the brain1,2. Ever since the inception in 1925,
when the German physicists Heisenberg, Born, and Jordan developed matrix mechanics and
the Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger invented wave mechanics, quantum theory (QT) has
gone through different stages of evolution. Quantum theory, which was previously seen as an
exclusive “product” of Quantum Mechanics, now has many different interpretations, revealing
its transdisciplinary and unifying foundation. Interpretations such as “quantum cognition”,
“quantum complexity”, “quantum biology”, and “quantum chemistry”, are just a few examples
of its transdisciplinary nature. Since 1925, the theoretical landscape of quantum theories of
consciousness has also flourished. More recently, scientists have developed various quantum
computational models such as orch OR3 and fractal molecular-cavity resonance2,4,5. The
former, orch OR, explains how when orchestrated, bimolecular-oscillations or resonance,
produces entanglement, computation, and the collapse of the wave-function, giving rise to
conscious experience6. The scientific community is constantly seeking the experimental
validation of these and other theories7. We speak of quantum theory (QT) as a metaphysical
theory that describes the most fundamental aspects of reality, which resonates with Louis de
Broglie (1927), and David Bohm’s (1952) causal and metaphysical interpretations of QT.
Metaphysical, within this context, refers to an ontological framework, which describes the
nature of reality.
Quantum social learning
Where quantum physics relates QT to twelve (12) known fundamental particles that make up
the universe and their unique quantum fields, quantum social learning (QSL) describes an
additional five (5) fundamental aspects that relate to our human experience, viz., instances of
intuiting, thinking, feeling, sensing, and perceiving, and their unique quantum fields. Quantum
social learning, through its causal theory describes how observation focuses measuring to
increase the probability density of scalar fields of intuiting, thinking, feeling, sensing, and
Page 5 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
perceiving, into concrete instances, which are perceivable and measurable via self-reflexion,
and interoception. Upon appreciating, from open attention, these localized instances that have
gained a particular form, organization and structure, begin to diffuse in all directions, as
interference patterns and waves of intuiting, thinking, feeling, sensing, and perceiving, reducing
the probability-density and rendering a vibrational flow, frequency, which can be felt, sensed
and heard. Embodying our observations, enables us to simultaneously experience focused
measuring and open appreciating, enabling us to simultaneously observe the collapsing into
instances, and the diffusing into interference paterns (waves). This embodied way of observing
is referred to as “superposing”. In our brain, neuroendocrine system, and social interactions, we
naturally flow and glide through these differing states, producing real-world effects. We have a
good reason to believe, which is supported by two decades of action research, that if we hold
both of these states in superposition, we can find balance on all levels and under all
circumstances.
Subjective vs objective temporality
If life were without shocks and traumatic experiences, we would live in an ideal world, in a
constant flow, individually, and collectively. But, this is not so! In adverse experiences, we
receive shocks that instantly disrupt the flow that we are presently experiencing. Due to our
reactive adaptations from fear, sadness, rejection, etc., experience is rendered unresolved, and
gradually shifts from the conscious foreground to the unconscious background. Reactive
adaptations thus repress, suppress, and project. We label these unconscious experiences “the
past”, and deem them done and over with. But, again, this is not so!
For example, when we are experiencing anxiety about a future event, we often experience the
same anxiety we felt in reaction to past events. These unresolved experiences within their own
space-time configuration in the past, keep on happening in the present, often exhausting our
mental, emotional, and physical resources. And although we are here in the present, our
neuroendocrine system, which is triggered to recreate our reactive patterns of fear, sadness,
and so on, is simultaneously inhabiting our future and past.
QSL facilitates direct access to our inner microcosmos, enabling us to “step” through the
permeable boundaries between the unconscious (past), conscious (present), and subconscious
Page 6 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
(superposition of the conscious and unconscious). Facilitation of QSL’s integration-diffusion
process, restores our dynamic observational capacities, measuring, appreciating, and
superposing, which are linked respectively with the dynamics of the left and right hemispheres,
these may be physically experienced. In comparison, a recent quantum experiment8 has shown
that a photon can be in a state wherein it simultaneously or coherently travels forward and
backward in time. This is also referred to as a state of superposition of forward and backward
time direction - or quantum time flip. We can thus infer that, when we experience a stimulus-
response, we actually experience the superposition of forward and backward time directions,
cognitively, affectively, and somatically replaying our reactive adaptations to events in the
unconscious background (the past), in relation to the situation in our conscious foreground, the
present and/or imagined future.
This proposed study
In the currently proposed study, we wish to show the correlation between the potentiality field
of intuiting, thinking, feeling, sensing, and perceiving, which can semi-permanently collapse as
limiting thoughts, feelings, sensations, and perceptions. In the body, limiting feelings, and
sensations can collapse in the body’s connective tissues9 or fasciae, where these can generate
uncomfortable sensations. As these maladaptive response sensations accumulate, they can
agitate, spread, and localize as varying levels of stress. These stress responses can be
generated by hormone action of the hypothalamus-pituitary adrenal (HPA), and other axes. We
consider the combination of maladaptive responses, “traces from the past” that tend to show
up whenever we feel emotionally triggered. In our study, we are expecting to measure dense
patterns of weak bio-photon (light) emission in the areas where these maladaptive responses or
traces from the past are generated by the neuroendocrine system.
In this study, fifteen (15) citizen scientists will contribute by having ninety (90) minute recorded
sessions, once (1) a week, during twelve (12) weeks, rendering a total of: 15 persons x 1,5
hours x 12 weeks x 2 (qualitative+quantitative) = 270 x 2 = 540 hours of recorded qualitative
and quantitative data. Qualitative data will consist of the audio recordings of sessions, and
quantitative data will consist of the recordings of the weak bio-photon emission of participants.
Page 7 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
A LIVING LANGUAGE FRAMEWORK
Linguistic skills
Over time, it has become clear that many people struggle to articulate their inner thoughts and
experiences due to a lack of language skills that allow them to describe the nuances of human
experience. While academic fields like micro-phenomenology have made progress in
developing ways to understand conscious experience, these are often used for academic
purposes rather than personal or social transformation. QSL offers a solution by teaching
individuals the language skills necessary to express their subjective and intersubjective
experiences using the IOLEE framework. Regardless of one's cultural, religious, or ethnic
background, QSL helps individuals identify and describe subtle phenomena that are often
difficult to differentiate. These insights are based on extensive observations contributed by
citizen scientists from around the world.
Attuning to subtle experiences
At the quantum level, we can attune to the subtlest aspects of experience. By measuring reality
through objectifying focused attention, every probability-wave in a given massless physical
space, can converge into instances of intuiting, thinking, feeling, sensing, and perceiving. Thus
wave collapse forms experience as we know it. And as part of the brain’s most natural inclusive
flow, appreciating through immersive open attention spreads out the instances that form
experience, creating interference-patterns and waves of intuitions, thoughts, feelings,
sensations, and perceptions. By embodying our observations, we can experience focused
measuring and open appreciating simultaneously. This allows us to observe the collapsing into
instances and diffusing into interference patterns (waves) at the same time, which is known as
"superposing". Our brain, neuroendocrine system, and social interactions naturally flow and
glide through these different states, resulting in real-world effects, which are in superposition.
Based on two decades of action research, we have reason to believe that holding all states in
superposition can lead to balance on all levels and in all circumstances. This requires
interoception to observe our inner microcosm, and exteroception to observe our outer
macrocosm. Evidence for how conscious awareness plays a major role in the integration of the
brain and the body’s circuitry, may be found in a recent quantum lab experiment, wherein
researchers could clearly observe the precise phase-correlated coupling between parts of the
brain and the heart, and how this depended on whether a person was consciously aware or
Page 8 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
not10,11. This experiment also showed that we experience not only through the brain, but
through the whole body. We have a good reason to believe that in the case where we
experience reactive patterns in response to a present or imagined future event, these reactions
are entangled and phase-correlated with the same reactions in a past unresolved experience.
Active adaptation
These reactive adaptations, viz., repression, suppression, and/or projection, render any
experience E(t,x) {t=time | x=space} unresolved, trapping the experience E(t,x)’ within its own
space-time configuration, and moving this to the unconscious background. At this time, we
refer to this unresolved experience E(t,x)’ as “the past”. Our experience E(t,x)’ in situation S(t),
where “t ≤ -1” has a backward time direction, and “x” is the separate space configuration, the
circumstances associated with the experience. Furthermore, we are entangled with the
versions of ourselves that are trapped within these virtual spacetime “bubbles” that hold in
them our unresolved experiences.
Page 9 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
Using the IOLEE language framework, we can, in realtime, map where in the body we sense
our reactions, which we previously only experienced inside virtual spacetime “bubbles”. We can
also learn to recognize how we keep unresolved experiences from diffusing and resolving. By
frequently focusing, objectifying, and measuring, expecting outcomes similar to the one’s we
have experienced in our unresolved past, we either repress (pull back), suppress (push back),
or project (expell) what we virtually think, feel, sense, and perceive. In quantum theory, the fast
and persistent repitition of measuring, which affects reality by not allowing a determined
outcome to change, is referred to as a quantum Zeno effect. Due to this condition, we keep
our unresolved experiences from completing and resolving. Based on thousands of cross-
referenced observations, we have a strong reason to believe that unresolved experiences need
a vessel, our mind and body, and an experience in the present moment, which triggers their
convergence. Provided we do not repress, project, and/or suppress these unresolved
experiences, they can complete, diffuse, and completely resolve.
Mentioned Zeno effects are produced by an unknown number “n” of unconscious virtual
observers, versions of ourselves, each of which is associated with its own past experience,
contained in its own spacetime configuration, or spacetime bubble. Furthermore, we are at all
times entangled with each one of these spacetime bubbles. Imagine having many spacetime
bubbles floating around you, as you move through differing environments. We describe how the
unconscious observers, continually and frequently measure the present reality, with respect to
their expected trauma-based outcomes. Triggers render the conscious observer subsurvient to
the unconscious virtual observer, making one react to the present reality from associated
trauma-based reactions. These reactions, which are unconscious at first, dynamically generate
discomfort in differing parts of the body, according to what we think and emotionally feel.
We infer, and this is substantiated by real-world evidence, that as long as the aforementioned
unconscious virtual observers exist, our mind and body can be highjacked or triggered,
repeating the same “virtual” experiences, over and again. Which is why when this happens, we
experience a state of alertness and stress, which is associated with the unresolved past.
Page 10 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
Functional circuits
We hypothesize that in such case, when unconscious virtual observers and their past reactions
entangle with the present-moment experience, patterns of reactive adaptation or for short
maladaptive responses, dynamically and holographically encode as reactive patterns in the
body’s connective tissues. These responses, which may generate sensations such as tension,
contraction, pressure, heat, or pain, may be felt either in specific parts or in the whole body. A
study by Iob, Kirschbaum, and Steptoe9 describes this connection between negative affect,
activity in the hypothalamus pituitary-adrenal axis or HPA, and somatic symptoms in more
detail. Fasciae are especially studied in relation to affective processing within the context of
using craniosacral therapy, osteopathy, acupuncture12, and other therapeutic interventions. By
expanding the way we observe, and by mapping and tracking sensations, we orient our
intuition towards recognizing, completing and diffusing the reactive patterns and associated
unresolved experiences that recreate and cause these sensations. These will otherwise likely
remain unnoticed, and cause increasing levels of stress and further localize, causing disorder in
mind and body.
Page 11 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
For example, if at the time of an adverse event, an individual inhibits the “expression” of a felt
emotion, a physical response will likely be triggered in the “throat”, which we associate with
Where hormone actions normally exhibit oscillations2 and diffuse, as wave-like Fourier
transforms, maladaptive responses will likely encode hormone actions to converge, as inverse
Fourier transforms, increasing the density of their actions to maintain the structure of what we
think, feel, sense, and perceive.
Maladaptation, reactance, and conductivity
effects produce maladaptive response sensations in the fasciae (connective tissues), causing
varying impedances, or potentials towards repression, suppression, and/or projection. In a rest-
state, we expect the impedance to be lower, rendering greater conductivity13. Based on our
observation, we associate the following characteristics with different axes in the endocrine
system.
• Capacitive impedance is generated by the Hypothalamus Pituitary - Adrenal Axis;
• Inductive impedance is generated by the Hypothalamus Pituitary - Thyroid Pancreas Axis;
• Resistive impedance is generated in the Hypothalamus Pituitary - Pineal Thymus Gonadic
Axis.
We posit that these axes and their mechanisms are expressions of active adaptation or
repression, projection, and suppression. Active adaptation is organized in the following ways:
• Repression: capacitive impedance is frequency-dependent and will be lower at the top
of the body where the frequency is higher, creating less resistance and generating less
contraction in that part; impedance will be higher towards the bottom of the body, where
the frequency is lower, potentially creating more resistance in that part of the body, and
thus generating more contraction; thus keeping whatever it encapsulates from shifting
out from the unconscious background. Zones: Communicating, and Acting. Sensations:
tension, and contraction. Hormones: pituitary, and adrenal. Nervous system: Left brain,
sympathetic, adrenergic, ENS.
Page 12 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
• Projection: inductive impedance is frequency-dependent and will be higher at the top
of the body where the frequency is higher, creating more resistance to the natural flow,
thus generating less heat at the top; impedance will be lower towards the bottom, where
the frequency is lower, creating less resistance, and thus generating more heat; expelling
drives whatever wants to be expressed from the unconscious background into the
conscious foreground. Zones: Expressing, and Volition. Sensations: heat, and three
kinds of burning. Hormones: thyroid, pancreas, small intestines, liver, gallbladder.
Nervous system: Right brain, para sympathetic, cholinergic, and ENS.
• Suppression: resistive impedance will be the same from top to bottom and is not
frequency dependent, dissociating, pushing, or isolating an experience from the
conscious foreground towards the unconscious background. Zones: Referencing,
Connecting, and Supporting. Sensations: disconnection, pressure, and heaviness.
Hormones: pineal, thymus, and gonad. Nervous system: Hind brain, spine.
Conductivity, impedance, and sensation
Higher impedance reduces conductivity, thus stagnates. Active adaptation mechanisms,
through the way these resist conductivity, may produce differing combinations and patterns of
sensations, ranging from tension, cramp, heat, burning, disconnect, pressure, heaviness, to
numbness, ache, and pain. These are dynamically generated in parts or throughout the body,
depending on what we emotionally feel. What we need to keep in mind is that, when triggered,
what we think, feel and sense entangles with virtual spacetime bubbles, each of which contains
an unresolved experience, and an unintegrated version of ourselves. For instance, remember
the times where memories of past experiences popped up when you felt emotional. At times
you may even have lost your capacity to formulate logically, because you were feeling too
emotional.
The following reactance matrix describes the primary zones that, through the HPA and other
axes, dynamically encode a set of nine (9) functional circuits, in the fasciae. These translate into
differing patterns of nine (9) adaptive responses, which we describe in the IOLEE framework.
Thus what we think, and feel, expresses in, and is in superposition with, what we sense
physically. If over time challenging situations persist, our persistent thoughts may not allow
Page 13 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
mentioned functional circuits to lose their structure, consistent with what we have previously
described as the quantum Zeno effect. This typically happens when a person is triggered into
rapidly measuring, converging or focusing attention, anticipating an expected adverse
outcome. This semi-permanently collapsed state may be associated with, for instance,
depression, or obsessive behavior. This means that maladaptive responses can become
“chronic”, influencing our mind body towards loosing homeostasis, biasing towards unbalance,
and localizing stress towards disorder.
Weak biophoton emission and maladaptation
In our study, we expect to see greater biophoton emission density in those parts of the body
that are affected by aforementioned adaptive responses, which by definition cause discomfort.
In QSL’s internally led sessions, participants learn to appreciate, and open or diverge attention,
to diffuse (or Fourier transform) discomforts. The observational dynamic of opening attention is
typically associated with experiencing positive affective states. In our study, associated with
Page 14 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
opening attention to receive maladaptive responses, we expect to see greater distribution in the
recorded biophoton emission, which describes interference patterns, and waves. In previous
studies by Meluna Research14, greater distribution in light emission density has been
associated with the healing of a disorder, which was measured over a period of several weeks.
A state of homeostasis, is when we can use our observing system in such a way that this
causes a dynamic natural inclusive flow between differing states (instances and waves),
hemispheres, and other parts of the brain and body’s circuits, including in our exchange with
our social environment.
QSL and distribution of biophoton emission
In the present proposed study, we wish to elicit significant natural inclusive flow to drive an
evolutionary change, during each and every session, recorded over the course of twelve weeks.
In QSL we wish to accomplish this through:
• The practice of harmonizing the observational dynamic of measuring, appreciating, and
superposing, which causes collapse, diffusion, and superposition as observer effects.
• The practice of decoding patterns of maladaptive responses, to orient us towards
recognizing associated virtual unresolved experiences in the unconscious background.
In QSL, the increase in conductivity (flow) in the connective tissues throughout the body, is
accomplished through reestablishing the coherent flow between measuring, appreciating, and
superposing:
• Measuring - through converging/focusing objectifying attention
• Appreciating - through diverging/opening/unfocusing attention
• Superposing - holding both open restfulness and focused activity in superposition.
Page 15 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
The dynamics of observing
In Chinese medicine, this flow is described as a flow hence and forth between the active
fullness of “Yang” and the restful emptiness of “Yin”. Holding both, we may experience an in-
between state of being simultaneously actively full and restfully empty. We attribute this
dynamic flow, to our “observing system”, which we attribute to our brain, and associate with
the functions of the neuroendocrine, and other systems, the body’s circuits. In our study we
wish to show how the brain, and the body’s dynamic can be changed through changing how
we observe, which evolves what Henry Stapp and other quantum philosophers have
theoretically described. We have expanded the quantum mechanics definition of a single
function, measuring, observing system with a single real-world effect, the quantum collapse, to
a definition wherein we describe a conscious observing system, with various dynamic
functions, measuring, appreciating, and superposing, and their varying real-world effects. While
Page 16 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
of intuiting, thinking, feeling, sensing, and perceiving, hold the potential of experience. In
Bohmian mechanics, the way that measuring converges probability-waves from the frequency
domain into the corresponding experience in the space-time domain, is described as an
inverse Fourier transform, whereas appreciating diffuses experience back to the frequency
domain via a Fourier transform.
QSL, realist and operationalist
QSL’s theory can, on the one hand, be described as realist, because it brings more detailed
descriptions to our inner microcosm, the frequency domain, and it can also be described as
operationalist, as it brings greater understanding about how what happens in our inner
microcosm shapes what happens in the outer world, and how this translates into our
“operation” in relation to the people and other living systems that surround us. Herewith, we in
fact describe, and we hope to validate this through our study, the principle role of conscious
observation and conscious experience in shaping reality. In addition we wish to offer QSL’s
living language framework to expand our scientific enquiry beyond objective experience, and its
dependence on time, crossing the permeable boundaries between the unconscious,
subconscious, and conscious, to understand, describe and consciously experience the
richness of our subjective reality, individually, intersubjectively, and socially.
Page 17 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
The role of conscious awareness
Being consciously awareness, plays a principle role in organizing the dynamics of observing,
using varying ways of paying attention. It influences observing, and all of its effects towards
evolving intuition, greater connection, perception, highly synchronous functional activity of the
brain, heart-brain coherence, individually, intersubjectively, and socially. This may be observed
as well-connected highly synchronous functional activity in the rest of the body, including left
and right synchronization4 (Van Wijk et al.). Evidence for this brain-body connection may be
found in the recent study by Silvia Solís-Ortíz et al. “coincident frequencies and relative phases
among brain activity and hormonal signals”10.
Time direction & time compartmentalization
In the objective world time “seems” to be flowing from the past to the future. This is so,
because we have been conditioned to semi-permanently collapse time in this linear forward
moving sequential order. What’s more, the way we observe through objectifying hyper-focus,
semi-permanently collapses our personality traits and beliefs around this forward moving
cause-effect relationship. This may result in a chronic sense of not being in control, which
externalizes our locus of control.
When the dynamic of our observing system viz., measuring, appreciating, and superposing, is
in a flow of cohering and decohering, collapsing, and distributing, from being consciously
aware, we will be able to witness an indefinite time direction, a state of consciously being in the
present. This is different from a recent quantum experiments that describe a coherent
superposition of forwards and backwards time directions, or quantum time flip. This may
underly the superposition of an imagined future, and unresolved past. In this case, our brain
and neuroendocrine system simultaneously inhabit our future and past - rendering us present in
both spacetime configurations (future and past) at the same time. What happens in all
configurations, in the past, present, and future, may either harmonize or disrupt our observing
system towards balance or unbalance, depending on whether we observe consciously or not.
Page 18 of 26
Guiding toward the eternal present
Through QSL’s action learning process, we become aware that it is the way we observe, using
our observing system, which holds the past, present, and future spacetime configurations in
superposition. Through integration-diffusion this process guides us beyond the fragmentations
in spacetime15, towards experiencing the eternal present. It is “here” that we can experience
the potential of both being consciously aware and embodying conscious experience, access all
our faculties and intelligences, and co-create a world that is at peace with itself. In the following
section, we describe the way in which we wish to accomplish this promise.
Page 19 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
THE STUDY
What we investigate
In the current study, we wish to show that through a conscious awareness attuning
observational dynamic, in combination with the decoding practice, which uses various QSL
tools, referred to as the IOLEE body, affect, and integration-diffusion matrices, we can attune
our language skills to the subtlest aspects within, our inner microcosm. Restoring our
observational dynamic, influences maladaptive response patterns, from measuring, increasing
density (inverse Fourier convergence); towards appreciating, increasing diffusion (Fourier
distribution); and including superposing, an in-between embodied state of holding both the
dynamic of measuring and appreciating. This observational flow nearly instantly begins to
influence the various connective tissues (fasciae) towards greater conductivity, rendering a
sense of comfort and vibrational flow. Our research question is whether we can observe
immediate shifts from denser weak bio-photon emission toward greater (Fourier) distribution of
emission, correlating with the diffusion of responses towards resolution.
The educational intervention
• Introspection, and interoception informs about the mental-emotional-body state.
• Recognition of the frequency, resonance, amplitude, physical location, combination,
sequence, and layering of maladaptive responses associated with fear-loss-of-control,
sadness-frustration-disappointment-anger, and rejection-disassociation-isolation, helps
to develop the capacity to discern the unconscious virtual bubbles that render reactive
patterns.
• Additionally, internally mapping feelings and response-sensations helps to discern what
real-world themes trigger these felt stress-responses.
• Assistance in developing the capacity of participants to attune their language skills to
mentioned feelings and response sensations to orient their intuition towards recognizing
patterns and virtual bubbles, as these unfold in relationship.
• Development of the participant’s capacity to evaluate responses and recognize patterns,
before or as these arise.
• Tracing patterns to the past unresolved experiences where they originated.
Page 20 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
• Recalling the memory, realizing the adverse situation, and one’s responses, aligned with
one’s own momentary feelings and response sensations.
• Keep on holding space, from open attention, for the trapped feelings/sensations that
recreate the past unresolved experience, beyond overwhelming.
• Feeling an effortless desensitization, movement, and/or vibration associated with the
diffusion as waves of intuiting, thinking, feeling, sensing, and perceiving.
• The cathartic cleansing of felt emotions, or “riding the wave” of the emotions that reach
one from within.
• A sense of expansion that evolves one beyond the fragmentation of spacetime5, into
being and embodying conscious experience.
The study design
• This study requires a multidimensional approach, wherein we will both record and
quantitatively and qualitatively assess the collected recorded data.
• We would like to explore if there is a research group at Wageningen University or any
other institution that would be interested in this study, and that would like to collaborate.
• A number of citizen scientists (Ages: 21- 50), educators, who are willing, will be asked to
collaboratively contribute to the study after getting their written informed consent. We
appreciate citizen scientists to contribute their exploration of their own sensitivities and
discomforts, especially those associated with stress and chronic discomfort.
• We need to find out whether an approval from an ethics commission for human subject
research will be required for this study. Because we work with citizen scientists, this
might not be necessary.
• While citizen scientists will conduct their study at the facility of Meluna Research at
Wageningen University, facilitation of the 12-week mentoring process will be conducted
online, in a once a week for ninety (90) minutes session, guided using the QSL
educational intervention.
• QSL’s educational intervention will be conducted during three (3) months, 90 min per
week, with supporting audio material and learning support. In the intervention, citizen
scientists will learn about the six stages of psychophysiological localization, from greater
density (localization of thoughts, feelings, and sensations) to greater distribution
(distribution of thoughts, feelings, and sensations), or from more discomfort to a natural
Page 21 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
vibrational flow (waves) of thoughts, feelings, and sensations. In each session the
scientist participant gets to test the hypothesis that one can distribute or spread out and
resolve psychophysiological discomfort, nearly instantly restoring flow on all levels.
• Qualitative measurement: all QSL sessions will be recorded, audio-only, so that this
qualitative data can be matched with the quantitative data, revealing weak biophoton
emission density and distribution.
• Weak biophoton emission will be recorded during all of the above sessions in a
completely dark room.
• Quantitative measurement: recording of weak bio-photon emission of parts of the body
that are affected by chronic maladaptive responses, or disorder. These recordings
generate data-points that can be matched with the above qualitative data.
• Qualitative self-evaluation by the citizen scientist and evaluation by a facilitator will be
done throughout the process. Questionnaires and psychological scales are offered
throughout the process:
• The Consciousness Quotient Inventory (CQ-i)16 will be submitted at the beginning and
end of the process.
• Stress, anxiety and depression scales will serve as qualitative measurements throughout
the process.
• Pre-recorded material and support via e-mail, WhatsApp, Signal, and/or Telegram will be
provided by Monsanto-Petruse during self-directed practice in-between sessions.
• Data collected will be cross-referenced, and analyzed by the team of Van Wijk, Agrawal,
Petruse, and Monsanto.
• A research article will be prepared for publication. This study can be presented at
conferences to attract more interest from academia for the possibility of bio-photon
research and the significance of QSL-IOLEE as a transformative knowledge-system and
practice that can guide individuals and groups toward impactful social change.
Page 22 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM
ORGANIZATION
Team members
Eduard Van Wijk - Research scientist from Meluna Research - The Netherlands
Lokesh Agrawal - Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology - Japan
Andreea Petruse - Intervention specialist from IOLEE Ecosystem - U.S.A.
Carlo Monsanto - Intervention specialist from IOLEE Ecosystem - U.S.A.
Budget range
We aim at raising a combination of grants and/or research funding in the amount of EUR
70.000 for this study. Fifteen (15) citizen scientists will contribute by having ninety (90) minute
recorded sessions, once (1) a week, during twelve (12) weeks, rendering a total of 270 hours of
recorded qualitative and quantitative data. The cost per hour will be EUR 100 for facilitation by
Meluna researchers + EUR 100 facilitation of the QSL process by expert facilitators from IOLEE
Ecosystem. Furthermore, we have included EUR 6.000 for the use of equipment at Meluna
Research during 3 months, and EUR 10,000 for miscellaneous expenses.
Description Use of Facilitation Miscellaneous Sub-total
Equipment (EUR 100/h) expenses
Meluna 3x 2,000 = 15x18x100 = Neurofeedback
Research EUR 6.000 EUR 27.000 EUR 5.000 EUR 38.000
IOLEE 15x18x100 = Article
Ecosystem publication, etc.
EUR 27.000 EUR 5.000 EUR 32.000
Total EUR 6.000 EUR 54.000 EUR 10.000 EUR 70.000
Page 23 of 26
IOLEE ECOSYSTEM