MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 1
Developing a Causally Valid Picture-Story Measure of Sexual Motivation:
II. Effects of film clips
Oliver C. Schultheiss, Jessica Hinzmann, Sara Bergmann, Moritz Matthes, Bastian Beyer, &
Kevin T. Janson
Friedrich-Alexander University, Erlangen, Germany
Note: This manuscript is under review and has not been approved for publication. The
final published manuscript may differ from this version.
Author note
Inquisit testing scripts, data, SYSTAT analysis code, JASP files, documentation
was supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft grant SCHU 1210/5-1. We thank Ksenia
Khalaidovski for her assistance with processing psychophysiological data.
Please send correspondence to: Oliver C. Schultheiss, Lehrstuhl Allgemeine
Psychologie II, Department of Psychology, Friedrich-Alexander University, Nägelsbachstraße
49b, 91052 Erlangen, Germany, phone: +49 9131 8520880 (office) or +49 1525 3694974
(cell); fax: +49 9131 8520878; email: oliver.schultheiss@fau.de
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 2
Abstract
Replicating and extending previous work by Hinzmann et al. (submitted), the present
research aimed at validating a picture-story measure of sexual motivation, termed need for sex
(nSex). In two experimental studies (Ns = 154 and 171) with repeated-measures design, we
showed that (a) nSex is sensitive to experimental manipulation of sexual motivation via film
clips, (b) that this effect is mediated by increased subjective arousal as an indicator of a
motivational process, and (c) that the part of nSex variance that is sensitive for experimental
manipulation is also the one accounting for variations in a behavioral criterion (key pressing
and viewing time measures of relative preference for erotic over non-erotic pictures). These
effects emerged specifically when film clips portrayed sex positively, but not when they
showed sex with embarrassing or threatening consequences. As a dispositional measure, nSex
correlated positively with self-report measures of sexual desire and behavior. But it did not
feature the sex difference associated with these measures and retained incremental validity
above and beyond them for behavioral criterion measures.
Key words: thematic apperception; sexual motivation; picture-story measure; content coding;
validation
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 3
Developing a Causally Valid Picture-Story Measure of Sexual Motivation:
II. Effects of arousal through film clips
Sexual motivation is a fundamental propellant of behavior, grounded in well-described
neurobiological circuits and endocrine dynamics (Ågmo & Laan, 2022; Georgiadis et al.,
2012; Janssen, 2007), affecting physiology, affect, attention, and cognition (e.g., Hoffmann,
2017; Toates, 2009), and contributing to functional and dysfunctional sexual outcomes
(Ågmo, 2007). However, the measurement of sexual motivation can be challenging (e.g.,
Pfaus, 2007). In particular, assessment of sexual motivation and behavior per self-report is
fraught with demand characteristics, self-presentational issues, defenses, introspective
limitations, and other problems (Wiederman, 2002). The consistent difference between
women and men in self-reports of sexual desire and number of sexual partners (women report
less and fewer than men) illustrates this point (e.g., Alexander & Fisher, 2003; Penke &
Asendorpf, 2008; Regan & Atkins, 2006). Some researchers therefore question the validity of
questionnaire measures of sexual motivation and behavior in general (e.g., Ågmo, 2007; p.
57; Le Moëne & Ågmo, 2019). If one defines validity in causal terms, as the property of a
measure to be sensitive to experimentally induced variations in the measurement target, as
McClelland (1958, 1987) and more recently Borsboom et al. (2004) did, then it is indeed
striking that none of the measures of sexual motivation featured in a recently published
comprehensive handbook has been validated in this manner (see Fisher et al, 2011). It would
therefore be desirable to develop a measure of sexual motivation that is sensitive to causal
effects of motivational states and that may bypass some of the problems associated with self-
reports. This is what we set out to do in the present work.
Our research builds on and continues earlier work by Hinzmann et al. (submitted),
who introduced a new picture-story exercise (PSE; see McClelland, Koestner, & Weinberger,
1989) measure of sexual motivation, termed need for sex, or nSex (see Murray, 1938),
including motive-specific picture cues and a comprehensive coding manual that allows coders
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 4
to attain high levels of coding reliability. Hinzmann et al. (submitted) based their approach on
the notion that sexual motivation is the outcome of the multiplicative confluence of sexual
incentives – mostly learned – and the individual’s current motive level, termed the central
motive state (see Bindra, 1978; Toates, 1986). If there are no incentives or the central motive
state is low, no sexual motivation and behavior will emerge. One consequence of this view is
that if sexual incentive cues are held constant, one can gauge an individual’s central motive
state from the degree of her or his response to the cues. Incentive motivation theories also
posit a positive feedback loop between the central motive state and incentives such that
(sexual) incentives transiently turn on or increase the central motive state itself, making it
easier for subsequently encountered incentives to elicit motivational responses (Ågmo &
Laan, 2022; Toates, 1986).
Hinzmann et al. (submitted) made use of both of these aspects of incentive motivation
theory. They used a measurement approach that gauges responses (sex-related imagery in
imaginative stories) to fixed stimuli (i.e., picture cues; e.g., a man and a woman in underwear
engaged in a pillow fight) somewhat suggestive of sex to infer the strength of the central
motive state. They also manipulated the central motive state itself by priming experimental-
group participants with erotic and control-group participants with neutral pictures to
determine its effects on subsequent picture-story writing. In two studies with 86 and 113
participants, they found that experimental arousal of sexual motivation led to specific
increases in story imagery related to stated need for sex, positive goal anticipation (fantasy);
general instrumental activity as well as the specific instrumental behaviors seduction, kissing,
and inducing relaxation; positive goal attainment, accompanied by positive affect;
interpersonal attraction; and erotic atmosphere. The sum score of these aspects of participants’
stories increased from baseline to priming in the erotic-prime group (ds = 0.33 and 0.48), but
not in the control-prime group (ds = -0.16 and -0.31) and hence featured causal validity as
envisaged by Borsboom et al. (2004) and McClelland (1958, 1987).
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 5
Moreover, Hinzmann et al. (submitted) argued that for a measure to be a valid measure
of motivation, it does not suffice to demonstrate its sensitivity to experimental manipulation –
problems of circularity would loom. It is equally important to show that experimentally
elicited changes in the measure are mediated by changes in a relevant indicator of the targeted
process. Hinzmann et al. focused on affect, a hallmark of motivation in incentive theories
generally (see Berridge, 2004; Toates, 1986) and in theories of sexual motivation specifically
(see Ågmo & Laan, 2022; Hardy, 1964). They documented a mediating role of affect in their
second study, using a combination of subjective (arousal) and psychophysiological affect
measures (facial electromyography [EMG] over the corrugator and zygomatic muscles). Thus,
participants in the erotic-prime condition injected more sexual imagery into their stories
because they responded with positively tinged arousal to the primes, compared to their own
baseline levels and to control participants. Finally, Hinzmann et al. argued that for a measure
to have predictive validity, one needs to show that the portion of its variance that is sensitive
to experimental manipulation is also the one that accounts for variance in a representative
criterion. To demonstrate the criterion validity of their nSex measure, they had participants in
their second study work on a key-press task (KPT) that allowed them to increase or decrease
viewing time for erotic or non-erotic pictures by pressing an up or a down key. Mediation
analysis indicated that nSex assessed during the priming phase of the experiment relayed the
effect of experimental manipulation to the behavioral criterion (relative viewing time and key
presses for erotic versus non-erotic pictures). Thus, according to the EMMIC (experimental
manipulation, measure, indicator, criterion) approach employed by Hinzmann et al.
(submitted; see also Schultheiss et al., in preparation), the PSE nSex measure represents a
promising approach to the valid assessment of sexual motivation.
In the present research, we aimed to advance the validation of the nSex measure by
replicating and extending Hinzmann et al.’s work within the EMMIC validation framework in
the following ways: First, Hinzmann et al. used series of brief primes, presented either for 20
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 6
ms or 180 ms, before the presentation of PSE picture cues in the sexual-arousal and control
conditions. This is a relatively subtle procedure that may leave room for larger arousal effects
with stronger stimuli. We therefore decided to use film clips of 2 to 3 min duration before
each PSE picture during the experimental manipulation phase to elicit stronger arousal effects.
Film clips have been used frequently and successfully in previous research with PSE-based
motive measures (e.g., Wirth & Schultheiss, 2006) and on human sexual motivation (e.g.,
Both et al., 2004; Goldey & van Anders, 2016).
Second, contemporary theories of sexual motivation often conceptualize net sexual
motivation as resulting from the interplay of sexual appetitive motivation (excitation) and
avoidant motivation (inhibition; resulting, for instance, from a fear of the consequences of
sexual activity; see Bancroft et al., 2009; Toates, 2009). In the present research we therefore
tested whether presenting sexual activity either in a positive way (positive arousal) or in a
manner that is associated with aversive consequences (negative arousal) would also lead to
different imagery “signatures” in the stories that participants write, ideally yielding separate
scores for sexual appetitive motivation and inhibition. The comprehensive coding system
described by Hinzmann et al. is well suited for this purpose, because it features coding
categories reflecting appetitive (e.g., positive goal anticipation) and avoidant (e.g., negative
goal anticipation, negative goal attainment, negative affect, blocks in person and the world)
story themes. We explored whether these would differentiate between positive and negative
sexual arousal.
Third, Hinzmann et al. found experimental manipulation effects on subjective and
psychophysiological measures of affect only in their second study, in which they used
measures of subjective arousal, facial EMG, and pupillometry, but not in their first study, in
which they used more general measures of subjective affect only (hedonic tone, energization,
tension). We therefore tested whether the specific effect of sexual arousal on feelings of
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 7
arousal and on psychophysiological measures could be replicated and whether such effects
would differ between positive and negative sexual arousal.
Another important aspect in which our present research differs from Hinzmann et al.’s
is that we assessed affect not repeatedly, in response to multiple pictures, but more
continuously during four film clips in the case of psychophysiological measures and before
and after the experimental manipulation in the case of subjective measures. Apart from these
variations, we aimed to replicate Hinzmann et al.’s original studies as closely as possible to
allow meaningful comparisons between studies and arousal approaches. Thus, we employed
the same PSE picture sets, writing instructions, and coding system and we also used the same
KPT criterion measure introduced in the earlier research.
Overview of the studies and hypotheses
Our overall goal in this research was identifying those aspects of sexual imagery that are
consistently sensitive to experimental manipulation of motivational states and for which a
mediating effect of affective changes as a core indicator of a motivational process can be
obtained. In addition, we wanted to show that sexual imagery identified in this manner has
predictive utility for a behavioral criterion precisely because it transmits the effect of
experimental motive arousal on the criterion. In two preregistered studies, one conducted in
we tested the following hypotheses :
1 Hypotheses presented here deviate from the preregistration in the following ways: We dropped one hypothesis
(H10 in Study 1, H7 in Study 2) related to the approach-avoidance task after it became clear to us that this
measure may be unsuitable for testing an association between nSex and behavior (see Janson et al., 2021; Phaf et
al., 2014). We erroneously used the word “moderate” instead of “mediate” for the affect-mediation hypothesis in
the preregistration. For Study 2, we could test H4 and H5 (KPT performance) only for key presses, not viewing
time. We replaced the subjective tension measure referred to in H6 (both studies) with subjective arousal. We
summarized H7, H8, and H9 (Study 1) as Hypothesis 2 here. We did not test and report results for H12 (Study 1)
and H9 (Study 2), which refers to an analysis of simple counts of sexual words. In Study 2, H8 was misspecified
and superfluous (the EM  M  C path is already specified in H5).
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 8
1. Experimental manipulation (arousal of sexual motivation) effect on the measure
(thematic content changes; EM  M)
We expected positive and negative sexual arousal conditions, but not a control
condition, to elicit an overall increase in sexual themes in PSE stories and hence to
establish causal validity for the measure. We expected this overall increase to be
stronger in the positive than in the negative arousal condition, because in the latter
sexual inhibition was expected to counteract sexual excitation more than in the former.
Moreover, we expected the negative nSex categories to increase more in the negative,
and the positive nSex categories to increase more in the positive condition, relative to
the other arousal condition.
2. Experimental manipulation effect on the indicator (affective changes; EM  I)
We expected motivational arousal conditions, relative to the control condition, to lead
to changes in subjective and physiological affect measures. Specifically, we expected
an increase in subjective arousal, hedonic tone, and pupil size in the positive arousal
condition and an increase in subjective arousal, pupil size, and corrugator activation in
the negative arousal condition. We expected arousal conditions to elicit changes in
zygomatic activation, too, but did not pre-specify the direction of these effects.
3. The indicator mediates the experimental manipulation effect on the measure (EM  I
 M)
We expected those measures of affect that both picked up experimental manipulation
effects and were associated with changes in thematic content to mediate the effect of
motivational arousal on nSex.
4. Experimental manipulation effect on behavioral criterion (EM  C)
We expected motivational arousal, relative to the control condition, to elicit relatively
more effort, reflected in key presses and viewing time, to view erotic pictures than to
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 9
view non-erotic pictures. We expected this effect to be stronger in the positive arousal
than in the negative arousal condition.
5. Changes in the measure mediate experimental manipulation effect on criterion (EM 
M  C)
We expected changes in nSex from baseline to post-intervention to mediate the effect
of motivational arousal on effort to view erotic pictures (relative to non-erotic
pictures).
In addition, although we did not specify this in our preregistrations, we also explored
the PSE nSex measure’s convergence with questionnaire measures of sexual motivation and
behavior, the sexual inhibition and excitation scales (SIS/SES; Janssen et al., 2002) and the
revised sociosexuality orientation inventory (SOI-R; Penke & Asendorpf, 2008). Given
previous findings documenting statistical independence between PSE-based and self-report
measures of motivation (e.g., Köllner & Schultheiss, 2014), we did not expect strong positive
correlations between the two types of sexual motivation measures. However, because we did
not base our nSex measure on a requirement of minimal variance overlap with self-report
measures, neither did we rule out a degree of convergence. We did expect, however, that the
PSE nSex measure would show incremental criterion validity above and beyond self-reported
sexual motivation. We also explored associations between nSex and participant gender and
sexual orientation.
Method
We obtained approval for both studies from the Institutional Review Board of
Friedrich-Alexander University, Erlangen, Germany.
Participants
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 10
Study 1. Between August 2020 and February 2021, 154 participants (64% women;
age M = 21.31, SD = 3.50) were recruited and admitted to the study, which was advertised as
a study on movies and story writing and conducted at the Human Motivation and Affective
Neuroscience Laboratory of FAU. The sample was predominantly heterosexual, with 65%
self-identifying as exclusively heterosexual, 24% as predominantly heterosexual, 8% as
bisexual, 1% as predominantly homosexual and 2% as exclusively homosexual.
Study 2. Between November 2020 and March 2021, 204 participants were recruited
and admitted to the study, which was advertised in the same manner as Study 1 and conducted
online. Of these participants, 6 dropped out after giving informed consent, and another 27
dropped out before completing the PSE. This left 171 (71% women; age M = 25.29, SD =
4.59) participants who had given informed consent and completed the PSE section of the
study. We note below where N for specific measures deviates from this number. The sample
was predominantly heterosexual, with 77% self-identifying as exclusively heterosexual, 17%
as predominantly heterosexual, 3% as bisexual, 2% as predominantly homosexual and 2% as
exclusively homosexual.
Design
In both studies, participants were randomly allocated to an Experimental Manipulation
(positive arousal, negative arousal, control) x Time (T1: baseline, T2: after manipulation)
design, with the first factor varied between and the second within participants. In addition,
PSE Sequence (AB, BA) was varied between participants and orthogonally to the other design
factors to balance the allocation of PSE sets A and B to T1 and T2. Dependent variables were
(a) sexual imagery in PSE stories, (b) affective responses (subjective; in Study 1 also EMG
and pupil size), and (c) relative preference for erotic versus non-erotic stimuli on the KPT
(key press; in Study 1 also viewing time). Per our preregistration, we aimed for a minimum of
50 participants per cell of the experimental manipulation factor based on our goal of capturing
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 11
in each of the sexual arousal conditions an expected within-group increase corresponding to d
= .70 with a probability of 80% at p < .01, two-sided. In the control condition, we expected d
to approximate 0.
Experimental manipulation
On each trial of the experimental manipulation phase, participants first focused on a
fixation cross for 12 s, then watched a film clip, then saw a PSE picture for 10 s, and finally
wrote a story about the picture. This was repeated four times, with four different movie clips
and PSE pictures. Movie clips had a fixed sequence while PSE pictures were randomly
assigned within PSE sets to the four trials.
Positive arousal. We chose four consecutive clips from a movie showing a
heterosexual couple having consensual and pleasurable oral sex and penile-vaginal
intercourse (clip durations in min:s – 6:03, 3:02, 3:04, 3:01). Prior research has shown this
movie to reliably elicit subjective and genital arousal in women and men alike (e.g., Wang et
al., 2022).
Negative arousal. We chose the following four clips and presented them in the given
sequence because they showed sexual activity, but with unpleasant outcomes. An excerpt
from “Shame” (McQueen, 2011) showed a man trying to have sex with a woman, but being
unable to perform the act (6:03). An excerpt from “American Pie” (Weitz, 1999) showed a
young woman letting her boyfriend enter her room and engaging in sexual foreplay. This is
interrupted by her father entering and her boyfriend having to hide and ultimately flee the
room (3:00). An excerpt from “Cat People” (Schrader, 1982) showed a naked woman
becoming intimate with a naked man. In the next scene she gets up from the bed where he lies
with closed eyes, goes to the bathroom, finds blood on her body and smears it across her lips
(2:59). An excerpt from “Gone Girl” (Fincher, 2014) showed an encounter between a man
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 12
and a woman involving conversation, kissing, brief fellatio, followed by sex and the woman
killing the man during the act by slitting his throat (2:30).
Control condition. We selected the following four clips and presented them in the
sequence given because they were non-sexual, but engaging to watch and physically exciting.
An excerpt from “Point Break” (Bigelow, 1991) showed men jumping from a plane and
opening their parachutes only at the very last moment (6:00). A second excerpt, found on the
internet, showed women skateboarding in halfpipes in a skateboard park (2:39). An excerpt
from “Point Break” (Core, 2015) showed a group of men wingdiving from a mountain and
flying across forests and gorges in a mountainous range (3:00). An excerpt from a
snowboarding film showed a group of women snowboarding down a mountain (2:49).
Measures
nSex
We used the picture cues described in Hinzmann et al. (submitted) in the present
research, with the PSE sets of 8 each employed in Hinzmann et al.’s Study 1 and 2 assigned to
the present Studies 2 and 1, respectively, and divided evenly into sets A and B within each
study in the same manner as in the earlier studies. We administered the PSE with standard
instructions and procedures described in Schultheiss and Pang (2007). Two trained coders
who were blind to participants’ experimental condition assignment later coded stories for
nSex imagery based on the coding system described in Hinzmann et al. (submitted). In brief,
the coding system features specific coding categories and rules for the following general
domains: need (e.g., “She wanted to have sex with him”), goal anticipation (positive and
negative; e.g., “They both looked forward to a hot night between the sheets”, “He was unsure
whether it was a good idea to have sex in this state”), instrumental activity (positive and
negative; e.g., “They were getting undressed”, “She feigned a headache to avoid having to go
further with him”), blocks (person and world; e.g., “She was too worn out to have sex”, “They
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 13
were discovered by her dad”), goal attainment (positive and negative; e.g., “They had sex”,
“They did not sleep with each other”), affect (positive and negative, e.g., “She enjoyed it”,
“He felt guilty the entire time”), and miscellaneous other imagery (e.g., mention of sexual
Affect
Subjective affect. In both studies, we assessed changes in subjective affect with the
sentence lead “Right now, I feel…” and word pairs rated on 7-point scales. Hedonic tone was
represented by the word pair happy – sad taken from the hedonic tone scale of the University
of Wales Mood Adjective Check List (Matthews et al., 1990). Arousal, whose German
equivalent – Erregung – includes the meaning of sexual arousal, was represented by the word
pair aroused – unaroused. Subjective affect was assessed twice, once at the beginning of the
study (T1) and once after the experimental manipulation (T2). In Study 2, 170 participants
completed both affect assessments.
Objective affect. In Study 1 only we obtained objective affect measurements via
EMG over the corrugator and zygomatic muscles and via pupillometry while participants
watched movie clips during the experimental manipulation phase.
EMG. Participants’ facial skin was cleaned with alcohol and rubbed with a conductive
EMG gel (Nuprep), keeping impedances below 10 k. Electrodes were filled with electrode
paste (OneStep Cleangel) and then attached to the left side of the face, over the zygomaticus
major (n = 152) and the corrugator supercilii (n = 153) muscle regions (Fridlund & Cacioppo,
1986). Ground was placed on the upper half of the forehead. Raw EMG signals were recorded
with an MP150 BIOPAC system at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz. Using AcqKnowledge 5.0,
raw EMG data were filtered at a band pass of 28 to 500 Hz plus a notch filter at 50 Hz,
followed by signal rectification. EMG signal was extracted into 1 s bins and later averaged
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 14
first within and then across fixation baseline and movie clips (full duration) to provide overall
baseline and movie measures of EMG activity.
Pupil diameter. Pupil diameter, which is sensitive to sexually arousing stimuli (e.g.,
Rieger & Savin-Williams, 2012), was recorded using a Tobii TX300 eye tracker, at a
sampling rate of 120 Hz. Because only two testing cubicles were equipped with an eye
tracker, pupil size could be assessed in 80 participants only. Similar to EMG data, pupil
diameter measurements were extracted into 1 s bins and averaged first within and then across
fixation baseline and movie clips (full duration) to provide overall baseline and movie
measures of pupil diameter.
Behavioral criterion
We administered the KPT, which is described in Hinzmann et al. (submitted) and
requires participants to watch erotic and non-erotic pictures in alternating order for 4 min.
Participants could increase or decrease by 0.25 s steps the preset presentation time of 4 s for
each picture by pressing an up or a down key. Thus, both the number of up (positive sign) or
down (negative sign) key presses and the overall resulting viewing time, calculated separately
for erotic and non-erotic stimuli, could be used as measures of preference for erotic and
control stimuli. Due to a programming problem in the web version of the KPT, viewing time
data are available for Study 1 only, whereas key press data are available for both studies. In
Study 2, 169 participants completed the KPT.
Self-reported sexual motivation
Sexual inhibition/excitation scales (SIS/SES). We used the German-language
adaptation (Turner et al., 2013) of Janssen et al.’s (2002) SIS/SES measure with standard
instructions described in the original publication. The measure consists of a 6-item scale
assessing sexual excitation (SES; example item: “When I start fantasizing about sex, I quickly
become sexually aroused”) and two 4-item scales assessing sexual inhibition due to a concern
with performance failure (SIS1; example item: “If I am distracted by hearing music,
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 15
television, or a conversation, I am unlikely to stay aroused.”) and due to a concern with the
consequences of sex (SIS2, example item: “If I can be seen by others while having sex, I am
unlikely to stay sexually aroused.”). Participants responded on a Likert scale with gradations
labeled not at all applicable (1), not applicable (2), applicable (3), very applicable (4). Scale
reliability coefficients (Cronbach’s alpha) were .73 and .79 for SES, .40 and .46 for SIS1, and
.58 and .73 for SIS2 in Studies 1 and 2, respectively. We created scale scores by averaging
across scale items. In Study 2, 167 participants completed this measure.
Sociosexual Orientation Inventory – revised (SOI-R). We used Penke and
Asendorpf’s (2008) revised German-language version of Simpson and Gangestad’s (1991)
original measure, with instructions taken from the revised version. The SOI-R differentiates at
the scale level with three items each between behavior (sample item: “With how many
different partners have you had sex within the past 12 months?”), attitude (sample item: “Sex
without love is OK”), and desire (sample item: “In everyday life, how often do you have
spontaneous fantasies about having sex with someone you have just met?”). Participants
recorded their responses on 9-point Likert scales whose gradation labels varied by scale (see
Penke & Asendorpf, 2008, for details). After recoding of negatively keyed items, scale
reliability coefficients (Cronbach’s alpha) were .83 and .79 for behavior, .86 and .82 for
attitude, .84 and .87 for desire, and .84 and .85 for the full 9-item measure in Studies 1 and 2,
respectively. We created scale scores by averaging across scale items. In Study 2, 167
participants completed this measure.
Procedure
We collected all data with Inquisit Desktop 5.0 in Study 1 and Inquisit Web 6.2 in
Study 2. Both studies started with obtaining informed consent from participants. In Study 1
only, experimenters then prepared participants for EMG assessment as described above. Next,
baseline (T1) subjective affect was assessed. In Study 1 only, participants collected a saliva
sample in parallel for later hormone assaying (not part of the results reported here).
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 16
Participants then worked on the PSE, first under baseline conditions (T1), without the
presentation of film clips, and then under experimental conditions (T2), while in Study 1 only
their facial EMG and pupil size were being assessed. Afterwards, they again completed a
measure of their current affective state (T2) and then worked on the KPT. Participants
subsequently completed other measures not related to the hypotheses and results reported here
and in Study 1 collected a second saliva sample. After filling out a questionnaire probing for
demographic information and their sexual orientation (in Study 2, n = 168), they filled out the
SIS/SES and SOI-R questionnaires, and were debriefed and paid. A video illustration of the
Results
Experimental manipulation effects on word count. In Study 1, participants wrote more
during the experimental manipulation (M = 394, SD = 119) than at baseline (M = 362, SD =
102, t[153] = 6.51, p < .001), but the overall condition x time effect did not become
significant, F(2, 150) = 2.40, p = .12, η² = .028. Likewise in Study 2, participants wrote more
during the experimental manipulation (M = 394, SD = 119) than at baseline (M = 379, SD =
109, t[170] = 2.93, p = .004), but the condition x time effect did not become significant, F(2,
167) = 2.42, p = .092, η² = .028. We therefore did not control for word count for either study
in the following analyses.
Experimental manipulation effect on the measure (EM  M). Across both studies, we
devised nSex scores in a principled manner to explore which specific combination of nSex
coding categories captures the effect of experimental manipulation of sexual motivation best,
but also in such a manner that the mediating effect of affective changes on motive score
change are strongest and thus indicate that the resulting score reflects a genuine motivational
process. To do so, we created the following scores using the notation of logical AND (overlap
between two sets) and OR (total of two sets):
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 17
(a) A Priori: As a benchmark against which we could compare empirically derived
scores, we calculated a priori nSex as the sum of all nSex coding categories,
excluding negative categories (i.e., negative goal anticipation, negative
instrumental activity, block, negative affect; see Hinzmann et al., submitted).
(b) EM AND: Only those categories that turned out to be sensitive to experimental
manipulation in both studies (N, N_pay, PGA_Exp, PGA_Ar, PI_Tend, PI_Kiss,
PG, NG, PA, Sex_Att). We operationalize sensitivity here and below as the
combination of (a) a score increasing by more than one percentage point in the
positive arousal group relative to the baseline, but (b) not decreasing more than
one percentage point in the negative arousal group, and (c) the positive-arousal
increase being at least two percentage points greater than the percentage increase
that a coding category showed specific sensitivity to arousal manipulations, with
emphasis on the positive-arousal condition representing the most straightforward
type of sexual motivation arousal, while excluding general increases unrelated to
arousal. Note that this algorithm did not capitalize on decreases in the control
condition.
(c) EM OR: All categories that were sensitive to experimental manipulation either in
Study 1 or in Study 2 (N, N_pay, N_sub, PGA_Exp, PGA_Ar, PGA_Fan,
NGA_Amb, PI_Gen, PI_Fli, PI_Tend, PI_Sed, PI_Kiss, NI_Avoid, BW, BP, PG,
NG, PA, NA_Jeal, Att, Sex_Att, SME, Derog, EroAtm)
selected the top 12 (average bipartial rs ≥ .08), which represented a third of all
coding categories (N, N_sub, PGA_Exp, PGA_Ar, PI_Gen, PI_Sed, PI_Tend,
PI_Kiss, PG, PA, NA_Jeal, Sex_Att)
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 18
(e) Affect AND EM AND: Overlap between EM AND and Affect (N, PGA_Exp,
PGA_Ar, PI_Tend, PI_Kiss, PG, PA, Sex_Att)
(f) Affect AND EM OR: Overlap between EM OR and Affect (N, N_sub, PGA_Exp,
PGA_Ar, PI_Gen, PI_Sed, PI_Tend, PI_Kiss, PG, PA, NA_Jeal, Sex_Att)
(g) Affect OR EM AND: Total of EM AND and Affect (N, N_pay, N_sub, PGA_Exp,
PGA_Ar, PI_Gen, PI_Sed, PI_Tend, PI_Kiss, PG, NG, PA, NA_Jeal, Sex_Att)
(h) Affect OR EM OR: Total of EM OR and Affect (N, N_pay, N_sub, PGA_Exp,
PGA_Ar, PGA_Fan, NGA_Amb, PI_Gen, PI_Fli, PI_Sed, PI_Tend, PI_Kiss,
NI_avoid, BW, BP, PG, NG, PA, NA_Jeal, Att, Sex_Att, SME, EroAtm)
on nSex score changes from T1 to T2 in both studies, with ds varying between 0.35 and 0.46.
In contrast, the negative arousal manipulation had a negative effect on nSex score changes in
Study 1, with ds varying between -0.26 and -0.10, but a positive effect on nSex score changes
in Study 2, with ds ranging from 0.12 to 0.19. Participants in the control condition of both
studies showed a slight to moderate decrease in nSex scores from T1 to T2, with ds ranging
from -0.27 to -0.01.
sensitive categories were identified, performed rather well in both studies, with good
discrimination of positive sexual arousal both vis-à-vis the baseline (T1) and relative to
control participants’ post-manipulation scores. It had satisfactory intercoder agreement, as
estimated by Shrout and Fleiss’s (1979) intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). In Study 1,
ICC (2, k) was .97, 95% CI [.95; .98] for T1 and .97, 95% CI [.96; .98] for T2. In Study 2, it
was .97, 95% CI [.96; .98] for both T1 and T2. However, many of our additional scores based
on sensitivity criteria outperformed the a priori score, and the EM AND score and the Affect
AND EM AND score performed best overall within and across studies. Not surprisingly,
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 19
Affect AND EM AND, which in both studies represents the overlap between sensitivity to
experimental manipulation and positive covariation with affective changes, yielded lower
mean scores than EM AND, which is based only on across-study manipulation sensitivity.
Moreover, the former scores had slightly worse distributional properties than the latter (Study
1: EM AND M = 4.26, SD = 3.24, skewness = 0.91; Affect AND EM AND M = 4.11, SD
T1 T1
= 3.19, skewness = 0.93; Study 2: EM AND M = 2.02, SD = 2.31, skewness = 1.46; Affect
T1
AND EM AND M = 1.89, SD = 2.22, skewness = 1.57). We therefore decided to conduct
T1
all further analyses with the EM AND score due to its better differentiation and distributional
properties and refer to it in the following as optimized nSex score because it best captures the
effect of experimental manipulations on PSE nSex imagery. This score, too, had satisfactory
intercoder agreement. In Study 1, ICC (2, k) was .95, 95% CI [.93; .96] for T1 and .97, 95%
CI [.96; .98] for T2. In Study 2, it was .96, 95% CI [.95; .97] for T1 and .98, 95% CI [.97; .99]
for T2.
Repeated-measures ANOVAs for a priori and optimized nSex scores, with PSE set
sequence as a control variable, showed the expected significant Time x Experimental
Manipulation effect – Study 1: a priori nSex, F(2, 150) = 6.18, p = .003, η² = .076, and
optimized nSex, F(2, 150) = 8.26, p < .001, η² = .099; Study 2: priori nSex, F(2, 167) = 5.56,
p = .005, η² = .062, and optimized nSex, F(2, 167) = 8.68, p < .001, η² = .094.
specific and consistent increase in nSex categories that would have allowed us to derive an
nSex score capturing imagery reflecting a fear or avoidance motivational state. Likewise,
creating a sexual avoidance motivation score based on a priori assumptions (NGA_Fail,
NGA_Amb, NI_Avoid, BW, BW_Ig, BP, BP_Mf, BPLol, NA) did not show any consistent
specific sensitivity to the negative-arousal manipulation. We therefore did not pursue this
aspect of our first hypothesis further.
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 20
positive and negative experimental arousal had consistent positive effects on subjective
arousal in both studies. Control participants also increased in their reported arousal, but not to
the same extent. Moreover, they had lower post-manipulation arousal compared to
participants in the positive arousal condition (both studies) and negative-arousal participants
(Study 1). Repeated-measures ANOVAs showed the expected significant Time x
Experimental Manipulation effect on arousal, Study 1: F(2, 151) = 7.05, p = .001, η² = .085;
Study 2: F(2, 166) = 3.92, p = .022, η² = .045.
Experimental manipulations had no consistent effects on hedonic tone changes across
F(2, 151) = 4.10, p = .019, η² = .052; Study 2: F(2, 166) = 0.59, p = .55, η² = .007.
In Study 1, experimental arousal conditions elicited corrugator activation increases to
a greater extent than the control condition, with the Time x Experimental Manipulation effect
at a trend level, F(2, 149) = 2.38, p = .096, η² = .031. The effect became statistically
significant after removal of an outlier (studentized residual = 4.08) who showed an unusually
strong corrugator response to control movies, F(2, 148) = 3.82, p = .024, η² = .049.
Zygomatic activation decreased in all groups from before to after the movie
manipulation, but with no differential effect of experimental condition; for the Time x
Experimental Manipulation interaction, F(2, 149) = 0.11, p = .89, η² = .001.
Pupil size changed differentially across conditions, with positive-arousal and control
participants both showing a decrease and negative-arousal participants showing an increase.
Accordingly, we found a significant Time x Experimental Manipulation interaction, F(2, 77)
= 66.05, p < .001, η² = .632.
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 21
Indicator mediates experimental manipulation effect on measure (EM  I  M). To
test whether experimentally elicited affective changes mediate the effect of experimental
manipulation on nSex score changes, we chose subjective arousal as our focal indicator of
affect. Arousal was the only affect measure available for both studies that picked up a
meaningful and consistent differential effect of experimental conditions.
We first ascertained that changes in felt arousal indeed predicted changes in nSex by
running regression analyses in which we entered optimized nSex (T1) and arousal at T1 and
T2 as predictors. Across both studies, arousal at T2 was a significant unique predictor of
increases. (In Study 1, bipartial correlations of optimized nSex at T2, controlling for T1, and
affect measures at T2, controlling for T1, were .01 for pupil size, .04 for corrugator, .03 for
zygomatic, and .11 for hedonic tone. When we dropped participants in the negative-arousal
condition from analyses, coefficients [n] were .22 [52], .14 [100], -.00 [100], and .14 [102],
respectively; all ps > .05)
In a second step, we conducted mediation analyses with JASP’s (0.16.3) SEM
mediation module and ML estimation of bias-corrected bootstrap confidence intervals with
1000 replications. We specified optimized nSex at T2 as outcome, arousal at T2 as mediator,
dummy-coded experimental condition (dummy 1 coding for positive arousal and dummy 2 for
negative arousal) as predictor and PSE sequence, arousal (T1) and optimized nSex (T1) as
negative arousal led to increased nSex scores via increases in subjective arousal.
Experimental manipulation effect on behavioral criterion (EM  C). Repeated-
measures ANOVAs with KPT (erotic, non-erotic) as within-subjects measure did not yield
Experimental Manipulation x Measure effects on key presses in either study – Study 1: F(2,
151) = 2.28, p = .105, η² = .029; Study 2: F(2, 166) = 1.29, p = .28, η² = .015. When we
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 22
repeated the same analysis for the viewing time measure available only in Study 1, we found
the expected Experimental Manipulation x Measure interaction, F(2, 151) = 3.98, p = .021, η²
= .050. We found in post-hoc pairwise comparisons (Tukey) that the effect was due mainly to
participants in the negative-arousal condition, who spent relatively more time viewing non-
erotic than erotic pictures (for the erotic minus non-erotic difference, M = -17.09, SD =
31.88), compared to both positive-arousal (M = -1.24, SD = 30.24; p = .020) and control
participants (M = -4.60, SD = 30.24; p = .092). The latter did not significantly differ from
each other (p = .849).
Mediation effect of measure on behavioral criterion (EM  M  C). We first tested
whether changes in optimized nSex were associated with KPT performance by regressing
KPT (erotic minus non-erotic difference variables for key presses and viewing time) on nSex
uniquely predicted by optimized nSex both at T1 and T2, indicating that relative preference
for erotic stimuli over other stimuli is associated both with higher dispositional nSex (i.e., T1)
and with experimentally manipulated nSex changes (T2).
Next, we ran mediation analyses following the procedure described above, with
relative KPT key press performance (erotic minus non-erotic) as outcome, optimized nSex at
T2 as mediator, dummy-coded experimental condition as predictor, and nSex (T1) and PSE
on KPT performance via nSex at T2. Confidence intervals indicated that the indirect effect
excluded zero only for the positive arousal condition in Study 1, but for both the positive and
the negative arousal conditions in Study 2.
Convergent and incremental validity. To examine the overlap of nSex with other
measures, we created dispositional nSex scores, separately for a priori and optimized scores,
by residualizing T1 raw scores for T1 word count and PSE set and converting residuals to z
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 23
shows, the resulting nSex scores had positive, small-to-medium-sized, and often significant
correlations with SOI behavior and desire as well as SES, but less so with attitudes towards
sex (SOI attitude) and none with scales assessing avoidance (SIS1, SIS2). Unlike
questionnaire measures of sexual motivation and behavior, which were frequently associated
with gender in both studies, nSex had negligible variance overlap with gender in both
samples. Optimized nSex was associated with less exclusive heterosexual orientation in Study
1 only (p = .05).
To examine incremental validity of nSex above and beyond self-reported sexual
motivation, we regressed KPT key press difference scores (erotic minus non-erotic; both
studies) and KPT viewing time difference scores (Study 1) on optimized nSex, SES and SOI-
R simultaneously. Although SES and SOI-R were significant positive predictors of KPT
performance in all analyses, too, nSex (residualized T1 z scores) remained a significant
unique positive predictor of KPT key presses in Study 1, B = 1.17, SE = 0.29, 95% CI [0.59;
1.75], β = 0.29, p < .001, and Study 2, B = 0.86, SE = 0.37, 95% CI [0.13; 1.59], β = 0.16, p =
.021, and of KPT viewing time in Study 1, B = 9.74, SE = 2.16, 95% CI [5.48; 14.00], β =
0.32, p < .001. Findings for AP scores were nearly identical.
Discussion
The objective of our present work was to advance the assessment of sexual motivation,
or nSex, via a story-writing method by replicating and extending recent work by Hinzmann et
al. (submitted). In doing so, we conducted two studies and employed an EMMIC validation
framework, aiming to show that (a) experimental manipulation of sexual motivation via film
clips leads to changes in its measure (i.e., nSex), (b) that these changes in nSex are mediated
through changes in affect as an indicator of motivation (assessed subjectively and, in Study 1
only, also via psychophysiological measures), and (c) that changes in nSex transmit the effect
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 24
of experimental sexual arousal on a behavioral criterion (i.e., key-pressing for viewing time
changes associated with erotic or non-erotic pictures).
Across both studies, we found replicable evidence in support of our first hypothesis
that the picture-story measure of nSex is sensitive to experimental arousal of motivation.
Compared to participants in the control condition, participants in the positive sexual arousal
condition consistently showed increases in nSex above baseline with a medium effect size.
This was the case for an nSex score representing coding categories which we had identified a
priori; that is, without knowledge of the outcome of our studies. Not surprisingly, it was even
more so the case for an nSex score composition that considered only those categories that
turned out to be sensitive to positive arousal in both studies (optimized nSex score). This
score had considerable overlap with a similar score Hinzmann et al. derived in their previous
work based on convergent sensitivity to experimental arousal across studies, sharing the
categories need, kissing as instrumental activity, positive goal attainment, and positive affect.
It also featured categories not contained in Hinzmann et al.’s score (e.g., positive goal
anticipation: expectation, arousal) and left out others that were part of this earlier score (e.g.,
instrumental activity: general, seduction).
We note however, that some of the categories that Hinzmann et al. found to be
consistently sensitive to experimental manipulation across both of their studies were sensitive
to positive arousal in at least one of our studies (e.g., positive goal anticipation: fantasy;
instrumental activity: general, seduction) and vice versa (e.g., positive goal anticipation:
expectation). These differences are unlikely to stem from variations in intercoder reliability,
which was good to excellent in their research and in ours, and is more likely to be due to
different experimental manipulations and samples. Thus, recommendations for a final valid
nSex measure may require additional research sorting out which categories are sensitive
across most studies, samples, and methodological variations. Like Hinzmann et al. before us,
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 25
we therefore refrain from making such a recommendation at the present stage of research and
note that the optimized score we derived in the present studies provides a good “local”
solution, striking an acceptable balance between sensitivity to experimental manipulation and
score distribution properties relative to other possible score compositions we tested.
We failed to derive a nSex score that is specifically sensitive to the negative arousal
condition. Although the Hinzmann et al. (submitted) coding system features categories that
we had deemed promising for picking up effects of an avoidance aspect of sexual motivation
(e.g., negative goal anticipation and instrumental activity, block person and block world,
negative goal attainment and negative affect), none of them was consistently and specifically
sensitive to the negative arousal condition across both studies. Further exploratory analyses
employing a somewhat relaxed criterion for category selection likewise did not lead to
meaningful results. In terms of affect, the negative arousal condition had strong effects on
subjective (arousal, hedonic tone) and objective measures (corrugator, pupil size), compared
to the control condition, suggesting that it had an emotional impact. Still, it may be the case
that the film clips we presented in the negative-arousal condition were unsuitable for eliciting
the concern about the possible negative consequences of sexual activity that we were aiming
for. Alternatively, this concern was elicited, but failed to register in participants’ picture
stories, either because relevant tell-tale imagery was not covered by our coding system or
because a preponderance of sexual inhibition over excitation is reflected in an overall absence
of sexual imagery in fantasy. The latter argument would be consistent with Schultheiss and
Köllner’s (2021) argument that low scores on a PSE targeting a particular motive indicate an
avoidance of the incentive at the core of the motive (see also below). The decrease in nSex,
both for a priori and optimized scores we observed in Study 1 in the negative-arousal
condition would be consistent with this explanation. However, the slight increase of these
scores in Study 2 is not or may suggest that for the second sample, excitatory effects were
slightly stronger than inhibitory effects in this condition. To resolve this issue, more research
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 26
with more specifically tailored arousal of a concern about the negative consequences of sex
may be necessary.
Across both studies, we also found replicable evidence for our second and third
hypotheses, namely, that experimental conditions have an effect on affect and that changes in
affect mediate the effect of experimental motivational arousal on changes in the nSex
measure. Focusing on the optimized nSex score and subjective arousal, the only affect
measure that was sensitive to experimental manipulations and that had been administered in
both studies, we not only found increases in nSex to be consistently associated with increases
in how aroused participants felt. We also obtained replicable evidence for an indirect effect of
positive arousal (and in Study 1 also of negative arousal) on nSex changes via changes in
subjective arousal. Thus, participants who had been exposed to motivational arousal injected
more sexual imagery into their stories precisely because they also felt more (sexually)
aroused. This finding is important, because it provides direct evidence for the idea that the
nSex measure picks up variations in a motivational process. Conversely, it cannot be
explained solely via other mechanisms, such as verbal priming through the film clips. (This
explanation is particularly unlikely because there was virtually no talking going on in the film
clips shown in the positive-arousal condition.)
The consistent affect-based mediation effect moreover replicates the one reported by
Hinzmann et al. (submitted; Study 2) for a subjective arousal measure based on self-
assessment manikin ratings and using a priming manipulation with picture stimuli. Like in
that earlier research, we failed to observe consistent effects of experimental motivational
arousal on a hedonic-tone measure, but saw an increase of corrugator activity in the sexual-
arousal conditions. But unlike that earlier research, in Study 1 zygomatic activation decreased
across all conditions and pupil size did not increase in the positive-arousal condition -- it
increased only in the negative-arousal condition. While the experimental effects on corrugator
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 27
and pupil size support our argument that our arousal manipulation was successful in triggering
affective changes associated with motivation, we also note that differences between
Hinzmann et al.’s earlier research and our present work may be due to the different modes of
arousal and method of measuring affective responses. Hinzmann et al. used static pictures and
assessed affective responses to them separately after the arousal manipulation and within a
time frame of seconds, whereas we used dynamic film clips > 2 min in each case and
averaged affective responses across the changing content presented in each clip directly
during the experimental manipulation phase. Perhaps for those reasons, psychophysiological
indicators of affect are less comparable between the past and the present research, and
subjective judgments may represent a more comparable, integrative measure of affect across
different methods of sexual motivation arousal.
We obtained evidence for our fourth hypothesis, which concerned direct experimental
manipulation effects on a behavioral criterion (relative preference for erotic versus non-erotic
stimuli on the KPT), only for viewing time in Study 1 but not for key presses in either study.
We explain our relative lack of consistent support for our hypothesis with the temporal
distance between experimental arousal of sexual motivation during the PSE task and the
assessment of KPT performance, with an interspersed assessment of subjective affect – strong
direct effects of the experimental manipulation on the KPT may have decayed too much to be
statistically detectable by the time it was administered, particularly in the positive-arousal
condition (see Hinzmann et al., submitted, for a similar finding and explanation).
More importantly, however, increases in optimized nSex not only predicted a stronger
preference for erotic relative to non-erotic stimuli on the KPT, as assessed via key presses
(and in Study 1 also via viewing time) across both studies. Consistent with our fifth
hypothesis, confidence intervals for the indirect path of experimental manipulation  nSex
changes  KPT performance also excluded zero for the positive arousal condition in both
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 28
studies and for the negative arousal condition in Study 2, too. These findings suggest that the
variance portion of nSex that is sensitive to effects of experimentally elicited changes in
sexual motivation is also the one that accounts for variations in a behavioral criterion of
sexual motivation. This interpretation is consistent with the observation that nSex measured at
T1, before the experimental manipulation, also explains unique portions of variance in KPT
performance. After all, it too is made up of thematic imagery that is causally valid in the sense
of reflecting effects of experimental manipulation of sexual motivation.
Our exploratory analyses regarding nSex’s associations with other measured variables
revealed the following. First, in Study 2 somewhat more so than in Study 1, baseline
optimized nSex showed small-to-medium positive associations with self-report measures of
sexual desire, attitudes and behavior (SES, SOI-R). However, in contrast to these measures,
which consistently captured well-known sex differences, with women reporting less sexual
desire and behavior than men, nSex did not show a consistent sex difference across both
studies. We interpret this as an indication that nSex as a more procedural, contextualized
measure of sexual motivation (Schultheiss, 2007; Schultheiss & Schultheiss, 2014) may be
less fraught with self-presentational issues than direct self-report is. Second, despite its slight,
but consistent variance overlap with self-report measures of sexual motivation and behavior
(SES, SOI-R), it remained in both studies a unique incremental predictor of KPT performance
after holding variations on these measures’ scores constant. Third, nSex had no systematic
associations across studies with self-report measures of sexual inhibition (SIS1, SIS2). Given
the low internal reliability of these measures, however, this finding should not be interpreted
as conclusive evidence for the idea that nSex is not affected by inhibitory tendencies within
individuals’ sexual motivation system. For one, apart from reliability concerns self-report may
not be a particularly valid approach towards assessing sexual inhibitions (e.g., Wiederman,
2002). Another reason is that we suspect optimized nSex -- in conjunction with PSE pictures
that suggest sexual themes -- to already represent a sensitive measure of the balance between
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 29
sexual excitation and inhibition. According to this logic, individuals high in nSex are those
with more excitation than inhibition and who therefore readily respond to such “opportunity
situations” with sexual imagery. Conversely, individuals low in nSex are those who avoid
writing about sexual themes, despite the thematic opportunity provided by the pictures.
Participants’ responses to the picture (Un)dressing, which shows a man standing behind a
woman, with this hand touching the zipper of her dress, may illustrate this point. Many
participants view this picture as one in which the pair undresses and engages in foreplay or
sexual activity, leading to high nSex scores in their stories. Others, however, state that the
man has helped the woman to get dressed and both are heading out for a concert or dinner. As
a result, no nSex imagery can be scored in such stories. While other interpretations may also
be valid, it is difficult not to see an element of thematic avoidance of the sexual cues inherent
in the picture in the latter stories.
A similar interpretation of the inner workings of the PSE nSex measure may also
explain the finding, observed only in Study 1, that nSex scores tended to be lower the more
participants were homosexually oriented. Because all picture cues we employed in these
studies showed opposite-sex couples, they may have had less incentive value for
homosexually oriented than for heterosexually oriented individuals. We would expect higher
degrees of homosexual orientation to go along with higher nSex scores in response to picture
cues showing same-sex couples of the preferred gender, though. Clearly, this is an important
area for future research on the nSex measure.
Limitations and future directions
Although key findings from hypothesis tests, such as the sensitivity of nSex scores to
experimental manipulation as well as mediation effects for affect as an indicator of motivation
and behavioral preference for erotic pictures as a criterion, replicated with remarkable
similarity in effect size and other parameter estimates, we also note some shortcomings of our
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 30
present research. One weakness is its one-item, bipolar measurement of subjective affect.
Nevertheless, findings closely resemble those of Hinzmann et al.’s Study 2, which were
obtained with multiple measurements of subjective affective responses to priming stimuli.
Another weakness is the between-study difference in the motivational pull of the
picture sets. The picture set we used in Study 1 elicited overall higher amounts of sexual
imagery than the one we used in Study 2. Hinzmann et al., using the same picture sets in their
studies 2 and 1, respectively, reported similar differences, which points to systematic
variations of picture sets for the elicitation of motivational imagery (for picture cue effects
observed in the context of other motive measures, see, for instance, Schönbrodt et al., 2020).
We see this as the main explanation for the considerably lower nSex scores and slightly lower
effect sizes for experimental manipulation effects on nSex scores observed in our Study 2
relative to Study 1. While we deem it a methodological virtue to systematically vary picture
sets across experimental arousal methods (priming in Hinzmann et al.; film clips in the
present study; audio stories in a forthcoming paper) to be able to gauge the independent
contributions of these design factors to the validity of the measure, it will be important to
examine, at the conclusion of this series of studies, which picture cues are most sensitive to
experimental arousal effects and should therefore be used in future research.
A third shortcoming of the present research is the shift from a more controlled
laboratory experiment in Study 1 to a less controlled online experiment in Study 2, which also
forced us to sacrifice psychophysiological measurements originally planned for this latter
study and also did not allow us to properly assess viewing time for the KPT (the COVID
pandemic necessitated the switch from lab to web in Study 2). This may have contributed to
the slightly weaker findings from Study 2, despite overall slightly better statistical power,
compared to Study 1. At the same time, our findings from Study 2 represent a proof of
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 31
principle: validation research for a PSE-based motive measure can be done online, too, with
the high degree of standardization that the programming of experimental procedures affords.
A fourth shortcoming is the choice of our indicator measures. Although affect in
general, assessed either subjectively or objectively, is a meaningful marker of motivational
processes, a more specific objective marker of sexual motivation would have been genital
responses. But this would require the assessment of penile tumescence and vaginal blood flow
via relatively intrusive measures and thereby restrict the pool of individuals willing to
participate in such a study. We therefore stuck to the affect measurement approach established
by Hinzmann et al. (submitted), a decision that is justifiable with the convergence of genital
and subjective arousal measures (e.g., Chivers et al., 2010). We suggest, however, that future
validation work for the nSex measure should investigate its relation to genital arousal as a
more specific indicator within the EMMIC validation framework.
Conclusion
The present research replicated and extended earlier work by Hinzmann et al.
(submitted), providing replicable evidence across two studies that a picture-story measure of
nSex is sensitive to experimental manipulations of sexual motivation and showing that
experimentally elicited changes in nSex are mediated by affect as an indicator of motivation
and in turn mediate the effect of arousal on a behavioral criterion measure. We also used this
study to explore which combination of nSex coding categories is particularly suitable as a
causally valid measure of sexual motivation. We were unable to find thematic content in
stories that specifically and consistently picks up experimentally elicited sexual inhibition.
However, although nSex shows slight overlap with some self-report measures of sexual desire
and behavior, it predicted behavior above and beyond those measures and was not susceptible
to the gender bias associated with self-report. We think that these validity characteristics of
nSex make it a promising measure for future research on sexual motivation.
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 32
MEASURE OF SEXUAL MOTIVATION 33