PrePrint
Under Review (V2)
Measuring Sport-School Conflict and Enrichment:
Theoretical Considerations and New Measures
Solène Lefebvre du Grosriez1, Sandrine Isoard-Gautheur1, For correspondence: sandrine.isoard-
Valérian Cécé23, Guillaume Martinent2 and Philippe Sarrazin1 gautheur@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr
1 th
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, SENS, 38000 Grenoble, France First submission on 22 December 2022
2 th
Univ. Claude Bernard Lyon I, L-VIS, 69100 Villeurbanne, France Second submission on 26 May 2023
University of Teaching Education, 1014 Lausanne, Switzerland
ABSTRACT
Student-athletes face unique challenges due to the demands of both academic and athletic contexts, which
can put them at risk of mental health impairments. However, there is a lack of studies that focus on the specific
impact of dual career factors on their mental health primarily due to the absence of measurement tools designed
to examine the interactions between their student and athlete roles. To address this gap, this study aimed to
develop the Sport-School Interactions Scale in a long (SSIS-LF) and a short form (SSIS-SF) based on existing
work-family and school-family conflict and enrichment scales (Carlson et al., 2000; Carlson et al., 2006;
van Rhijn et al., 2018). The factorial structure, discriminant validity, and reliability were examined and provided
acceptable evidence in Study 1 (n = 371, CFA goodness of fit: χ² (528) = 1222.41, p < .001, CFI = .92, SRMR
= .05, RMSEA = .06; McDonald’s omega coefficients ranged from .80 to .93) and Study 2 (n = 367, CFA
goodness of fit: χ² (47) = 126.27, p < .001, CFI = .93, SRMR = .06, RMSEA = .07; McDonald’s omega
coefficients ranged from .63 to .76). Furthermore, concurrent validity was established through significant
relationships between sport-school interactions and role-specific perceived stress and satisfaction, as well as
global well-being.
Keywords: well-being, mental health, sport-school interaction, scale development, exploratory structural
equation modeling.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been growing 3.7% to 39.5%), eating disorder (from 5.6% to 26%),
recognition of the unique challenges faced by and levels of emotional, psychological and social
student-athletes (SAs), who must balance both well-being (with 45% of SAs reporting high and
academics and athletics commitments, resulting in a 1.86% reporting low levels of well-being) (Kegelaers
dual engagement that can have implications for their et al., 2022). To gain a deeper understanding of the
mental health. This was highlighted in a recent relationships between the specific dual-career (DC)
systematic scoping which revealed varying context and mental health outcomes in SAs,
prevalences of the symptoms of depression (from researchers have examined the negative interactions
th
This article was last modified on: 26 May 2023
Authors can be reached on Twitter:
@IsoardGS @SoleneLDG @CValrian
between both roles (e.g., conflict; Lu et al., 2018; Vilaplana et al., 2022). This approach prioritizes the
Rusbasan et al., 2021) while others have examined role of the government or state authorities in
the positive interactions (e.g., spillover; Postema et coordinating and providing resources for dual career
al., 2022; Yukhymenko-Lescroart, 2022). The support programs, including financial support,
investigation of role interactions among SAs could academic accommodations, and flexible training
provide valuable insights for effective DC schedules. The focus is on creating a supportive
management and promotion of mental health. environment for SAs that ensures their successful
However, to the best of our knowledge, there is transition between sport and education while also
currently a lack of valid measures available to assess providing adequate support to pursue both paths.
sport-school interactions in SAs context. This This approach highlights the importance of a
limitation hinders the ability to thoroughly examine coordinated effort to address the unique challenges
the role interactions in the context of SAs and to that SAs face in their DC.
compare findings with previous research. In the The concept of DC balance, defined as the
organizational context, two scales have been combination of academic and athletic pursuits to help
developed to measure the interactions between work SAs achieve their goals, maintain their well-being
and family roles: the Work-Family Conflict (WFC) and lead fulfilling lives, has been proposed by
Scale (Carlson et al., 2000) and the Work-Family scholars (Stambulova et al., 2015). Therefore, the
Enrichment (WFE) Scale (Carlson et al., 2006). mental health of SAs has become crucial for optimal
These scales have also been successfully adapted to athletic and academic development (Kegelaers et al.,
the school-family context among university student- 2022; Schinke et al., 2018). The advantages of
parents, demonstrating the transferability of these pursuing a DC are believed to outweigh the stressors
concepts in the school context (van Rhijn et al., of competitive sports, promoting the development of
2018). Thus, the purpose of the present study was to essential skills, fostering holistic growth, and
adapt and examine the validity of the WFC and WFE enhancing the well-being of SAs (Armstrong et al.,
for use in the sport-school contexts, and to examine 2015; De Brandt et al., 2018; Kegelaers et al., 2022;
their concurrent validity in relation to well-being of Lodis et al., 2012). However, some authors suggest
SAs. that the multilevel demands of pursuing two parallel
careers can place SAs at a higher risk compared to
Managing the Dual Career in the
non-SA (Putukian, 2016; Yang et al., 2007). Failure
Sport-School Context to manage these demands effectively can lead to
psychological distress, decreased well-being, and
SAs are elite and semi-elite athletes
even early discontinuation of sports or education
who participates in organized sport or athletic
(Sorkkila et al., 2019). These conflicting views may
competitions while also pursuing academic
be due to the lack of studies focusing on the specific
education at the high school or college level
DC factors that contribute to SAs mental health
(Stambulova et al., 2015). These individuals face
(Armstrong et al., 2015; Kaishian & Kaishian, 2021;
unique challenges in combining their athletic and
Kegelaers et al., 2022). Therefore, researchers
academic demands and commitments, collectively
emphasize the need to investigate the
referred to as a "dual career" (DC) (Guidotti, et al.,
interconnections between different aspects of the DC
2015). While a substantial amount of scientific
and create measures to assess the effectiveness of DC
literature focuses on American SAs, research on their
pathways for SAs (Guidotti et al., 2015). Indeed,
European counterparts is more limited (Aquilina,
although some scales specific to SAs have been
2013; Kegelaers et al., 2022; Steele et al., 2020).
developed (e.g., College student-athletes life stress
Studies have shown the existence of four approaches
scale: Lu et al., 2012; Role Strain Questionnaire for
and policies in place across European Member
Junior Athletes: van Rens et al., 2016; Student
States, namely state as a sponsor or a facilitator,
Athletes' Motivation toward Sports and Academics
national sporting bodies as intermediaries, state-
Questionnaire: Gaston-Gayles, 2005), these scales
centric regulation, and “laisser faire” (Guidotti et al.,
simultaneously question the potential antecedents of
2015). France, along with Spain, Luxemburg,
well-being and mental health in both domains of
Poland, Portugal, and Hungary, falls under the state-
sport and academics, without exploring possible
centric regulation approach (Lupo et al., 2015; Vidal-
interactions between the two.
In the realm of dual-career (DC) recent study adapted the work-family conflict
considerations, one crucial factor that has gained concept by Greenhaus and Beutell (1985) to
increasing importance is the concept of role investigate sport-school conflict (Rusbasan et al.,
interactions. This refers to the way in which each 2021). The study's findings revealed a positive
role, such as being a student and an athlete, can correlation between role conflict, burnout, and
influence and impact the commitments and demands dropout from both sports and academics, along with
of the other roles, including academic, athletic, and a negative correlation between role conflict and
social components (Condello et al., 2019). Within engagement in both areas (Rusbasan et al., 2021).
this framework, some researchers have examined a In parallel with these studies which suggested
specific form of role interactions known as “identity a competitive relationship between academic and
conflict” which arises when there is a perceived athletic roles (Steele et al., 2020), others have
impossibility to fulfil the demands of both student highlighted the positive influence of one role on the
and athlete roles (Lu et al., 2018). Findings from this other. In this line, Postema et al. (2022) explored the
study revealed that a high level of identity in one concept of study-to-sport spillover, whereby one role
domain, regardless of the level of the other identity, (i.e., student) enhances an individual functioning in
was associated with a higher frequency of perceived the other (i.e., athlete). This study showed that this
conflict. Moreover, several qualitative studies have spillover mechanism contributes to a positive state
shed light on the challenges faced by SAs in that improved training performance (Postema et al.,
managing their dual roles (i.e., time management, 2022). While previous studies have only examined
role conflict, and clashes between sport and school one type of interaction (i.e., either positive, or
programs) which have been identified as sources of negative), Yukhymenko-Lescroart (2022) examined
stress (Davis et al., 2019), burnout (Han et al., 2015), both positive and negative sport-to-school spillover
and barriers to mental health (Van Rensburg et al., effects. She showed that a strong athletic identity
2011). In addition to qualitative studies, three studies negatively predicted grade point average (i.e.,
have examined the notion of role conflict using negative spillover), whereas harmonious passion for
different theoretical models. The first study sport positively predicted academic persistence (i.e.,
examined the discordance between identities that positive spillover). According to the author,
arise when roles are perceived to be inconsistent or harmonious passion for sport positively predicted
contradictory (Killeya-Jones, 2005). The authors academic persistence, mainly due to its enriching
draw on identity discrepancy theory (Allen et al., influence. However, in this study, the author did not
1983), to suggest that conflicts can arise when one measure the perceptions of enrichment that one
role's demands impede the fulfilment of another. The context may have on the other. In parallel with the
study's findings indicate a positive correlation previous study, O’Neil et al., (2021) examined the
between identity discrepancy and depression, as well dual commitment to sports and studies by
as a negative correlation with self-esteem, life considering the possible existence of compatible and
satisfaction, and academic satisfaction. However, no incompatible commitments, relying on the sport
significant correlation was found between identity commitment model (Scanlan et al., 1993). The
discrepancy and athletic satisfaction (Killeya-Jones, authors identified different profiles of academic and
2005). In another study, the focus was on role sports engagement, revealing that SAs with a high
conflict and overload (Settles et al., 2002). The level of enthusiastic commitment in both domains
authors expounded that when two roles have a strong (i.e., those wishing to persevere in both areas)
interference and SAs view them as independent, it reported higher academic and sport commitment,
results in role conflict. Conversely, when two roles overall better psychological well-being, and less
have a strong interference and SAs view them as sports and academic burnout (O'Neil et al., 2021).
interconnected, this leads to role overload with fewer However, these studies had limitations, as they only
negative consequences (Barnett & Baruch, 1985; focused on specific aspects (e.g., interactions in one
Settles et al., 2002; Van Sell et al., 1981). The direction only) and did not allow for an overall
findings of this study revealed a positive correlation examination of role interactions (i.e., positive and
between role interference and stress in SAs who view negative interactions in both directions).
their roles as independent, while this was not the case Furthermore, a study has proposed that different
for those who perceive their roles as linked. Lastly, a forms of conflict (e.g., time-based, and pressure from
the coach) deserves further investigation (Lu et al., stressors, making these frameworks relevant in
2018). Another limitation is the absence of a valid understanding their experiences. Moreover, work-
measurement tool to support their qualitative family interaction construct has already been adapted
findings. Some studies relied on a single item with success in different contexts, particularly in the
developed for the study without validation (Lu et al., school-family context (van Rhijn et al., 2018).
2018) or included preliminary items that were not Work-family interactions literature makes it
present in the final validated scale (Lupo et al., possible to study the interaction between the work
2015). Others examined role interactions indirectly, and the family (or non-work) role and postulates that
through their consequences rather than the there are two types of interactions: conflict
interactions themselves (Postema et al., 2022; (Greenhaus & Beutell, 1985) and enrichment
Yukhymenko-Lescroart, 2022), while some used the (Greenhaus & Powell, 2006). As with the definition
conflict label to categorise a set of items that do not of identity conflict used in the sport-school context
refer to a role interaction (e.g., for conflict in a role (Lu et al., 2018), work-family conflict is defined as:
strain scale: "I have to do things for my sport that I “participation in the work (family) role is made more
don't really want to do", van Rens et al., 2016). difficult by virtue of participation in the family
Finally, the above-mentioned studies have also used (work) role” (Greenhaus & Beutell, 1987, p.77). This
several indicators of mental health (i.e., stress, conflict reflects the interferences that occur between
burnout, mental health, depression, self-esteem, the two roles, which can go both ways from work-to-
satisfaction, dropout, engagement, performance, family and from family-to-work, and be
persistence, and psychological well-being). This lack characterised by six forms: work-to-family and
of valid measurement tool, a consensus definition of family-to-work time-based conflict (i.e., difficulty or
role interactions, and multiple indicators of mental impossibility to participate in some role activity
health prevent a comparison of the results and a because of the second), work-to-family and family-
generalisation about the consequences of role to-work strain-based conflict (i.e., strained
interactions on SAs’ mental health. Moreover, the participation in one role hinders participation in
absence of a valid tool has been recently highlighted another role), and work-to-family and family-to-
in the development of adapted programs to help SA work behaviour-based conflict (i.e., behaviour
to manage their DC (Vidal-Vilaplana et al., 2022). related to the first role is different from, or even
Ultimately, in order to improve the mental health of incompatible with, the behaviour related to the
SAs and help them better manage DC, it is important second role, which requires adaptation) (Carlson et
to understand how their two primary roles interact, al., 2006; Greenhaus & Beutell, 1985). Given the
for better or worse. similarity to the sport-school context, we believe that
the six forms of work-family conflict are applicable
Relevance of the Concept of Role
to sport-school conflict, namely: school-to-sport and
Interactions in the Work-Family Context for sport-to-school time-based conflict (e.g., repeated
the Sport-School Context trainings can limit the possible for homework to be
done, Macquet & Skalej, 2015), strain-based conflict
The roles of a student, athlete, and employee
(e.g., pressures of academic achievement may limit
share notable similarities, each requiring a
investment in sport, Davis et al., 2019) and
significant investment of time and effort (Balk et al.,
behaviour-based conflict (e.g., the norms of
2018 for athlete role; van Rhijn et al., 2018 for
behaviour in athletic competition may be different
student role), that is why some authors in the sport-
from those in the school environment, which may
school context suggested to build on work-family
require adjustment on the part of SAs, Di Lu et al.,
literature to understand the interactions between
2018).
sports and studies (e.g., Postema et al., 2022;
Among the terms characterizing different
Rusbasan et al., 2021; Wendling et al., 2018).
levels of positive interactions between work and
Research on work-family conflict proposes that
family roles (i.e., positive spillover, enhancement,
stressors from work, such as high demands, low
facilitation, gains, fit), enrichment is the most used
levels of control, fast pace, and frequent deadlines,
concerning individual interactions, and also includes
can affect the quality of life in other areas, such as
the concept of positive spillover (Carlson et al., 2006;
family (Pak et al., 2022). SAs experience similar
McNall et al., 2010). Work-family enrichment is
defined as “the extent to which experience in one role compared to efficiency (i.e., involvement in one role
improves the quality of life, namely performance or providing a sense of focus or urgency that helps to be
affect in the other role” (Greenhaus & Powell, 2006, better in the second role) which better characterizes
p.73). As conflict, enrichment can act in both roles’ the contribution of the family role on the work role.
direction and be characterised by six different forms: Thirdly, this decision was also made to propose a
work-to-family and family-to-work development- symmetric scale in both directions of role
based enrichment (i.e., when the acquisition of interactions (i.e., sport-to-school and school-to-
knowledge, competences, and perspectives in the sport). All forms, directions and types of sport-
to-family and family-to-work affect-based the best of our knowledge, no measurement tool has
enrichment (i.e., when the involvement in the first been validated to evaluate conflict and enrichment
role results in a positive emotional state which helps between student and athlete roles, even though it has
to be better in the second role), family-to-work been suggested that these interactions may affect the
efficiency-based enrichment (i.e., when the mental health and performance of SAs (Postema et
involvement in the family role gives a sense of focus al., 2022; Steele et al., 2020; Yukhymenko-
or urgency which helps to be better in the work role), Lescroart, 2022). Due to the complexity of the role
and work-to-family capital-based enrichment (i.e., interaction concepts (i.e., twelve forms, four
when the gain of psychosocial resources such as directions, and two types), its measurement is a
confidence and/or self-fulfilment in the work role crucial issue that requires consideration before using
helps to be better in the family role) (Carlson et al., it in the sport-school context.
2006). As with conflict, we believe that all six forms
Adapting Existing Self-Report
of work-family enrichment are applicable to
sport/school enrichment because of the similarity to Assessments of Work-Family Interaction
the sport/school context, namely: school-to-sport and Concepts to Measure Role Interactions in
sport-to-school development-based enrichment (e.g.,
Sport-School Contexts
SAs learn skills while playing sport, such as goal
As there is currently no validated scale
setting, planning, that can be useful for their studies,
available to measure the role interactions in sport-
De Brandt et al., 2018), affect-based enrichment
school context, it is relevant to explore existing
(e.g., trainings provide positive emotions that help to
scales used to measure work-family interaction as a
perform better in studies, Postema et al., 2022), and
starting point for developing a sport-school
capital-based enrichment (e.g., academic successes
interaction scale. This approach has proven
produce a sense of accomplishment that helps one be
successful in the school-family context, where
better at sport, van Rens et al., 2016; Settles et al.,
researchers adapted both work-family conflict and
2002). The decision to exclude the efficiency form,
enrichment scales (van Rhijn et al., 2018). The
which is applicable only in the family-to-work
authors assumed that the knowledge and empirical
direction, and instead employ the capital form in both
evidence obtained in the work-family context could
directions was motivated by three primary reasons.
be transferred in other contexts. In line with this
Firstly, the “efficiency” form does not strictly
procedure, scales developed in the work-family
correspond to resources gained in the family role that
context will be reviewed to identify the most
would be transferred to the work role. Rather, it
appropriate for measuring sport-school role
pertains to the perceived constraints related to the
interactions.
family role that require a higher level of organization
Although there is a consensus on conflict
and effectiveness in the work role (i.e., if I lose time
definition, there was previously no consensus on
in my work activity, it will affect my family
how to operationalize it (Min et al., 2021). Several
activities). Secondly, the capital form (i.e., when the
scales have been proposed to assess work-family
acquisition of psychosocial resources such as
conflict, including those by Netemeyer et al. (1996),
confidence and/or self-fulfilment in one role helps to
Carlson et al. (2000), Grzywacz et al. (2006) and
be better in the second role) was deemed more
Fisher et al. (2016). The oldest measurement tool is
suitable for the sport-school context given the
composed of two 5-item scales (i.e., one per
similarities between the student and athlete roles
direction) independently tested: the work-family
(e.g., achievements, results, performance) as
conflict and family-work conflict scales (Netemeyer structure to the work-family conflict scale (i.e., 18-
et al., 1996). The second measurement tool consists item to assess the six forms of enrichment, Carlson
of a 6-item scale with two subscales, one for each et al., 2006) and is based on Greenhaus and Powell's
direction (Grzywacz et al., 2006). Carlson et al. (2006) definition of enrichment. However, as with
(2000) scale is the largest, comprising 18 items and the conflict scale, the length of this scale is a limiting
six subscales that measure the six forms of conflict, factor. To address this, Kacmar et al. (2014)
including time, strain, and behaviour-based conflicts developed a 6-item scale using the Carlson et al.
in both directions. Finally, the most recent (2006) scale. In the first stage of their study selecting
measurement tool (Fisher et al., 2016) consists of a the most representative items for each form of
single-item for each direction. Psychometric enrichment produced comparable results to using the
evaluation have been conducted to assess the full-scale version. The final 6-item scale
strengths and limitations of these four scales and to demonstrated similar psychometric properties and
establish a consensus on the assessment of work- relationship with concurrent variables (e.g., positive
family conflict (Min et al., 2021). Although these relationship with job and family satisfaction,
scales share a common higher-order concept, they stronger relationship with satisfaction in the role
are not interchangeable due to differences in content from which the enrichment came, i.e., work
domain (i.e., global assessment or discriminating satisfaction was stronger when related to work to
forms of conflict), number of items (i.e., short, or family enrichment than family to work enrichment).
long scale) and response scales (i.e., agreement, or Therefore, the scales developed by Carlson and her
frequency). The scales of Fisher et al. (2016) and of collaborators (2000, 2006) appear to be the more
Grzywacz et al. (2006) are acceptable for repeated suitable for evaluating the multidimensionality of
measures designs considering the scale length work family conflict and enrichment, as well as for
(particularly, because of the use of the frequency creating acceptable short scales that consider the
response scale), but do not discriminate forms of specificities of role interactions.
conflict. Min et al. (2021), found that the scale of
The Present Research
Netemeyer et al. (1996) and the scale of Carlson et
al. (2000) were the best options, with the former
In this multi-study article, we address the
more precise for moderate conflict and the latter
need for a more comprehensive understanding of role
more precise for high and low conflict levels.
interactions in the sport-school context. Drawing
Carlson's scale assess all six dimensions of conflict
from the work-family literature and utilizing the
(i.e., work-to-family and family-to-work time, strain
school-family conflict and enrichment scales (van
and behaviour-based conflict) and had strong
Rhijn et al., 2018), we introduce the Sport-School
correlations with relevant variables (e.g., work and
Interactions Scale Long-Form and Short-Form in
family satisfaction, global health). However, the total
French (SSIS-LF and SSIS-SF). These
length (18 items) of this scale hinders its use in
multidimensional scales assess both positive (i.e.,
longitudinal or diary studies where frequent
enrichment) and negative (i.e., conflict) role
assessments are made over time. Matthews et al.
interactions between the student and athlete roles.
(2010) addressed this issue by developing a 6-item
The development of the SSIS-LF and SSIS-SF
scale based on Carlson et al. (2000) tool, which
involved obtaining permission from the original
measures only the two directions of work-family
authors of the work-family and school-family scales.
conflict using a single item per form of conflict. Item
The multi-studies aimed to examine the scale
selection was based on the factor loading weight of
structure, reliability and discriminant validity of the
each item on their underlying construct. This short
SSIS-LF scores, as well as the scale structure,
scale showed acceptable psychometric properties
reliability, discriminant and concurrent validity of
and had similar relationships with concurrent
the SSIS-SF scores.
variables (e.g., negative relationships with job and
STUDY 1: EXAMINATION OF THE
family satisfaction) than the long form of Carlson
and her collaborators (2000). SSIS-LF SCORES VALIDITY
Regarding enrichment, there is a general
Study 1 aimed to achieve two primary
consensus around the work-family enrichment scale
objectives: (a) to translate and adapt existing scales
(Carlson et al., 2006) which follows a similar
from the work-family and school-family contexts to university. Participants were recruited via email
measure conflict and enrichment in the sport-school through their university sports services and were
context, and (b) to examine the factorial structure, invited to complete an online survey. Participation
reliability, and discriminant validity of the resulting was voluntary, and informed consent was obtained
SSIS-LF scores. In developing the SSIS-LF, we from all participants. Data were collected in October
addressed the past limitations of work-family scales, 2020.
specifically the need to consider bidirectionality and Development of the SSIS-LF. The SSIS was
multi-dimensionality of the concepts. Drawing on designed to examine both positive (i.e., enrichment)
previous successful adaptations of work-family and negative (i.e., conflict) role interactions of SAs.
conflict and enrichment scales to the school-family To develop the scales to the Sport-School context,
context (van Rhijn et al., 2018), we hypothesized that we used the School-Family conflict and enrichment
our proposed adaptation of the work-family and scales as a starting point, as the school role is present
school-family conflict and enrichment scales to the in both scales. Given the similarities of the school
sport-school context would demonstrate acceptable and sport roles with the work role, we took care to
validity in terms of factorial structure, reliability, and maintain symmetry in the structure of the SSIS,
discriminant validity. choosing to use only capital-based enrichment in
both directions (sport-to-school and school-to-sport).
Method
A panel of three expert researchers in the domains of
work and sport psychology was composed. The
Participants. The present study included 387
researchers possessed knowledge of both languages,
French university SAs (50.4% female; 81.13%
the characteristics of SAs, and the work-family
between 18 and 21 years old) who were recruited as
context. Each member of the panel undertook the
part of a larger research project on SAs well-being.
translation (following the recommendations for
The variables examined in this study have not been
transcultural validation; Beaton et al., 2000) and
reported in other publications related to this project.
adaptation of both school-family interactions scales,
Sixteen participants were excluded from the study
and the work-family interaction scales as a reference.
because they did not complete the SSIS-LF, resulting
Subsequently, the lead-in and items wordings were
in a final sample of 371 participants. The sample
discussed and refined to reach a consensus and to
comprised students from different academic levels
create a usable version based on the three adaptations
(52.1% high school or first university year, 30.1%
and French translations. The SSIS-LF is a
second year, 9.3% third year, and 8.5% master and
comprehensive scale that captures both types of role
beyond), enrolled in a range of disciplines (56.9%
interactions (i.e., conflict and enrichment), the
sport-related studies, 43.1% non-sport related
bidirectional process (i.e. Sport-to-School and
studies, such as engineering, life or earth sciences,
School-to-Sport) and the six forms of each construct
literature, etc.), and competing at different levels
(i.e., for conflict: time, strain and behaviour; for
(27.3% local and regional, 45.1% national, and
enrichment: development, affect, and capital). The
27.6% international and Olympic) across diverse
scale underwent minor adaptations to ensure clarity
team (27.4%, e.g., handball, hockey, water-polo) and
and relevance in the French language and to the
individual sports (72.4%, e.g., gymnastics, tennis,
sport-school context. For example, the item “The
ski). On average, participants devoted 11.74 hours
behaviours that work for me at home do not seem to
per week (SD = 6.4) to athletic participation and
be effective at school” was modified to “The
25.65 hours per week (SD = 11.94) to academic
behaviours that help me to be effective in my sports
activities, and 43.1% participated in a major sporting
activities do not help me to be better in my studies”.
event several times a month.
The SSIS-LF includes 36 items (i.e., 3 items per form
Procedure. The present study adhered to
ethical principles established by the American
Psychological Association (APA) (Ethics
supplemental material for items) using a 5-point
Committee of the American Psychological
agreement response format (from 1 = strongly
Association, 1996). Prior to conducting the larger
disagree to 5 = strongly agree), as original scales.
research project, institutional approval was obtained
For clarity and to prevent confusion between the
from the data protection delegate of the first author’s
directions, the subscales in each direction were
grouped. Participants were instructed to first respond In Model 4 (i.e., 1 Level - 2 dimensions: 2
to the school-to-sport conflict, followed by the directions), each latent factor is represented by items
school-to-sport enrichment, then the sport-to-school in one direction of interaction, and include items in
conflict and, finally, the sport-to-school enrichment. the two types (i.e., conflict and enrichment) and in
The lead sentences used to introduce each section the six forms (i.e., strain, behaviour, development,
were “Think about how your studies influence your affect and capital), thus resulting in 2 dimensions on
sport, at the moment” and “Think about how your one level. In Model 5 (i.e., 1 Level - 2 dimensions: 2
sport influences your studies, at the moment”. types), each latent factor was represented by items in
one type of interaction, and include items in the two
Data analysis
directions (i.e., sport-to-school and school-to-sport)
and in the six forms (i.e., strain, behaviour,
Evidence of Scale Structure. As in previous
development, affect and capital), thus resulting in 2
studies (e.g., Carlson et al. 2000, 2006), various
dimensions on one level. In Model 6 (i.e., 2 Levels –
Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) models were
16 dimensions: 3 forms - 2 directions), there were 12
tested. Additionally, assuming that the different
first order latent variables of forms and 4 second
forms of interactions could be part of higher-level
order latent variables of directions. In Model 7 (i.e.,
constructs (e.g., existing in the sport-to-school and
2 Levels – 12 dimensions: 3 forms – 2 types), there
school-to-sport directions, or in a global conflict
were 12 first order latent variables of forms and 2
construct; Ádám & Konkoly Thege, 2017), several
second order latent variables of types. In Model 8
hierarchical CFAs (H-CFA) have been tested. All
(i.e., 2 Levels – 6 dimensions: 2 directions – 2 types),
analyses were conducted using MPlus 7.31 software
there were 4 first order latent variables of directions
(Muthén & Muthén, 2017).
and 2 second order latent variables of types. In Model
First, for the CFA models, items were
9 (i.e., 3 Levels – 18 dimensions: 3 forms - 2
allowed to load on their a priori factor and all crossed
directions - 2 types), there were 12 first order latent
loadings were constrained to be exactly zero.
variables of forms, 4 second order latent variables of
Second, the H-CFA models, were similar to the CFA
directions and 3 third order latent variables of types.
models but with a hierarchical structure, that is a
The following criteria were used to assess the
priori factor (e.g., form such as time) load on a higher
fit and compare the different models: the χ²
order factor (e.g., direction such sport-to-school).
goodness-of-fit index, degree of freedom,
For all CFA and H-CFA models, all crossed loadings
Comparative Fit Index (CFI), Root Mean Square
were constrained to zero. All models were examined
Error of Approximation (RMSEA) with its 90%
owing to standardized factor loadings that need to be
confidence interval, Standardized Root Mean Square
higher than .35 (van Zyl & ten Klooster, 2022). The
(SRMR), Akaike Information Criteria (AIC) and
fit of the factorial structures of nine competing
Bayesian Information Criteria (BIC). Excellent and
models was tested. These models are presented in
adequate fits of the model were indicated by CFI
values greater than .95 and .90, and by RMSEA and
1 Level - 12 dimensions: 3 forms x 2 types x 2
SRMR values respectively lower than .08 and .06
directions), each latent factor was represented by
(Hu & Bentler, 1999). AIC and BIC were used for
items in one form (e.g., time), in one direction (e.g.,
comparison across two models, with the best-fitting
sport-to-school) and in one type of interaction (e.g.,
model being the one with the lowest values (Raftery,
conflict), thus resulting in 12 dimensions on one
1995; Simonton et al., 2021). Among all the tested
level. In Model 2 (i.e., 1 Level - 6 dimensions: 3
models, only the models presenting acceptable
forms x 2 types), each latent factor was represented
goodness-of-fit to the data were kept for the rest of
by items in one form of interaction, and include items
the analyses (i.e., factor loadings, reliability and
in the two directions (i.e., sport-to-school and
discriminant evidence).
school-to-sport), thus resulting in 6 dimensions on
Reliability Evidence. To evaluate the
one level. In Model 3 (i.e., 1 Level - 4 dimensions: 2
reliability of SISS-LF scores, McDonald’s omega
types x 2 directions), each latent factor was
(Ω) coefficients were used for each subscale,
represented by items in one direction (e.g., sport-to-
consisting of items that are theoretically related to
school) and in one type of type of interaction (e.g.,
that subscale (Dunn et al., 2014). A value of omega
conflict), thus resulting in 4 dimensions on one level.
greater than .70 is considered acceptable, indicating
that the items within the subscale are measuring the results indicated a relatively poor fit (i.e., CFI =
same construct (Béland & Michelot, 2020). 0.836, TLI = 0.826, RMSEA = 0.301, SRMR =
Discriminant Validity Evidence. Following 0.223), that CMV is not the primary source of
the procedure used in the work-family context (e.g., variation in the items. Then, we examined the
Carlson et al., 2000, 2006; Min et al., 2021), structural equation models to test for factorial
discriminant validity was examined by an validity. All the goodness-of-fit indices of the
forms of role interactions. Both scales (conflict and model 1 (i.e., 1 Level - 12 dimensions: 3 forms x 2
enrichment) were examined simultaneously. Values types x 2 directions) showed acceptable goodness-
over 0.80 were deemed indicative of considerable of-fit to the data (i.e., CFI > .90; SRMR < .06;
overlap between the factors (John & Benet-Martínez, RMSEA < .08). Moreover, this model presented the
2000). lower values of AIC and BIC. For this CFA model,
Results
(supplemental material). Factor loadings were
from .68 to .94. The best-fitting hierarchical models
Item Distribution. The normality of the data
were the model 6 (i.e., 2 Levels – 16 dimensions: 3
was screened for all the SSIS-LF items. The
forms - 2 directions) and the model 9 (i.e., 3 Levels
skewness median was -0.101 and the values ranged
– 18 dimensions: 3 forms - 2 directions - 2 types),
from -1.107 to 0.594. The kurtosis median was -
although it fell just short of the criteria for adequate
0.491 and the values ranged from -1.266 to 1.633.
model fit (i.e., CFI = .89 and SRMR = .08 in both
The means, skewness, and kurtosis of all items are
models).
Reliability and Discriminant Evidence of
between -1 and 1 and kurtosis values were between -
the SSIS-LF Scores. Reliability (i.e., McDonald’s
2 and 2, the values were considered normal
omega coefficient) and discriminant evidence (i.e.,
(Carlsberg et al., 2016), and the data were analysed
factor correlations) for the SSIS-LF scores are
using the maximum likelihood estimator (ML).
Structural Validity Evidence of the SSIS-
McDonald’s omega coefficients ranged from .80
LF Scores. Because the data in this study were
to .93. Significant correlations between forms ranged
collected at a single time point with self-reported
from -.41 to .77 and were in expected directions:
measures, there is a potential for the occurrence of
forms were positively correlated in the same type of
common method variance (CMV). In this study, an
interactions (i.e., for conflict from .33 to .72 and for
analysis using the Hartman single-factor method was
enrichment from .16 to .77) and forms of conflict
conducted to assess the presence of CMV and its
were negatively correlated with forms of enrichment
impact on the study results (see Malhotra et al., 2006;
(i.e., from -.41 to -.12). No correlation was over .80.
Podsakoff et al., 2003). Firstly, an EFA was
performed to explore the underlying factor structure
STUDY 2: VALIDITY EVIDENCE OF
of the measured variables (i.e., 36 items of the SSIS-
THE SSIS-SF SCORES
LF). If CMV were a serious problem in the study, we
As above-mentioned, short scales in the
would expect a single factor to emerge from a factor
work-family context have demonstrated acceptable
analysis or one general factor to account for most of
psychometric proprieties, comparable relationships
the covariance in the independent and criterion
with concurrent variables to those of long scales, and
variables. The results of the EFA revealed eight
the ability to examine longitudinal role interactions
factors with eigen values greater than one.
variations (Fisher et al., 2016; Grzywacz et al., 2006;
Furthermore, no general factor was apparent in the
Kacmar et al., 2014; Matthews et al., 2010; Miller et
unrotated factor structure, with Factor 1 accounting
al., 2022). Although often criticized for their limited
for less than 25% of the variance. This outcome
assessment of the spectrum of constructs (i.e.,
suggested that the observed covariance among the
multidimensionality), short scales have advantages
variables could be attributed to distinct constructs,
over long scales as they take less time for
indicating a minimal presence of CMV.
participants, show less redundancy, and potentially
Subsequently, a CFA was conducted to assess the fit
measure constructs with less ambiguity, which may
of the hypothesized single-factor model. The CFA
prevent confusion, and save time and effort (Allen et McNall et al., 2010; Sonnentag, 2015) and sport-
al., 2022). Given the time constraints of SAs with school context (Davis et al., 2019; Killeya-Jones,
dual engagement in a demanding context, short 2005; O’Neil et al., 2021; Settles et al., 2002; Van
scales are particularly suitable for their assessment. Rensbrug et al., 2011), it was hypothesized that
Additionally, repeated design studies can facilitate positive interactions between roles (i.e., enrichment)
examining the variations in role interactions over would predict a positive well-being state (i.e., low
time. level of school and/or sport perceived stress, and
At the same time, stress and satisfaction are high level school and/or sport satisfaction, and global
commonly used outcomes in the literature on work- well-being), while negative interactions between
family conflict (Amstad et al., 2011) and enrichment roles (i.e., conflict) would predict negative well-
(Kacmar et al., 2014; McNall et al., 2010). being state (i.e., high level of school and/or sport
According to Lazarus and Folkman (1984), stress is perceived stress, and low level of school and/or sport
a psychological phenomenon that arises from an satisfaction, and global well-being). Moreover, we
individual's appraisal of the demands and resources hypothesized that conflict and enrichment will have
of their environment, which may threaten their well- stronger associations with outcomes in the context
being. On the other hand, life satisfaction is a widely from which conflict and enrichment originated (e.g.,
used measure of well-being that captures an school to sport conflict would be more strongly
individual's overall evaluation of their life (Pavot & related to school than sport satisfaction) (Shockley &
Diener, 2008). This concept has been operationalized Singla, 2011).
as satisfaction in various domains of life, such as
Method
school or sports. School satisfaction refers to a
student's subjective evaluation of the quality of their
Participants. A total of 610 individuals were
school life (Baker & Maupin, 2009), whereas sport
contacted to participate in this study. Of these, 367
satisfaction reflects athletes' contentment with their
French individuals (49.05 % female) with an average
athletic experience (Burns et al., 2012). Previous
age of 20.76 years (SD = 3.93, 17-48 years) were
research on sport-school interactions has shown that
found to be eligible as they reported regularly
perceptions of negative interactions are positively
engaging in sports and studying, and completed the
associated with stress (Davis et al., 2019; Settles et
online study. Participants were students from
al., 2002), and negatively associated with academic
different academic levels (33.79% high school or
satisfaction and mental health (Killeya-Jones, 2005;
first university year, 21.25% second year, 19.35%
Van Rensburg et al., 2011). In contrast, perceptions
third year, and 25.62% master and more).
of positive sport-school interactions have been
Participants came from different fields of study
linked to higher levels of psychological well-being
(57.77% in sport-related study, 41.96% in non-sport
(O’Neil et al., 2021). Controlling for identity
related studies, such as biochemistry, medicine,
salience is also important when examining the
engineering, history) and represented various levels
relationship between role interactions and
of sports participation (22.34% without competition,
health/well-being because it can influence how
30.25% local, 26.98% regional, and 19% national
individuals express themselves across roles and
and more) from a diversity of team (50.14%, e.g.,
perceive the link between their abilities acquired in
handball, volleyball, hockey) and individual sports
one role and the requirements of the other
(49.32%, e.g. gymnastics, athletics, skating). On
(Greenhaus et al., 2006).
average, participants reported dedicating 9.31 hours
In light of these considerations, the current
per week (SD = 8.88) for sport participation and
study aims to (a) develop the short form of the SSIS
24.65 hours per week (SD = 15.07) for academic
(i.e., SSIS-SF), (b) examine the evidence for its
time.
factorial structure, reliability, and discriminant
Procedure. The same procedure was
validity, and (c) test its concurrent validity by
followed for study 2 as for study 1. Data were
exploring the relationships between sport-school
collected in December 2021 and in March 2022.
interactions and mental health, while controlling for
the identity salience of each role (i.e., athletic, and
academic identities). Building on prior research in
both the work-family (Greenhaus et al., 2006;
Measures differ in wording in one direction and in the other
(e.g., “The time I spend on my sporting
Development of the SSIS-SF. Similar to
responsibilities often interferes with my school
previous research on work-family context (Kacmar
responsibilities” was duplicated to “The time I spend
et al., 2014; Matthews et al., 2010), the short form of
on my school responsibilities often interferes with my
the SSIS (SSIS-SF) was developed based on the full-
sport responsibilities”). Eighteen items were thus
scale version (Study 1) using CFA and Exploratory
pre-selected (i.e., preliminary SSIS-SF) to assess the
Structural Equation Modelling (i.e., ESEM), which
negative (i.e., conflict) and positive (i.e., enrichment)
allows items to load on their a priori factors and all
SA role interactions using the same 5-point response
cross-loadings to be freely estimated with orthogonal
format (from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly
rotation. Firstly, to select the most representative
agree). The preliminary form underwent testing
items, factor loadings and cross-loadings were
using the same criteria for factorial structure as in the
ESEM Model 1 (i.e., 1 Level - 12 dimensions: 3
determine the items that would be included in the
forms x 2 types x 2 directions) (χ² (264) = 389.78, p
final SSIS-SF.
< .001, CFI = .99, SRMR = .01, RMSEA = .04 [90%
Sport-School Related Well-Being. Both
CI .03, .04]), factor loadings for conflict ranged
positive and negative indicators of well-being (i.e.,
from .50 to .95, while factor loadings for enrichment
satisfaction and perceived stress) related to sport and
ranged from .45 to .94. The maximal value of cross-
school contexts were assessed. Firstly, the 5-item
loading for conflict was .33 and for enrichment
school subscale of the Extended Satisfaction With
was .69. The decision to discard an item was based
Life Scale (ESWLS; Alfonso et al., 1996) was
on several criteria. The first criterion was the
translated into French (considering the French
presence of a weak loading (i.e., factor loading lower
version of the SWLS, see Blais et al., 1989) to assess
than .40) and simultaneous loadings (i.e., one or
positive school well-being (α = .83, e.g., “So far I
more cross-loadings higher than .30) because “factor
have learned the important things I wanted to at
loadings are generally considered to be meaningful
school.”) and adapted to sport to assess positive sport
when they exceed .30 or .40” (Floyd & Widaman,
well-being (α = .79, e.g., “So far I have learned the
1995, p.294). The second criterion was internal
important things I wanted to learn at sport.”) using a
consistency (McDonald’s omega) and suggestions
7-point response format (from 1 = strongly disagree
for McDonald’s omega improvement if the item was
to 7 = strongly agree). Secondly, the 4-item French
version of the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS, Dupret &
developing a symmetrical scale, we also considered
Bocéréan, 2013) was adapted to assess negative
the items wording in each direction, in order to select
school well-being (α = .79, e.g., “in the last month,
identical wordings for the sport-to-school and the
in my studies, how often have I found it difficult to
school-to-sport forms of conflict and enrichment in
control the important things?”) and negative sport
well-being (α = .68, e.g., “in the last month, in my
that had the best goodness-of-fit and internal
sport, how often have I found it difficult to control
consistency was chosen to represent their form of
the important things?”) using a 5-point response
interaction. In the case where the results of study 1
format (from 1 = almost never to 5 = almost always).
did not allow the selection of one item, two items
Global Well-Being. The French
were kept in study 2 to test a preliminary form with
(Trousselard et al., 2016) and the short form (Ng Fat
the objective of creating a version with one item per
et al., 2017) of the Warwick-Edinburg Mental Well-
form of conflict and enrichment. During the item
being Scale (Tennant et al., 2007) were used to assess
selection process, minor adaptations were made,
global well-being. The participants responded to
including combining similar concepts that illustrate
seven items (α = .70, e.g., “I’ve been feeling
a form of conflict or enrichment (e.g., items about
optimistic about the future”) using a 5-point response
development-based enrichment were adjusted to
format (from 1 = none of the time to 5 = all of the
“What I have learnt during my sports activities
time).
(knowledge, skills, methods, etc.), has helped me to
Student-Athletes Identities. The 10-item
be better in my academic/school activities.”), as well
French version of the Academic and Athletic Identity
as duplicating items with appropriate criteria that
Scale (AAIS-FR; Lefebvre Du Grosriez et al., 2022)
was used to assess specific identities using a 6-point ESWLS also exhibited normality for most items,
response format (from 1 = not central to my sense of except for item 2 related to sport, with skewness = -
self to 6 =very central to my sense of self). This scale 2.09 and kurtosis = 4.29, and for item 2 related to
consists of the following two subscales: academic school, with skewness = -1.74 and kurtosis = 3.19.
identity (5 items, α =.91, e.g., “doing well in school”) Based on the finding that most items demonstrated
and athletic identity (5 items, α = .90, e.g., “being a normality, the maximum likelihood (ML) estimator
good athlete”). was employed in the SEM analysis. Means, standard
deviations and factor correlations of the final version
Data analyses
Reliability, Structural, and Discriminant
Evidence of Factor Structure and
Validity Evidences of the SSIS-SF Scores. Among
Reliability of SSIS-SF Scores. The same procedure
the different tested models, the model 3 (i.e., 1 Level
used in Study 1 was applied. However, only models
- 4 dimensions: 2 types x 2 directions) of the
3 (i.e., 1 Level - 4 dimensions: 2 types x 2 directions),
preliminary form presented the best fit to the data
Model 4 (i.e., 1 Level - 2 dimensions: 2 directions),
(i.e., higher CFI and lower SRMR, RMSEA, AIC
5 (i.e., 1 Level - 2 dimensions: 2 types), and Model 8
(i.e., 2 Levels – 6 dimensions: 2 directions – 2 types),
were selected to examine the final form where each
were examined. This was because the other models
type of role interactions was represented by one item.
(i.e., 1, 2, 6, 7, and 9) focused on the “forms” level
The model 3 of the final form had some inadequate
of interaction which is only represented by one item
fits: χ² (48) = 171.041, p < .001, CFI = .888, SRMR
in the SSIS-SF. (Allen et al., 2022).
= .062, RMSEA = .084, (90% CI .070; .097),
Concurrent Validity Evidence of SSIS-SF
although close to the cut-offs defined above for the
Scores. Structural Equation Modelling was used to
validity of the analyses (i.e., CFI < .90, SRMR ≥ .06,
examine the concurrent validity by checking the
RMSEA ≥ .08 and lower AIC and BIC values than
theoretically expected relationships between the
preliminary form). Examination of McDonald’s
different directions of role interactions and well-
omega coefficients of the final SSIS-SF CFA was
being indicators. This method allowed for the
comprised between .63 and .76 (i.e., school-to-sport
examination of all variables in a single analysis,
conflict, Ω = .76; sport-to-school conflict, Ω = .72;
minimizing issues related to multicollinearity
school-to-sport enrichment, Ω = .63; and sport-to-
(Bhavsar et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2015). Similar
school enrichment, Ω = .72). Finally, factor
criteria as used for scale structure evidence were
correlations for the final form are available in
employed to assess the fit of the models, such as χ²,
CFI, RMSEA, SRMR, AIC, and BIC. All analyses
subscale correlations were found between both
were performed using MPlus 7.31 software (Muthén
directions of conflict (r = .40), both directions of
& Muthén, 2017).
enrichment (r = .37) and both school-to-sport type of
interactions (r = .12).
Results
Concurrent Validity Evidence of
Descriptive Statistics. All items on the
the SSIS-SF Scores. Because the data in this study
different scales were screened for normality of data,
were collected at a single time point with self-
with skewness and kurtosis values evaluated for
reported measures, there is a potential for the
each. The SSIS-SF exhibited skewness values
occurrence of CMV. In this study, an analysis using
ranging from -0.71 to 0.49 and kurtosis values from
the Hartman single-factor method was conducted to
-1.22 to 0.31, indicating normality. Similarly, the
assess the presence of CMV and its impact on the
AAIS-F demonstrated skewness values ranging from
study results (see Malhotra et al., 2006; Podsakoff et
-0.90 to 0.95 and kurtosis values from -0.94 to -0.51,
al., 2003). Firstly, an EFA was performed to explore
also indicating normality. The PSS exhibited
the underlying factor structure of the measured
normality for school-related items, with skewness
variables (i.e., 7 items of well-being, 8 items of
values ranging from -0.45 to -0.05 and kurtosis
stress, 10 items of satisfaction, 12 items of SSIS-SF,
values from -0.84 to -0.29, as well as for sport-related
10 items of identity). If CMV were a serious problem
items, with skewness values ranging from -0.30 to
in the study, we would expect a single factor to
0.32 and kurtosis values from -0.23 to -0.72. The
emerge from a factor analysis or one general factor
to account for most of the covariance in the Structural Validity and Reliability
independent and criterion variables. The results of
Evidence of the SSIS-LF Scores
the EFA revealed 12 factors with eigen values greater
To address previous limitations in the work-
than one. Furthermore, no general factor was
family context, which emphasized the need for
apparent in the unrotated factor structure, with Factor
bidirectionality and multidimensionality to provide a
1 accounting for less than 16% of the variance. This
more comprehensive examination of conflict and
outcome suggested that the observed covariance
enrichment, the SSIS-LF was developed. The
among the variables could be attributed to distinct
psychometric evaluation of the SSIS-LF scores
constructs, indicating a minimal presence of CMV.
revealed acceptable construct validity, with the best
Subsequently, a CFA was conducted to assess the fit
fitting factorial structure being model 1 (i.e., 1 Level
of the hypothesized single-factor model. The CFA
- 12 dimensions: 3 forms x 2 types x 2 directions).
results indicated a relatively poor fit (i.e., CFI =
Notably, while hierarchical structures for work-
0.626, TLI = 0.611, RMSEA = 0.246, SRMR =
family role interactions have been described before,
0.181), further supporting that CMV is not the
this structure was never tested in previous
primary source of variation in the items. Then, we
adaptations of the context (Hernández González &
examined the structural equation model to test for
Blackford, 2022; Simmons & Greenwell, 2014; van
concurrent validity. The fit of the model was
Rhijn et al., 2018). The best-fitting hierarchical
acceptable: χ² (973) = 1779.99, p < .001, CFI = .90,
models were the model 6 (i.e., 2 Levels – 16
SRMR = .06, RMSEA = .05 (90% CI .04, .05)
dimensions: 3 forms - 2 directions) and the model 9
(i.e., 3 Levels – 18 dimensions: 3 forms - 2 directions
four directions of interaction (i.e., school-to-sport
- 2 types), although it fell just short of the criteria for
conflict, β = .266, p < .001; sport-to-school conflict,
adequate model fit (i.e., CFI = .89 and SRMR = .08
β = .210, p < .05; school-to-sport enrichment, β =
in both models). Future studies are needed to further
-.413, p < .001; sport-to-school enrichment, β = .185,
examine the validity of these models and to
p < .01). Sport stress significantly predicted school-
determine whether it is feasible to group the three
to-sport conflict (β = .228, p < .01), sport-to-school
forms of interactions by direction and by type.
conflict (β = .355, p < .001), sport-to-school
Secondly, analysis of the internal consistency
enrichment (β = -.239, p < .01). School satisfaction
coefficients showed acceptable reliability of SSIS-
significantly predicted to school-to-sport enrichment
LF scores, consistent with previous studies (Carlson
(β = .420, p < .001). Sport satisfaction significantly
et al., 2000, 2006; van Rhijn et al., 2018). Finally, the
predicted to sport-to-school enrichment (β = .307, p
discriminant evidence was demonstrated through the
< .001). Global well-being was significantly related
correlation of subscales, which were below .80, in
to school-to-sport conflict (β = -.193, p < .05), and
line with previous findings (Carlson et al., 2000).
school-to-sport enrichment (β = .325, p < .001).
These results indicate that the SSIS-LF scores have
GENERAL DISCUSSION
adequate factorial structure, reliability and
discriminant validity. However, future studies are
To address the growing concern regarding the
needed to confirm these findings and establish the
lack of research focusing on the impact of specific
validity of the SSIS-LF.
dual career factors on SAs mental health (Kegelaers
et al., 2022), the present studies aimed to develop two
Structural, Reliability Evidence
versions of the Sport-School Interactions Scale: a
Concurrent Validity Evidence of the SSIS-SF
Long-Form (SSIS-LF) and a Short-Form (SSIS-SF).
Scores
The research comprised two studies, which aimed to
(a) adapt, translate, and assess the validity of the
Another objective of the present study was to
scales measuring role conflict and enrichment in
develop a short form of the SSIS, resulting in a 12-
work-family and school-family contexts to the
item scale consisting of one item per form of
French Sport-School context, and (b) develop and
interaction. However, the results of the present study
evaluate the validity of a short form of the scale,
revealed that the fits of the SSIS-SF Model 3 (i.e., 1
which would enable effective longitudinal follow-
Level - 4 dimensions: 2 types x 2 directions) were
up.
inadequate for the preliminary form and near the cut-
off criteria for the final form. In the first study, the
best fitting model was Model 1 (i.e., 1 Level - 12 interactions (i.e., enrichment) (Matthews et al., 2006,
development of the SSIS-SF, this model could not be In addition, our study supported our initial
tested because the short scale included only one item hypotheses by revealing that the relationship
per forms of interaction. This finding is consistent between sport-to-school conflict was more strongly
with past research that demonstrated that a short related to sport stress than school stress. Likewise,
version of the WFC scale had lower construct school-to-sport enrichment was more strongly
validity than the original scale (Matthews et al., related to school stress and satisfaction than sport
2010). The results of both the SSIS-LF and SSIS-SF stress and satisfaction, while sport-to-school
suggest that it is relevant to consider the different enrichment was more strongly related to sport stress
forms of interactions, not just their directions. and satisfaction than school stress and satisfaction.
The present study provided further validation However, we did not find support for our hypothesis
evidence for the SSIS-SF by examining the regarding the school-to-sport conflict, as it was
relationships between sport-school interactions and almost equally related to stress in both the school and
known outcomes in the sport-school and work– sports context. To our knowledge, similar findings
family contexts. Our hypotheses were supported by have not been reported in the work-family role
the results, as perceived stress in each context was interaction literature (Carlson et al., 2000, 2006).
positively linked to the two types of conflict, school One possible explanation may lie in the identity of
satisfaction was positively linked to school-to-sport the SAs. Indeed, previous studies have shown that
enrichment, and sport satisfaction was positively SAs identify more strongly with athletic identity than
linked to sport-to-school enrichment. These findings with academic identity (Hagiwara et al., 2020; Di Lu
are consistent with past research in the sport-school et al., 2018; van Rens et al., 2019). Therefore, when
context, which has demonstrated that negative sport- they perceive a conflict from their studies to their
school interactions are positively associated with sport, it may influence both the stress they feel
stress, and positive sport-school interactions are related to their academics, but also related to their
positively associated with satisfaction (Davis et al., sport since their athlete role is central to whom they
2019; Killeya-Jones, 2005; Settles et al., 2002). are. Further research with diverse samples is needed
Moreover, these findings are also in line with past to explore the generalizability of these findings in the
research in the work-family literature which has sport-school context.
shown that context-specific stress was positively Finally, our study found significant
linked to conflict, and that context-specific relationships between well-being and sport-school
satisfaction was positively linked to enrichment interactions, which is consistent with past research
(Greenhaus et al., 2006; McNall et al., 2010; (Greenhaus et al., 2006; McNall et al., 2010; O'Neil
Shockley & Singla, 2011). However, in the present et al., 2021; Sonnentag, 2015; Van Rensburg et al.,
study, contrary to our hypotheses, satisfaction in 2011). Specifically, we found that global well-being
each context was not predicted by the two types of was positively related to school-to-sport enrichment,
conflict. Despite our thorough review of the relevant and negatively related school-to-sport conflict.
literature and examination of previous studies, we These results are also in line with previous studies,
have not found any comparable studies that would which have demonstrated that negative sport-school
enable us to explain these findings in the context of interactions can act as barriers to mental health (Van
sports and schools (e.g., Stambulova et al., 2015). Rensburg et al., 2011) and that positive sport-school
However, this finding is consistent with some past interactions are positively associated with
research in the work-family context. In a past study, psychological well-being among SAs (O’Neil et al.,
work-to-family conflict was not related to job 2021). Similarly, previous research has shown that
satisfaction (Carlson et al. 2000). Additionally, in a work-to-family and family-to-work conflicts are
short form version of the scale, work-to-family and negatively related to life satisfaction (with a stronger
family-to-work conflict were not related to job or effect for the work-to-family direction, Carlson et al.,
family satisfaction (Matthews et al. 2006). 2000). However, the authors tested the relationships
Furthermore, previous studies have reported lower with the six forms of conflict, which limits
relationships between negative interactions (i.e., comparisons with the present study, as in the SSIS-
conflict) and satisfaction, as compared to positive SF, the forms of conflict and enrichment are gathered
in higher order directions of interactions. Thus, it is negative and the positive aspects of SAs role
advisable to use the long version of the SSIS-SF interactions by measuring forms of conflict and
when possible, to gain a more comprehensive enrichment in school-to-sport and sport-to-school
understanding of the relationships between forms of directions. This research provides evidence that role
conflict and enrichment, and their consequences for interactions have a significant influence on the
SAs. Further research is needed to confirm these mental health of SAs. Therefore, the development of
recommendations. Although the SSIS-SF scores measurement tools that specifically address dual-
exhibited satisfactory factorial structure, reliability, career concerns can support future research to
discriminant validity, and partial concurrent validity, improve dual career management, and promote
further research is required to confirm these findings. mental health, potentially reducing dropout rates in
one or both careers.
Limitations and future directions
Although this research contributes to the
AUTHOR NOTE
current knowledge on the impact of specific dual-
Data of the first study was partially presented
career factors on SAs’ mental health, it has several
at the Congress of Association of Researchers In
limitations that should be addressed in future
Physical Activities and Sport (ACAPS, 27th–29th
research. Firstly, the face and content validity of the
October 2021, Montpellier, France). The slideshow
SSIS items were not tested among participants. To
of the congress communication is shared on HAL
ensure that the items refer to the different forms or
and the preprint is shared on Open Science
directions of each interaction, future research should
Framework of the first author.
examine whether SAs identify the items that
correspond to the forms of conflict and enrichment
CONTRIBUTIONS
that the scale is designed to measure. Second, while
Conceptualization: SLDG, SIG, and PS;
the samples used in this study were relevant, they
Methodology: SLDG and SIG; Formal analysis and
may have unique characteristics (e.g., half of the
investigation: SLDG, VC, GM; Writing - original
samples are composed of sport science students) that
draft preparation: SLDG and SIG; Writing - review
require validation of the scale with other SAs
and editing: SLDG, SIG, VC, GM, and PS;
samples. Fourth, the results of the hierarchical
Supervision: SIG and PS.
models were not acceptable. As these hierarchical
models are theoretically justified, it would be
FUNDING INFORMATION
relevant to further test this factor structure and
This research was not funded.
identify whether it is relevant or not in the sport-
school context, as well as in the work-family and
ETHIC APPROVAL
school-family contexts. Finally, since the research
This research adheres to research integrity
design was cross-sectional, longitudinal studies are
guidelines of authors’ university and Ethics
necessary to explore the stability of the SSIS-LF and
Committee of the American Psychological
SSIS-SF, and their predictive value on the postulated
Associations (1996).
consequences of sport-school interactions over time.
In this perspective, researchers could examine
CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE
whether certain dual-career context characteristics
Informed consent was obtained from all
predict SAs role interactions, and how these
individual participants included in the study.
interactions influence SAs’ mental and physical
health outcomes over time.
CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION
CONCLUSION
Consent for publication was obtained from all
individual participants included in the study.
Despite the aforementioned limitations, the
present studies provide valuable insights into the
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
dual-career context and its implications for the SAs’
This study was made possible thanks to the
mental health. The SSIS-LF and the SSIS-SF are
SCREEN platform (Service Commun de Ressources
theoretically sound measures that capture both the
d'Expérimentation et qu'Équipements Numériques) involvement in multiple roles and psychological
distress. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
of the MSH-Alpes (Maison des Sciences de l'Homme
chology, 49(1), 135–145.
Alpes) which gave us access to the online
questionnaire platform, and several French
Béland, S., & Michelot, F. (2020). Une note sur le coef-
university sports services (e.g., the “Centre
ficient oméga (ω) et ses déclinaisons pour esti-
d'Accompagnement pour Sportifs d'Excellence” of
mer la fidélité des scores. Mesure et évaluation
the University of Grenoble Alpes) which introduce
en éducation, 43(3), 103.
us to the student-athletes who participated in this
study.
Bhavsar, N., Bartholomew, K. J., Quested, E., Gucciardi,
D. F., Thøgersen-Ntoumani, C., Reeve, J., Sarra-