General Factor of Personality and creativity 1
The creative personality or General Factor of Personality? Integrating the Big
Five personality traits to predict creativity
Abstract: Creativity has been found to be a fundamental factor in innovation and
generating new knowledge, and it is influenced by personality. The present study
innovatively tested the personality-creativity relationship by resorting to the General
Factor of Personality (GFP). Multiple measures were used for a comprehensive and
unbiased estimation of the target relationship while controlling for the common
method bias. The results showed that the GFP was consistently related to creative
self-belief (above .40), other-rated creative performance (above .40), divergent
thinking skills (.31), and convergent thinking skills (.40). Based on the findings, the
present study concludes that the GFP comprehensively profiles creative personalities.
Additionally, the present study found that the GFP correlated with creative traits (.75)
more strongly than creative abilities (.36), based on which we proposed a division of
creative traits vs creative abilities. The reason for all found correlations can be
attributed to the GFP being the most comprehensive personality structure
encapsulating social characteristics, which enables it to address as many components
of creativity as possible. Suggestions for practical implications and future studies are
discussed.
Keywords: General Factor of Personality; innovative personality; higher-order
personality factors; creativity; creative self-beliefs; creative traits; creative abilities.
General Factor of Personality and creativity 2
It is without a doubt that the progress of human civilization throughout history
has been greatly influenced by the presence of remarkable geniuses. Newton,
Beethoven, and Van Gogh are among the greatest geniuses in human history, known
for their profound knowledge, innovation, and aesthetic masterpieces. The success of
such geniuses has raised many intriguing questions, such as what made them
extraordinary and what was their drive to innovate? One obvious answer is that they
were highly creative (Simonton, 1985). For innovation (Yusuf, 2009) and generating
new knowledge (Auernhammer & Hall, 2014), creativity is a fundamental resource
that has been found to be largely influenced by personality (Eysenck, 1995; Hezel &
Hooley, 2014). As such, studying creative personalities may help to elucidate the
drivers of innovation. Although many studies have examined the creativity of
geniuses, it has become clear that many of the processes underlying creativity can also
be tested in general samples, as creativity is considered to be a continuum.
Accordingly, in the present study, we will test the creativity-personality relationship
in general samples. Different from previous studies, the present study will integrate
the influential Big Five traits (McCrae & Costa, 1999) into a General Factor of
Personality (Figueredo et al., 2004). By doing so, we expect to obtain the incremental
validity of the Big Five in predicting creativity and thereby comprehensively address
creative personalities.
Creativity and personality
Creativity is a complex psychological phenomenon, of which there are over
fifty different definitions in the literature. One commonly used definition is that
“Creativity is the interaction among aptitude, process, and the environment by which
an individual or group produces a perceptible product that is both novel and useful as
defined within a social context.” (Plucker et al., 2004; p.90, original italics). To
General Factor of Personality and creativity 3
generate creativity, there are six putative resources: personality, intelligence,
knowledge, intellectual style, motivation, and environment. Among those resources,
personality was thought to be a crucial one, which not only underlay creative potential
(Hinton, 1970) but also contributes to the realization of creative potential (Mackinnon,
1965). Since Guilford's (1959) seminal work on traits of creativity, large numbers of
studies on creative personality have been published.
Many personality characteristics of creative individuals have been identified,
such as high valuation of aesthetic qualities in experience, broad interests, attraction
to complexity, high energy, independence of judgment, activeness, alertness, ambition,
argumentativeness, artistic expression, and assertiveness, etc. (Barron & Harrington,
1981; Harrington, 1975). However, to systematically reduce the number of creative
personality characteristics, the majority of studies on creative personality have used
the influential Big Five personality model (Goldberg, 1999; McCrae & Costa, 1987).
The Big Five model assumes that there are five basic traits in the personality
structure: Openness to new experiences (O), Conscientiousness (C), Extraversion (E),
Agreeableness (A), and Neuroticism (N, the opposite of Emotional stability). Each of
the Big Five traits has been found to relate to creativity (Feist, 1998; Ma, 2009).
Among the five traits, O and E were found to be the two most important predictors of
creativity. As reported in the meta-analysis of Puryear et al. (2017), O and E were
related to general creativity with values of ρ =.24 and .14, respectively. In contrast,
the other three traits showed lower correlations with general creativity, with values of
ρ = .02 (C), .03 (A), and -.04 (N). It is worth noting, however, that in their meta-
analysis, Puryear and colleagues also found that, for different measures of creativity,
the Big Five traits showed different correlational patterns. Therefore, Puryear et al.
(2019) conducted a follow-up study and found that the correlation between the Big
General Factor of Personality and creativity 4
Five traits and creativity depends on the type of creativity measure. Different
measures may assess different aspects of creativity, and as such, show differential
relationships with the Big Five. Given that multiple dimensions of personality seem to
be involved in various aspects of creativity, it may be useful to study creativity in
relation to a construct that integrates personality traits. In line with recent literature,
one way of doing so is by using the General Factor of Personality (Figueredo et al.,
2004).
Beyond the Big Five: The General Factor of Personality
Although the Big Five traits are often considered to reflect the most basic and
independent personality dimensions, empirical studies have made it clear that the
traits are systematically covaried (Digman, 1997). Musek (2007) reported that the Big
Five covariance can be explained by the existence of a single higher-order factor,
often referred to as the General Factor of Personality or GFP. The GFP was found in
individuals' personality structure across nations and cultures and depicts a composite
pattern of the Big Five: + O, + C, + E, + A, and -N (or +ES; Van der Linden et al.,
2010a; Wu et al., 2021). Since the GFP integrates all the Big Five traits, it can be
thought of as a comprehensive assessment of personality. Regarding the implication
of the GFP, empirical research suggests that the GFP is indicative of social
effectiveness or adaptiveness - the ability to deal successfully with the social aspects
of life to achieve one's goals (Dunkel & Van der Linden, 2014; Van der Linden et al.,
2021). Persons with higher GFP scores indeed seem to have social advantages, such
as being popular among classmates (Van der Linden et al., 2010b), obtaining
leadership positions (Wu et al., 2022), or receiving good ratings on job performance
(Pelt et al., 2017), etc. However, the notion of a substantive GFP was also criticized.
Ashton et al. (2009) considered the GFP mainly as a statistical artifact, while
General Factor of Personality and creativity 5
Bäckström et al. (2009) considered the GFP to be a socially desirable bias. The debate
involving these different views continues and has been well-documented in the
literature (e.g., Van der Linden et al., 2016; 2021). What is important, however, is that
there is now a sufficient body of empirical research confirming that the GFP has wide
criterion-related validity (Musek, 2017) and is useful in predicting social-related
outcomes (Van der Linden et al., 2021, 2022). One nonnegligible meta-analysis (k ＝
142; N = 36,268 ) even identified the GFP as a synonym for the trait Emotional
Intelligence, since both structures extremely overlapped (r ≈ .85, van der Linden et
al., 2017).
The GFP and creativity
When adopting a substantive account of the GFP, there are several reasons to
expect that the GFP positively relates to creativity. First, it is assumed that the GFP,
as a higher-order factor, plays a role in some of the specific attitudes and behaviors
connected with its underlying dimensions (Pelt et al., 2020). Therefore, the GFP can
be expected to play a role in creativity, which has been found to be related to O and E
(Puryear et al., 2017). To conceptually integrate the notions of personality and
creativity, Feist (1998) proposed four creativity-related psychological categories:
social, cognitive, motivational, and affective. In those categories, each of the Big Five
can be expected to have a position. Specifically, Extraversion and Agreeableness can
be clustered into being predominantly social since they focus on one's attitudes and
interactions with others. Openness would be linked to cognitive dispositions such as
ideation. In carrying out creative work, motivational characteristics such as
persistence, drive, and discipline are needed, which can be captured by
Conscientiousness. The last category - affective - would obviously cluster with
General Factor of Personality and creativity 6
Neuroticism. Therefore, the GFP, by representing the common variances of the Big
Five (Musek, 2007), can be considered a concept that integrates personality and
creativity across Feist's categories.
Within Feist’s social category, a second reason to expect a link between GFP
and creativity is the notion that being creative does not only involve generating new
ideas but also has a significant social component. Conveying new ideas to others or
implementing them requires the ability to convince others, form strategic alliances,
and persist in the face of critique. The GFP includes characteristics that support those
mentioned abilities. However, the presumed relation between the GFP and social
effectiveness does not imply that individuals with high GFP scores are always
friendly or cooperative. A more accurate description would be that they have the
social and emotional agility to adapt their behavior to maximize the odds of achieving
their personal goals (Van der Linden et al., 2016). The supportive evidence can be
seen from the large overlaps of the GFP with not only the aforementioned emotional
intelligence (Riggio & Reichard, 2008) but also ego resilience (r = 0.93, N = 15,609,
Dunkel et al., 2021). Interestingly, both emotional intelligence and ego resilience have
been linked to creativity in previous studies. For example, Sánchez-Ruiz et al. (2011)
found that trait EI, defined as self-perceptions of emotional abilities, correlated with
general creativity, and Metzl and Morrell (2008) found an association between ego
resilience and creativity. Based on these findings, it can be expected that the GFP
would also show a relationship with creativity.
In recent literature, Lebuda et al. (2019) did not find a direct correlation
between GFP and creative achievement, as measured by the Creative Achievement
Questionnaire. However, they did discover a negative correlation between GFP and
lawbreaking behavior (r = - .36). It is important to note that lawbreaking is often
General Factor of Personality and creativity 7
considered a positive indicator of creativity (Cropley & Cropley, 2011), so the GFP-
lawbreaking correlation may partly reflect the GFP-creativity correlation. More
recently, Rodriguez et al. (2020) tested the relationship between GFP and idea
evaluation - a typically creative process. They found that GFP was indeed linked to
interpersonal and social creative skills. High-GFP individuals provided better
evaluations of peer ideas compared to low-GFP individuals. The authors recommend
that creativity scholars consider using GFP in their future work due to the parsimony
of the general factor.
Current study
The present study aimed to investigate the direct correlation between GFP and
creativity. In designing the tests, we took into account that the way creativity is
measured can significantly affect the correlation between creativity and personality
(Puryear et al., 2019). Therefore, we used multiple measures of creativity, as
suggested by Furnham et al. (2008). To assess the various components of creativity,
we used self-rated creativity as a measure of creative self-beliefs (Karwowski &
Barbot, 2016) and peer-reported creativity to measure observable creative
performance (Sternberg & Lubart, 1991). These measures were used to capture
creative traits - dispositional characteristics for creativity (Karpova et al., 2013).
Additionally, we included two tests to measure creative abilities (Choi et al., 2009),
namely the Remote Association Test (RAT) and the Alternative Uses Test (AUT),
which are presumed to measure convergent (Mednick, 1968) and divergent thinking
(Dippo, 2013), respectively.
While previous studies have referred to creative traits and abilities (Choi et al.,
2009; Karpova et al., 2013), to our knowledge, no published article has explicitly
General Factor of Personality and creativity 8
considered both as divisions of creativity measures. However, we adopted this
division in the present study to compare both types of variables in their correlations
with GFP. We did so because we noted a similarity with findings in another but
related field, namely trait EI measured with self-reports (Petrides et al., 2007), and
ability EI measured with tests (Mayer et al., 1999).
To control for Common Method Variances (CMVs), we used self-report and
peer-report methods for the measure of personality in the present study. By using self
and other ratings of creativity and personality, we expect to provide a comprehensive
estimation of correlations between personality (GFP and Big Five traits) and
creativity (creative traits and creative abilities).
Method
Samples and procedures
We calculated the required sample size by means of power calculations (for
correlational tests) with the R package “pwr” (Champely et al., 2017) and found that
to approach power .95, a minimum of 46 participants is needed. Nevertheless, for
stable estimates, we considered the suggestion of having an n of at least 200
(Schönbrodt & Perugini, 2013). We recruited 258 students from six classes (an
average of 43 from each class) from a college in the Shanxi province of China. Each
participant was part of a pair of desk mates for at least one year. Thus, they knew each
other well, which enabled them to be reliable peer-raters for each other. All students
received credits for participating in the study, which consisted of two sessions in
which they had to fill in surveys and do tests.
The participants were first asked to rate their desk-mates on personality and
creativity and then also rated themselves on both variables (self-reported). This (first)
General Factor of Personality and creativity 9
session took about one hour.
One week later, the same participants were asked to conduct the creativity
tests (RAT, AUT) and an intelligence task, namely the Raven Progressive Matrices
(RPM). Finishing all tasks (second session) took about one hour.
After eliminating incomplete questionnaires , we, obtained a sample of 197 of
paired-participants (108 females, M = 19.94 years, SD = 1.04, ranging from 18 to 28) .
Measures
Big Five Inventory. We used the 44-item Big Five Inventory ( BFI; John &
Srivastava, 1999) to measure participants’ personalities. The items could be answered
on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from not agreeing (1) to absolutely agreeing (5). We
computed the scores for the Big Five traits: Openness, Conscientiousness,
Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism. In the present study, Cronbach's alpha
coefficients were .70 (O), .67 (C), .80 (E), .59 (A), and .65 (N) for the self-report
measure, and .63 (O), .69 (C), .79 (E), .68 (A), and .73 (N) for the peer-report
measures.
Creativity Questionnaire. The original version of the Creativity Questionnaire
(CQ) consisted of 9 items (Cronbach alpha .95) and was used to test the employee’s
creativity with a 6-point Likert-scales (Tierney et al., 1999). Raters need to answer
how often the statements in the items characterize the subjects. We changed three
items to make them fit for students. For example, we replaced the word “work” in the
item “demonstrated originality in his/her work” with “study”. The Cronbach's alpha
Due to many missing values in the second sessions, it is not feasible to apply imputation.
We tried but failed to recruit new paired-participants who can meet our criteria: each two
participants have to be desk-mates for at least a year. Nevertheless, a post doc power analysis states that
n = 197 for r = .50 can approach power 1.
General Factor of Personality and creativity 10
coefficients in the present study were .91 for the self-report measures and .89 for the
peer-report measures. The sum score of all nine items provided an assessment of
participants’ general creativity. In the present study, we computed each of the sum
scores for self-reported and peer-report creative traits.
Remote Association Test. Based on the original version of the Remote
Association Test (RAT; Lee et al., 2014), (Li et al., 2015) created the 49-item Chinese
Remote Association Test, or RAT, Chinese version. The RAT was used to measure
combine with every word of the given triad to be a phrase. For example, the word
“star” is the resolution to items “Falling, Actor, Dust”. Filling the correct word in an
item implies receiving one point. The sum score of all 49 items is the estimate of
participants’ converging thinking ability.
Alternative Uses Task. The AUT (Guilford, 1967) asks participants to think of as
many uses as possible for common objects: in this case, a paper, a book, and a pillow.
Three trained raters judged the answers of the participants on four dimensions: (1)
Originality – how unusual the answers are – evidence of ‘thinking different; (2)
Fluency – the number of alternative uses you can think of; (3) Flexibility – the range
of ideas, in different domains and categories; (4) Elaboration – level of detail and
development of the idea. In the present study, each rater gave scores for three items
on four dimensions. The sum score of those four dimensions represented the overall
AUT score (Puryear et al., 2019). For three out of the four specific dimensions, the
Intraclass Correlation coefficients (ICC) were low: .39 (originality), .79 (fluency), .40
(flexibility), and .25 (elaboration). Therefore, any analyses involving these
dimensions should be interpreted with great care. The ICC for the overall AUT scores
was acceptable (.55), though. Given the rather low ICCS for the specific dimensions,
General Factor of Personality and creativity 11
we decided to only focus on the general AUT score in this study. The AUT and the
RAT described above altogether were supposed to measure creative abilities.
Raven’s Progressive Matrix. We also included a measure of general cognitive
ability (or intelligence), the RPM (Raven & Raven, 2003). This nonverbal group test
measures abstract reasoning, which is regarded as a non-verbal estimate of fluid
intelligence. The full version of this test consists of five blocks (A to E) of 12 items
each (e.g., A1 through A12). The difficulty of blocks gradually amounts from A to E.
Each item consists of a visual geometric design with a missing piece. Respondents are
given six to eight choices to pick from and fill in the missing piece. Giving one right
choice could receive one point. In the present study, we took out blocks A and E of
the test, considering that the prior is too easy, and the latter is too difficult.
Participants had two minutes to finish block B, four minutes to finish block C, and six
minutes to finish block D (12 minutes in total). The total score of the rest three blocks
is the estimate of respondents’ intelligence.
Results
EFA for the GFPs
By using the self- and peer-reports s, we obtained two versions of the Big Five
and creative traits (measured by the Creativity Questionnaire). Based on the self-
reported and peer-reported Big Five traits, we extracted two GFPs, respectively. The
results of the Principal Axis Factoring supported the existence of the GFPs in both
measurements. In detail, the peer-reported GFP with eigenvalue (EV) of 2.32
explained 46.37% of the variances of all OCEAN and as a comparison, the self-
reported GFP explained 33.30% of the OCEAN’s variances with EV of 1.66. The
General Factor of Personality and creativity 12
peer-reported and self-reported GFPs loaded on OCEAN for .67, .63, .73, .57, and -
.79, and .61, .55, .49, .60, and -.63, respectively.
Multi Trait-Multi Method analyses
Five intercorrelations were significant in both the self- and peer ratings. No
significant difference was found in the average Big Five intercorrelation between the
peer-report (|r |=.37) and self-report measures (|r |=.29; ∆r = .08, Z = .92, p = .36).
peer self
We then computed the mean of both values (.33), which roughly represented the
average of the heterotrait-monomethod (HTMM) correlations. The values in bold in
dimensions: all were significant. The mean of the Big Five self- and peer-report
correlations was .50.
----------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------
Similar to Chang et al. (2012), we compared the HTMM correlations to
heterotrait-heteromethod (HTHM) correlations. The fact that no significant
differences were found (∆r=.05, Z=.56, p=.58) implied that the HTMM correlations
are likely to approach the true correlations among the Big Five.
Beyond the Big Five, the GFP showed even stronger MTHM correlations than
the Big Five traits (r = .62). The GFP significantly correlated with creativity in mono-
The HTMM correlations included two parts (see the values in italic on two sides of MTHM
values in bold). We calculated the absolute means of those two correlational matrices: .29 and .26.
Since both values were identical (∆r=.03, Z=.37, p=.71), we could use their mean value (.28) to
represent the average of the HTHM correlations.
General Factor of Personality and creativity 13
and across-measures. Considering CMVs may inflate the correlations, the cross-rating
associations were particularly relevant. The cross-ratings tests revealed that the peer-
reported GFP significantly related to the self-reported creativity scores with r = .49,
respectively. In the conversed direction (self-rated GFP to peer-rated creativity), those
values became r = .45. We calculated the average of those two values as the
conservative estimate: r = .47 for the GFP. The result of a post-doc power test
displayed that r reached power .99.
SEM testing the correlation between the GFP and creative traits with controlling
for Common Method Variances
To estimate the true correlations between the GFP and creativity, we
controlled for the common method variance in the SEMs. We did so, first, by
extracting two measurement factors, namely the self-report factor and the peer-report
factor (see Fig 1). Although the sources of the reports were different (self vs peer), the
content (the items) and the way to obtain the ratings (subjective scores) were the same.
So, we allowed those two measurement factors to correlate with each other .
Alternatively, we considered another type of common method variance, namely
acquiescence bias, which implies the tendency to respond in the same manner on all
questions (e.g., strongly agree with all items) . We correspondingly extracted a single
acquiescence bias factor (Anusic et al., 2009) instead of two measurement factors (see
Fig 1). Regarding the extraction of the GFP, we used two different approaches:
extracting those factors a) directly from the Big Five traits (one-layer approach; also
see Fig 1) or b) from the mid-level Big Five factors (Chang et al., 2012). In a series of
We compared those models to the models in which two measurement factors were not allowed to
be correlated. The prior models always fit data better than the latter models. Details can be seen in the
R-script embedded in the supplementary.
The acquiescence bias is commonly controlled for by assigning the even number of positively
and negatively worded questionnaire items. However, many scales do not have an even balance of
these two types of items, including the BFI that we used in the present study.
General Factor of Personality and creativity 14
comprehensive models, we made a few modifications : allowing correlations between
a) several Big Five traits due to their intercorrelations (Musek, 2007); b) we allowed
the unique variance of Openness and creativity to correlate (Puryear et al., 2017) .
Those modifications, nevertheless, did not change the correlations that we aimed to
----------------------------------------------------------
Insert Fig 1 about here
----------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------
A consistent finding from those SEMs (see Fig 1) is that the GFP showed a
strong correlation with the creative traits measured by the creativity questionnaire
(from .75 to .83), regardless of how the CMVs and GFP were extracted. We used the
model with the best fit to estimate the true GFP-creativity correlation r = .75 (χ =
94.49, df = 37, CFI = .95, TLI = .92, RMSEA = .09). A post-doc power test indicated
that r reached power 1.
Correlation between creative abilities and the GFP with the consideration of
intelligence
The two-layers models (displayed in Fig 1) cannot be modified due to their complicated
constructs.
It is reasonable that Openness can remain unique correlation with creativity out of the GFP, given
that Openness has the strongest correlation with creativity among the Big Five traits.
General Factor of Personality and creativity 15
relate to the personality traits/factors and intelligence (tested by the RPM). The GFP
was found to be significantly correlated with the RAT scores as well as with the
changed only slightly after controlling for intelligence.
----------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------
Next, to validate the robustness of the findings for statistical methods uses, we
ran the SEMs again on the relationships between the AUT/RAT, intelligence, and the
TLI = .92, RMSEA = .08), the correlations of the GFP with the AUT and RAT
remained stable, even after taking into account general intelligence. In that model, the
GFP was related to the RAT scores (r = .40; power = .99) and the AUT scores (r = .31;
power = .99). The mean of those two rs (.36; power = .99) can be considered the
overall correlation of the GFP with the performance on creativity tests.
Discussion
Previous research has confirmed that creativity is a vital resource for
innovation (Yusuf, 2009) and for generating new knowledge (Auernhammer & Hall,
2014). It has also been established that creativity is partly influenced by personality
(Eysenck, 1995; Hezel & Hooley, 2014). The present study adopted an innovative
General Factor of Personality and creativity 16
way to test the relationship between personality and creativity, using the GFP as an
integration of various Big Five aspects (Rodriguez et al., 2020). To obtain a
comprehensive estimation that takes method bias into account, this study used
multiple measures to test the relationship of interest. Specifically, the present study
measured various components of creativity: creative self-beliefs (self-reported
creativity), creative performance (rated by others), divergent thinking (tested by AUT),
and convergent thinking skills (tested by RAT). Personality traits and the GFP were
also measured while controlling for CMV. Intelligence as a possible confounding
variable was additionally measured. To our knowledge, few studies in the literature
have taken such diverse measures in one go to test the personality-creativity
relationship.
Regarding the study’s outcome, the first finding worth noting was that there
was a considerable amount of overlap between self- and peer-reported measurements,
ranging from r = 0.42 to 0.72. Thus, the different raters showed substantial agreement
on personality as well as creativity, suggesting that they partly tap the same
underlying constructs (Connelly & Ones, 2010). Subsequently, we consistently found
relatively strong and positive correlations between the GFP and creativity within each
type of rating. We acknowledge that such within-rater correlations need to be
interpreted with great caution, as they likely reflect common method variance (Dunkel
et al., 2016). Nevertheless, a more convincing finding was that the GFP-creativity link
remained largely intact when examining the associations across the type of ratings
(i.e., self-creativity with other-rated personality and self-personality with other-rated
creativity). In other words, when participants reported that they possessed a relatively
broad range of socially desirable traits (i.e., high GFP), then, on average, classmates
independently provided those participants with higher scores on creativity and vice
General Factor of Personality and creativity 17
versa. As the peer reports were provided by classmates who also lived together in
collective dormitories during college, it can be assumed that the targets and peer raters
knew each other quite well. This may have contributed to the overlap in ratings.
To test the correlations of interest and reduce bias, we applied a series of
statistical models that controlled for CMVs. Previous studies have only used this
approach to examine the personality hierarchy and the viability of higher-order factors
(Anusic et al., 2009; Chang et al., 2012). We adopted the same approach to test the
robustness of the correlations between the GFP and creativity, as measured by
questionnaire-based creativity measures. Using this approach, we found even stronger
correlations between the GFP and creativity measures (from .75 to .83). This finding
suggested that when measurement errors such as CMVs were taken out, individuals'
creative traits, as measured by the questionnaire, largely overlap with their GFP.
However, one question remains open: why is the GFP-trait creativity
correlation so strong? One possible reason is that because the GFP integrates all the
Big Five dimensions, it also captures most of the trait aspects of creativity. Sternberg
and Lubart (1991) stated that there are six resources for creativity - personality,
knowledge, motivation, environmental context, intellectual processes, and intellectual
style. As the most general factor in personality, the GFP has been empirically found to
associate with almost all other resources of creativity. For example, the GFP was
found to link to social knowledge (van der Linden et al., 2014) and motivation
(Musek, 2017), and be strongly associated with persistence (Musek, 2007) and grit
(Dunkel et al., 2017), which are often required to establish innovations. Furthermore,
the GFP has been associated with a better environmental context in terms of higher
socio-economic status (van der Linden et al., 2022) and good neighborhoods (Dunkel
et al., 2020). Therefore, part of the GFP-creativity association may also include
General Factor of Personality and creativity 18
environmental pathways. Regarding intelligence, several studies have linked the GFP
to higher general intelligence (Dunkel et al., 2014; Irwing et al., 2012). As
intelligence is one of the resources for being creative or providing significant novel
contributions to a field, part of the GFP-creativity relationship may be established
through intelligence. Unfortunately, the present study did not support such a
deduction since no significant correlation was found between the GFP and
intelligence. Instead, the present study found the GFP and intelligence as two distinct
resources for creativity (see Fig 2), which is in line with Musek’s (2007)
argumentation that the GFP integrates the most general non-cognitive dimensions of
personality. Nevertheless, most findings from the present study support Feist's (1998)
idea that personality (the GFP in this case) interacts with the environment and
influences creativity.
Furthermore, compared to creative traits (as either self-rated or other-rated),
creative abilities (as measured by either AUT or RAT) displayed weaker correlations
with the GFP (∆r = .35, Z = 5.41, p = 0; ∆r = .44, Z = 6.43, p = 0). These findings
support the division between creative traits and creative abilities, which could
simplify the category of creative criteria. Specifically, creativity-related dispositional
or behavioral characteristics that can be self-rated or other-rated may be categorized
as creative traits, while creative abilities refer to the capacity for creatively solving
problems and are supposed to be linked to intelligence (Barron & Harrington, 1981).
In the present study, a correlation between creative abilities and intelligence was
indeed found (r ≈ .36).
In conclusion, the GFP as a global measure of personality addresses multiple
components of creativity. Accordingly, the General Factor of Personality seems to
reflect Creative Personalities to some extent. High GFP persons are those who a) have
General Factor of Personality and creativity 19
a high level of confidence in their creativity and believe they can apply their creativity;
b) are rated as creative by others; have relevant c) divergent and d) convergent
thinking skills.
Returning to a classic debate, creative people may question social norms and be
relatively independent of conforming influences, which allows them to spend their
time and energy on bold creations. However, this is only the first stage of creating
(discovery/idea generation). Without the second stage – justification/carrying out
ideas (Reichenbach, 1938), particularly expressing/practicing creative ideas that are
socially useful, those ideas may lose impact and power, and their creators would not
be remembered in human history. Feist (1998, p. 301) speculated that “The most
creative people are those who often prefer to be away from other people, but who
master expressing their ideas in media that others can understand and appreciate.
This is precisely what makes the creative act inherently social, -it must be expressed
in a social context and ultimately be understood by others if it is to be creative by the
definition given earlier, namely, be both novel and useful.”
Considering the above, testing a comprehensive personality structure that
encapsulates social characteristics may provide a good fit for studying creative
personalities. In this regard, the presumed social effectiveness associated with GFP
makes sense. To achieve creative outcomes, people must have a sufficient level of
sociability (extraversion, agreeableness), the ability to persistently and meticulously
work (conscientiously), and cope with challenges and critique by others (emotionally
stable/low on neuroticism). Combining all the characteristics described above points
in the direction of the GFP as a part of having creative personalities.
It should be noted that the present findings are based on a general student sample.
General Factor of Personality and creativity 20
Therefore, the findings might not generalize to outlier creative individuals.
Specifically, previous research has indicated that highly creative people, on average,
may not only be non-conformist and inclined to break rules but also socially
maladjusted (Wysocka & Ostafińska-Molik, 2019) and less socially desirable
(Dahling et al., 2012; Morrison, 2006). Thus, in such extremely creative individuals, it
is possible that the GFP is not a suitable predictor of creativity (Lebuda et al., 2019)
or may even be a negative predictor. Future studies could investigate domain-specific
creative personalities (i.e., creative scientists or artists; Feist, 1998) or large samples
that include a sufficient number of "creative outliers" to gain more insight into any
differential associations regarding the GFP.
Practical implications
Based on the findings of the present study, it is suggested that the GFP is an
effective and useful predictor of creativity in personality because it can
simultaneously predict multiple measures of creativity, i.e., the self-believed and
other-rated creativity and divergent and convergent thinking skills. Moreover, in real
life, creative performance is often assessed by observers such as HRs, leaders,
monitors, or supervisors. In this scenario, the GFP is recommended as an indicator of
creative performance since it provided large predictive effects on the other-rated
creativity in the present study.
Concluding remarks
Knowing how personality traits relate to creativity has always been one of the
major themes in creativity research. In the current study, we examined this
relationship using the GFP as a construct that captures much of the social aspects of
personality. Accordingly, the GFP was found to correlate with multiple measures of
General Factor of Personality and creativity 21
creativity. Therefore, we support the recommendations of Lebuda et al. (2019) that
the general factor found in personality measures should be given serious consideration
when attempting to identify the characteristics of creative personalities.
General Factor of Personality and creativity 22