CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 1
Comparing Implications of Distinct Emotion, Network, and Dimensional Approaches
for Co-Occurring Emotions
1 2
Jens Lange & Janis H. Zickfeld
University of Hamburg
Aarhus University
Manuscript is in press at Emotion
Author Notes
We have no known conflicts of interest.
Correspondence should be addressed to Jens Lange, University of Hamburg, Von-
Melle-Park 5, 20146 Hamburg, Germany, E-mail: lange.jens@outlook.com.
All data, analysis code, research materials, and preregistrations are available at the
CRediT Contributions: Jens Lange (conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis,
funding acquisition, investigation, methodology, software, visualization, writing – original
draft). Janis Zickfeld (conceptualization, investigation, methodology, visualization, writing –
review & editing).
We thank the members of the Amsterdam Interdisciplinary Centre for Research on
Emotion at the University of Amsterdam, the group for General Psychology II at the
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 2
University of Cologne, the group for Social Psychology at the University of Jena, and the
Affective Sciences Group at the University of Oslo for valuable feedback. Jens Lange
presented parts of this research at the conference of the International Society for Research on
Emotions in Amsterdam 2019, and at the digital conference of the Society for Affective
Science 2021. We further thank Seger Breugelmans for making his data available to us and
Riet van Bork for her feedback on the PCL Test.
Jens Lange received funding from the Idea and Venture Fund of the University of
Hamburg as part of the Excellence Initiative.
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 3
Abstract
Many situations elicit multiple emotions at the same time. Therefore, emotion theories should
explain when and how emotions co-occur. We compared four parsimonious, formal theories
that could explain emotion co-occurrence inspired by distinct emotion, network, and
dimensional approaches to emotions. In three studies (N = 1,038), diverse participants rated
the intensity of awe and kama muta (Study 1; US community sample; conducted in 2020),
shame and guilt (Study 2; Dutch students; conducted in 2006), or awe and fear (Study 3; GB
community sample; conducted in 2022) on multi-componential scales in response to emotion-
eliciting stimuli (i.e., vignettes or videos). All three studies indicated that the network theory
explains the data best. The theory implies that emotions co-occur because the networks of
interacting components representing different emotions partly overlap. The parsimonious
model can serve as a starting point for a comprehensive formal theory that is able to integrate
seemingly inconsistent findings in research on co-occurring emotions.
Keywords: emotion co-occurrence, mixed emotions, emotion blends, emotion theory,
network theory
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 4
Comparing Implications of Distinct Emotion, Network, and Dimensional Approaches
for Co-Occurring Emotions
It is hardly conceivable that specific emotions ever occur in isolation. Instead, any
situation probably elicits multiple emotions at the same time and probably to different
degrees. Failing an exam may elicit sadness and disappointment. Receiving a birthday present
may elicit gratitude and joy. Or eating chocolate may elicit satisfaction and regret. Previous
research indeed documented the vast prevalence of emotion co-occurrence (e.g., Moeller et
al., 2018; Scherer et al., 2004; Trampe et al., 2015). Therefore, emotion theories should
outline how a person can experience various emotions simultaneously. Yet, debates around
co-occurring emotions remain (e.g., Kreibig & Gross, 2017; Larsen, 2017), especially how to
theoretically explain them (e.g., Oh & Tong, 2022). Different theories that can potentially
explain emotion co-occurrence have different implications, which are, however, rarely
compared in the same study (but see for instance Vansteelandt et al., 2005). The goal of the
current studies was to compare the implications of formalized theories of three broad
approaches to emotions that may explain co-occurring emotions, that is, distinct emotion,
network, and dimensional approaches to emotions.
The Co-Occurrence of Emotions
Abundant evidence indicates that emotions frequently co-occur—that is, people
frequently experience multiple emotions in response to the same stimulus at the same time.
Studies documented emotion co-occurrence in the daily life of high school students (Moeller
et al., 2018) and adults (Scherer et al., 2004; Trampe et al., 2015; Watson & Stanton, 2017)
even across cultures (Miyamoto et al., 2010). Oftentimes, multiple positive or multiple
negative emotions co-occur (i.e., positive blend, negative blend), but people also sometimes
experience emotions with a different valence at the same time (i.e., mixed blend or mixed
emotion; Berrios et al., 2015; Larsen & McGraw, 2014). Relatedly, in experiments, pictures
from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS) fostered ambivalent experiences
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 5
(Schneider et al., 2016) and thousands of visual or auditory stimuli always elicited different
emotions in different people, but probably also multiple emotions in the same person (for a
review see Cowen et al., 2019). Thus, it is fair to conclude that emotion co-occurrence is more
the norm than the exception. Accordingly, emotion theories should focus on explaining it.
Theories Explaining The Co-Occurrence of Emotions
There are three main approaches to emotions that can also provide plausible accounts
consider emotions as distinct or dimensional: distinct emotion, network, and dimensional
approaches to emotions. As a starting point, all of these approaches define emotions as multi-
componential, that is, all emotions entail synchronized changes in feelings, cognitions,
physiological changes, motivational tendencies, and expressive behavior (e.g., Coppin &
Sander, 2016; Ekman & Cordaro, 2011; Russell, 2003). For instance, anger may be defined as
an emotion that entails synchronized changes in hostile feelings, sympathetic nervous system
activity, aggressive thoughts, attack motivation, and frowning. The approaches differ,
however, in the mechanisms that explain how the components of one or multiple emotions
synchronize.
The approaches are very broad. There are multiple definitions of distinct emotions,
various possible network structures, and different views on the number and kind of
dimensions. Nevertheless, there are specific theories within these broad approaches that are
more popular than others. Typically, these specific theories are not formalized. Lack of
formalization leaves room for interpretation when deriving implications of particular theories
and this room for interpretation facilitates post hoc rationalizations of findings that fail to
confirm the respective theory (for the same argument see Marsella & Gratch, 2009; see also
Smaldino, 2017). Such problems can lead to fierce discussions that are difficult to resolve. To
derive precise implications that specific theories representing each general approach may have
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 6
for the co-occurrence of emotions, we propose parsimonious, formalized theories of each
approach according to previous literature.
The first and most common approach to emotions conceptualizes them as distinct
(e.g., Ekman, 1999). Emotion components synchronize because of a central mechanism (e.g.,
an affect program). This unobservable (i.e., latent) mechanism causes changes in the emotion
components (e.g., Levenson, 1994; for a similar depiction of the theory see Coan, 2010;
Russell, 2003). Hence, the emotion components do not have causal effects among each other.
Instead, they synchronize because the same causal force affects them.
Under the distinct emotions approach, all emotions have their own central
mechanism (Ekman, 1999; Levenson, 1994). The relationship of the central mechanisms of
different emotions should therefore explain emotion co-occurrence. One interpretation is that
the mechanisms of multiple emotions in the same situation are independent. Such statistical
independence could result from one situation activating multiple mechanisms over longer
time spans (e.g., because of a reappraisal) or in such rapid succession that they vary
opposingly in their intensity levels (for a related argument see Ekman & Cordaro, 2011). We
interpretation is that each mechanism is distinct, yet a specific situation can trigger multiple
mechanisms simultaneously. Co-activation of multiple emotions would result in a correlation
of the mechanisms that cause different emotions, potentially explaining why multiple distinct
emotions can form higher-order clusters (e.g., Shaver et al., 1987). We call this the correlated
A second approach conceptualizes emotions as networks of direct causal connections
between emotion components (Lange et al., 2020; see also Lewis, 2005; Suri & Gross, 2022).
In networks, emotion components synchronize because the activation of a component leads to
the activation of connected components. Feedback loops within the network may lead to
constant reactivation of the entire network (see also Izard et al., 2000). Co-occurring emotions
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 7
may then result from network overlap (Lange & Zickfeld, 2021). That is, different emotions
entail the same components (e.g., the same appraisals), leading to shared components of
networks that represent different emotions. Moreover, the components of one emotion will
frequently (negatively and positively) cause components of other emotions (e.g., motivational
tendencies of one emotion suppress the motivational tendencies of another emotion). When
causal effects develop across networks that represent different emotions, these emotions will
A third approach conceptualizes emotions as dimensional (e.g., Russell & Barrett,
1999; Schlosberg, 1954; Wundt, 1887). Emotion components synchronize because they are all
indicative of broad dimensions. Previous research supported that entire emotions (Russell,
1980; Watson & Stanton, 2017) or components of emotions (Fontaine et al., 2007) may be
indicative of dimensions such as valence, arousal, pleasantness, control, or unpredictability. In
a popular approach, endogenously generated valent states (together with other causal
mechanisms) cause changes in emotion components (Lindquist, 2013; Lindquist et al., 2012).
Emotions would co-occur to the extent that this mechanism causes them equally strongly,
which would be likely for emotions that are similar on the respective dimension. Co-
occurrence is impossible when the emotions are at opposite ends of the dimension (Russell &
Thus, multiple specific theories representing the broad approaches can explain the
co-occurrence of emotions. The absolutely distinct theory and the correlated distinct theory
are popular representations of distinct emotion approaches. They both invoke latent
mechanisms for each emotion that cause the respective emotion’s components. Depending on
the relationship of the latent mechanisms of different emotions, the two theories make
different predictions about why emotions co-occur. The dimensional theory also invokes a
latent mechanism. This mechanism causes the components of multiple emotions at the same
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 8
time. It therefore predicts that emotions that are similar on a dimension should co-occur and
that emotions at opposite ends of the dimension cannot co-occur.
The network theory covers a middle ground between distinct emotions and
dimensional approaches (for an extended discussion, see Lange & Zickfeld, 2021). In the
network theory, there is no latent mechanism, but emotion co-occurrence results from causal
connections between emotion components of multiple emotions. Network communities, that
is multiple emotion components that are strongly connected with each other in a large set of
connected components, can represent distinct emotions. Moreover, network overlap can
account for dimensions. A dimension could occur, for instance, when emotions similar on a
dimension (e.g., with similar valence) share more components with each other than emotions
dissimilar on a dimension (e.g., with dissimilar valence), or when emotions dissimilar on a
dimension have components that strongly oppose each other. Hence, in the network theory,
emotions are distinct with fuzzy (i.e., dimensional) boundaries. Accordingly, evidence in
favor of the network theory would not discard the notions of distinct emotions or dimensions.
It would provide a different theoretical perspective on what a distinct emotion or dimension
is, namely they would not be latent causes of emotion components but emerge from the
connections between the components.
The Current Research
We conducted two new studies and reanalyzed existing data to compare
parsimonious, formalized theories representing variants of broad approaches explaining
emotion co-occurrence. Specifically, we compared parsimonious variants of distinct emotion,
network, and dimensional approaches to emotions. Study 1 focused on two positive emotions,
awe and kama muta, Study 2 focused on two negative emotions, shame and guilt, and Study 3
focused on two emotions with a different valence, awe and fear.
In all three studies, we confronted participants with stimuli eliciting the emotions.
Participants then completed self-report measures that exhaustively capture the respective
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 9
emotions. Even though self-reports have known limitations and multiple biases may affect the
relationships of self-report items (Leising et al., subm.), self-reports allow measuring all
components at the same level of abstractness. To control for the strongest limitations of self-
reports, we checked for semantic redundancy of items in Studies 1 and 3 and conducted a
robustness check in Study 3 controlling for common response styles.
Transparency And Openness
We report all studies we ever conducted in this line of research, how we determined
our sample size, all data exclusions (if any), all manipulations, and all measures. All data,
analysis code, research materials, and preregistrations are available at the Open Science
preregister Steps 1 and 2 of the analytic approach as we developed the idea to run them at a
later point in time. Moreover, some of the exploratory steps that we preregistered for Study 1
(node predictability, network comparison test) later appeared to distract from the main point
of the manuscript. We therefore decided to not include these analyses here. Accordingly, the
analyses in Study 1 are largely exploratory despite the preregistration. The preregistrations of
Studies 2 and 3 covered the entire analytic approach, rendering the studies confirmatory tests.
Note that as Study 2 was a reanalysis, we preregistered only the analytic approach before
looking at the data and not the design. We received ethics approval from the University of
Hamburg (2021_380) for Study 3. As Study 1 is very similar, it is also covered even though
we did not obtain ethics approval before conducting the study. For the reanalysis we
conducted in Study 2, information on ethics approval was no longer available.
We conducted the analyses in R (R Core Team, 2019; versions 3.6.3, 4.1.3, and
4.2.1). Across all analyses, we used the packages bootnet (Epskamp, Borsboom, et al., 2018;
versions 1.3 and 1.5), qgraph (Epskamp et al., 2012; versions 1.6.5 and 1.9.2), dplyr
(Wickham et al., 2019; versions 0.8.3, 1.0.8, and 1.0.10), plyr (Wickham, 2011; versions 1.8.6
and 1.8.7) DescTools (Signorell, 2019; versions 0.99.34 and 0.99.46), colorspace (Zeileis et
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 10
al., subm.; versions1.4-1, 2.0-2, and 2.0-3), psych (Revelle, 2018; versions 1.8.12, 2.2.3, and
2.2.5), lme4 (Bates et al., 2014; versions 1.1-21 and 1.1-30), emmeans (Lenth, 2019; versions
1.4.5 and 1.8.1-1), ggpubr (Kassambara, 2019; versions 0.2.5 and 0.4.0), ggplot2 (Wickham,
2016; versions 3.3.0, 3.3.5, and 3.3.6), gridExtra (Auguie, 2017; version 2.3), apaTables
(Stanley, 2018; versions 2.0.5 and 2.0.8), coxed (Kropko & Harden, 2019; versions 0.3.2 and
0.3.3), lavaan (Rosseel, 2012; versions 0.6-5, 0.6-9, and 0.6-12), MASS (Venables & Ripley,
2002; versions 7.3-51.5, 7.3-55, and 7.3-57), corpcor (Schafer et al., 2017; versions 1.6.9 and
1.6.10), and CliquePercolation (Lange, 2021; versions 0.2.0 and 0.3.0). We also conducted a
pretest for Study 3, which we analyzed using additional packages. As the pretest is reported in
the Supplementary Materials, we list all the packages also in the Supplementary materials.
Study 1
In Study 1 (conducted in 2020), we focused on the positive emotions of awe and
kama muta. Awe is evoked by perceived vastness and the need for accommodation (Keltner &
Haidt, 2003). It is often accompanied by goosebumps or chills, results in distorted perceptions
of time, diminished feelings of the self, and motivations to act pro-socially (Stellar et al.,
2017). The emotion concept of kama muta designates states that are evoked by sudden
intensifications of communal sharing relationships, or more simply put, individuals coming
closer together, for example two old friends reuniting unexpectedly after a long time of
absence (Fiske et al., 2017). Kama muta commonly involves tears, goosebumps or chills, and
warm feelings in the center of the chest, motivates communal behavior, and is experienced as
predominantly positive across several different cultures (Zickfeld et al., 2019).
We chose awe and kama muta for three reasons. First, both emotions can co-occur.
Theoretical and empirical evidence supported that awe and kama muta are two distinct
emotions (e.g., Haidt, 2003; Schnall et al., 2010; Shiota et al., 2017; Zickfeld et al., 2019,
2020). At the same time, there are several aspects that both seem to share including that they
can be elicited in similar situations (Fiske et al., 2019). Second, there are comprehensive and
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 11
validated self-report measures capturing all components of awe (Yaden et al., 2019) and kama
muta (Zickfeld et al., 2019). Third, we could elicit both emotions with vignettes. This
pragmatic reason allowed to reduce the probability of setting up a study that insufficiently
compares the theories because none of the emotions are elicited at all.
Method
Participants
We recruited 410 participants (232 females, 177 males, 1 other) via Amazon MTurk,
requesting only US workers with an approval rate of at least 95%. Reported age ranged from
19 to 72 years (M = 36.71, SD = 11.48, two missing values). As well reasoned a priori power
calculations are still complicated for model estimation, we decided to apply a rule of thumb to
determine our final sample size (N = n x 15). This resulted in a suggested sample size of
items
405 participants based on 27 items included in the present study.
Materials and Procedure
We confronted participants with vignettes. For exploratory purposes, we varied
which emotion a vignette elicited. Each participant responded to a vignette that should elicit
both emotions simultaneously, a vignette that should primarily elicit awe, and a vignette that
should primarily elicit kama muta. Our intention was to ensure that the study covers each of
these realistic situations. We expected that the vignettes would all support the same theory.
However, it is imaginable that the theories of the co-occurrence of emotions are applicable
mostly to situations that explicitly elicit both emotions simultaneously.
Hence, we employed a 3 Condition (kama muta/awe vs. awe vs. kama muta) within-
subjects design. Each participant responded to three vignettes, always reflecting the mixed,
awe, and kama muta type. For each vignette type, three different versions were available
(Vignette; Version A: Proposal/Natural Scenery vs. Version B: Reunion/Space vs. Version C:
Wedding/Cathedral). If, for example, a participant first responded to the Version A kama
muta vignette, the participant would then either respond to the awe or mixed vignette
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 12
presented in Versions B or C, but not A. If the participant responded to the Version B awe
vignette second, the participant would receive the Version C mixed vignette eventually. The
three vignette types were presented in an individual random order. For each vignette,
participants completed the same measures.
We created vignettes to represent the three different conditions based on topics
identified in previous research (Fiske et al., 2017; Keltner & Haidt, 2003). The awe vignettes
featured instances of vastness, including the mountain range of a national park, a view from
space, and the interior of a cathedral. The kama muta vignettes featured instances of
extraordinary closeness, namely a man proposing to his girlfriend, a soldier reuniting with his
children after deployment, and a couple marrying. For the mixed vignettes, we combined both
instances into one story: the man proposed to his girlfriend in the national park, the soldier
reunited on a space station (via a video call), and the couple celebrated the wedding in a
cathedral. Each vignette was about 100 words long and was always accompanied by a
photograph illustrating the described situation. For each vignette, participants imagined that
they would be part of and observe the depicted situation.
Participants then rated ten items adapted from the AWE-S scale, a state measure
assessing awe exhaustively (Yaden et al., 2019). To reduce semantic redundancy of pairs of
items, we chose one item from the factors covering altered time perception, self-loss,
connectedness, vastness and accommodation, always picking the item with the highest
loading in Yaden et al. (2019). As the items assessing physiological changes were not as
redundant, we included all of them and conducted robustness tests investigating whether
including only one item changes the results. Finally, we also added “I feel awe” to these items
to include a feeling label, leading to 11 items in total. We presented all eleven items in a fixed
randomized order. Afterward, participants completed a short version of the KAMMUS Two
scale, a self-report scale assessing kama muta exhaustively (Zickfeld et al., 2019). Similarly,
for the appraisal and motivation scale we chose one out of four items based on the highest
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 13
factor loading in Zickfeld et al. (2019). We also presented these items in a fixed randomized
order. Participants provided answers for all items on a scale from 0 (not at all) to 6 (very
Descriptive Statistics of the Items in Study 1 Across All Conditions
Scale Label Item M (SD)
AWE-S AS_1 I feel my jaw drop. 2.21 (2.03)
AWE-S AS_2 I gasp. 2.26 (2.07)
AWE-S AS_3 I feel that I am in the presence of something grand. 3.35 (2.02)
AWE-S AS_4 I sense things momentarily slow down. 2.63 (1.98)
AWE-S AS_5 I have goosebumps. 2.49 (2.04)
AWE-S AS_6 I feel challenged to mentally process what I am experiencing. 2.14 (2.01)
AWE-S AS_7 I feel my eyes widen. 2.84 (2.09)
AWE-S AS_8 I have the sense of being connected to everything. 2.61 (2.03)
AWE-S AS_9 I have chills. 2.35 (2.04)
AWE-S AS_10 I feel awed. 3.13 (2.16)
AWE-S AS_11 I feel that my sense of self is diminished. 2.11 (2.04)
KAMMUS Two KA_1 I have moist eyes. 2.18 (2.08)
KAMMUS Two KA_2 I have positive feelings. 4.26 (1.69)
KAMMUS Two KA_3 I feel like telling someone how much I care about them. 2.77 (2.04)
KAMMUS Two KA_4 I have difficulty speaking. 1.79 (1.92)
KAMMUS Two KA_5 A warm feeling in the center of the chest. 2.96 (1.97)
KAMMUS Two KA_6 I feel refreshed, energized, or exhilarated. 2.93 (1.97)
KAMMUS Two KA_7 A lump in the throat. 2.05 (2.02)
KAMMUS Two KA_8 I am moved. 3.44 (1.98)
KAMMUS Two KA_9 I feel buoyant or light. 2.54 (2.00)
KAMMUS Two KA_10 Some feeling in the center of the chest. 2.68 (1.99)
KAMMUS Two KA_11 I feel/observed an incredible bond. 3.00 (2.15)
KAMMUS Two KA_12 It is heartwarming. 3.70 (1.99)
KAMMUS Two KA_13 I smile. 3.85 (1.99)
KAMMUS Two KA_14 I shed tears. 1.87 (2.05)
KAMMUS Two KA_15 I feel choked up. 2.00 (2.07)
KAMMUS Two KA_16 I am touched. 3.41 (2.04)
Note. Participants provided answers on a scale from 0 (not at all) to 6 (very much)
Analytic Approach
Comparing the theories requires testing their implications with adequate statistical
techniques. At least the network theory is too unspecific to allow fitting it directly to data.
Instead, we derived an analytical approach that compares the implications of the theories such
that, eventually, only one theory results as the best-fitting one.
All four theories are reminiscent of psychometric models, that is, models outlining
how indicators of a construct (e.g., questionnaire items assessing awe) measure the construct
itself (e.g., awe). Indeed, when interpreted as causal models, psychometric models can
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 14
represent minimal theories of emotions (Lange et al., 2020). The distinct emotion and
dimensional theories map onto latent variable models in which latent, unobservable variables
predict the components of emotions. The network theory maps onto psychometric network
models in which the components of emotions (called nodes in network terms) relate directly
to each other (called edges in network terms). Mathematical proofs show that network models
are equivalent to latent variable models (e.g., Epskamp, Maris, et al., 2018). Each latent
variable model has a mathematically equivalent network model and vice versa (Van Bork et
al., 2021). Consequentially, tools from either approach can be used to compare theories of the
respective other approach.
Nevertheless, when theory development is in the early stages, it may be more
convenient to rely on network analysis. Latent variable models must be specified in advance.
As we could not know the exact structure of the network theory in particular studies, we could
not anticipate the latent variable model that will map onto the respective structure. Network
modeling is largely exploratory allowing to also estimate networks of unknown structures. In
addition, also the latent variable models mapping onto the distinct and dimensional theories
imply certain network structures. Thus, we decided to proceed from tools developed in
network analysis.
To compare the different theories explaining co-occurring emotions using tools of
network analysis, we propose to follow three steps. To showcase the implications of the
theories in each step, we simulated data under the four theories and depict the predictions they
each theory. The estimated networks implied by each theory differ. The absolutely distinct
theory implies two fully connected communities of nodes in the network that represent the
two emotions, while the communities themselves are unrelated. The correlated distinct theory
additionally implies edges between components of different emotions. The average within-
emotion edges, however, are stronger than the average between-emotion edges. The network
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 15
theory implies a pattern very similar to the correlated distinct theory, except that the between-
emotion edges may be more selective and potentially also negative and the communities
representing the different emotions are not fully connected. Finally, the dimensional theory
implies between- and within-emotion edges that are equally strong.
We estimated regularized partial correlation networks (i.e., Gaussian Graphical
Models; Epskamp, Waldorp, et al., 2018). We deleted missing values pairwise. As
preregistered, we also considered thresholding as model selection, because psychological
networks are often densely connected. Yet, networks based on thresholding led to very similar
results.
Step 1 exploits the fact that the implied networks of all four theories differ. That is,
we propose testing whether the between-emotion edges are larger than zero and whether the
within-emotion edges are larger than the between-emotion edges. To test these hypotheses,
we used bootstrapping techniques (Efron, 1979). We drew 1,000 nonparametric bootstrap re-
samples with replacement from the data. From each sample, we extracted the estimate of the
average of the between-emotion edges and the differences of the average within- and
between-emotion edges in each condition, generating parameter distributions for each
statistic. We then performed an adapted version of an equivalence test (e.g., Lakens, 2017).
This strategy was necessary as the absolutely distinct and dimensional theories both predicted
null effects for one of the bootstrap tests, which common null hypothesis significance testing
cannot support. We initially tested the distributions against zero using the 95% bias-corrected
accelerated confidence interval (DiCiccio & Efron, 1996). We also calculated p-values
corrected with the Holm method under the assumption that the parameter distributions are
normal. Then, we tested the distributions against a smallest effect size of interest (SESOI). If
the confidence interval of a test would fall entirely below the SESOI, one can conclude that
the parameter is statistically equivalent to zero. We derived the SESOIs from simulations
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 16
described in the Supplementary Materials, because for regularized partial correlations there
are no reasonable effect size measures or previous benchmarks available.
In all the bootstrap analyses, we took the absolute value of all edge weights. We
decided in favor of this strategy because if positive and negative edges would balance each
other out, the average edge would be zero, even though there are in fact various notable edges.
A simulation we report in the Supplementary Materials and whose code is available on OSF
supports that the bootstrap test is nevertheless rather conservative and leads to the acceptance
of the null hypothesis if the true value of the average edge is indeed zero or very small.
Even though two equivalence tests can collectively lead to various outcomes, we
focused on a particular decision strategy that was likely to cover all expected results. First, if
the test of the average between-emotion edge would be statistically equivalent to zero,
independent of whether the confidence interval excludes zero, we conclude that the absolutely
distinct theory explains the data best and no additional step is necessary. Second, if the test of
the difference of the average within- and between-emotion edges would be statistically
equivalent to zero, independent of whether the confidence interval excludes zero, we conclude
that the dimensional theory explains the data best and no additional step is necessary. If both
tests are not statistically equivalent to zero and the confidence interval excludes zero, we
proceed to Step 2.
In Step 2, we tested the correlated distinct and network theory more directly against
each other. Even though data generated under both theories translates into similar implied
network models, this is not to say that the theories are indistinguishable. In fact, it is possible
to test whether the data supports a latent variable model more strongly than a network model
and vice versa by investigating the pattern of partial correlations, that is, the correlation of all
pairs of items when controlling for all other items (for mathematical proofs and the derived
test, see Van Bork et al., 2018, 2021). Specifically, under a latent variable model with a single
latent variable, a partial correlation of two items can never have the opposite sign or be larger
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 17
than the corresponding zero-order correlation (i.e., the pure correlation of the items) of the
same items. Such striking partial correlations should not occur. Under a network model, such
constraints do not apply.
The Partial Correlation Likelihood Test (PCL) exploits these constraints. It entails
three steps. First, the PCL Test makes a prediction for how many striking partial correlations
one should find for each model. To this end, it simulates data from the best fitting latent
variable model and the best fitting network model. For each simulated data set, it stores the
number of striking partial correlations. Over all simulations of a model, it thereby generates a
distribution of striking partial correlations one can find if the respective model is true. For the
correlated distinct theory, we simulated data from a model with two correlated latent
variables. For the network theory, we simulated data from the estimated network model. For
each model, we simulated 10,000 data sets of as many participants as were in the sample. For
each data set, we determined the number of striking partial correlations, providing a
distribution for each model. Second, the PCL Test determines the probability of finding the
number of striking partial correlations observed in the data with the distributions of both
models generated during the simulations. We compared whether the number of striking partial
correlations observed in the data were more likely under the model representing the correlated
distinct theory or the model representing the network theory. Third, if the number of striking
partial correlations observed in the data is more likely under the model representing the
correlated distinct theory than the model representing the network theory, the PCL Test
concludes that the correlated distinct theory fits the data best and vice versa. Note that even
though it seems as if the network theory is more flexible and therefore more easily supported
by the data, both models are compared on one and the same statistic, namely the number of
striking partial correlation.
Even if Steps 1 and 2 indicate that a network with between-emotion edges and
stronger within- than between-emotion edges underlies the data, this evidence is still not
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 18
features separate communities representing the two emotions, while the communities do not
share any components with each other. Moreover, the communities could be fully connected
instead of partly connected. An algorithm that can test for partly connected, overlapping
communities is the clique percolation algorithm (Farkas et al., 2007; Palla et al., 2005; for an
introduction of the algorithm as applied to emotions, see Lange & Zickfeld, 2021), which we
applied in Step 3.
The clique percolation algorithm entails two steps. First, it identifies k-cliques. K-
cliques are smaller networks within the entire network in which one is attempting to find
communities. These smaller networks have k nodes and have all possible connections between
each other. In our case, the nodes are different items. Hence, the algorithm identifies smaller
networks with k items in the entire network with all k items being connected with each other.
As another check, the algorithm considers these smaller networks only if they are sufficiently
strongly connected. That is, any k-clique is considered only when the geometric mean of their
connections is larger than a specified threshold I. Take, for instance, the implied network of
six cliques of size 3, namely C1–C2–C3, C2–C3–C4, C3–C4–C5, C5–C6–C7, C5–C7–C8,
and C6–C7–C8. Second, once the algorithm has identified sufficiently strongly connected
smaller networks in the entire network, it checks which smaller networks belong to a
community. Specifically, the algorithm puts k-cliques into a community that share k – 1 nodes
with each other. In the example, each of the cliques C1–C2–C3, C2–C3–C4, and C3–C4–C5
shares two nodes with one other clique, leading them to end up in a community. The same
logic leads C5–C6–C7, C5–C7–C8, and C6–C7–C8 to end up in another community. By
following these two steps, the algorithm naturally allows communities that are not fully
connected, for instance, C1–C2–C3 and C3–C4–C5 are in the same community, yet they
share only one node. The algorithm also allows nodes that are shared by multiple
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 19
communities, for instance, C5 is part of both communities. Finally, the algorithm also allows
isolated nodes that belong to no community if they are not part of any clique. Different
decision rules help identifying the optimal values for k and I when running the algorithm. As
recommended for very small networks, we optimized k and I by maximizing the entropy
threshold and minimizing the number of isolated nodes (for details see Lange, 2021).
We subsequently visualized the identified communities in the original network,
taking into account that we knew to which emotion a specific item should belong. We colored
the items according to the identified communities. Specifically, a priori, there were multiple
items assessing the involved emotions. We assigned a specific color to each of these
emotions. When the clique percolation algorithm identified a community that entailed only
items from one emotion (e.g., a community with only awe items), this community fitted the a
priori expectation. Hence, we assigned this community the color of the respective emotion.
When there were multiple pure communities, we shaded the basic color towards white for the
next community. If, however, the algorithm identified a community that entailed items from
multiple emotions (e.g., three awe and two kama muta items), we mixed the basic colors
proportionally just like color mixes (e.g., mixing the basic colors in a ratio 3:2). Based on this
logic, we assigned a color to each item. If an item belonged to multiple communities, we split
it accordingly, each part representing one of the colors of the respective communities. We
Next to the colored original network, we also created the community graph. The
community graph is a network with communities as nodes and the number of shared
communities as edges. We set the node size proportional to the number of nodes from the
original network in the respective community and split the nodes into pie charts depending on
how many items of each emotion were in the community. If the clique percolation algorithm
identifies partly connected communities representing each emotion as well as shared items
between them, the network theory would explain the data best.
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 20
Finally, we conducted a robustness check. We repeated all analyses multiple times,
each time including only one of the five items measuring physiological changes of awe.
Previous research showed that all items loaded on a single latent variable (Yaden et al., 2019),
which should be a bias against the network theory. However, physiological changes also
hardly distinguish between different emotions (Siegel et al., 2018), which may be a bias in
favor of the network theory. Hence, testing whether results are robust to including only one
time will indicate to which extent the set of items already favored a specific theory. For the
kama muta items, such a problem did not exist.
Results
Manipulation Check
We conducted a manipulation check that confirmed that the vignettes elicited the
predicted emotions. Details are available in the Supplementary Materials.
Main Analyses
Next, we followed the three-step procedure to test the four theories against each
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 21
Results of The Three-Step Procedure For All Three Studies
Study Step 1 Step 2 Step 3
Average between-emotion edge Difference of average within- and between-emotion edges PCL test Clique percolation
Study 1
Condition = mixed M = .021, SE = .005, 95% CI [.016, .039], p < .001 awe: ΔM = .059, SE = .004, 95% CI [.048, .067], p < .001 p(Data|Factor) < - parameters: k = 4 and I = .111
BCA BCA
kama muta: ΔM = .044, SE = .003, 95% CI [.035, .049], p < .001 p(Data|Network) - six communities
BCA
- five shared items
- no isolated item
Condition = awe M = .023, SE = .004, 95% CI [.019, .034], p < .001 awe: ΔM = .053, SE = .004, 95% CI [.044, .060], p < .001 p(Data|Factor) < - parameters: k = 4 and I = .088
BCA BCA
kama muta: ΔM = .037, SE = .003, 95% CI [.029, .042], p < .001 p(Data|Network) - eight communities
BCA
- 18 shared items
- no isolated item
Condition = kama muta M = .023, SE = .004, 95% CI [.018, .036], p < .001 awe: ΔM = .056, SE = .004, 95% CI [.047, .063], p < .001 p(Data|Factor) < - parameters: k = 3 and I = .121
BCA BCA
kama muta: ΔM = .038, SE = .003, 95% CI [.031, .044], p < .001 p(Data|Network) - seven communities
BCA
- nine shared items
- two isolated items
Study 2 M = .014, SE = .001, 95% CI [.012, .017], p < .001 shame: ΔM = .040, SE = .001, 95% CI [.036, .043], p < .001 p(Data|Factor) < - parameters: k = 5 and I = .066
BCA BCA
guilt: ΔM = .050, SE = .001, 95% CI [.047, .052], p < .001 p(Data|Network) - four communities
BCA
- nine shared items
- five isolated items
Study 3 M = .021, SE = .002, 95% CI [.019, .025], p < .001 awe: ΔM = .041, SE = .003, 95% CI [.035, .047], p < .001 p(Data|Factor) < - parameters: k = 3 and I = .129
BCA BCA
fear: ΔM = .029, SE = .002, 95% CI [.024, .033], p < .001 p(Data|Network) - six communities
BCA
- two shared items
- three isolated items
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 22
Results of The Clique Percolation Algorithm in Step 3 For All Three Studies
Study Unshared Itemsa Items Shared Between Same Emotionb Items Shared Between Different Emotionsc Isolated Itemsd
Study 1
Condition = mixed I feel my jaw drop (AS_1) I am moved (KA_8) I feel challenged to mentally process what I I feel like telling someone how much I care
I gasp (AS_2) am experiencing (AS_6) about them. (KA_3)
I feel that I am in the presence of something I have the sense of being connected to
grand (AS_3) everything (AS_8)
I sense things momentarily slow down I have chills (AS_9)
(AS_4) I have moist eyes (KA_1)
I have goosebumps (AS_5) I have difficulty speaking (KA_4)
I feel my eyes widen (AS_7) A lump in the throat (KA_7)
I feel awed (AS_10)
I feel that my sense of self is diminished
(AS_11)
I have positive feelings (KA_2)
A warm feeling in the center of the chest
(KA_5)
I feel refreshed, energized, or exhilarated
(KA_6)
I feel buoyant or light (KA_9)
Some feeling in the center of the chest
(KA_10)
I feel/observed an incredible bond (KA_11)
It is heartwarming (KA_12)
I smile (KA_13)
I shed tears (KA_14)
I feel choked up (KA_15)
I am touched (KA_16)
Condition = awe I have chills (AS_9) Some feeling in the center of the chest I feel my jaw drop (AS_1) -
I feel awed (AS_10) (KA_10) I gasp (AS_2)
I feel that my sense of self is diminished I am touched (KA_16) I feel that I am in the presence of something
(AS_11) grand (AS_3)
I have positive feelings (KA_2) I sense things momentarily slow down
I feel refreshed, energized, or exhilarated (AS_4)
(KA_6) I have goosebumps (AS_5)
A lump in the throat (KA_7) I feel challenged to mentally process what I
It is heartwarming (KA_12) am experiencing (AS_6)
I shed tears (KA_14) I feel my eyes widen (AS_7)
I feel choked up (KA_15) I have the sense of being connected to
everything (AS_8)
I have moist eyes (KA_1)
I feel like telling someone how much I care
about them (KA_3)
I have difficulty speaking (KA_4)
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 23
A warm feeling in the center of the chest
(KA_5)
I am moved (KA_8)
I feel buoyant or light (KA_9)
I feel/observed an incredible bond (KA_11)
I smile (KA_13)
Condition = kama muta I feel that I am in the presence of something I gasp (AS_2) I feel my jaw drop (AS_1) I have goosebumps (AS_5)
grand (AS_3) A warm feeling in the center of the chest I sense things momentarily slow down I have chills (AS_9)
I feel challenged to mentally process what I (KA_5) (AS_4)
am experiencing (AS_6) I feel/observed an incredible bond (KA_11) I have the sense of being connected to
I feel my eyes widen (AS_7) everything (AS_8)
I feel that my sense of self is diminished I feel awed (AS_10)
(AS_11) I have difficulty speaking (KA_4)
I have moist eyes (KA_1) I feel buoyant or light (KA_9)
I have positive feelings (KA_2)
I feel like telling someone how much I care
about them (KA_3)
I feel refreshed, energized, or exhilarated
(KA_6)
A lump in the throat (KA_7)
I am moved (KA_8)
Some feeling in the center of the chest
(KA_10)
It is heartwarming (KA_12)
I smile (KA_13)
I shed tears (KA_14)
I feel choked up (KA_15)
I am touched (KA_16)
Study 2 powerless and small (Shame3) - Others are looking at me, I am the center of feeling weak in my arms and legs (Shame6)
angry with others (Shame4) attention (Shame1) feeling hot (Shame7)
blushing (Shame5) avoiding the gaze of others (Shame2) heart beating faster (Shame9)
trembling (Shame8) laughing or smiling about what happened explaining to others what happened
sweating (Shame10) (Shame13) (Guilt11)
avoiding the gaze of others (Shame11) I have done damage to someone (Guilt1) punishing myself for what happened
leaving the situation, hide from others Others will disapprove of what I did (Guilt12)
(Shame12) (Guilt3)
trying to forget what happened (Shame14) What I have done will harm my reputation
shame (Shame15) (Guilt4)
I am responsible for what happened (Guilt2) I have violated a moral or social norm
I deserve to be punished for what I did (Guilt5)
(Guilt6) bad and reprehensible (Guilt7)
angry with myself (Guilt8) guilt (Guilt14)
apologizing (Guilt9)
doing things differently in the future
(Guilt10)
ruminating a lot about what happened
(Guilt13)
Study 3 I felt my jaw drop (A1) - My muscles tensed up (F8) I sensed things momentarily slow down
I gasped (A2) I let out a yell (F15) (A4)
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 24
I felt that I was in the presence of something I felt that my sense of self was diminished
grand (A3) (A11)
I had goosebumps (A5) I attended to everything around me (A13)
I felt challenged to mentally process what I
was experiencing (A6)
I felt my eyes widen (A7)
I had the sense of being connected to
everything (A8)
I had chills (A9)
I felt awed (A10)
I felt afraid (F1)
I felt nervous (F2)
I was out of control (F3)
I could imagine a disastrous outcome of
such a situation (F4)
I perceived such a situation to be dangerous
(F5)
My heart beat faster (F6)
I had moist hands (F7)
My breathing got faster (F9)
I was weak in the knees (F10)
I wanted to quickly get out of such a
situation (F11)
I was speechless (F12)
I attended to everything around me (F13)
I attended to everything around me (F14)
Each of these items is part of only one community. This community can include items of only one emotion or multiple emotions.
Each of these items is part of multiple communities and all these communities includes items of the same emotion
Each of these items is part of multiple communities. Some items are part of at least one community that includes items of only one emotion and at
least one community that includes items of multiple emotions. Other items are part of multiple communities that all include items of multiple
emotions.
Each of these items is not part of any community.
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 25
Condition. Descriptively, the networks were densely connected, entailing largely positive but
also negative edges between all kinds of items, in line with the notion that there were
substantial within- and between-emotion edges. We conducted bootstrap analyses to test
whether between-emotion edges are larger than zero and whether within-emotion edges are
larger than between-emotion edges. Both hypotheses were confirmed in all three conditions.
In fact, all tests indicated that the respective tests are statistically significant and not
statistically equivalent to zero (i.e., larger than the SESOIs). Hence, the results in Step 1 did
not favor the absolutely distinct theory and the dimensional theory. Therefore, we proceeded
to Step 2.
In Step 2, we compared the correlated distinct theory and the network theory more
directly with the PCL Test. The results favored the network theory in all three conditions
observed in the data was even zero under the correlated distinct theory. Hence, the results in
Step 2 did not favor the correlated distinct theory. Therefore, we proceeded to Step 3.
In Step 3, to check whether the network model complied with the network theory in
graphs of the three conditions are depicted in Figures 4 to 6. All of them are in line with the
network theory. That is, there were multiple communities for each emotion and overlapping
networks.
For the mixed Condition in Study 1, there were seven communities of which two
communities were pure for awe and two communities were pure for kama muta. The other
communities entailed items from both emotions. Moreover, all of the shared items were either
between pure communities or were shared between a pure and a mixed community,
supporting a smooth transition between awe and kama muta communities. For instance, the
awe item “I have chills” was shared between a pure awe community and a mixed community
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 26
and the kama muta item “I am moved” was shared between a pure kama muta community and
a mixed community. One item was isolated.
For the awe Condition in Study 1, there were eight communities of which one
community was pure for awe and three communities were pure for kama muta. The other
communities entailed items from both emotions. Moreover, 18 items were shared among
communities. The awe item “I feel my jaw drop” was even shared between three communities
of which one was a pure awe community, one was predominantly awe, and the last was
mixed. The kama muta item “A warm feeling in the center of the chest” was also shared
between three communities of which two were pure kama muta communities and one was
predominantly kama muta. No item was isolated.
For the kama muta Condition in Study 1, there were seven communities of which
two communities were pure for awe and three communities were pure for kama muta. The
other communities entailed items from both emotions. Moreover, nine items were shared
among communities mostly between pure communities or between pure and mixed
communities. For instance, the awe item “I feel my jaw drop” was shared between the pure
awe community and a predominantly awe community. And the kama muta item “I have
difficulty speaking” was shared between a pure kama muta community and a predominantly
awe community. Two items were isolated. The isolated items were surprising given that one
of them was even shared in the mixed Condition.
Finally, we investigated whether the results are robust to including only one item
from the set of physiological changes of awe. When repeating the analyses each with only one
item of the five representing physiological changes for all three conditions, the results again
favored the network theory in all 15 cases. Only in one case (i.e., when keeping only item
AS_1 in the kama muta condition) did the clique percolation algorithm not identify a shared
item, yet there was nevertheless a community with both awe and kama muta items. Details are
available in the Supplementary Materials.
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 27
Discussion
Study 1 indicated that the network theory explains best why awe and kama muta co-
occur. In three conditions, it always fitted the data best. However, positive emotion co-
occurrence is a special case. Positive emotions may co-occur more frequently as they are
more similar (e.g., Alves et al., 2017). Such increased similarity may, for instance, translate
into stronger between-emotion connections, disadvantaging the absolutely distinct theory.
Thus, we aimed to replicate Study 1 with two negative emotions in Study 2.
Study 2
In Study 2, we reanalyzed data on shame and guilt (originally reported in
Breugelmans & Poortinga, 2006). Shame and guilt are shaped by internal attributions of
failure (e.g., Tracy & Robins, 2004). Both emotions involve prosocial motivation to repair the
done damage (Leach & Cidam, 2015; Tangney et al., 1996). When experiencing guilt, people
typically feel responsible for what they did such that they even punish themselves (Inbar et
al., 2013) or they may sometimes be willing to repair the damage, even if this means that
other people are going to suffer (de Hooge et al., 2011). When experiencing shame, people
typically feel inferior, tend to blush (Tangney et al., 1996), or may sometimes lash out in
anger or withdraw (Leach & Cidam, 2015; Tangney et al., 1992). Despite their differences,
shame and guilt occur in similar situations (Tangney et al., 1996), whereby they are ideal
candidates to investigate as co-occurring emotions.
Method
Participants
In Study 2, we reanalyzed data from Breugelmans and Poortinga (2006; norm data).
In total, there were 120 Dutch student participants (94 females, 26 males). Reported age
ranged from 17 to 46 years (M = 19.93, SD = 3.42).
Materials and Procedure
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 28
We reanalyzed data originally collected by Breugelmans and Poortinga (2006). In the
original study, participants read five vignettes describing various situations of personal
failure. The five vignettes were randomly drawn from a set of 15 vignettes, which resulted
from extensive pretesting by Breugelmans and Poortinga. Five vignettes each should elicit
shame, guilt, or both emotions. Information about which vignettes participants read exactly
and which category a particular vignette operationalized is no longer available (personal
communication by Breugelmans). For each vignette, participants rated 47 items that
exhaustively measure component changes of shame and guilt. Of these 47 items, Breugelmans
and Poortinga selected 29 items for further analysis. Even though the data set we reanalyzed
had all 47 items, information about which emotion the excluded items assessed was not
available. Therefore, we analyzed only the 29 selected items. Participants provided answers
for all items on a scale from 0 (not at all) to 5 (very strongly). An overview of all items and
Descriptive Statistics of the Items in Study 2
Label Item M (SD)
Shame1 Others are looking at me, I am the center of attention 2.19 (1.76)
Shame2 confused, not knowing what to do 2.69 (1.62)
Shame3 powerless and small 1.78 (1.56)
Shame4 angry with others 0.98 (1.42)
Shame5 blushing 3.05 (1.76)
Shame6 feeling weak in my arms and legs 1.05 (1.39)
Shame7 feeling hot 3.28 (1.61)
Shame8 trembling 1.52 (1.55)
Shame9 heart beating faster 2.91 (1.63)
Shame10 sweating 2.27 (1.71)
Shame11 avoiding the gaze of others 2.21 (1.71)
Shame12 leaving the situation, hide from others 1.73 (1.67)
Shame13 laughing or smiling about what happened 1.80 (1.71)
Shame14 trying to forget what happened 2.46 (1.48)
Shame15 shame 3.64 (1.38)
Guilt1 I have done damage to someone 2.32 (1.92)
Guilt2 I am responsible for what happened 3.68 (1.28)
Guilt3 Others will disapprove of what I did 2.86 (1.58)
Guilt4 What I have done will harm my reputation 2.52 (1.52)
Guilt5 I have violated a moral or social norm 2.19 (1.77)
Guilt6 I deserve to be punished for what I did 1.20 (1.45)
Guilt7 bad and reprehensible 2.01 (1.71)
Guilt8 angry with myself 3.12 (1.51)
Guilt9 apologizing 3.58 (1.83)
Guilt10 doing things differently in the future 3.40 (1.46)
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 29
Guilt11 explaining to others what happened 3.21 (1.57)
Guilt12 punishing myself for what happened 1.06 (1.35)
Guilt13 ruminating a lot about what happened 3.14 (1.52)
Guilt14 guilt 2.88 (1.82)
Note. Participants provided answers on a scale from 0 (not at all) to 5 (very strongly)
Analytic Approach
We used the same analytic approach as in Study 1 with only one necessary additional
step. As each participant rated shame and guilt for five vignettes, we had 600 cases in total.
As further information about the vignettes was not available, we could not split participants’
responses into different groups of vignettes as in Study 1. Instead, we collapsed over all
vignettes and analyzed the entire 600 cases for one network. Given that participants rated
multiple vignettes, these 600 cases were not independent. To control for the interdependence,
we ran intercept-only multi-level models with a random effect for participants for each
variable. From these analyses, we saved the residuals for further analysis. The analytic
approach then proceeded in the three steps.
Results
We followed the three-step procedure to test the four theories against each other.
Study 1 and, hence, Step 1 did not favor the absolutely distinct theory and the dimensional
theory. Therefore, we proceeded to Step 2.
In Step 2, we again compared the correlated distinct theory and the network theory
probability of the number of striking partial correlations observed in the data was 2.76 times
higher under the model representing the network theory than the model representing the
correlated distinct theory. Hence, the results in Step 2 did not favor the correlated distinct
theory. Therefore, we proceeded to Step 3.
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 30
In Step 3, to check whether the network model complied with the network theory in
were multiple communities for each emotion and overlapping networks.
There were four communities of which one community was pure for shame and one
community was pure for guilt. The other communities entailed items from both emotions.
Moreover, nine items were shared among communities. All of the shared items were shared
between a pure and a mixed community, supporting a rather smooth transition between shame
and guilt communities. For instance, the shame item “Others are looking at me, I am the
center of attention” was shared between the two mixed communities and the guilt item “I have
done damage to someone” was shared between the two mixed communities and the pure guilt
community. Five items were isolated.
Discussion
Study 2 again indicated that the network theory explains emotion co-occurrence best,
here the co-occurrence of shame and guilt. We nevertheless sought to go beyond Studies 1
and 2 in two ways. First, Studies 1 and 2 both focused on co-occurring emotions of the same
valence. A theory of emotion co-occurrence should ideally also explain the co-occurrence of
emotions with a different valence. Second, self-reported items, as used in Studies 1 and 2,
suffer from problems that can artificially inflate correlations between the items (Leising et al.,
subm.), thereby potentially biasing results. Thus, in Study 3, we replicated Studies 1 and 2 for
co-occurring emotions of different valence and controlled for biases of self-reports.
Study 3
In Study 3 (conducted in 2022), we aimed to replicate Studies 1 and 2 with a pair of
emotions with a different valence, namely awe and fear. Fear is elicited in situations of
threats to a person’s safety and includes physiological reactions related to nervousness and
activation, disastrous thoughts, and the intention to flee or hide (e.g., Meuleman & Rudrauf,
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 31
2018; Shaver et al., 1987). Many situations that elicit awe also elicit fear such as dangerous
natural events that are simultaneously fascinating (e.g., volcano eruptions, tornados).
Previously, research studied this experience as threat-based awe (e.g., Gordon et al., 2017;
Takano & Nomura, 2020). Yet, other evidence indicates that this experience is in fact a mix of
two emotions instead of a variant of awe (Chaudhury et al., 2021).
As part of the replication, we also sought to control for common problems that
artificially inflate correlations between self-report items, namely response styles and semantic
redundancy of items (Leising et al., subm.). We estimated participants’ extreme and
acquiescence response styles in the study and controlled for it in robustness checks.
Furthermore, we conducted a pretest to estimate in how far the items we planned to include
are semantically redundant. As part of this pretest, three pairs of items could be considered
redundant according to a very conservative criterion. The full results of the pretest are
presented in the Supplementary Materials. As a robustness check, we then repeated the central
analyses with one item of these pairs dropped.
Finally, we again conducted a robustness check for the awe items. That is, we
checked whether results are robust to including only one of the five items measuring
physiological changes of awe as in Study 1. For the fear items, such a problem did not exist.
Method
Participants
We recruited 521 participants via Prolific.co requesting a gender-balanced sample
from the UK with an approval rate of at least 90%. According to preregistered criteria, we
excluded nine participants who had technical problems playing the videos and two additional
participants who indicated we should not use their data. Furthermore, two participants had
missing data on all variables. Hence, the final sample included 508 participants (252 females,
251 males, four non-binary, one preferred to self-describe). Reported age ranged from 19 to
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 32
80 (M = 40.52, SD = 13.90). The sample size was planned using simulations (available on
OSF) based on the results of Study 2.
Materials and Procedure
Participants watched one of three videos depicting natural events from previous
research on the co-occurrence of awe and fear (taken from Gordon et al., 2017; Takano &
Nomura, 2020). Subsequently, participants rated the 11 items assessing awe from Study 1
(adapted to the current context) and a compilation of 15 items created based on theoretical and
empirical research on fear (Meuleman & Rudrauf, 2018; Shaver et al., 1987; Weidman et al.,
2017). All items were presented in a random order for each participant. Participants provided
answers for all items on a scale from 1 (not at all) to 7 (very much). An overview of all items
Descriptive Statistics of the Items in Study 3
Emotion Label Item M (SD)
awe A1 I felt my jaw drop. 2.31 (1.62)
awe A2 I gasped. 2.19 (1.62)
awe A3 I felt that I was in the presence of something grand. 4.63 (1.86)
awe A4 I sensed things momentarily slow down. 2.92 (1.76)
awe A5 I had goosebumps. 2.55 (1.73)
awe A6 I felt challenged to mentally process what I was experiencing. 2.87 (1.76)
awe A7 I felt my eyes widen. 3.50 (1.85)
awe A8 I had the sense of being connected to everything. 3.33 (1.75)
awe A9 I had chills. 2.57 (1.73)
awe A10 I felt awed. 4.75 (1.82)
awe A11 I felt that my sense of self was diminished. 2.48 (1.74)
fear F1 I felt afraid. 2.56 (1.69)
fear F2 I felt nervous. 2.63 (1.71)
fear F3 I was out of control. 1.57 (1.20)
fear F4 I could imagine a disastrous outcome of such a situation. 5.04 (1.75)
fear F5 I perceived such a situation to be dangerous. 5.05 (1.84)
fear F6 My heart beat faster. 2.80 (1.73)
fear F7 I had moist hands. 1.46 (0.92)
fear F8 My muscles tensed up. 2.30 (1.55)
fear F9 My breathing got faster. 2.39 (1.57)
fear F10 I was weak in the knees. 1.58 (1.05)
fear F11 I wanted to quickly get out of such a situation. 2.74 (1.90)
fear F12 I was speechless. 2.65 (1.74)
fear F13 I attended to everything around me. 2.52 (1.70)
fear F14 I had a trembling voice. 1.33 (0.80)
fear F15 I let out a yell. 1.24 (0.73)
Note. Participants provided answers on a scale from 1 (not at all) to 7 (very much)
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 33
Finally, we estimated participants extreme and acquiescence response style based on
ratings of fictional characters (Baird et al., 2017). Calculating response styles from separate
ratings is necessary to not conflate estimates of response styles with responses on scales of
interest. Moreover, when choosing fictional characters, their personalities are fixed and any
variance between participants is more likely indicative of response styles than substantive
differences. Participants rated Harry, Hermione, and Ron from the Harry Potter series each
with the Ten-Item Personality Inventory (Gosling et al., 2003) on a scale from 1 (Disagree
strongly), 2 (Disagree moderately), 3 (Disagree a little), 4 (Neither agree not disagree), 5
(Agree a little), 6 (Agree moderately), to 7 (Agree strongly). We created estimates of response
styles with common procedures (e.g., Wetzel et al., 2016). For an extreme response style, we
recoded the extreme response options 7 and 1 to 1 and the rest to zero before averaging all
items (α = .86). When recoded in this way, higher values imply that participants prefer
extreme response options over non-extreme ones across all items. For an acquiescence
response style, we recoded the affirmative response options 7 to 3, 6 to 2, 5 to 1, and the rest
to zero before averaging all items (α = .71). When recoded in this way, higher values imply
that participants, to an increasingly stronger degree, prefer more affirmative (i.e., acquiescing)
response options over neutral and opposed ones.
Analytic Approach
We used the same analytic approach as in Study 1.
Results
Manipulation Check
We conducted a manipulation check that confirmed that all videos elicited both
emotions. Details are available in the Supplementary Materials.
Main Analyses
We followed the three-step procedure to test the four theories against each other.
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 34
and, hence, Step 1 did not favor the absolutely distinct theory and the dimensional theory.
Therefore, we proceeded to Step 2.
In Step 2, we again compared the correlated distinct theory and the network theory
probability of the number of striking partial correlations observed in the data was even zero
under the correlated distinct theory. Hence, the results in Step 2 did not favor the correlated
distinct theory. Therefore, we proceeded to Step 3.
In Step 3, to check whether the network model complied with the network theory in
were multiple communities for each emotion and overlapping networks.
There were six communities of which two communities were pure for fear. The other
communities entailed items from both emotions. As there was no pure community for awe, its
network was less salient. Moreover, two fear items were shared among communities. Both
shared items were shared between a pure and a mixed community, supporting a rather smooth
transition from fear to awe. Three items were isolated.
The robustness checks fully replicated the results of the main analysis. All steps
again favored the network theory even when controlling for extreme and acquiescence
response style or when dropping one item each from three pairs of potentially semantically
redundant items. We report the full results in the Supplementary Materials.
Finally, as in Study 1, we conducted another robustness check in which we
conducted analyses again when including only one item of the physiological changes of awe.
As in Study 1, all five analyses supported the network theory. However, when including only
A7 or only A9, the most optimal solutions for k and I identified by the clique percolation
algorithm just fell short of being more surprising than already expected by chance (for details
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 35
on this decision rule, see Lange, 2021). Still the almost optimal solutions showed the structure
predicted by the network theory. Details are available in the Supplementary Materials.
Discussion
Study 3 again indicated that the network theory explains emotion co-occurrence best,
here the co-occurrence of emotions with different valence, awe and fear. Importantly, the
results were also robust to common problems that inflate correlations between self-report
items, namely response styles and semantic redundancy.
General Discussion
Across three studies, we compared four parsimonious, formal theories derived from
broad approaches to emotions that can explain how emotions co-occur, namely the absolutely
distinct theory, the correlated distinct theory, the network theory, and the dimensional theory.
The evidence unanimously favored the network theory. Hence, emotions may co-occur
because each emotion is a network of causal relationship between its components that partly
overlaps with the network representing other emotions. The studies supported this conclusion
for pairs of co-occurring positive emotions, negative emotions, and emotions with a different
valence elicited with vignettes or videos in samples from the US, the Netherlands, and Great
Britain. The pattern was further robust to controlling for response styles and semantic
redundancy of items.
Implications
There is a lot of debate about various findings from research on co-occurring
emotions, especially emotions with a different valence (e.g., Kreibig & Gross, 2017), and
some are pessimistic that these debates can be resolved (Larsen, 2017). We think that
theoretical development will help reconciling many seemingly contradictory findings (see, for
instance, Oh & Tong, 2022). For instance, a theory based on a bipolar valence dimension in
conjunction with proper measurement predicts and empirically supports an L-shaped
correlation of positive and negative emotions and rules out that emotions at opposite ends of a
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 36
dimension can co-occur (Russell & Carroll, 1999). In contrast, a theory based on a bivariate
valence dimension predicts and empirically supports that emotions of opposite valence can
co-occur (Larsen & McGraw, 2014), yet cannot as easily account for the L-shaped
relationship. How can emotion research escape such contradictions? Especially formal theory
building can substantially contribute to the development of fields that produce such complex
patterns of results (Smaldino, 2017). The rather parsimonious, formal network theory that the
evidence favored can serve as a starting point for such a comprehensive formal theory.
Future research may implement the network theory in a formal model and simulate
data from it. Such an approach allows testing whether the model can reproduce multiple,
seemingly contradictory findings in the literature. As a case in point, a formal model similar
to the network theory, the Affective Ising Model, was able to reproduce various patterns of
relationships between positive and negative emotions that previous research often described
as incompatible (Loossens et al., 2020). By allowing different structures of overlapping
networks, we predict that an implementation of the network theory may explain even more
contradictory findings on co-occurring emotions of all types. Furthermore, such a formal
model may even make new predictions that await empirical scrutiny.
One challenge for such a model is the fact that different pairs of emotions may show
very different structures. For instance, the awe and fear networks shared items with each other
and had largely positive relationships between each other. For other mixed emotions, the
structure can be entirely different. Joy and sadness networks may not share many items and
may have mostly negative relationships between each other (for a similar approach see
Loossens et al., 2020). Also, the structure of networks could vary between cultures, situations
asf. (e.g., Boiger et al., 2018). Hence, future research should investigate different pairs of
emotions in different contexts to test whether the network structure proposed in the network
theory generalizes. In light of the current findings, we consider such generalizability very
likely.
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 37
Such an investigation could also pave the way toward a more comprehensive theory.
For instance, interestingly, the number of communities identified in Step 3 in Studies 2 and 3
was smaller and the overlap less strong than in Study 1. Potentially, co-occurring positive
emotions have more overlap than co-occurring negative emotions and emotions with different
valence. This finding aligns with the notion that positive emotions are more similar than
negative emotions (Alves et al., 2017; see also Shaver et al., 1987) and should,
consequentially, show more overlap. Theoretical explanations around contradictory and
shared appraisal dimensions related to the involved emotions may allow deriving more
precise predictions to explain such differences (Oh & Tong, 2022). Regarding the evidential
value of the current studies, they also differed in terms of the kind of items assessing the
components, in the population from which the sample was drawn, and in the sample size.
Hence, it is difficult to draw general conclusions for specific kinds of co-occurring emotions.
Any comprehensive theory of co-occurring emotions may also address other
complex questions. For instance, are co-occurring emotions a new kind of experience or are
they two distinct emotions elicited in the same situation? Take awe and fear which previous
research often studied as a distinct variant of awe called threat-based awe (e.g., Gordon et al.,
2017) and other research provided evidence that it is actually the co-occurrence of awe and
fear (Chaudhury et al., 2021). The network theory treats co-occurring emotions as two distinct
emotions with fuzzy boundaries (Lange & Zickfeld, 2021). As co-occurring emotions result
from overlap of the components of different emotions in the network theory, they may not be
an entirely new experience. However, it is imaginable that such co-occurrence somehow feels
different to the emotional person as feelings may result primarily from the interplay of the
other components of emotions (Fontaine et al., 2013).
Despite a focus on distinctiveness, the network theory can also account for
relationships between emotions. Higher overlap of two emotions could explain why certain
emotions often form higher-order clusters (Shaver et al., 1987) that can even be indicative of
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 38
dimensions (e.g., Russell, 1980). When the components of any pair of emotions show more
overlap, these emotions will more often co-occur, leading to stronger relationships between
them that can manifest in a dimension. Hence, the network theory retains the notion of a
dimension, yet it provides a new perspective on what a dimension is. Importantly, in the
current studies, the analyses identified each emotion and not only broad dimensions.
Following the clique percolation algorithm, we colored the items such that if a community
consisted of only components of one emotion, we assigned a color given to that emotion. If
communities were mixed, we also mixed their respective colors. If emotions were entirely
dimensional, all items should have had the same mixed color. Contrary to this hypothesis, the
colors of all emotions were visible (if anything, awe in Study 3 was less visible). Still, also
each emotion entailed multiple communities. Had we, for instance, assigned colors to
different kinds of components of each emotion (e.g., different colors to physiological changes
and motivations of fear), probably also these colors would be visible. Hence, how networks of
interacting components map onto distinct emotion concepts or higher-order structures
including dimensions is difficult to conclude from the network theory (see also the discussion
in Lange et al., 2020) and future research may illuminate this question further.
Limitations And Future Research Directions
The current set of studies had various strength, yet also leaves room for
improvement. First, all three studies relied entirely on self-reports. Self-reports have various
limitations and may be less able to capture certain components of emotions such as
physiological changes or facial expressions. However, one advantage is that they measure
each component at the same level of abstractness. We took two precautions to control for
known problems of self-reports. As a first precaution, we used multi-componential measures
of largely validated scales, overcoming limitations of the rather common ad-hoc, single-item
feeling scales that dominate emotion research (Weidman et al., 2017). As a second precaution,
we controlled for factors that would bias relationships of items, namely semantic redundancy
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 39
(in Studies 1 and 3) and response styles (Study 3; Leising et al., subm.), showing that these
biases could not explain the pattern of results. Nevertheless, future research should include
diverse measures of components (e.g., physiological measures) and replicate the current
findings.
Second, we have used the PCL Test in a setting in which it may not be ideal.
Notably, it had an unexpected result in Study 2, namely the model representing the correlated
distinct theory predicted, on average, more striking partial correlations than the network
model. According to previous research, the pattern should actually be reversed (Van Bork et
al., 2021). However, the corresponding mathematical proofs applied to latent variable models
with a single latent variable. In the current case, we had two latent variables. In Study 2, the
correlation between the latent shame and guilt variables was non-significant and small.
Accordingly, in data simulated from such a model, the shame and guilt items will have a
correlation around zero with each other. In such a context, a partial correlation between shame
and guilt items could quickly switch signs. Nevertheless, note that we were not interested in
the absolute number of striking partial correlations but in the probability of the number of
striking partial correlations observed in the data under the model representing the correlated
distinct theory and the model representing the network theory. Independent of the absolute
value of predicted striking partial correlations by each model, the probabilities of both models
can be compared. Therefore, the current results are unaffected by this anomaly. Future
research should test the applicability of the PCL test further. Preliminary simulations support
the conclusion that the test is also valid for distinguishing between networks and latent
variable models with more than one latent variable (Van Bork, personal communication).
Finally, the parsimonious, formal models may fail to do justice to the very broad
approaches to emotions. For instance, it is possible to formalize the dimensional theory in
various different ways, leading to different implications the theory would have for the data.
As one example, it could be that a dimension is an extraction of shared data between the
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 40
components, such that the emotion components actually cause the dimension and not the other
way around (as is for instance analytically implemented in Fontaine et al., 2007). As another
example, it is also possible that a dimension is a higher-order causal force that predicts
multiple emotions as would be the case when the correlated distinct theory has another latent
variable that predicts the latent emotions (e.g., Diener et al., 1995). As a final example, there
could be more dimensions than valence (e.g., arousal) that may relate to valence in various
ways (Kuppens et al., 2013). These additional dimensions could have separate cross-effects
on the emotion components or each dimension may relate to different components.
Future research may compare such alternative models to the dimensional theory we
tested. We suspect that the higher-order model has the same implications as the dimensional
theory we used. For the reversed dimensional theory, any relationships between the
components are imaginable. Hence, this theory would need to be specified more to derive
precise implications. And for the multi-dimensional theory, implications would also depend
on the precise formalization of the theory and the included emotions. For instance, think of
two emotions that are similar on one dimension (e.g., valence) but differ on another
dimension (e.g., arousal). As valenced states typically relate to higher arousal (Kuppens et al.,
2013), these emotions would be predicted by valence to the same degree and by arousal to
different positive degrees. We depict such a theory and its implications in the Supplementary
Materials. Such a pattern is imaginable for awe and kama muta (Zickfeld et al., 2020). If this
pattern occurs, the differently positive effects of arousal would attenuate the correlations
between the components of both emotions. Hence, a two-dimensional theory would lead to
the same prediction as the correlated distinct theory and the network theory in Step 1 of our
analytic approach. To test whether the PCL Test that would follow in Step 2 is robust to such
cases, we ran a simulation. In all cases tested, the PCL Test favored the dimensional theory
over the network theory when the dimensional theory was actually true in more than 88% of
the cases. Thus, the evidence in favor of the network theory in our three studies indicates that
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 41
a two-dimensional theory does not fit better to the data. Details are available in the
Supplementary Materials. Nevertheless, emotions can load on more than two dimensions
(Fontaine et al., 2007), leading to complex patterns of predictions that should be tested in
future research.
Constraints on Generality
The current evidence favored the network theory for three different pairs of
emotions, in three different countries, and with eliciting emotions via vignettes and videos.
We also collected a broad community sample in Study 1, reanalyzed student data in Study 2,
and requested equal numbers of people self-identifying as female and male in a broad
community sample in Study 3. Finally, we also controlled for common biases of self-reports.
However, we do not expect that replications would lead to exactly the same results. The
replications will probably show other network structures and would therefore produce other
communities, other shared items, and other isolated items. In fact, in different cultures, for
instance, even different components may belong to an emotion than the one’s we included
(e.g., Boiger et al., 2018). Similar effects are imaginable depending on participants’
personalities (Kuppens & Tong, 2010) or characteristics of the situation (e.g., Averill, 1983).
Nevertheless, we expect that when a replication includes exhaustive sets of component
measures applicable to a specific context for any pair of co-occurring emotions, our analytic
approach would again favor the network theory.
Conclusion
In each emotional situation, people probably experience multiple emotions at the
same time. It is therefore of utmost importance to explain how multiple emotions co-occur.
Theoretical advancement will contribute to such an explanation. As suggested by the current
evidence, emotions may co-occur when a situation activates both networks representing each
emotion or when the activation of one network spreads to the other. Future research can build
on these initial findings to foster theoretical advancement. Eventually, a comprehensive,
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 42
formal network theory promises to explain the complex experiences people have when failing
an exam, receiving presents, or eating chocolate.
CO-OCCURRING EMOTIONS 43