Uniqbu Journal of Social Sciences (UJSS)
E-ISSN: 2723-3669
Volume 3 Nomor 2, Agustus 2022 Halaman 82—87
Copyright © 2022 LPPM Universitas Iqra Buru (UNIQBU). All Right Reserved
INVESTIGATING GRAMMATICAL ERRORS IN RECOUNT TEXT WRITTEN OF
EFL LEARNERS
Andi Sadapotto, Usman M, Muhammad Hanafi, Abd Kahar, Lababa, Lajetta
Lecturers and Student of English Department, Muhammadiyah University of
Sidenreng Rappang, Indonesia
Corresponding Email: andisadapotto@gmail.com
(Received 19 July; Revised 08 August; Accepted 21 August 2022)
Abstract
This research aimed to find out the most frequent errors that the students made in writing recount text. This
research used descriptive method with quantitative data analysis technique to answer proposed question. The
scope of this researh is limited to grammatical analysis and the mechanics of writing components to the forthy
recount texts written by the third year studentts of STKIP Muhammadiyah Rappang. The errors were classified
into six categories : errors in using verb form; thr use of article; the use of preposition; noun pluralization; the
use of pronoun; the use of conjunction. The research findings indicated that the most frequent errors made by
the students were in using verb form, punctuation, preposition, noun, article, and pronoun. It can be inferred
that the students have not mastery the grammar well. They face a lot of problems English language in general
and in particular in writing the English language.
Keywords: recount text, grammatical errors, writing
Abstrak
Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui kesalahan yang paling sering dilakukan siswa dalam menulis teks
recount. Penelitian ini menggunakan metode deskriptif dengan teknik analisis data kuantitatif untuk menjawab
pertanyaan yang diajukan. Lingkup penelitian ini terbatas pada analisis gramatikal dan mekanisme penulisan
komponen teks recount keempat puluh yang ditulis oleh mahasiswa tahun ketiga STKIP Muhammadiyah
Rappang. Kesalahan diklasifikasikan ke dalam enam kategori: kesalahan dalam menggunakan bentuk kata
kerja; melalui penggunaan artikel; penggunaan kata depan; pluralisasi kata benda; penggunaan kata ganti;
penggunaan konjungsi. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa kesalahan yang paling sering dilakukan siswa
adalah dalam penggunaan bentuk kata kerja, tanda baca, kata depan, kata benda, artikel, dan kata ganti. Dapat
disimpulkan bahwa siswa belum menguasai grammar dengan baik. Mereka menghadapi banyak masalah bahasa
Inggris pada umumnya dan khususnya dalam menulis bahasa Inggris.
Kata Kunci: teks recount, kesalahan tata bahasa, penulisan
INTRODUCTION requiring mastery not only of grammatical
Writing is getting more and more and rhetorical devices but also of conceptual
essential today, while in the process of and judgemental elements. Ironically, even
teaching and learning English, writing though writing is perceived to be hardest
ability is the most difficult and complicated skill to acquire, it is becoming more
language skill to be learned almost by the demanding in the age of entire
students in every level of education. Heaton communication via email and other
(1988: 35) stated that the writing skills are communicative technologies.
complex and sometimes difficult to teach,
INVESTIGATING GRAMMATICAL ERRORS IN RECOUNT TEXT WRITTEN OF EFL LEARNERS
(Andi Sadapotto, Usman M, Muhammad Hanafi, Abd Kahar, Lababa, Lajetta)
Grammar is the first writing components that that error analysis serves three purposes.
should be considered in composing a good Firstly, to find out the level of language
writing. Grammar is the main component in proficiency the learner has reached.
language learning. Harmer (2001 : 12) Secondly, to obtain information about
defined grammar as the description of the common difficulties in language learning,
ways in which words can change their forms and thirdly, to find out how people learn a
and can be continued into sentences in that language. In addition, Weireesh (1991) also
language. argued that error analysis is a valuable aid to
Having a good grammar system of a identify and explain difficulties faced by
language, will help the students in delivering learners. It serves as a reliable feedback to
their ideas, messages and feelings eiter to the design a remedial teaching method.
listeners or the readers. Language without Moreover, it can be said that error analysis is
grammar would be disorganized and causes the best tool for describing and explaining
some communicative problems, like errors made by the students. By investigating
rammatical errors in writing. The students students written work, it will provide a
need to know the grammatical system of means to help the teachers to recognize the
language they can communicate with others importance of errors as one of the
in order to transfer the message properly but challenging areas in teaching English.
differ from the pre-eliminary observation by Based on the statement above the researcher
the third students of SMAN 6 Pinrang, realizes the importance to error analysis in
almost all the students lack of grammar the students' writing. That's why the
mastery, their teachers said that the students researcher interested to conduct this
made grammatical errors when they made a research. Based on the curriculum, recount
composition, it because grammar is not text is being taught at the first year and the
taught spesifically. According to James second year, so the third year students have
(1988) ― errors in writing such as tenses, understood how to write a recount
prepositions and weak vocabulary are tye composition in English.
most common and frequent type of errors
that are commited by learners. Since METHOD
grammar is seen only as a means to an end, Research Design
some learners tend to re-emphasize its This research used descriptive quantitative
importance and in the process, they make research. According to Gay (2006 : 9),
many more errors. The lerners usually face quantitative research is the collection and
difficulties in learning grammatical aspects analysis of numerical data in order to explain
of the Target Language (TL), such as in , predict , and or control phenomonena of
subject-verb agreement, the use of interest the method was used to describe the
prepositions, articles and the use of correct errors made by the third year students of
tense ‖. STKIP muhammadiyah Rappang in writing
The students cannot avoid errors mostly reocount text
occur in learning process. Littlewood (1992)
stated that making errors during studying the Research subject
second language can be considered as a The subject population of this research was
means of building learners’ abilities. the third year students of STKIP
Therefore, it is important to analyze the Muhammadiyah Rappang in 2016 – 2017
errors because by learning the errors there academic year . there were four classes that
are many advantages for example, Sercombe consist of two exact classes and two social
(2000) explained that error analysis serve classes , each class consisted of 4 students
thre purposes. Sercombe (2000) explained
(UJSS), Vol. 3, No. 2, Agustus 2022: 82—87
the total number of subject population was researcher explained whats is recount text to
160 students refresh the students understanding about
The researcher used porpusive sampling recount itself . then the students wrote
method . according to gay (2006:113) recount text in 60 minutes . after that the
purposive sampling is the process of researcher collected their works and then
selecting a sample that is believed analyzed the grammatical errors that they
representative of a given population . it made.
meant that the researcher porpusively
selected. Technique of data analysis
The participant or the class that she believed In analyzing the data , there were some steps
would vield a good recount text. 1n addition, had been done by the researcher , it was
the english teacher suggested the class based modified from Ellis ( 1997:15-19) as
on her observation during followed
Teach the class. The sample was 40 which 1. Identefication of errors
consisted of 31 girls and 9 boys, it mean that In this step , the researcher identified of
there would be 40 recount texts to be found out the students errors by reading the
analyzed. Most of the sample was 16 years studnets worksheet one by one and then
old and all of the sample have studied underlining their errors.
english for 6-9 years. 2. Classification of erros
In this step , the researcher stated the classes
Place and time of the research of the errors that have been found into 6
This research will be held at stkip categories , they were :
muhammadiyah rappang on second semester a. Errors in using verb forms
of 2016 -2017 academic year. b. Errors in the use of article
c. Errors in the use of preposition
Instrument of the research d. Errors in noun pluralization
The instrument of this research is written e. Errors in the use of pronoun
text which made by the students of class the f. Errors in the use of conjuction
students will do the task in the classroom. Tabulating the result
The students are given 60 minutes for In this step , the reseaarcher tabulated
writing recount text about the students the result of students errors in order to see
unforgetable experience n their life (personal how many students did those errors
recount). The text should be composed at Calculating the errors
least 3 paragraphs (orientation, event and re- In this step , the researcher calculated
orientation) which consist of 200 300 words the errors in order to know how to frequent
the researcher will take the result of the those errors have been made by the students
students' recount writing to become primary . the researcher used descriptive analysis (
data which will be analyzed in term of percentage )
finding the grammatical errors the researcher The Formula was :
classifies the grammatical errors into six
categories verb forms, article, preposition, Where :
oun, pronoun, and conjunction. P : percentage of each error
Fq : number of frequency
Procedure of collecting data N : Total sample
In conducting the research , the researcher
had a meeting with the headmasterand DISCUSSION
english teacher talked about the purpose . the Based of the findings above , generally , the
arranged the time . in the class , the students grammar mastery and writing
INVESTIGATING GRAMMATICAL ERRORS IN RECOUNT TEXT WRITTEN OF EFL LEARNERS
(Andi Sadapotto, Usman M, Muhammad Hanafi, Abd Kahar, Lababa, Lajetta)
ability at STKIP Muhammadiyah Rappang construct a correct sentence structurally . the
were still slow , the frequency of the errors verb must agree with the subject . Thus , the
that made by students reached 92.5% in students must be able to identify the subject
using verb forms , 85% errors in using whether it is singular or plural , so that it
preposition , 75% errors in using noun , made the students failed to produce the
57.%5 in using article , 52.5% errors in correct form of the verb .
using pronoun , 37.5% errors in using The findings found by the researcher weer
conjuction and 22.5%. similar with the previous researcher found ,
The findings found that the most frequent zheng and Park (2013) ,
error made by the students was error in using Watcharapunyawong and Usaha (2012),
verb forms . there were 37 students made Ikhwana ( 2008) , Ramba (2007) and
this error with the percentage 92.5% in Gunatang (2005) that the second and foreign
using verb , there are some rules that have to language learners were not aware of rulse of
be obeyed , such as the form of the sentence english writing . it generally felt that the
whether it is in active or passive , the tense second and foreign language learners face a
of the sentence , transitive and intrasitive lot of problems in english language in
verb , finite and non-finite verb , auxilary general and in particular in writing the
verb and linking verb . since the students english language . thats why error analysis is
were asked to write recount text , it meant very important in students writing , as
that the tense that used was past tense . the Corder (1974: 125) viewed ―the study of
researcher found that some students failed to error is part of investigation of the process of
put verb 2 in their composition . they language learning . in this respect , it
confused to use the tense correctly . they resembles methodologically the study of the
also failed to put verb 1 after modal and they acquisition of the mother tongues . it
couldnt differentiate whether use active and provides us with a picture of linguistic
passive voice in using punctuation , the development of the learner and may give us
researcher found that the students didnt indications as to the learning process .
aware about which word they should use the moreover Corder (1973:262) argued that
true punctuatuion and whenever select the studying students error also has some
punctuation amrk . in using preposition , the advantages for foreign language teachers :
researcher found that the students couldnt Errors provide feedback ; the teachers
differentiate whether use ―on , in and at‖ in something about the effectiveness of his
the composition , in using noun , the teaching materials and his teaching
researcher found that the students failed to techniques , and show him what parts of the
recognize wherether countable and syllabus need further attention . in terms of
uncountable noun and which word refffered broader planning , they provide the
to singular and plural noun in using the information for designing a remedial
article , the researcher found that the syllabus of a programme of re-teaching.
students couldnt differentiate whether use In addition , based on the findings and
definite and indefinite article. In using previous related studies , the secong
pronoun , the researcher found that the language learner of chinese , korean , iran ,
students failed to use personal pronoun , india , thai , and indonesian have difference
interogative pronoun , demonstrative in the most frequent errors that they made in
pronoun and reflexive pronoun . in using their composition . the most frequent error of
conjuction , the researcher found that the chinese and korean students was error in
students failed to use the correct conjuction using verb , noun , preposition and article .
to connect word , phrase , even clause . the students of iran did the most frequent
moreover , in subject verb agreement to error in punctuation and the minimum error
(UJSS), Vol. 3, No. 2, Agustus 2022: 82—87
was in conjuction . in india the most frequent concluded that the most frequent errors
error that the students made was in the use of made by the third year students of STKIP
article and minimum error was in the Muhammadiyah Rappang in writing recount
spelling . whether in thai , the most frequent text was in useng verb form, preposition,
error that the students made in narrative noun, article, and pronoun. According to the
writing was error in verb tense , then the findings, it can be inferred that the students
desripctive writing was in article and the last have not mastery the grammar well. They
in comparison writing was in error in noun face a lot of problems in English language in
pluralization . however the students of general and in particular in writing the
indonesia particulary at STKIP English language.
Muhammadiah Rappang made the most
frequent error in using verb form , ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
preposition , and noun pluralization. The researcher would express thanks to
The researcher assumed that those errors Allah SWT- the only one substance who has
caused by mother tongue interference or given him a guidance, blessing, and mercy in
indonesian language , some students before completing this thesis. Salam and Shalawat
wrote an english sentence , they made a draft to our prophet, Muhammad SAW, his
in indonesia language , then they translated families and followers untill the end of the
into english language , it made them usually world. The researcher realizes that this thesis
maker erorrs , for example : i went to the will never been completed yet without the
living room and i found everyone at there. assistance the number of people. Therefore,
In addition to the six categories that the the researcher would express his deepest
researcher analyzed , the researcher found appreciate and thank to those people who
that some students usually used have involved in completing this thesis, for
inappropriate vocabulary , the studnets failed their valuable advises, supporting guidance
to recognize which one the vocabulary that and sacrifies. Furthermore: (1) The head of
they should use appropriate with the context STKIP Muhammadiyah Sidrap for the
of the sentences . Therefore , the researcher chance given to the researcher to finish his
suggested for the next researcher to add the study in STKIP Muhammadiyah Sidrap. (2)
kind of errors that the students usually made A.Sadapotto,S.pd.M.Hum the head of
in construct english sentences . English Education Program of STKIP
Moreover , the researcher found that some Muhammadiyah Sidrap for advice and
students didnt follow the instructions from guidance during the year of study. (3)
the researcher . their compostions were not Thanks to her supervisor Dr. Andi
appropriate with the instrument of the Sadapotto,S.Pd.,M.Hum and Rosmini
researcher such as the total of paragraph that Kasman. For their quidance, correction and
should consist of three ( orientation , event suggestion during the writıng of this thesis.
and reorientation ) and the total of wrods (4) The headmaster of STKIP
that should concist of 200-300 . However , Muhammadiyah Rappangfor his permission
those problems were not a constraint for the that the researcher could make in his school,
researcher ,because the students composition and also the third year student of STKIP
based on their own unforgottable Muhammadiyah Rappang their participation
experiences. for being a sample for this research. (5) The
researcher beloved parents Nursaman and
Muliana who always pray for the success of
CONCLUSION study. (6) All the best friends and all his
Based on the findings and discussions of the friends in morning class and afternoon class
previous chapter in this study, the researcher
INVESTIGATING GRAMMATICAL ERRORS IN RECOUNT TEXT WRITTEN OF EFL LEARNERS
(Andi Sadapotto, Usman M, Muhammad Hanafi, Abd Kahar, Lababa, Lajetta)
of English Department for their help, program: pesantren students’ perceptions of
the multilingual simultaneous-sequential
brotherhood, togetherness and advices.
model. JELE (Journal Of English Language
Finally, the researcher offers his thanks and
and Education), 3(2), 44-53.
apologizes for ali people whose names could
Bin-Tahir, S. Z., Hanapi Hanapi, I. H., & Suriaman,
not all be mentioned here, for their help,
A. (2020). Avoiding Maluku Local Languages
services, ideas, suggestions and advices in Death Through Embedded Multilingual
Learning Model: Menghindari Kematian
completing this thesis. This thesis is still far
Bahasa Daerah Maluku melalui Model
from perfect and therefore all constructive
Pembelajaran Embedded Multilingual. Uniqbu
critic and suggestion will be appreciated.
Journal of Social Sciences, 1(1), 53-60.,
May Allah SWT always bless us.
Bin-Tahir, S. Z., Suriaman, A., Hanapi, H., Iye, R., &
Umanailo, M. C. B. (2020). Development of
Buru Local Language Conversation Material