Why people hesitate to help: Neural correlates of the counter-dynamics
of altruistic helping and individual differences in daily helping
tendencies
1,2 1 1 1,3*
Vidya Gani Wijaya , Kentaro Oba , Ryo Ishibashi , Motoaki Sugiura
1 Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
2 School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Atma Jaya Catholic University of Indonesia,
Jakarta, Indonesia.
3 International Research Institute of Disaster Science, Tohoku University, Japan.
correspondence:
Motoaki Sugiura
sugiura@tohoku.ac.jp
Abstract
Recent psychological and neuroimaging studies on altruism–egoism dilemmas have
promoted our understanding of the processes underlying altruistic motivation; however,
little attention has been paid to the egoistic counter-dynamics that prompt hesitancy to
help. These counter-dynamics may involve the construction of reasons not to help based
on contextual elaboration and explain individual differences in the tendency to help others
in daily life. In this functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study, we explored
the neural correlates of altruism–egoism dilemmas during empathy-driven helping
decisions, with particular attention to the counter-dynamics related to individual helping
tendency traits. We used two context-rich helping decision scenarios. In the empathy
dilemma (Emp) scenario, empathy-driven motivation to help a poor person was
associated with a cost, whereas in the economic dilemma (Eco) scenario, self-beneficial
motivation to help a non-poor person was associated with a cost. Our results showed
activation of the right anterior prefrontal cortices, supramarginal gyrus, and posterior
cingulate cortex (PCC) for the altruism–egoism dilemma (i.e., Emp > Eco). A significant
negative effect of the helping tendency trait score was observed on PCC activation;
interestingly, this effect was observed for both Emp and Eco dilemmas. The identified
neural correlates of altruism–egoism dilemmas appear to be related to the construction of
decision reasons based on contextual elaboration in naturalistic situations. In contrast to
the classical view, our results suggest a two-stage model that includes an altruistic helping
decision followed by counter-dynamics to determine the individual helping tendency.
Keywords: Altruism, empathy, decision-making, moral-dilemma, fMRI, personality,
posterior cingulate cortex
Introduction
Although most people are happy to help others who are in adverse situations, we
often hesitate to act after contemplating the consequences to ourselves. For example, we
might easily decide to offer a bottle of water to a thirsty person, but then defer because
we would have less to spend for lunch. We might offer organ donation to save a life, but
then decline after considering our own medical risks and the concerns of close friends
and family. Such non-helping decisions are typically accompanied by moral pain, which
we must then overcome. Interestingly, some people often choose to help while others
rarely experience such altruism–egoism dilemmas.
Recently, psychological studies on altruism–egoism dilemmas have primarily
focused on altruistic motivation. Early studies doubted purely altruistic motivation behind
helping (Cialdini, 1991; Harris, 1977; Schroeder et al., 1988). However, recent research
has mainly been based on the empathy–altruism hypothesis (Batson et al., 1991), in which
altruistic helping of disadvantaged others is assumed to be driven purely by natural
empathic feeling (Harbaugh et al., 2007; Rodrigue et al., 2011). Individual differences in
the tendency to help others have also been attributed to differences in the tendency to
have empathic concern for others (Batson et al., 1983; Decety et al., 2016).
Neuroimaging studies on altruism–egoism dilemmas have also focused on
altruistic motivation, based on an experimental paradigm in which participants can
choose to help a person who is receiving electric pain, by taking on some of their pain
(Singer et al., 2004). The anterior insula (AI) and temporoparietal junction (TPJ) are
activated when a person observes another receiving pain (i.e., empathic response),
whereas the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) is activated at the decision to help
(FeldmanHall et al., 2015; Lamm et al., 2011). AI and TPJ activity is greater in people
with a higher degree of empathic feeling during the observation of another person’s pain
(Decety & Jackson, 2006; Decety & Lamm, 2007; Timmers et al., 2018). These findings
have been replicated in people who tend to make altruistic decisions in economic games,
without pain manipulation (Cornelissen et al., 2011; Eimontaite et al., 2019; Sanfey,
2007).
There was a time when psychologists were interested in the egoistic counter-
dynamics that prompt hesitancy to help; early analyses suggested that these dynamics
may involve the construction of reasons not to help, based on contextual elaboration of
the situation. A half century ago, psychologists discussed egoistic counter-dynamics in
the context of the Kitty Genovese case, in which a woman was reportedly killed while
being observed by 38 people. Although it is now known that witnesses did report the
attack, many potential reasons were raised for witnesses not helping despite feeling
empathy, including the awareness of other witnesses reducing the individual’s sense of
responsibility, and the fear of being evaluated by others while asking for help (reviewed
in, Latane & Darley, 1968). Such reasons would appear to be constructed based on
contextual elaboration of the situation, allowing future simulation of potential cost and
risk.
Few experimental studies have addressed the counter-dynamics of helping
decisions, possibly in part due to a preference for well-controlled experimental designs
that prioritize real self-sacrifice in terms of monetary or physical cost while minimizing
the context of the decision. Contextual elaboration in constructing reasons not to help is
unlikely to occur in a minimal experimental design because a rich context is required to
allow an individual to spontaneously explore reasons for not helping. Such egoistic
counter-dynamics may share neural substrates with the resolution of moral dilemmas,
which appear to involve similar contextual elaboration processes that are necessary for
overcoming the moral pain associated with deciding not to help. Several studies have
addressed these neural substrates by devising various moral dilemmas, and have
demonstrated the involvement of the anterior prefrontal and lateral temporoparietal
cortices, as well as the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) (Greene et al., 2004; Moll et al.,
2002, 2006; Reniers et al., 2012), which are the candidate neural substrates for egoistic
counter-dynamics.
Another reason for the scanty of this line of studies is that trait measures for the
individual differences in the tendency to help others in daily contexts has been poorly
developed. It is in part due to the availability and researchers’ preferred use of
individual’s behavioral measure of helping decision in the experimental task (Moll et al.,
2006; Volz et al., 2017). Although some researchers have examined individual traits in
altruistic motivation, most such studies have used the empathic concern subscale of the
Interpersonal Reactive Index (IRI) (Davis, 1980) to evaluate empathy in association with
a particular type of decision (Banissy et al., 2012; Paciello et al., 2013). Recently, an
altruism subscale was developed for the Power to Live questionnaire, which measures
eight personal characteristics associated with survival in disasters, identified through
exploratory analyses of interviews and questionnaire surveys of survivors of the 2011
Great East Japan Earthquake (Sugiura et al., 2015). The altruism subscale has been
demonstrated to measure helping behavior during disaster evacuation at the expense of
one’s own safety (Sugiura et al., 2020), and may be inversely related to the individual
tendency to recruit counter-dynamics during helping decisions.
In the current functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study, we aimed to
identify the neural correlates of altruism–egoism dilemmas during empathy-driven
helping decisions, with a particular focus on the counter-dynamics of helping decisions
and individual tendencies to avoid helping. We used a context-rich scenario to allow
contextual elaboration for constructing reasons to overcome moral pain associated with
not helping. We used two helping decision scenarios, an empathy dilemma (Emp)
scenario, in which empathy-driven motivation to help a disadvantaged other was
associated with a cost, and an economic dilemma (Eco) scenario, in which self-beneficial
motivation to help a non-disadvantaged other was associated with a cost. We expected
that the decision as to whether to help would activate the moral dilemma network (i.e.,
anterior prefrontal and lateral temporoparietal cortices and the PCC) to a greater extent
under the empathy dilemma than under the economic dilemma, predominantly in people
who tend to help less in daily life. We used the altruism subscale of the Power to Live
questionnaire as an index of the helping tendency.
Methods
Ethics statement
The protocol for this was reviewed and approved by the Tohoku University
School of Medicine Ethics Committee (2018-1-785). All participants signed an
informed consent form and were compensated for their participation. All participants
were screened for fMRI contraindications and were given an orientation to the fMRI
procedure prior to entering the scanner.
Participants
Forty healthy right-handed students participated in the present study. All
participants were undergraduate or graduate students of Tohoku University, Japan (26
males and 14 females; mean age = 21.2). Four participants were excluded from the
analysis due to technical errors during data collection and three were excluded due to
excessive head movement (> 6 mm).
Personal characteristics measurements
To measure individual tendencies of empathic concern and helping others in
adverse situations, we used the empathic concern subscale of the Japanese version of the
IRI (Himichi et al., 2017) and the altruism subscale of the Power to Live questionnaire
(Sugiura et al., 2015), respectively, in association with stimulus and fMRI data analyses.
The empathic concern scale is composed of seven items such as, “I often have tender,
concerned feelings for people less fortunate than me”; respondents rated the self-
applicability of these statements on a 5-point scale (1: does not describe me at all, 5:
describes me very well). The helping tendency (i.e., altruism) is composed of five items
such as, “When I see someone experiencing trouble, I have to help them”; respondents
rated the self-applicability of these statements on a 6-point scale (0: does not describe me
at all, 5: describes me very well). We used the total score of all items for each scale
(responses to the three reverse items for empathic concern were reverse-coded). The
reliability (Cronbach’s α) and construct validity of the Japanese version of IRI (Himichi
et al., 2017) and the Power to Live questionnaire have been established in disaster
survivors (Sugiura et al., 2015) and in normal populations (Ishibashi et al., 2019).
Experimental tasks
For both the Emp and Eco scenarios, each trial was composed of two phases:
context presentation (Con) and helping decision (Dec) (Fig. 1A). Each phase started with
a presentation period (10 s) during which the scenario was described in text, followed by
a rating period (4 s). In the Con phase, the scenario text described a situation introducing
another person whom the participant would later decide whether to help or not; the person
was in a disadvantaged situation in the Emp scenario but not in the Eco scenario. During
the subsequent rating period, the participant was required to rate the degree of empathic
concern they felt (“Do you feel empathy?”) toward the person using a 4-grade scale (1:
not at all; 4: very much). In the subsequent Dec phase, the scenario text described a
situation that would be relevant to a later helping decision; in the Emp scenario, the
described situation could provide a good egoist reason for the participant to decide not to
help (e.g., in a rush or tired) despite empathic motivation, whereas in the Eco scenario,
the participant had some benefit (e.g., monetary or social evaluation) that could mitigate
the cost of helping a non-disadvantaged other. During the subsequent rating period, the
participant was required to rate the likelihood of helping the person (“Are you likely to
help?”) using a 4-grade scale (1: not at all; 4: very much). A total of 80 trials (40 per
scenario type) were conducted; the order of the scenario types was pseudo-randomized.
The interval between trials or phases varied between 3 and 10 s, while an eye-fixation
cross was presented. The entire trial period was divided into four sessions, each of which
lasted 769 s including 16- and 20-s rest periods at the beginning and end, respectively.
Thus, the total length of the sessions was 51 min 16 s.
Stimuli
We prepared the Emp and Eco scenarios in pairs, such that each pair described an
identical situation except for the key features manipulating empathic concern and the
dilemma (Fig. 1A). We collected the sample scenario pairs using an online cloud sourcing
service (Lancers; Tokyo, Japan) and survey software (Qualtrics; Provo, UT, USA). We
asked 100 applicants (without demographic specification or data) to create three pairs
each after an explanation of the scenario specifications, and obtained 243 effective pairs.
We created 82 candidate pairs using the situations and expressions in these 243 sample
pairs, considering their appropriateness to the students, situational variability, and
individual rating variability. Then, we selected 40 pairs for the fMRI experiment from
these 82 candidates through an online experiment using the same cloud sourcing service
and survey software. We asked 349 applicants (130 males and 219 females; mean age =
30.82 years) to perform the same tasks as the fMRI experiment (i.e., rating empathic
concern and helping likelihood) for all 82 candidate pairs (i.e., 164 trials; presented in
random order) and two personality trait measures. The 40 pairs were arbitrarily selected
through discussion among the authors, with preference for situational variability across
pairs, high correlation between empathic concern and trait empathic concern scores for
EmpCon trials, and high correlation between helping likelihood and trait helping
tendency scores for EmpDec trials.
Experimental procedure
Before entering the scanner, participants completed the empathy and helping
likelihood personality trait questionnaires and practiced the fMRI task (20 trials, 10
scenario pairs not selected for the fMRI experiment). The participants then lay supine on
the bed of the MRI scanner and stimuli were presented though a liquid-crystal display
(LCD) monitor via a mirror attached to a head coil. Each participant performed the rating
task by pushing the four buttons of an MRI-compatible response device (Current Designs,
Philadelphia, PA, USA) with the first, second, third, and fourth fingers of their right hand.
The assignment of the fingers to the ratings were counterbalanced across participants.
The participant’s head was supported bilaterally by a cushion to reduce head motion, and
they were instructed not to move their body throughout the experiment, except for the
assigned finger. All trials were created, controlled, and recorded using the E-prime 2.0
software (Psychology Software Tools, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA, USA).
fMRI measurements
All MRI data were collected using a 3-T MRI scanner (Achieva Quasar Dual,
Philips Medical Systems, Best, Netherlands). To obtain functional images of blood
oxygenation level-dependent T2*-weighted MR signals, 40 transaxial images covering
the entire brain were obtained using a gradient echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence
[repetition time (TR) = 2500 ms; echo time (TE) = 30 ms; slide thickness = 3 mm; gap =
0 mm; flip angle (FA) = 85°; field of view (FOV) = 192 mm2; and scan matrix = 64 ×
64]. High-resolution T1-weighted structural MR images were also obtained from each
participant.
fMRI analysis
All functional images were analyzed using the Statistical Parametric Mapping
software (SPM 12; Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK)
implemented in the MATLAB R2016a environment (Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA).
All analyses were performed using the Montréal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. For
pre-processing, head motion along the time-series EPI images was estimated and all
images were realigned. Scanning time lags across the slices were corrected using a time
series interpolation. The EPI images were spatially normalized to the MNI space using
parameters estimated using the MNI-T1 template and structural T1 image of each
participant, which were co-registered to the EPI image beforehand; a segmentation
procedure was adopted to normalize the T1 image. Finally, all normalized EPI images
were smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with a full width at half maximum of 8 mm.
A conventional two-level approach was applied to the multi-subject fMRI dataset
for statistical analysis. At the first level, condition-specific hemodynamic responses were
estimated at each voxel for each participant in a general linear model (GLM) framework.
Each 10-s scenario presentation period of the two phases (Con and Dec) for the two
scenario types (Emp and Eco) was split, with the first and second halves modelled
separately as reading and thinking periods, with the latter being of interest in this study
(Fig. 1B). The rating periods of both phases in both scenario types were modelled together,
coupled with a regressor in which the response magnitude was modulated parametrically
with the rating score; these were intended to tease out sensorimotor effects across fingers.
Thus, 10 condition-specific regressors (EmpCon_read, EmpCon_think, EmpDec_read,
EmpDec_think, EcoCon_read, EcoCon_think, EcoDec_read, EcoDec_think, rating, and
reting_parametric) were included in the model for each session. The six estimated head
motion parameters were included to remove any artefacts caused by head motion. A high-
pass filter (128-s cut-off) was adopted to remove low-frequency noise.
At the second level, between-subject statistical inferences were made for the
contrasts of estimated condition-specific hemodynamic responses. To confirm the
successful experimental manipulation of emotional concern in the Emp scenario, the
contrast EmpCon_think > EcoCon_think was tested using a voxel-wise single-sample t-
test; we expected higher activation of empathic concern-related regions during context
presentation under the Emp scenarios than under the Eco scenarios. Second, to identify
the neural response characterizing the altruism–egoism dilemma during empathy-driven
helping decisions, the contrast EmpDec_think > EcoDec_think was tested using a voxel-
wise single-sample t-test.
Finally, to identify the neural correlates of individual differences in the helping
tendency, we performed regression analysis using the helping tendency trait score (i.e.,
the altruism subscale of the Power to Live questionnaire). We conducted a voxel-wise
search of the trait effect on two contrasts: EmpDec_think – EcoDec_think and
EmpDec_think + EcoDec_think (i.e., against baseline). The former addressed neural
responses specific to the empathic dilemma and the latter was common to both dilemma
types. We also performed a post-hoc region-of-interest (ROI) regression analysis to
address the trait effects for all identified activation peaks in these voxel-wise regression
analyses, as well as to those in the single-sample t-test of the contrast EmpDec_think >
EcoDec_think. The ROI analysis addressed the trait effects separately for the
EmpDec_think and EcoDec_think (i.e., against baseline) and the EmpDec_think –
EcoDec_think contrasts.
The statistical threshold for the voxel-wise analysis was P < 0.001 (uncorrected)
for the cluster formation, and corrected to family-wise error (P < 0.05) using cluster size,
and assuming the entire brain as the search volume. For the single-sample t-test of the
contrast EmpCon_think > EcoCon_think, a small-volume correction was applied to
empathic concern-related regions, i.e., the bilateral AI and right TPJ (FeldmanHall et al.,
2015). Volume images for bilateral AIs were obtained from the automated anatomical
labelling (AAL) brain atlas (Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002), and those for the right TPJ
used a sphere centered at [54, −54, 24] (Morishima et al., 2012) with a 20-mm radius.
Post-hoc ROI analyses also used a 20-mm-radius spherical ROI from the Marsbar toolbox
v0.44 (Brett et al., 2002), with a statistical threshold of P < 0.05 (uncorrected).
Results
Behavioral data
We compared the average rating scores and their correlations with two personality
scores, between two scenario types. For the Con phase, we wanted to confirm a high
empathic concern rating (i.e., close to the maximum of 4) under the Emp scenario and a
minimal rating (i.e., close to the minimum of 1) under the Eco scenario to ensure that
empathy manipulation was successful; positive correlation between the former and the
empathic concern trait was also expected. For the Dec phase, we expected the average
helping likelihood rating to be close to the midpoint of the range (2.5), reflecting a balance
between helping and non-helping decisions among participants for both scenario types.
However, we expected positive correlation between the rating and trait helping tendency
only for the Emp scenario.
rating was > 3 for the Emp scenario and < 2 for the Eco scenario, with a mean difference
close to 1.5 (P < 0.05, two-tailed, single-sample t-test). Correlation (Pearson’s r) with the
empathy concern trait was significant for the Emp scenario, but not for the Eco scenario;
a similar correlation pattern was observed for helping tendency. As expected, average
helping likelihood ratings were close to the midpoint (2.5) for both the Emp and Eco
scenarios, with a significant difference of < 0.5. Significant correlations with both helping
tendency and empathic concern were observed for the Emp scenario, but not for the Eco
scenario.
There was a moderate degree of positive correlation between the two personality
traits, empathic concern and helping tendency (r = 0.50, P = 0.003).
fMRI results
Confirmation of experimental manipulation
Differential neural activation between two scenarios (Emp > Eco) during the Con
phase was identified using a voxel-wise single-sample t-test of the contrast
during EmpCon was observed in the right insula and TPJ, which are implicated in
empathic concern (FeldmanHall et al., 2015), suggesting our successful induction of
empathic concern in the Emp scenario. Activation was also observed in the left anterior
prefrontal region, including the middle frontal gyrus and inferior frontal gyrus. We
performed an ROI regression analysis with the empathy concern score for each peak
differential activation, expecting to find a positive correlation; however, no significant
effect was identified for any of the peaks (P > 0.05, uncorrected).
Neural response characterizing the altruism-egoism dilemma
Differential neural activation between the two scenarios (Emp > Eco) during the
Dec phase was identified using a voxel-wise single-sample t-test of the contrast
was observed in the right anterior prefrontal cortices, including the superior frontal sulcus
and middle frontal gyrus, as well as the supramarginal gyrus and PCC.
Neural correlates of the individual differences in helping tendency
Our voxel-wise test of helping tendency effects on the contrast EmpDec_think -
EcoDec_think, which addressed the neural response specific to empathic dilemma,
showed no significant activation, whereas that of the contrast EmpDec_think +
EcoDec_think (i.e., against baseline), which addressed the neural response common to
4).
4) detected a significant negative trait effect for both scenarios (i.e., EmpDec_think and
EcoDec_think against baseline); these effects were not significant according to the
EmpDec_think – EcoDec_think contrast. Among the activation peaks identified in the
voxel-wise single-sample t-test of differential activation during the helping decision
contrast (i.e., EmpDec_think > EcoDec_think), a negative effect was detected at the right
PCC under the Emp scenario, whereas those under the Eco scenario and the difference
Discussion
Using context-rich scenarios to allow contextual elaboration for constructing
reasons to overcome the moral pain associated with not helping a disadvantaged person,
we explored the neural responses characterizing naturalistic altruism–egoism dilemmas.
We detected activation of the right anterior prefrontal cortices, supramarginal gyrus, and
PCC during the decision as to whether to help under an empathy dilemma (i.e., EmpDec
> EcoDec). Consistent with our expectation, these identified regions largely overlapped
with the cortical areas implicated in moral dilemmas (Greene et al., 2004; Moll et al.,
2002, 2006; Reniers et al., 2012), supporting commonality between altruism–egoism and
moral dilemmas. Among these regions, the PCC showed a significant negative effect of
helping tendency and neural response during EmpDec, suggesting greater involvement of
this region in people who tend to help less in daily life. A more robust negative effect of
this trait was detected in the left PCC by its close proximity in the voxel-wise search;
interestingly, this negative effect was observed during both the EmpDec and EcoDec
periods.
The identified neural correlates of altruism–egoism dilemmas appear to be related
to the egoistic counter-dynamics of helping decisions in naturalistic context-rich
situations. Their anatomical overlap was also prominent in moral dilemma studies based
on context-rich decisions (Greene et al., 2004; Reniers et al., 2012), which tested
responses to viewing morality-related, emotional images (Moll et al., 2002) or asking for
donations to existing organizations without providing a decision context (Moll et al.,
2006).These studies primarily reported the involvement of the mesolimbic and
orbitofrontal cortices, which were not detected in the current study. Moral dilemma
studies that used scenarios where the dilemma is embedded in the context of the decision
(Greene et al., 2004; Reniers et al., 2012) reported activation of the supramarginal gyrus
and PCC, which is consistent with our results. These regions are activated during the
evaluation of realistic situations for which there is no logically correct answer, such as a
choice between two roads to reach a place of employment (familiar congested road vs.
newly constructed shortcut) (Pearson et al., 2011) and self-evaluation of a participant’s
emotions on being offered help with luggage by a stranger (Olivo et al., 2021). Therefore,
these areas may be involved in contextual elaboration for constructing reasons for
decisions, regardless of the decision type. The role of the of supramarginal gyrus in
processing action goals in the sensorimotor domain (Van Overwalle & Baetens, 2009)
and that of the PCC in autobiographical information processing (Busler et al., 2019;
Leech & Sharp, 2014) may constitute the contextual elaboration process for realistic
situations; these areas are also known to collaborate for future episodic simulation
(Schacter et al., 2007, 2008). The anterior prefrontal cortices, which have been implicated
in moral dilemmas irrespective of contextual richness (Moll et al., 2006; Reniers et al.,
2012; Schaich Borg et al., 2006), are known to have a general role in cognitive control
and may be involved dilemma resolution (de la Vega et al., 2016).
The role of PCC activation in the egoistic counter-dynamics of helping decisions
may be conceptualized around the comparison and integration of different types of values,
considering its anatomical location and relationship with behavioral data. Anatomically,
the PCC and adjacent precuneus are considered to have dorsal and ventral functional
subdivisions (Leech et al., 2011; Stawarczyk & D’Argembeau, 2015); in both of these
studies, PCC activation occurred at the dorsal subdivision. In the context of decision
making, activation of the dorsal subdivision was observed during choices between fixed
amounts of money and the probability of winning incommensurable goods such as food
(FitzGerald et al., 2009), and higher activation was associated with better evaluation
performance in people or consumer products based on 12 attributes (Kageyama et al.,
2019). There appears to be a gap between the behavioral and neural data, as the effect of
helping tendency on helping likelihood was specific to the Emp scenario in this study,
whereas its effect on neural activation during decision-making was common to both
scenario types. Thus, in people who tend to help less in daily life, PCC activation was
high during the decision as to whether to help under both empathic and economic
dilemmas, and was behaviorally reflected in reduced helping likelihood only under the
former condition. This gap may occur because the participant must compare and integrate
altruistic (i.e., socioemotional) and egoistic (i.e., materialistic) values under the empathic
dilemma (Lee et al., 2019; Volz et al., 2017), whereas competing values are largely
egoistic under the economic dilemma.
The negative effect of helping tendency on PCC activation observed in this study
may be consistent with the generally inverse relationship between the adaptive
personality trait and degree of neural activity. Helping tendency is considered to be an
adaptive personality trait; in the Power to Live questionnaire, it is scored using the
altruism subscale as one of the eight psycho-behavioral characteristics beneficial for
survival in disasters (Sugiura et al., 2015) and has been demonstrated to be associated
with both the tendency to help others (Sugiura et al., 2020) and to be helped by others in
the aftermath of a disaster (Sugiura et al., 2021). These findings are consistent with the
notion that altruistic tendencies are adaptive in response to social processes, although its
evolutionary process remains controversial (Boyd & Richerson, 2009; Glassman, 2000;
Trivers, 1971). The adaptive capacity of abilities that are generally achieved through brain
activity may be related to low, rather than high, brain activity. However, adaptive
personality traits are rarely associated with lower brain activation in situations where the
adaptive nature of the trait is exerted. For example, among other Power to Live subscales,
the adaptive trait of problem solving is associated with lower brain activation in motor-
related areas (Miura, Yoshii, et al., 2020), stubbornness (i.e., resistance to social
conformity pressure) in a cognitive control area (Miura, Sugiura, et al., 2020), and
emotion regulation in extensive cortical regions including the prefrontal control system
(Sugiura et al., 2022).The concept of mindfulness (Bishop et al., 2004) may be relevant
to the adaptive role of reduced PCC activation. Trait mindfulness has been shown to be
correlated with prosocial behavior (Donald et al., 2019) and reduced PCC activation was
observed during mindful acceptance of emotion (Messina et al., 2021). However, the
relationship between PCC activation and adaptability may be nonlinear; fear of death and
PCC activation were shown to have a quadratic relationship during the contemplation of
one’s own death (Hirano et al., 2021).
Based on these considerations, we propose a two-stage model of altruistic helping
decision-making. The first stage is an altruism–egoism dilemma process, in which
empathy-driven helping motivation conflicts with egoistic cost and may be subject to
little individual difference. This stage may feature a contextual elaboration process for
constructing reasons for the decision in naturalistic context-rich situations, in the right
anterior prefrontal cortices and supramarginal gyrus. The second stage concerns the key
counter-dynamics of the helping decision, and is responsible for individual differences in
the helping tendency in daily life. This stage may be related to the comparison and
integration of different types of values in the PCC. There are two important implications
of this proposed model. First, the important determinant of individual differences in the
helping tendency appears to exist outside of the empathic process, in contrast to the
classic view (Batson et al., 1991; FeldmanHall et al., 2015). Second, the latter stage
appears to be non-specific to altruistic helping decisions; although the effect was
expressed behaviorally only in altruistic helping in this study, the effect of this trait on
the neural process was also present in the egoistic helping decision and may be expressed
behaviorally in other decision contexts in daily life.
One limitation of this study is the virtual nature of the helping decision; thus, our
findings may not be applicable to actual helping decisions accompanied by real costs.
However, we believe that the tasks designed in this study simulated the psychological and
neural processes of actual helping decisions, as the helping likelihood rating was
correlated with helping tendency, which is associated with real-world helping behaviors,
as previously established (Sugiura et al., 2020).
Acknowledgment
We thank Azumi Tanabe, Kanan Hirano, Koichi Toida, Suguru Maruyama, Shoki Ogata,
Yi Ding, and Yumi Hamamoto for their support for the fMRI experiment.
Authors Contributions
VW, KO, RI, and MS contributed to the conception and design of the study. KO, RI, and
VW prepared the experimental stimuli. VW, KO, and RI carried out the experiment. VW,
KO, RI, and MS analysed the data. VW and MS wrote the manuscript. All authors
contributed to the manuscript and approved the submitted version.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Supplementary Material
The Supplementary Materials of Behavioural and ROI data (behaviour-ROI.xlsx) is
available.