Uniqbu Journal of Social Sciences (UJSS)
E-ISSN: 2723-3669
Volume 3 Nomor 2, Agustus 2022 Halaman 54—59
Copyright © 2022 LPPM Universitas Iqra Buru (UNIQBU). All Right Reserved
INTERPLAY OF SELF CONFIDENCE AND ORAL COMMUNICATION OF ENGLISH
LEARNERS
Buhari, Muhammad Hanafi, Andi Sadapotto, Ibrahim Manda, Nadirah, Andi
Atira Masyita.
English Department, University of Muhammadiyah Sidenreng rappang, Indonesia
Corresponding Email: buharabuhara@gmail.com
(Received 19 July; Revised 08 August; Accepted 21 August 2022)
Abstract
This Article aims to describe whether there is a relationship between students 'self-confidence with students'
oral ability. This research uses cluster sumpling method and oral test. The population in this research is the
students of class VII SMPN 9 Pinrang. The total population is 104 students. The sample used is class VIIL.1
amounted to 28 students. The method used in the assessment of speech is an oral test. Result of research by using
Pearson Product Moment obtained r value count 0,700 and with value of product r product moment product
with N = 28 found 0,478 at significant level 1% and found 0,374 at level signifikan5%. And to know the level of
product moment correlation then coefficient 0.61-0.80 = substantial.Thus it can be interpreted to the rxy that
between variable X and variable Y. It can be seen on the analysis result that is: 0,700> 0,478 (5%) and 0,700
0,374 (1%) with d.b:28. This means Ho is rejected and Ha accepted. The conclusion in this study is there is a
significant relationship between student self-confidence and oral ability of eight-year students SMPN 9 Pinrang.
Keywords: Self Confidence, Oral Skill
Abstrak
Artikel ini bertujuan untuk mendeskripsikan apakah ada hubungan antara rasa percaya diri siswa dengan
kemampuan lisan siswa. Penelitian ini menggunakan metode cluster sumpling dan tes lisan. Populasi dalam
penelitian ini adalah siswa kelas VII SMPN 9 Pinrang. Jumlah populasi adalah 104 siswa. Sampel yang
digunakan adalah siswa kelas VII.1 yang berjumlah 28 siswa. Metode yang digunakan dalam penilaian
kemampuan berbicara adalah tes lisan. Hasil penelitian dengan menggunakan Pearson Product Moment
diperoleh nilai r hitung 0,700 dan dengan nilai r product moment product dengan N = 28 didapatkan 0,478
pada taraf signifikan 1% dan ditemukan 0,374 pada taraf signifikan5%. Dan untuk mengetahui tingkat korelasi
product moment maka koefisien 0,61-0,80 = substansial. Dengan demikian dapat diinterpretasikan terhadap rxy
bahwa antara variabel X dan variabel Y. Hal ini dapat dilihat pada hasil analisis yaitu : 0,700 > 0,478 (5% )
dan 0,700 0,374 (1%) dengan d.b:28. Artinya Ho ditolak dan Ha diterima. Kesimpulan dalam penelitian ini
adalah terdapat hubungan yang signifikan antara kepercayaan diri siswa dengan kemampuan lisan siswa kelas
VIII SMPN 9 Pinrang.
Kata Kunci: Percaya Diri, Keterampilan Lisan
INTRODUCTION motivation, diligent, and self-confidence in
learning. Self-confidence is one aspect that is
Self-confidence brings influence in the
able to make people success it plays an
students learning process it has dose relation to
the information of the students' motivation. important role, as the fact show many people
failed in their business, in the country; high self-
There are a lot of aspect the encourage people to
confidence can up lift people's willingness or
be successful in their learning such as attitude,
INTERPLAY OF SELF CONFIDENCE AND ORAL COMMUNICATION OF ENGLISH LEARNERS
(Buhari, Muhammad Hanafi, Andi Sadapotto, Ibrahim Manda, Nadirah, Andi Atira Masyita)
strong desire in to accomplish something. The support from the all of the their teacher
success of the people may be greaty offended by headmaster and their parents. It is that the
their competence in communication. The students who have self-confidence can perform
students' in learning English particularly in oral all learning activities better than those with low
must have self confidence. self-confidence. According to Cock in Madja
Without self-confidence the students' may (1997:2) more leamers do better than the other
not have courage to speak to people. Basic on because they have better self-confidence in
the researcher experience when she was studying themselves, if they do not practice well resulting
in junior high school up to university level, most in title of learing of oral. Calvin Coolidge in his
students' are reluctant to use English to philosophy stated that Nothing in the world can
communicate with another only few of them take the of persistence". Talent will not nothing
usually used it. Oral is one the ways of in more common than unsuccessfiul of talent.
exchanging giving and students (giving and Genius is not the world is full of educated.
talking) information through oral communication Refering to the explanation and being aware of
on the world becomes more and more useful. the fact above, the writer is interested in
Oral to another people is the activity that can conduction a research under a title. "The
give someone a high degree of self confidence. Correlation between Self-Confidence and Oral
Many students are frightening to give small talk Skill of the Students at the Eight Grade Students
in the classroom; Vassile( 1992:7) added public of SMPN 9 Pinrang.
oral is the member on fear on students. Oral does
not only involve the knowledge of oral but also METHOD
psychological actor, in this case self-confidence Research Design
without having self-confidence, the students will The method was cluster sampling
get many troubles to speak English in the technique of this research was use description
classroom. In English learning specially English corelation at method to find out the effect from
is a foreign language, students must need self- students self confidence to students oral skill at
confidence to achieve on the subject. the eight grade students of SMPN 9 Pinrang. Of
Vassile(1993) stated that among of the the explained from the result of the student's is
students has the same intellectual ability, those questionnaire.
who have highly self-confidence obtained higher Variable of the Research and Operational
achievement test score on basic skills, than those Definitions
with less self-confidence. In this research, the In this research, the writer used two kinds
writer have chosen the students SMPN 9 Pinrang of variable namely independent variable and
specially the eight year as her research object. dependent variable. Independent variable is the
The students SMPN 9 Pinrang have support and student's self-confidence and dependent variable
motivation from headmaster, teacher and the all is the result in their oral skill. Self-confidence is
of the students parents. Basic on her experienced a feel that something can make the students
she has done Teaching Field Practice in there. brave, and always want to try that something is
The writer saw the enthusiast of the students to interesting. Oral skill is students want to speak to
learning English. The fact is when the his or her friends without shy, and afraid to make
headmaster of SMPN 9 Pinrang went to a free mistake if they speak. Variable of the self-
course for the students who have talent, than a confidence in oral English with its
frame two classes that consist of 28 students. All indicators,fluency, vocabulary common,
the students in SMPN 9 Pinrang can be said motivation, shame and shyness, fear and anxiety.
know basic English pattern, because the students The distribution of the self-confidence is
in English classroom class follow in English questionnaire. Variable of the student's English
exam if they want to enter in the class. oral skill with the indicator in fluency and
In the other hand, this research has accuracy and comprehension. The distribution of
purpose to know that what the studenť's in eighth the student's English oral skill in the oral test.
year is worth to enter the class. The writer hope Population and Sample
witk chosen SMPN 9 Pinrang as her research From the population that the researcher
object the students have encourage English to be find out the eight grade students SMPN 9
(UJSS), Vol. 3, No. 2, Agustus 2022: 54—59
Pinrang the 2016/2017 year, that consist of four From the data have been collected,
class, where there are 25 and 28 students for the writer explained the result from
each class with population are 104 students, as questionnaire from the student's opinion self-
NO Class Student find out the students self-confidence in oral.
The score of the oral was given follows:
1 VIII 1 28
item
2 VIII 2 25
3 VIII 3 25
4 VIII 4 26
Total 104
From the data of population, there are
not many classes in the eight year and the
writer choose classes as a sample that consist
of VIIII 28 students for each class, and the
total number for the sample are 28 students.
Instrument of the Research
The writer used the questionnaire to
find out the data from the student's oral skill
and the teacher's opinion about the students
self- confidence. In questionnaire, the writer
has given are questionnaire to the students, to
find out the opinion. In suggestion there is
any significant To find out the relationship of
the students' confidence with their oral skil,
Scoring Classification
the authors retrieve data from oral with The
Classificatio Score Criteria
researcher gives the theme to the students.
Which the theme of the oral test relates to
economics, culture, sports, school, and
country. High 5 Pronounciation is
Procedure of data Collecting slighthy influenced by
In this procedure oral test researchers mother tounge.
choose to see the level of their ability to A view minor
believe in and the students' oral skill. At grammatical and lexical
previous meetings students have given error.
different test themes. So in this procedure the
oral test chooses to look at the student's level
Substansial 4 Pronounciation is still
of confidence and oral skil. At this stage one
moderately influence by
by one student's progress and give their
mother
opinions on one of the themes that students
tounge but not serious
have chosen.. And researchers will observe
phonological errors. A
the beliefs and the askill to speak when
few minor
students perform.
grammatical and lexical
Technique of data Analysis
error.
INTERPLAY OF SELF CONFIDENCE AND ORAL COMMUNICATION OF ENGLISH LEARNERS
(Buhari, Muhammad Hanafi, Andi Sadapotto, Ibrahim Manda, Nadirah, Andi Atira Masyita)
Resp Score Score Respond Score Score of
onde of item of ent of
moderate 3 Pronounciation is
nt item
influence by the mother
classifi classific
tounge, only
cation ation
a few phonological
errors. Several
grammatical and 1 7 3,5 11 7 3,5
lexical errors, some of
which cause confusion.
2 6 3 12 8 4
Low 2 Pronounciation is
3 9 4,5 13 9 4,5
seriously influence by
tge mother
4 6 3 14 8 4
tounge with the mother
toungr with errors
5 7 3,5 15 7 3,5
causing a
breakdown in
6 7 3,5 16 6 3
communication. Many
grammatical and
7 8 4 17 6 3
To interpret the result of the correlation of
8 7 3,5 18 7 3,5
product moment analysis, the standard
9 9 4,5 19 7 3,5
below :
No R Interpretation
14 8 4 20 7 3,5
1 0 Nothing correlation
21 8 4 25 7 3,5
2 0,01- 0, 20 Very low
22 6 3 26 8 4
3 0,21- 0,40 Low
23 7 3,5 27 6 3
4 0, 41-0,60 Moderate
24 7 3,2 28 7 3,5
5 0, 61- 0,80 Substantial
Su 200 ∑100
6 0,81- 0, 99 High
7 1 Higher
This discussion is for the purpose of
providing specific discussion of the data
analysis. It aims at describing the correlation
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
between self confidence and oral skill of the
The mean score of the students self-
student's at the eight grade students of SMPN
confidence in speech
9 Pinrang. Based on the calculation of the
To know the students self-confidence
result of the self confidence and oral skill,
is the writer used mean score analysis to find
person product moment value is 0,700 and if
outh the score then the result was tabulate and
classified into self-confidence classification.
moment with N=28 it is found 0,478 in level
The mean score if students the self-
of significant 1% and it is found 0,374 in level
confidence the steps as follows :
(UJSS), Vol. 3, No. 2, Agustus 2022: 54—59
significant S%. This means that is the person the first consultant and Drs. H. Tajuddin Posi,
product moment value is grearer la product M. Pd. as the second consultant.
degree of correlation product moment the Muhammadiyah Sidrap for their guidance
coefficient 0.61-00,80 = substantial . The during the years of her study.
outcome of the calculation between the Her endless gratitude goes to the
students self confidence and student s Oral headmaster and the English teachers SMP
Skill has substantial correlation the Negeri 9 Pinrang for their permission that the
calculation shows Ho rejected and accepted, it researcher could carry out research in this
means that there is significant correlation school.
between self Confidence and oral skill of the
students of eight grade of SMPN 9 Pinrang.