SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 1
What is Supportive Parenting?: Perspectives from Chinese Immigrant Caregivers with Low-
Income Status Living in the Greater Boston Area
Xian Zhang1, Jiayi Liu2, Carolina Sopper3, Ja-Hon Wang4, Yoyo Yau4, and Judith C. Scott5
1Mount Sinai Parenting Center
2 Department of Human Development and Family Studies, Michigan State University
3 Metrowest Behavioral Health Center, Justice Resource Institute
4Boston Chinatown Neighborhood Center
5 School of Social Work, Boston University
Author Note.
The data used in this manuscript was supported by research grants awarded to Judith C. Scott (PI)
from the Child Well-Being Research Network (formerly Doris Duke Doris Duke Fellowship for the
Promotion of Child Well-Being) Research-to-Action Grants, Chapin Hall
The authors have no known conflicts of interest to declare.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Judith C. Scott, Boston University
School of Social Work, 264 Bay State Road, Boston MA, 02215. Telephone: (617) 353-7916. E-mail:
jcscott@bu.edu
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 2
Abstract
Chinese immigrant families are the fastest growing immigrant population in the U.S. Yet,
research on Chinese immigrant parenting is limited, mostly focusing on stereotypes such as the
model minority myth and tiger parenting. Little is known about how Chinese immigrant
caregivers (i.e., parents and grandparents), especially those with low socioeconomic status
(SES), define and engage in supportive parenting. Drawing upon Crenshaw’s (1990)
intersectionality model and Darling and Steinberg’s (1993) integrative parenting model, this
phenomenological qualitative study investigated supportive parenting among Chinese immigrant
caregivers with low SES. Twenty-four Chinese immigrant caregivers with low SES and children
between the ages of 2 -12 from the Greater Boston area participated focus groups. The focus
groups aimed to identify parenting goals, values and practices influenced by different cultural
contexts. Supportive parenting goals, values, and practices – both culturally specific and
multicultural – were identified and varied among Chinese immigrant caregivers. The findings
have implications for researchers, parenting programs, and family service providers serving
Chinese immigrant caregivers.
Keywords: supportive parenting, Chinese immigrant caregivers, Chinese immigrant
parenting, socioeconomic status, intersectionality
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 3
What is Supportive Parenting?: Perspectives from Chinese Immigrant Caregivers with
Low-Income Living in the Greater Boston Area
Chinese immigrants are the fastest growing immigrant population and the third largest
foreign-born population in the United States (Migration Policy Institute [MPI], 2020; Pew
Research Center [PRC], 2018). Yet more research is needed to understand parenting among
Chinese immigrant families because most existing parenting research focuses on stereotypes
about Asian immigrant parenting. Most of the parenting research on Chinese immigrant families
focuses on families with middle and upper socioeconomic status (SES), demonstrating
stereotypes related to the model minority myth. The model minority myth describes Chinese
immigrants and other Asian families as economically successful and highly educated (e.g., Shih
et al., 2019). However, there is considerable variation in SES among Asian and Chinese
immigrant families (MPI, 2020). An intersectional lens, which considers how individuals’
multiple identities (e.g., ethnicity, class) and societal forces such as racism associated with each
identity converge to shape individuals’ experiences (Crenshaw, 1990), is needed to understand
parenting across the SES spectrum. Also, Chinese immigrant parenting is often stereotyped as
“tiger parenting” – harsh, authoritarian, and primarily focused on their children’s academic
success (Chao, 1994; Cheah et al., 2015) – and this stereotype is reinforced when Western
parenting frameworks (e.g., Baumrind, 1971) are applied in parenting research. However,
Western frameworks may not be culturally relevant or accurately capture Chinese immigrant
parenting. For example, supportive parenting, which is often conceptualized using a Western
lens, is defined as authoritative and includes nurturing, positive reinforcement, and physical
affection (McNeely & Barber, 2010; Pettit et al., 1997). However, this conceptualization of
supportive parenting may not qualitatively capture cultural aspects of parenting among Chinese
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 4
immigrant caregivers (Chao, 1994; Cheah et al., 2015).
Drawing upon Crenshaw’s (1990) intersectionality approach and Darling and Steinburg’s
(1993) parenting model, this study investigated supportive parenting among Chinese immigrant
caregivers (i.e., parents and grandparents). Focus groups were conducted among caregivers
living in the Greater Boston area with low SES and preschool and elementary age children. Data
were collected on caregivers’ goals for their children and the parenting practices that would help
their children achieve those goals. Thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006) was used to
analyze the data. The findings have implications for researchers, parenting programs, and family
service providers serving Chinese immigrant caregivers.
The Influence of the Model Minority Myth on Parenting Research
In the U.S., the population of Chinese immigrants has increased seven-fold since 1980,
resulting in approximately 4.2 million Chinese immigrants (MPI 2020; PRC, 2021b). Overall,
Chinese immigrants are viewed as economically successful and highly educated due to the
“model minority” myth (Shih et al., 2019). The model minority myth implies that Asian
immigrants successfully assimilate in U.S. society, do not experience or are able to overcome
racism and other forms of oppression, and achieve social and economic parity with the White
population (Shih et al., 2019). However, in the U.S., the income inequality gap among Asian
families is the largest of all the racial groups (PRC, 2018). The rate of Chinese families living in
poverty (17 %) is higher than immigrants overall (15%) and U.S. born families (13%; MPI
2020). Most parenting research about Chinese immigrant parents seems to subscribe to the model
minority myth and focuses on parenting among families in middle to upper SES. As a result,
there is limited research on parenting among families with low SES.
Where parents fall on the SES spectrum significantly influences parenting and family
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 5
processes and the resulting children’s outcomes (Bradley & Corwyn, 2002; Evangs & Kim,
2013). Economic stratification in the U.S. intersects with other identities such as race and
ethnicity to shape the very contexts families live in and navigate, resulting in specific contexts
for children of color (García Coll et al., 1996). Furthermore, individuals’ multiple identities (e.g.,
ethnicity, class, nationality) and societal forces such as racism associated with each identity
converge to shape individuals’ experiences, according to Crenshaw’s (1990) intersectionality
model. For example, SES can affect immigrant parents’ post migration opportunities and
experiences, resulting in differential access to resources and capital. Drawing upon Crenshaw’s
(1990) intersectionality model, we examined supportive parenting among Chinese immigrant
families with low SES in this study.
Conceptualizing Chinese Immigrant Supportive Parenting Using Western Frameworks
Along with the influence of the model minority myth, there is concerns that when
researchers apply Western-based parenting frameworks, Chinese immigrant parenting often has
been miscategorized as authoritarian. This categorization promotes the stereotype that Chinese
parents are tiger parents – aggressive, controlling, and lacking in warmth (Chao, 1994; Cheah et
al., 2015). Often, the authoritarian categorization of parenting is tied to academic socialization
and success, promoting the model minority myth in which Chinese immigrant parents
predominantly focus on academic achievement. This use of Western perspectives results not only
in stereotypes about parenting but also limited examination of supportive parenting among
Chinese immigrant parents.
The most used Western framework in Chinese immigrant parenting research is
Baumrind’s (1971) typology of parenting. Baumrind (1971) proposed four parenting patterns:
authoritarian, authoritative, permissive, and disengaged. Authoritarian parents are characterized
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 6
as highly demanding, rarely responsive, and very psychologically controlling (Baumrind et al.,
2010). Authoritative parents also are considered highly demanding but responsive and supportive
of autonomy (Baumrind et al., 2010). Parents who are permissive are highly responsive but low
in demanding and also lenient; whereas disengaged parents are the least demanding, responsive
and supportive of autonomy (Baumrind et al., 2010). Within this framework, supportive
parenting is conceptualized as authoritative (Pettit et al., 1997) and includes nurturing, positive
reinforcement, and physical affection (McNeely & Barber, 2010; Pettit et al., 1997). Baumrind’s
(1971) typology is one of the most widely used typologies for parenting studies and made
significant contributions to the field.
However, it is possible that Baumrind’s (1971) typology and other Western based
frameworks may not qualitatively capture parenting across different racial and ethnic groups
(McNeely & Barber, 2010; Sorkhabi & Mandara, 2013). Baumrind (1971; 2010) posited that the
parenting styles she identified among European American families should not be extended to
other ethnic groups and that researchers should explore different cultures on their own terms
(Sorkhabi & Mandara, 2013). In line with this perspective, Chao (1994) stated that Baumrind’s
(1971) conceptualization of parenting may not be culturally relevant or meaningful for Asian
American parents, especially immigrants (Chao, 1994, 2000). In response to these concerns, we
explored supportive parenting among Chinese immigrant caregivers by using an emic
perspective which consisted of asking caregivers about the goals, values, and behaviors related to
helping children achieve parenting expectations. Our exploration was guided by Darling and
Steinberg’s (1993) integrative parenting model.
Parenting Goals, Values and Practices
According to Darling and Steinberg’s (1993) integrative parenting model, parenting goals
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 7
and values, which focus on the socialization of children, are significant determinants for
parenting behavior which includes parenting practices and parenting style. Parenting practices
are behaviors defined by specific content and socialization goals (Darling & Steinberg, 1993);
examples of practices are helping with homework and attending cultural events with children.
These practices address specific socialization domains such as academic achievement and
cultural socialization (Darling & Steinberg, 1993). Parenting styles describe the attitudes towards
and communicated to children, creating an emotional environment in which practices and non-
goal directed behaviors (e.g., tone of voice, body language) are expressed (Darling & Steinberg,
1993, p. 493). In this model, parenting goals and values influence parenting behavior. Parenting
practices directly affect child developmental outcomes whereas parenting style moderates
(Darling & Steinberg, 1993). In our study, we only focused on goals, values, and practices
related to supportive parenting among Chinese immigrant caregivers with low SES. More
information on these aspects of parenting is needed before investigating parenting styles.
Using Darling and Steinberg’s (1993) model, we also considered that parenting goals and
values may explain cultural variation in parenting behaviors such as practices. Parenting goals
and values may be informed by beliefs, values, and traditions specific to a culture and as a result,
caregivers from different cultures may engage in qualitatively different parenting behaviors (e.g.,
Chao, 2000; Mandara & Murray, 2002). Differences in how cultures define supportive parenting
may result in differential parenting goals, values, and practices among caregivers.
Supportive Parenting among Chinese Immigrant Families
Parenting goals, values and practices associated with supportive parenting have been
explored among limited Chinese immigrant parenting literature. Chao (1994) proposes that
parenting goals among Chinese immigrant parents focus on “chiao shun” (or jiao xun) or
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 8
training; she identified training goals among parents with preschool and children in first through
third grade (Chao, 1994, 2000). Training goals originate from the Confucian emphasis on
responsibility to roles in service of family and societal cohesion and harmony and therefore,
focus on ensuring that children have socially desirable and culturally approved behaviors (Chao,
1994). These goals can be achieved through care, concern, active involvement, and modeling
proper behavior to children (Chao, 1994). Although parents practicing chiao shun utilize strict
control, monitoring, and correcting children’s behaviors – behaviors characterized as
authoritarian in Baumrind’s (1971) typology – chiao shun is accomplished through a nurturing
and supportive parent-child relationship, and thus, does not carry the negative implications
associated with European American authoritarian parenting (Chao, 1994). Chao (1994) found
that the concept of guan explained relations between training and supportive parent-child
relationships among Chinese immigrant parents. Guan, which in English translates as to care or
love, described how parental care, concern, and involvement are connected to control and
governance of children (Chao, 1994). Practices associated with guan may include monitoring
and correcting children’s behaviors (Chao, 1994).
Similarly, Chen and colleagues (2011) found that Chinese immigrant mothers with young
children focused on training and nurturing their children. Mothers reported that two key elements
of parenting guided their childrearing – jiao, which means educating, teaching, and training, and
yang, which means rearing and nurturing. Mothers shared that the jiao aspect of parenting
focused on training children in early childhood on moral virtues and cultural values (Chen et al.,
2011). Chen and colleagues (2011) also identified guan as an aspect of training among
caregivers. The yang aspect focused on the responsibility to ensure that children grow up
physically healthy (Chen et al., 2011). Parenting behaviors focused on ensuring children’s health
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 9
may also be a way for parents to demonstrate love and warmth (Cheah et al., 2015).
Although there is evidence that there are parenting goals, values, and behaviors that may
be specific to Chinese culture, because the literature predominantly focuses on middle and high
SES, it is not clear whether similar or different goals, values and behaviors exist among Chinese
families with low SES. Furthermore, variation in culturally specific parenting goals, values and
practices is rarely explored. Individuals vary in which cultural ideologies associated with their
group identity are salient to them and the meaning they make of these ideologies (Mistry et al.,
2016; Spencer et al., 1997). Variation in the meaning made of cultural ideologies results in
variation in how individuals interpret their cultural experiences and contexts and their responses
to that interpretation (e.g., parenting) (Mistry et al., 2016). Therefore, there may be more
culturally specific parenting goals, values and practices among Chinese immigrant caregivers
than have been identified, particularly when considering SES. Furthermore, it is also important to
consider that Chinese immigrant caregivers’ parenting is influenced by not only the cultural
norms of their native country but also the ones present in the U.S. (Cheah et al., 2013; Mistry et
al., 2016). Thus, the meaning made of multiple cultural norms may contribute to variation in
parenting goals, values, and practices as well.
Current Study
In the current study, we used an exploratory qualitative approach to investigate parenting
goals, values, and practices related to supportive parenting among Chinese immigrant caregivers,
which include parents and grandparents, of preschool and elementary age children who have low
SES. Grandparents were included in this study because within Chinese immigrant families, they
may act as primary or secondary caregivers (Xie & Xia, 2011). Therefore, their perspectives of
supportive parenting may impact Chinese immigrant children’s development and outcomes.
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 10
This study had two aims. The first aim was to identify caregivers’ goals and approaches
to supportive parenting and the second aim was to explore what parenting practices can be used
to successfully achieve those goals. Focus groups were used to explore both aims. Focus groups
enabled us to access the language and concepts that caregivers used to describe their parenting
experience and “identify cultural knowledge that is shared among group members as well as
appreciate the range of different experiences individuals within a group have” (Hughes &
DuMont, 1993, p. 776). We did not have hypotheses for either aim because of the dearth of
supportive parenting research focused on Chinese immigrant parents with low SES.
Methods
A phenomenological qualitative study design was used to investigate parenting among
Chinese immigrant caregivers with low SES. The phenomenological design captures and centers
the lived experiences of individuals related to a specific phenomenon and the meaning they make
of this phenomenon (Creswell, 2007). To conduct our study, we used a community based
participatory approach (CBPR), which draws upon the strengths and resources among
researchers and community partners to develop a research partnership defined by mutual trust,
participation, and respect, resulting in actionable knowledge (Rubin et al., 2012). We engaged in
this approach to improve the relevance of the research questions to the Chinese immigrant
caregivers, reduce cultural distances between us, the research team, and the communities
explored, and to increase the likelihood that the research would be used by practitioners (Rubin
et al., 2012). Boston Chinatown Neighborhood Center (BCNC), a family services community
organization, partnered with us in this study. BCNC’s mission is to ensure that the children,
youth, and families they serve have the resources and supports they need to achieve greater
economic success and social well-being. BCNC is the largest social service provider to Asian
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 11
residents in Boston Chinatown and the Greater Boston area, particularly those with low SES.
They participated in the study design and focus group guide development, recruitment, and
dissemination; their contributions will be detailed throughout this section.
Reflexivity Statement
All the co-authors reflected on how their identities and experiences may influence their
perceptions of parenting which has implications for data collection and analysis. The first author
is a Chinese national educated in the United Kingdom and U.S. and currently living in the U.S.
Some of her immigration experiences overlap with the study’s participants but she grew up in an
upper middle-class family. She was aware that her SES background may influence how she
understood caregivers’ parenting and lived experiences. The second author is a Chinese national,
who grew up in a middle-class family with college educated parents in Beijing, currently
pursuing graduate study in the U.S. As an international student, she navigates the cultural and
contextual differences between China and the U.S. like the study’s participants. However, she
recognized that the study’s participants may have different experiences and perceptions on
parenting than an only child from a Chinese middle-class family.
The third author identifies as a white middle class European American. She is familiar
with Chinese parenting and immigration experiences due to time abroad in China and is
proficient in Mandarin. She has also worked with international students and immigrants from
China as a higher education administrator and clinical social worker. This author is not a member
of the population studied here and recognizes that the practices of individual people she has
interacted with do not represent a monolithic approach to caregiving. The fourth author was
raised in a Taiwanese immigrant family living in a middle-upper class white suburb. He has
worked with Chinese immigrant caregivers and youth. These experiences and his own
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 12
upbringing have helped him understand Chinese and American differences in childrearing.
However, he recognized that the meaning he makes of Chinese parenting may differ from the
participants because of his economic background and U.S. nationality.
The fifth author is a Chinese American immigrant, who grew up in a middle low-income
family with a college-educated father in Hong Kong. As a first-generation Chinese American
immigrant and raising two Asian American children in the U.S, she navigates daily the cultural
and social contextual differences between Asian culture and the U.S. She was very aware that the
study’s participants may have different lived experiences, social contexts, and perceptions on
parenting than she does. The last author, who is the PI of the study, identifies as a Black
cisgender woman who grew up in an immigrant middle-class family in an urban context. She
became interested in Chinese immigrant parenting and some similarities in immigrant groups’
experiences while conducting an evaluation with BCNC. Because her identities differ from the
study’s participants, she recognized that collaborating with Chinese immigrant caregiver experts
(i.e., BCNC) was needed and that her multiple identities may shape the meaning she makes of
parenting among Chinese immigrant caregivers. To be consciously aware of how their identities
and lived experiences could affect the study, the co-authors engaged in an orientation on cultural
sensitivity and reflexivity, journaled about reactions to focus groups and data, and/or engaged in
frequent discussions within the team about capturing the caregivers’ voices.
Participants
Twenty-four Chinese immigrant caregivers, which included parents and grandparents,
participated in this study. Caregivers met the inclusion criteria which were: 1) to identify as
ethnically Chinese; 2) be a first-generation immigrant (immigrated to U.S.) or second-generation
immigrant (child of first-generation immigrant); 3) live in the Greater Boston area; 4) a caregiver
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 13
of a child between the ages of 2-12 and either biologically related to the child or a legal guardian;
5) over the age of 18 years old; 6) proficient in Mandarin or Cantonese and 7) have low SES.
Caregivers’ incomes were categorized as low SES if their income was less than 80% of the
average annual income in the city or county they lived in; this is similar to how housing
assistance eligibility in Massachusetts is determined (City of Boston, 2019; Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, 2017). We used local instead of federal criteria because the local criteria limit
considers cost of living, which impacts how much a family can afford (The White House, 2021).
Caregiver Demographics
average age of 38.45 (SD = 6.79), with ages ranging from 28 to 52. The four grandparents had an
average age of 61.00 (SD = 4.32). Twenty-two caregivers were female, and 17 were married.
Among caregivers, 12 had an income from $20K-50K. Caregivers’ education ranged from less
than high school degree to college degree. All but one caregiver identified as a 1st generation
immigrant and immigrated from or near Guangdong province, China. Most caregivers (n = 14)
lived in the U.S. for 3 to 10 years. Cantonese was the most spoken language at home (n = 18).
The mean number of children ages 2-11 years old living in households was 1.67 (SD = 0.70) and
their average age was 5.23 years old (SD = 2.99).
Procedures
Using flyers, phone calls, email, social media and in-person discussion, the research team
and BCNC staff recruited caregivers through their professional networks and snowballing. All
materials were translated into Chinese by BCNC staff. Interested caregivers contacted either the
research team or BCNC. Research assistants, fluent in Mandarin and Cantonese, conducted
screening calls to determine caregivers’ eligibility, collected sociodemographic information, and
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 14
discussed the study overview, confidentiality, and potential risk and benefits.
Focus Groups
Through focus groups, supportive parenting was explored as part of a multifaceted study
on Chinese immigrant caregivers with low SES. Supportive parenting was examined alongside
families’ perspectives on harsh and abusive parenting, the influence of contexts on their
parenting, and caregivers’ recommendations to services providers regarding the ways to support
their parenting. A semi-structured focus group guide with open-ended questions was developed
to facilitate discussion. BCNC contributed to the development of the focus guide by providing
feedback through a mock focus group conducted with staff. The guide was translated into
Chinese by the research assistants. Two questions from the guide examined supportive parenting.
First, we asked caregivers what type of person they wanted their children to be in the future.
Then we asked what parenting practices would help their children meet these expectations.
Four focus groups were conducted at BCNC offices, located in two Greater Boston cities,
from August to October 2019. Two research assistants conducted the focus groups in Cantonese,
Mandarin, and occasionally Taishanese. Each focus group was approximately two and half
hours. Childcare and food were provided. Written consent was obtained at the beginning of the
focus group. There were four caregivers in the 1st focus group, four in the 2nd, eight in the 3rd and
eight in the 4th group. Caregivers were audio or video recorded unless they indicated otherwise.
Research assistants served as notetakers to capture the discussion from caregivers who were not
recorded. At the end of the focus group, caregivers received a community resource guide and a
$50 gift card as an incentive. All procedures were approved by Boston University IRB.
Data Analysis
A research assistant with this expertise in translating Chinese to English translated and
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 15
transcribed the focus group recording and notes. After the transcripts were drafted, research
assistants fluent in Chinese reviewed the transcripts to ensure the context was clear and that the
translation was contextually based (Ho et al., 2019). They used a spreadsheet to track Chinese
idioms and questions about interpretation. Then the research team met to discuss and resolve any
interpretation issues. The transcripts were then finalized.
We used a phenomenological thematic analysis using emic (i.e., caregivers’ views) and
etic (i.e., researchers’ views) approaches to analyze the data (Creswell, 2007). Thematic analysis
is “a method for identifying, analyzing, organizing, describing, and reporting themes” within
data (Nowell et al., 2017, p. 2). This method is particularly useful in examining the perspectives
and voices of different participants with consideration of similarities and differences (Braun &
Clarke, 2006). In phenomenological thematic analysis, the data are coded without preexisting
coding frameworks or researchers’ analytic preconceptions (Nowell et al., 2017); the analysis is
data-driven (Braun & Clarke, 2006). We chose this approach to examine the phenomenon of
caregiving using the perspectives of the Chinese immigrant caregivers.
First, we read the transcripts to become familiar with the data and discussed and
documented initial impressions and reflections (Corbin & Strauss, 2007). We engaged in first
cycle coding using in vivo coding, which used words and phrases from the participants as codes,
emotion coding and values coding, which captures participants’ attitudes and beliefs,
representing their perspectives (Miles et al., 2014). We used this initial coding to develop a
we engaged in second cycle coding, which is pattern and theme identification within- and across-
focus groups (Creswell, 2007; Miles et al., 2014). Using the qualitative software, Dedoose, we
applied the codes to the transcripts. Memos were used to record reflections, potential themes, and
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 16
coding questions (Nowell et al., 2017). For each transcript, all researchers’ coding was reviewed,
and coding inconsistencies were discussed and resolved; transcripts were recoded to reflect the
resolutions. Therefore, interrater reliability was over 95%. After completing the coding, we
identified initial themes. Then, we reviewed coded data for each theme and determined if there
are coherent patterns within and across focus groups in research team meetings (Nowell et al.,
2017). Themes were reduced and collapsed, resulting in the final themes.
Results
Several parenting themes were identified using the data from the 24 caregivers in the four
focus groups. The following section presents findings about caregivers’ parenting goals, values
and beliefs, and practices. Pseudonyms were used to protect confidentiality.
Parenting Goals
When asked “What type of person do you want your child to be in the future?”,
caregivers described various hopes and expectations and had multiple goals for their children.
The most common goal for children is to be self-sufficient (n = 13). They wanted their children
to be able to support themselves as adults. JinJin, a mother with an 8-year-old child, described
what her son supporting himself would look like: “Take care of himself, can have his own job,
have an income, can support himself . . .” A mother with four children under the age of 12,
AiChen described why supporting themselves was important. She said:
When my kids play bubble[s], I told them, look at the bubble. It's beautiful but it’s
temporal . . . Just like our lives, it is beautiful on the outside but whether or not it is good,
you have to be responsible for it . . . Educate them, tell them what is good and bad…so
that they can support themselves in the future. When we get old, we cannot watch over
them. How can I say this? Teach them how to control and give them opportunity to
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 17
develop in the future . . .
Along with self-sufficiency, they wanted their children to be self-disciplined and able to
regulate themselves (n = 6). An example of a disciplined child was one who did homework
without needing a reminder from parents. Academic success (n = 3) was also mentioned.
Good health for their children was another hope among caregivers. The desire for their
children to have good mental health was mentioned by some caregivers (n = 5); however, they
did not describe what this would look like. There were also caregivers that mentioned good
health without specifying whether physical or emotional (n = 5). Similarly, caregivers mentioned
wanting their children to be happy but did not detail what happiness looked like (n = 6).
In addition to children’s well-being and success, caregivers had expectations regarding
their children’s interactions with peers and society. Some wanted their children to have positive
social interactions (n = 8). They hoped their children would be caring, communicate well, be
liked by others, and have healthy relationships. Ting, a mother of three, had several wishes:
To thrive, to stay grounded, to thrive in work and live life. I care about my children in
building emotional bonds between people. I feel that it’s very important . . . [I] expect
[my children] in the future to have a good job, to make money . . . I believe every
caregiver will have [those expectations]. But I value more in their future interactions
between people.
In addition, several caregivers wanted their children to contribute to society and not harm others
(n = 6). For example, a mother of 3- and 11-year-old children, Lily, wanted that “. . . at least his
heart is not bad [in the] end, will not do things to cause harm to others, or do bad things.”
When discussing expectations, caregivers often listed multiple goals that span different
developmental domains. For example, Mang, a mother, wanted her 6-year-old child to “be
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 18
responsible, have loving compassion, to grow up in good health”. Caregivers also expressed
different levels of expectations. When the Chinese expression, “Hoping sons become dragons
and daughters become phoenixes” was raised by group facilitators as a parenting goal example,
some caregivers agreed with this expectation and expressed wanting their children to achieve
much (n = 3). A grandmother with two grandchildren, LiRong, said, “We hope they start young
in studying hard, doing well academically, growing up having good health, to become a dragon”.
Some caregivers were not focused on achievement. ChunYan, a mother of two children, said:
We don’t insist on them to have big achievements, just that when they grow up and enter
the society, they feel happy...… First, don’t bring harm to the society, haha, right?
Second, you can live independently, and live happily. [I’d feel] very content.
In summary, caregivers had multiple hopes and expectations for their children and these
goals were across multiple domains. Some explicitly discussed the level of expectations they
have for their children. In addition to these specific goals, when asked, caregivers also discussed
the parenting practices they use to help their children achieve their hopes and expectations.
Parenting Practices
Across the four focus groups, caregivers discussed a variety of parenting practices they
would use to support their children to achieve these parenting goals. In our analysis, we grouped
the practices into four categories – encouraging desirable behaviors, preventing/addressing
unwanted behavior, helping children explore and learn, and addressing emotional needs.
Encouraging Desirable Behavior
Encouraging desirable behavior refers to practices that explicitly promote positive
behavior among children. Nine caregivers mentioned the importance of modeling desirable
behaviors for children. Modeling could be used to encourage reading, teach good manners, and
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 19
explain chores. While discussing her three children, Ying stated:
I think we should intentionally educate them, to be a role model, such as to be concerned
about others, to love and care for others, actually as long as [I] myself do well, then they
will follow us.
In addition to modeling, caregivers set rules and taught children right from wrong to
guide behavior (n = 9). Examples of rules were completing chores, finishing homework before
playing, coming straight home after school, and avoiding dangerous places in the home. Some
caregivers thought that it was their responsibility to tell children what is right and what is wrong,
especially younger children (n = 9). A father of two children, GuoHua shared:
During cooking, they cannot enter [the kitchen]. This is a rule (gui ju) . . . Because the
child is still small, tell them clearly what is right and what is wrong. Because little kids
do not know how to differentiate right from wrong . . . We want to guide them to do the
right things . . .
Preventing/Addressing Unwanted Behavior
Along with promoting certain desirable behaviors, caregivers discussed practices that
would prevent and address unwanted behaviors. When caregivers discussed right and wrong,
they also considered the importance of intervening when an unwanted behavior occurred and
compared Western parenting to Chinese parenting. Some thought the Western style of parenting
gave children too much freedom and when an incident occurred, parents waited to teach children
right from wrong. For example, caregivers in one focus group discussed how American and
Chinese caregivers would address children fighting. They agreed that Chinese caregivers would
intervene immediately and teach children right from wrong. They believed that the American
caregivers would not interrupt to teach until the fight became severe, which they disapproved of.
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 20
Caregivers also discussed limiting potentially harmful or dangerous activities such as
playing video games, watching too much TV, or entering the kitchen without supervision (n = 9).
Some caregivers also described using lengchuli or “cool down” to correct unwanted behaviors (n
= 10). Cool down was described as not acknowledging the child so that the child will calm
themselves and regulate their emotions. One mother, Mang, explained that “Sometimes their
emotions arise out of nowhere and they don’t know how. So, you let them be quiet for a bit, [let]
their emotions calm down then they are ok.” Another caregiver, Lily, described her response to
her daughter’s anger. She said:
My daughter is...when she is mad, she herself will throw things away in the trash can. . .
The more she wants to throw [them] away, the more I don’t pay attention to her, a few
moments later she will pick them up herself.
Sometimes, cool down also was used by caregivers to give themselves space and time to calm
down while parenting. AiChen, a mother, shared why adults need cool down as well. She said,
“We as caregivers, first of all, [are under] a lot of stress from work and taking care of children
and many things. We ourselves are not in good moods.”
Caregivers also mentioned time-out as a separate practice from cool down (n = 9). When
children misbehaved, caregivers asked them to stand still for five or ten minutes as a punishment;
time out was used to discipline the child. One caregiver, JinJin, shared:
just right that he can quiet his heart, to face these things, and also can learn.
Helping Children Explore and Learn
In addition to discussing children’s behavior, caregivers reflected on how to help children
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 21
learn about themselves and the world. One practice they used was trial and error. Caregivers
discussed allowing their children to explore and learn from their own experience (n = 7). They
believed that children have an innate curiosity and want to explore. Under adult supervision,
children should be given opportunities to try and learn. For example, to teach her child to
understand the danger of hot water, WeiWei, a mother of children ages 3 and 6, said:
If they want to touch the hot water, I would let them do it. Under the adult’s supervision,
I will let them try, so they know that it is hot, to know what is hot, what is burning. It’s
better than telling them, without supervision, you can tell them ten thousand times and
it’s still useless.
Caregivers also believed it was important to give their children the freedom to explore,
not necessarily with the goal of learning, but to let them experience and discover the world on
their own (n = 8). For example, Fang said, “I want them to grow up and develop [naturally], let
them explore what they like, or see what their strengths are . . .” They saw freedom as an
important part of a happy childhood and the practice as a good way for their children to learn.
Some caregivers compared Chinese and U.S. parents when discussing freedom. Some compared
freedom to the more structured parenting many caregivers in China endorse. Ling, a caregiver
with a 3-year-old and 9-year-old, shared:
Eastern style has good things and Western style has good things….Like us Chinese, we
are too anxious about our children. Westerners are more liberal . . . educational style
focuses on happiness. As long as the children are happy.
Addressing Emotional Needs
In addition to discussing parenting practices targeting children’s behaviors, caregivers
discussed the practices they use to address children’s emotional needs. Six caregivers talked
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 22
about the importance of just being there for children, playing with them, and spending quality
time with children. One parent shared her insight about providing high quality accompaniment
versus low quality accompaniment. High quality accompaniment referred to face-to-face time
with children when children get parents’ full attention. Low quality accompaniment referred to
despite being in the same space, caregivers are busy doing their own work such as chores or
work, and children play by themselves.
Caregivers also discussed the importance of helping children build confidence (n = 7). A
mother, Shu, shared how she ensured her 7-year-old daughter builds confidence and saves face in
front of her 2-year-old brother. A father, GuoHua, agreed with her approach.
Shu: But for my daughter who is older, if I emphasize too much about right and wrong, it
does not seem to be useful. She is 7 years old now, and her self-esteem is strong, on this
aspect, I would not emphasize what she did wrong. It’s better I just explain to her, what
you’ve done the good, and the not-so-good. In front of her brother, she wants to save-face
too. Because they are younger brother and elder sister, she wants to set a good model in
front of her brother. So, I emphasize more on her self-esteem. If her mistakes are not too
big, basically my attitude will not be too firm.
GuoHua: To encourage more…
Shu: Yes, to encourage more. Because generally here in America, I think [our] children
do not have self-esteem, not confident enough.
Sometimes, encouragement and praises were discussed in the context of giving children freedom
and letting them explore.
In summary, to ensure that their children would meet their future expectations, caregivers
discussed practices that encouraged desirable behaviors, prevented, or addressed unwanted
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 23
behaviors, helped children to explore and learn, and addressed emotional needs. During the
discussion of practices, caregivers also mentioned values and beliefs that guided their parenting.
Parenting Values and Beliefs
According to caregivers, values and beliefs that guide their parenting goals and practices
are reasoning (jiang dao li), developmental awareness, and awareness of children’s emotional
needs. Caregivers emphasized the importance of incorporating reasoning into parenting
practices. They believed children need to understand why certain behaviors are encouraged and
other behaviors are prohibited (n = 10). For example, when caregivers taught children right from
wrong, they often paired the teaching with explaining to children the underlying reasons. When
they disciplined their children, they also provided justifications. One mother, AiChen, shared that
when she disciplined her child, she would “tell him why he is wrong, why I treated him in that
way and tell him where he was wrong and help him correct it.” Some caregivers stated that they
provided reasoning because their own parents rarely explained why they should do something.
Another belief was that parenting choices should depend on children’s developmental
stages (n = 15). For example, caregivers said that they use reasoning and encouragement with
older children but focused more on enforcing the rules with younger children, especially
regarding safety. A mother, Shu, explained “I feel that to teach a child, need[s] to [be done]
according to [the child’s different [developmental] stages, like the little kids…give them a set of
rules… [like] what they can do and what they cannot do”.
The third parenting belief was that parents should pay attention to children's emotional
needs. Although not always explicitly explained, caregivers described actions such as soothing
during an emotional reaction and taking emotions into consideration, stressing the importance of
not ignoring children’s emotions (n = 7). Caregivers expressed that they did not want to “force
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 24
their children” to meet their expectations or “make them suffer”. These three parenting beliefs
and values guided caregivers’ parenting goals and practices in this study.
Discussion
We sought to advance knowledge about supportive parenting among Chinese immigrant
caregivers with low SES by 1) identifying caregivers’ goals related to supportive parenting; and
2) exploring what parenting practices they used to achieve those goals. Using Crenshaw’s (1990)
intersectionality lens, our study is one of the few that explored Chinese immigrant caregivers’
perspectives on goals and practices related to supportive parenting with consideration of cultural
and SES variation. To understand parenting practices, we also explored underlying reasons such
as parenting goals (Darling & Steinberg, 1993).
Findings related to parenting goals and practices had some similarities with existing
literature but there were also unique findings. Although much of the literature on Chinese
immigrant caregivers focuses on academic achievement (Juang et al., 2013), the caregivers in
this study had goals for their children that spanned multiple developmental domains such as self-
sufficiency and positive peer interactions. Some practices mentioned such as providing children
with the freedom to explore and cooldown have rarely been discussed in prior research.
Caregivers also consciously reflected on different cultural approaches to parenting (i.e., Chinese
and U.S.), considering strengths and challenges. This finding demonstrates how caregivers make
meaning of the cultures they are embedded in and engage in multicultural supportive parenting.
Overall, our findings illuminate the need to further investigate supportive parenting among
Chinese immigrant caregivers and have research and practice implications.
Supportive Parenting Goals and Values
According to Darling and Steinberg (1993), parenting practices are shaped by parental
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 25
goals and values. We found variation in caregivers’ parenting goals and those goals covered
multiple developmental domains. In addition, these goals aligned with prior research on chiao
shun or jiao, which both describe educating, teaching, and training (Chao, 1994; Chen et al.,
2011), and yang, which focuses on keeping children safe and healthy (Chen et al., 2011). Goals
related to chiao shun or jiao included wanting children to be independent, self-disciplined,
regulated, have positive peer interactions, contribute to society, and not harm others. Yang
related goals included children having good physical and mental health.
Not only was there variation in goals but also in the levels of functioning caregivers
expected from their children. Some expectations aligned with the Chinese expression “Hoping
sons become dragons and daughters become phoenixes” which focuses on great achievements.
Some cared more about their children’s happiness than achievements. The variation in levels of
expectations challenges the stereotype that Chinese caregivers only want children to have the
highest levels of academic achievement (Cheah et al., 2015; Juang et al., 2013). Moreover, the
Chinese learning model is a moral-oriented model (Li, 2002). The conceptualization of learning
is not just academic achievement, but also effort, attitude, continuous pursuit of self-perfection,
and a desire to better self and others (Li, 2002). Therefore, goals such as self-disciplined and
contributing to society could be part of a moral-oriented learning goal.
Like Darling and Steinberg’s (1993) integrative parenting model, we found that
caregivers’ values and beliefs informed goals and practices. A culturally specific belief
caregivers mentioned was reasoning (jiang dao li). They paired reasoning with goals and
practices that aligned with the training concept (Chao, 1994); caregivers stressed that children
should know why a behavior was desirable or undesirable. Some provided reasoning because
their own parents rarely explained why they should do something. Caregivers also displayed
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 26
emotional awareness through practices such as regulating emotion using cool down and
respecting children’s pride. The parenting value of emotional awareness is present in multiple
cultures (Lan, 2022). Lastly, when discussing practices, caregivers often considered their
children’s age and development. Caregivers did not associate developmental awareness with a
specific cultural context, but the importance of this value was clear. Future research investigating
multicultural influences on parenting may provide insight into the origin of this belief.
Parenting Practices
Similar to Darling and Steinberg’s (1993) model, caregivers identified parenting practices
they use to help achieve their goals. We categorized the practices into four categories –
encouraging desirable behaviors, preventing/addressing unwanted behavior, helping children
explore and learn, and addressing emotional needs. Some practices seemed specific to Chinese
culture whereas for others, it was not clear which cultural context was linked to the practices.
Culturally Specific Parenting Practices
The practices associated with promoting desirable behavior such as modeling, setting
rules and teaching children right from wrong may be aligned with training (Chao, 1994). Certain
practices associated with preventing/addressing unwanted behavior such intervening when an
unwanted behavior occurred, limiting potentially harmful or dangerous activities, cool down, and
time-out also aligned with the training concept (Chao, 1994). These practices also included the
yang aspect of parenting such as keeping children safe. Caregivers used these practices to
intervene/prevent potential physical or emotional harm. One of the practices, cool down, has
rarely been discussed previously. Almost half of the caregivers described cool down as not
acknowledging the child so that the child will calm themselves and regulate their emotions.
Caregivers expressed that this practice was more than just ignoring emotional outbursts;
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 27
emotions can be overwhelming, and children need space and time to control their emotions.
Caregivers’ responsiveness to children’s’ emotional needs, as seen in practices of
spending quality time and being present, has been associated with parental warmth in prior
research (Cheah et al., 2015). Caregivers’ practice of building and supporting self-esteem also
has been documented before and is considered very important among Chinese immigrants
(Cheah et al., 2013, 2015). Overall, these practices may demonstrate caregivers’ responsiveness
to their children’s emotional needs. Based on prior research, these practices seem to reflect the
caring aspect of guan. However, none of the caregivers explicitly mentioned guan. This finding,
in combination with prior research, challenges the stereotype that Chinese parents are
monolithically lacking in warmth and responsiveness (Chao, 1994; Cheah et al., 2015).
Furthermore, it raises questions about how emotional responsiveness is being conceptualized in
Chinese immigrant parenting research.
Intersectionality and Parenting
Chinese immigrant caregivers have multiple identities (e.g., caregivers, immigrants,
Chinese, SES) and the intersectionality of these identities shape their experiences (Crenshaw,
1990). Caregivers seemed to consider the multiple cultural contexts in their parenting practices.
When discussing unwanted behavior intervention, some caregivers reflected on the negative
aspects of Western parenting. They believed that American caregivers gave their children too
much freedom and interfered only when harm was done which they disapproved of. In another
conversation that explicitly compared both cultures, caregivers reflected about trial and error and
giving children the freedom to explore, which was rarely mentioned in prior research. Caregivers
discussed the importance of children learning through their own experiences about themselves
and the world while caregivers supervise. They specifically mentioned the freedom to explore as
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 28
a practice that makes children happy. Some decided to use this practice in response to their own
upbringing or concerns about how parents in China may have limited children’s exploration.
Others felt that one of the strengths of parenting among U.S. families is the freedom to explore.
Caregivers’ discussion of parenting practices demonstrated that they considered the
multiple cultural contexts they were in and navigating (Mistry et al., 2016). They may reflect
upon the strengths and challenges of parenting in different cultures. The meaning they make of
different cultural parenting approaches may inform their selection and/or adaptation of parenting
practice (Cheah et al., 2013). Meaning-making related to cultural contexts depends on the
individual, resulting in variation on whether and which parenting practices Chinese immigrant
caregivers may choose to keep from their culture, adapt from the U.S. or incorporate from both
cultures (Mistry et al., 2016). More research is needed to explore the process in which Chinese
immigrant caregivers reflect upon and incorporate multiple cultural influences in their parenting.
Limitations
The limitations of this study should be considered. First, all but one of the caregivers
immigrated from or near Guangdong Province, China and all lived in the Greater Boston area.
The cultural influences on their parenting may be specific to these geographical contexts.
However, this specificity demonstrates the need for more examination of the interplay between
culture and multiple contexts and its influence on parenting. Second, the original study design
included following up with the participants to verify findings, but the lockdowns associated with
COVID-19 prevented this. We were unable to verify our findings and ask follow up questions
such as what does good mental health look like and how to achieve that. Lastly, although we
included fathers’ and grandparents’ perspectives in our findings, the number was very small; we
were unable to make subgroup comparisons.
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 29
Implications and Future Research
This study contributed to knowledge about supportive parenting among Chinese
immigrant caregivers by focusing on families with low SES and identifying goals and practices
with consideration of multiple cultural influences. Our findings have implications for parenting
interventions and family service providers. Parenting interventions provided to Chinese
immigrant caregivers should have a curriculum inclusive of Chinese immigrant supportive
parenting values and practices, emphasizing the strengths within families. They should also
initiate discussions about how caregivers navigate multiple cultural norms, make meaning of
those norms, and incorporate that meaning making into their parenting. We also encourage
family service providers to discuss with caregivers training goals related to physical and mental
health and determine if any services can be provided to support their parenting goals. Providers
should ensure that the institutions that may interact with Chinese immigrant caregivers such as
schools can recognize culturally specific and supportive parenting strategies.
Future research is needed to determine if our findings are specific to a geographic area or can be
generalized to a broader population. Researchers also should investigate more in depth how
multiple cultural contexts can influence parenting among Chinese immigrant caregivers and
result in variation. Furthermore, more studies should consider alternate ways to qualitatively
capture parenting among this population instead of applying Western frameworks. More research
is needed that investigates parenting beyond academic achievement. Lastly, parenting research
on Chinese immigrant caregivers should be more inclusive of those with low SES to better
understand how SES and racial/ethnic cultural contexts interact to influence parenting.
SUPPORTIVE PARENTING 30