AVİM Commentary • No: 2022 / 42 •
December 2022
POPE FRANCIS' INTERVIEW: RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION AGAINST
BUDDHISTS, SHAMANS, AND MUSLIMS IN THE HOPES OF CHRISTIAN UNITY
Teoman Ertuğrul TULUN
Analyst
In a recent interview with five editors of the America Magazine, which identifies itself as
"the Jesuit Review of Faith and Culture, Pope Francis (spiritual leader of the Roman
Catholic Church) spoke of a "martyred people of Ukraine while suggesting that non-
Russian ethnic soldiers invading Ukraine are "probably the cruelest."[1]
He made the following statement:
"When I speak about Ukraine, I speak of a people who are martyred. If you have a
martyred people, you have someone who martyrs them. When I speak about
Ukraine, I speak about the cruelty because I have much information about the
cruelty of the troops that come in. Generally, the cruelest are perhaps those who are
of Russia but are not of the Russian tradition, such as the Chechens, the Buryati and
so on. Certainly, the one who invades is the Russian state. This is very clear.
Sometimes I try not to specify so as not to offend and rather condemn in general,
although it is well known whom I am condemning. It is not necessary that I put a
name and surname."[2]
To fully comprehend the severe prejudice committed by Pope Francis, one must be
familiar with the background of the characters in the preceding story. Since only
Chechens and Buryats are mentioned, the discrimination initially appears to be based on
racism. They are separated from Russians, although the Russian Army comprises
numerous ethnicities.
Here, the fact that Chechens and Buryats belong to different religions come into play.
Most Chechens are Muslims, while Buryats are Tibetan Buddhists and Shamans.[3]
Alternatively, if it was merely a matter of cultural or national "custom," Pope Frances
might have targeted numerous other ethnic groups comprising the invading Russian
Army, including the Russians.
The media's discriminatory treatment of non-Christian troops in the invading Russian
Army is not a new phenomenon. On the contrary, it has existed for some time. Parts of the
liberal media reporting on the war in Ukraine had already begun to refer to Buryat soldiers
of the Russian Army as "savages," "pandas," and worse.[4]
It is correct that Russia has relied disproportionately on ethnic minorities in its military
operation in Ukraine as its primary combat force. Human rights organizations and
independent media outlets have documented significant evidence of war crimes
committed by Russian forces, but there is no evidence to imply that soldiers from Russias
national minorities fighting in Ukraine have acted worse than ethnic Russians.[5]
Why would the leader of the Roman Catholic Church (the Vatican) think it helpful to
slander people from non-Russian tradition? Some contend that the Vatican is attempting
to mediate the dispute while avoiding antagonizing the Russian Orthodox Church, a
staunch backer of Russias war in Ukraine. Therefore, by attributing the most significant
crimes to non-Christians, the Vatican would keep the door open for further negotiations
with the Russian Orthodox Church. It should be noted that even before the
aforementioned interview, Pope Francis reiterated that the Vatican would do everything in
its power to intervene and resolve the war between Russia and Ukraine.[6]
Despite Pope Francis' efforts to unite Christianity, it appears to have backfired, at least
superficially. The Russian Orthodox Church appears to remain silent on these
discriminatory remarks. However, the Russian government utilized this chance to deliver a
strong reaction. Maria Zakharova, the official representative of the Russian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, stated that the Pope's remarks on the Chechens and Buryats are worse
than Russophobia.[7]
World leaders and governments seem to be looking for ways to stop the Russian-
Ukrainian War and are making efforts to realize this. Some of these efforts are made in
good faith and aim to contribute to world peace. Türkiyes efforts in this regard are an
example of good faith efforts. We read the praises and thanks of certain countries and
the United Nations for these efforts of Türkiye in the international press. It is not possible
to say that some of the ideas expressed in the above-mentioned interview serve this
purpose. In this context, attributing the alleged violence by Russian troops to the racial or
religious backgrounds of soldiers will not make any contribution to peace. On the contrary,
such statements or allusions undermine world peace and deepen the wounds of the past.
Recently, it is reported in the press that Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs has received
an apology from the Vatican after the Popes remarks about the Buryats and Chechens.[8]
Neverthless, it is useful for the leading political and religious leaders of the world to
carefully avoid of making matters worse while trying to be helpful.
*Photograph: Pope Francis and some of the America Magazine staff at Casa Santa Marta -
Source: VaticaNews.va
[1] Dina Newman, Why Pope Francis Was Wrong About Ethnic Minorities In Russia,
pope-francis-was-wrong-about-ethnic-minorities-in-russia/
[2] The Editors, Exclusive: Pope Francis Discusses Ukraine, U.S. Bishops and More,
Magazine, America The Jesuit Review, November 28, 2022,
[3] Elise Ann Allen, Vatican Confirms Papal Apology, Russia Praises Ability to Admit
Mistakes, News Website, Crux, December 15, 2022,
ability-to-admit-mistakes
[4] Ульяна Виноградова, 'Самые жестокие и беспощадные': Анатолий Анатолич
показал бурят, которые зверствовали в Буче, OBOZREVATEL NEWS, May 12, 2022,
anatolich-pokazal-buryat-kotoryie-zverstvovali-v-buche.htm ; Dina Newman, The Savage
Warriors of Siberia: How an Ethnic Minority in Russia Came to Be Unfairly Blamed for the
Worst War Crimes in Ukraine, Media Diversity Institute (blog), August 12, 2022,
russia-came-to-be-unfairly-blamed-for-the-worst-war-crimes-in-ukraine/
[5] Pjotr Sauer, Racist Interview with Pope Francis Causes Fury in Russia, The Guardian,
November 29, 2022, sec. World news,
[6] Reuters, Pope Francis Says Vatican Ready to Mediate to End Ukraine Conflict - Paper,
francis-says-vatican-ready-mediate-end-ukraine-conflict-paper-2022-11-18/
[7] Михаил Котляр, «Это извращение». В Москве ответили на слова папы Римского о
жестокости бурят и чеченцев, News Website, Газета.Ru, 2022,
[8] Hugues Lefèvre, Vatican Apologizes to Russia after Popes Remarks, Aleteia, December
About the Author :
Teoman Ertuğrul Tulun is an analyst at Ankara-based think-tank Center for Eurasian Studies. Dr.
Teoman Ertuğrul Tulun received his Ph.D. in Political Science and Public Administration from İhsan
Doğramacı Bilkent University in Ankara. His area of research include European Union Studies,
Globalization, Xenophobia, Hate Speech Studies and International Relations.
To cite this article: TULUN, Teoman Ertuğrul. 2022. "POPE FRANCIS' INTERVIEW: RELIGIOUS
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST BUDDHISTS, SHAMANS, AND MUSLIMS IN THE HOPES OF CHRISTIAN
UNITY." Center For Eurasian Studies (AVİM), Commentary No.2022 / 42. December 26. Accessed
DISCRIMINATION-AGAINST-BUDDHISTS-SHAMANS-AND-MUSLIMS-IN-THE-HOPES-OF-CHRISTIAN-UNITY
Süleyman Nazif Sok. No: 12/B Daire 3-4 06550 Çankaya-ANKARA / TÜRKİYE
Tel: +90 (312) 438 50 23-24 • Fax: +90 (312) 438 50 26
@avimorgtr
E-Mail: info@avim.org.tr
© 2009-2021 Center for Eurasian Studies (AVİM) All Rights Reserved