AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 1
Age Differences in the Neural Basis of Decision-Making under Uncertainty
Loreen Tisdall and Rui Mata
Center for Cognitive and Decision Sciences
University of Basel
Switzerland
Version date: December 12, 2022
Author Note
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Loreen Tisdall,
Center for Cognitive and Decision Sciences, University of Basel, Missionsstrasse 60-62,
4055 Basel, Switzerland. E-mail: loreen.tisdall@unibas.ch
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 2
Abstract
Humans globally are reaping the benefits of longer lives. Yet, longer life spans also
require engaging with consequential but often uncertain decisions well into old age.
Previous research has yielded mixed findings with regards to life span differences in how
individuals make decisions under uncertainty. One factor contributing to the
heterogeneity of findings is the diversity of paradigms that cover different aspects of
uncertainty and tap into different cognitive and affective mechanisms. In this study, 175
participants (53.14% females, mean age = 44.9 years, SD = 19.0, age range = 16 to 81)
completed functional neuroimaging versions of two prominent paradigms in this area,
the Balloon Analogue Risk Task and the Delay Discounting Task. Guided by
neurobiological accounts of age-related changes in decision-making under uncertainty,
we examined age effects on neural activation differences in decision-relevant brain
structures, and compared these across multiple contrasts for the two paradigms using
specification curve analysis. In line with theoretical predictions, we find age differences
in nucleus accumbens, anterior insula, and medial prefrontal cortex, but the results vary
across paradigm and contrasts. Our results are in line with existing theories of age
differences in decision making and their neural substrates, yet also suggest the need for
a broader research agenda that considers how both individual and task characteristics
determine the way humans deal with uncertainty.
Keywords: aging, brain, uncertainty, risk, ambiguity, BART, temporal
discounting
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 3
Age Differences in the Neural Basis of Decision-Making under Uncertainty
Uncertainty can come in many guises, be linked to many different sources (e.g.,
self vs. others), and refer to different properties of choice options, such as their
magnitude or probability, which in turn can be static or change over time (Dhami &
Mandel, 2022; Meder et al., 2013). Given the vast possible forms of uncertainty we face,
the proliferation of approaches and paradigms used in the psychological sciences to
understand age differences in dealing with uncertainty is not surprising; neither are the
conflicting results concerning the existence or magnitude of age effects in the associated
paradigms (e.g., Best & Charness, 2015; Lighthall, 2020; Mata et al., 2011; Seaman
et al., 2022) and their neural bases (e.g., Lighthall, 2020; Samanez-Larkin & Knutson,
2015; Tannou et al., 2021). In this work, we contribute to this area of research by
reporting results from a neuroimaging study designed to assess age differences in the
neural basis of decision-making under uncertainty.
In what follows, we first engage with the concept of uncertainty, including
varying definitions and paradigms used for assessment of individual and age differences
in dealing with uncertainty. Second, we provide an overview of past empirical work
examining the neural basis of decision-making under uncertainty. Third, we review the
current empirical literature on the link between aging and decision-making under
uncertainty. Fourth, and finally, we describe our current study, which aims to offer an
empirical contribution towards assessing age differences in decisions under uncertainty.
Uncertainty: Definition and Scope
Many researchers have often used the terms uncertainty, risk, and ambiguity
interchangeably (e.g., Dhami & Mandel, 2022), but more specific distinctions between
these concepts can be made. Risk can be defined in many ways (Aven, 2012), yet a
common understanding of risky decision-making refers to decisions that involve, at a
minimum, uncertain gains and losses (Schonberg et al., 2011). How individuals come to
know about prospective gains, losses, and their respective probabilities, however, can
vary. In the lab, gamified lotteries are popular tools to assess individuals’ risk
preference, as these allow researchers to exert full experimental control over the
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 4
information provided. For example, crucial information about magnitudes and
probabilities might be described from the outset, or might have to be learned through
(repeated) experience. The crucial aspect of decision-making under risk, however, is
that it refers to situations in which outcomes and their probabilities are known. In
contrast, ambiguity or "Knightian uncertainty" describes situations in which only the
outcomes, but not their probabilities, are known (Meder et al., 2013; Tymula et al.,
2013; Tymula et al., 2012). As such, relative to risk, ambiguity might be perceived as
entailing even more uncertainty (Wu et al., 2021).
Some behavioral paradigms have natural ways of offering distinctions between
risk and ambiguity. For example, when monetary gambles are presented descriptively to
participants (e.g., the magnitude and probabilities of choice options are stated
explicitly), manipulations of risk are easily achieved. However, in some cases,
participants need to learn about options and probabilities over time, which leads to a
continuum between risk and ambiguity, because the representation of ambiguity can
change into a representation of risk as a function of each individual’s learning
experience. Importantly, some researchers have proposed that age differences in learning
can partly account for age patterns in dealing with decision-making under uncertainty
in such scenarios, making it particularly interesting to examine paradigms involving
such components in order to understand age differences in dealing with uncertainty
(e.g., Frey et al., 2015; Henninger et al., 2010).
In the field of economics, it is also common to make a distinction between
preferences for risk, ambiguity, and time, because, in principle, economic agents can be
given different types of choices involving trade-offs about option characteristics, such as
their magnitudes, probabilities, and time of delivery, independently. However, some
have proposed that there is an inherent uncertainty associated with making decisions
about the future, leading to a direct link between risk, ambiguity, and time preferences
(Cohen et al., 2020; Epper et al., 2011). Importantly, some aging theories have proposed
that uncertainty about the future associated with older adults’ limited time horizon is
an important factor in determining age effects in temporal discounting (cf. Seaman
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 5
et al., 2022). Thus, it is possible that paradigms involving risk, ambiguity, and temporal
trade-offs all tap into individuals’ processing of, and attitudes toward, uncertainty.
We propose a research agenda that considers the many guises in which
uncertainty can be presented and investigates age differences in the underlying cognitive
and affective processes by assessing the neural basis of decisions under uncertainty.
Neural Correlates of Decision-Making Under Uncertainty
In this section, we provide a brief overview of studies which have used functional
neuroimaging methods to elucidate the brain regions involved in decision-making under
uncertainty. In particular, we review studies that have investigated risk, ambiguity, or
temporal preferences, and which can form a basis for understanding how aging can
affect the associated decision processes.
Some theories have proposed a neural risk matrix to account for decision-making
under risk (Knutson & Huettel, 2015), which includes brain regions that promote
(ventral striatum), inhibit (anterior insula), and modulate (dorsomedial prefrontal
cortex, also referred to as the anterior cingulate cortex) risky choice. Ambiguity, in
turn, has been suggested to elicit (stronger) activation differences in a range of neural
regions, including amygdala, inferior and posterior parietal lobe, anterior insula,
orbitofrontal cortex, and inferior frontal gyrus (cf. Wu et al., 2021). Recent
meta-analytic work confirms the view that risk and ambiguity evidence both
overlapping and unique neural substrates (Wu et al., 2021). In particular, risk and
ambiguity do indeed share activation differences in anterior insula, which has led some
to suggest that the anterior insular cortex is a key region for processing uncertainty (Wu
et al., 2021). However, whereas decision-making under risk relies on ventral striatum
and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (i.e., anterior cingulate cortex) activation (Knutson &
Huettel, 2015), ambiguity relies on dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and inferior parietal
lobe (Wu et al., 2021). Interestingly, it has been argued that the additional finding of
increased involvement of anterior insula activation in decision-making under ambiguity
relative to decision-making under risk maps onto the proposal of uncertainty being more
pronounced in ambiguity relative to risk (Wu et al., 2021).
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 6
Temporal preference refers to an individual’s tendency to devalue future options,
with high delay discounting describing the tendency to devalue future options at a
steep(er) rate. Multiple aspects influence an individual’s preference concerning
temporally delayed options, such that higher discounting (i.e., more devaluation), for
example, can stem from heightened sensitivity to anticipated present rewards, lower
sensitivity to anticipated future rewards, or the suboptimal integration of present and
future rewards into an overall subjective value signal. From a neurobiological
standpoint, each of these computations are associated with specific neural correlates
(McClure et al., 2004; Samanez-Larkin & Knutson, 2015; van den Bos et al., 2014); a
recent review of the empirical literature on the neural basis of temporal preference
(Frost & McNaughton, 2017) found evidence for the involvement of primarily striatal
and (pre)frontal cortical regions.
To isolate the neural basis of uncertainty in delay discounting, different
methodological approaches can be used. One approach involves the calculation of an
integrated subjective value for each offer based on individuals’ choices, and the tracking
of this value signal across the brain (cf. Seaman et al., 2018). Alternatively, uncertainty
could be captured by focusing on the neural representation of uncertainty related to the
temporal features of various trade-offs between choice options. For example, one can
examine the neural substrates of immediacy; that is, examine the neural functional
differences between the processing of trade-offs with and without immediate options,
under the assumption that an immediate option involves reduced uncertainty. Research
along these lines has found decision-making relevant activation differences for
immediate relative to delayed options in ventral striatum, medial prefrontal and medial
orbitofrontal cortex (Frost & McNaughton, 2017; McClure et al., 2004). Second, one
can consider reward delays, the logic being that longer delays evoke higher uncertainty
relative to shorter delays. Empirical findings suggest increased activation in ventral
striatum and putamen for shorter relative to longer delays (Wu et al., 2021).
All in all, empirical results across risk, ambiguity, and time preferences suggest
that although anterior insula activation could code uncertainty in decisions under risk
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 7
and ambiguity, when it comes to temporal trade-offs, uncertainty may be coded as a
relative activation difference in reward valuation and/or integration regions, such as
nucleus accumbens and the ventral medial prefrontal cortex. Decision-making under
uncertainty, whether in relation to risk, ambiguity, or temporal trade-offs, thus seems to
rely on both common and unique brain circuitry. Yet, to what extent age effects in
decision-making under uncertainty are driven by changes in single or several brain
regions remains to be determined.
Age Differences in Decisions Under Uncertainty
Empirical results on age differences in dealing with risk are patently mixed, with
meta-analyses and qualitative reviews suggesting that age effects vary considerably
across measures (Best & Charness, 2015; König, 2021; Mata et al., 2011). Overall,
self-report measures suggest age-related declines in the propensity to take risks (König,
2021) but task-based results are more heterogeneous, with meta-analyses suggesting
decreased risk taking with age for gains but not losses (Best & Charness, 2015). There
is overall less work on situations involving ambiguity, when the probability of options is
not described (Tymula et al., 2013) or needs to be learned from experience (Frey et al.,
2015; Frey et al., 2021; Mata et al., 2011). One paradigm that has received considerable
attention is the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART; Lejuez et al., 2002) but the results
concerning age differences are also mixed: Although some studies find older adults less
risk-seeking relative to younger adults (Grover, 2021; Henninger et al., 2010;
Koscielniak et al., 2016; Rolison et al., 2012; Sproten et al., 2018; Wilson et al., 2021), a
number of studies find this result in only some conditions (Mamerow et al., 2016;
Schulman et al., 2021), report no evidence of behavioral effects of age (Kim et al., 2022;
McCleskey, 2021; Yu et al., 2016), or find that older-adults are more risk-seeking
relative to younger adults (Cavanagh et al., 2012). Finally, concerning age effects on
temporal preferences, a recent meta-analytic synthesis suggests overall no effect of age
in delay discounting tasks (Seaman et al., 2022).
As it stands, there is limited knowledge concerning age differences in many
paradigms involving decision-making under uncertainty. For example, to our knowledge
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 8
only one study has investigated age differences in the neural basis using the BART (Yu
et al., 2016). Yu and colleagues (Yu et al., 2016) found evidence that suggests
preservation of value signals for processing of gains and losses but age differences in
ventromedial prefrontal cortex potentially reflecting age differences in information
integration. Concerning temporal preferences, a few neuroimaging studies examining
adult age differences suggest activation differences (Samanez-Larkin et al., 2011; Sasse
et al., 2017). For example, one study found younger adults showed more nucleus
accumbens activation for present than future rewards relative to older adults (Eppinger
et al., 2012), which could signal age differences in the valuation of uncertainty
associated with future outcomes. However, more recent efforts aimed at isolating age
effects on the neural representation of subjective value found no differences for temporal
preferences (Seaman et al., 2018).
There is so far relatively little in the way of a quantitative synthesis of age
differences in the neural basis of decision-making under uncertainty (Tannou et al.,
2021), but existing frameworks and qualitative reviews suggest that aging may be
associated with changes in the anticipation of gains and losses, as well as the integration
of different sources of information in decisions made under uncertainty (Lighthall, 2020;
Samanez-Larkin & Knutson, 2015). Crucially, age-related functional and structural
brain changes are not global but specific to particular neural regions (e.g., Cabeza,
2002; Sowell et al., 2004), some of which are highly relevant for explaining age effects on
decision-making. Exemplifying this approach is the Affect-Integration-Motivation
(AIM) framework (Samanez-Larkin & Knutson, 2015), an empirically-derived
neurobiological framework. By breaking the decision-making process down into various
sequential, hierarchically arranged processes, and identifying the respective neural
correlates, AIM stipulates several pathways for how age-related anatomical and
functional change may lead to age-related differences during varying decision making
stages (Frazier et al., 2019; Samanez-Larkin & Knutson, 2015), including anticipated
reward-related activity in nucleus accumbens, anticipated loss-related activity in
anterior insula, integrative processes subserved by activation in prefrontal cortices, and,
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 9
in situations involving learning, the thalamus.
All in all, the majority of aging studies reviewed above have focused on single
tasks, involved relatively small sample sizes and extreme-group comparisons, did not
specifically target theory-relevant brain regions (Samanez-Larkin & Knutson, 2015), nor
have they adopted a systematic approach to controlling for theoretically relevant
covariates (for a critique of the past literature see Frey et al., 2021; Mata et al., 2011;
Seaman et al., 2022). As a consequence, we still know relatively little about the
robustness of age differences in behavioral and neural patterns associated with many of
these measures.
Overview of the Current Study
The review above highlights a number of key limitations of the current
literature. In particular, it has become clear that there is a dearth of studies examining
adult age differences using multiple paradigms that allow to distinguish several
cognitive and affective processes underlying the processing of uncertainty. We aim to
contribute to this effort by conducting an empirical assessment of a relatively large
age-heterogeneous sample aged 16 to 81 using two paradigms, the Balloon Analogue
Risk Task (BART) and the Delay Discounting Task. Informed by the AIM framework
(Samanez-Larkin & Knutson, 2015), we do so by analyzing activation differences in an a
priori selected set of neural regions key for decision-making under uncertainty, and by
exploring a number of key contrasts that tap into different aspects of uncertainty.
Specifically, in the BART, we test the importance of using average and parametric
contrasts that have been previously considered in the literature (Yu et al., 2016) as well
as a novel contrast comparing different (i.e., linear and exponential) reward functions
that create varying values of uncertainty. In the delay discounting task, we consider
both delay and immediacy contrasts previously used in the literature (Frost &
McNaughton, 2017). Furthermore, we do so in a systematic, exhaustive fashion using
specification curve analysis (Rohrer et al., 2017; Simonsohn et al., 2020), which allows
us to (a) simultaneously explore the effect of age on various behavioral and neural
operationalizations of decision-making under uncertainty while (b) assessing and
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 10
controlling for the role of theoretically relevant covariates shown to impact
decision-making under uncertainty, including gender, education, income, and cognitive
ability (Frey et al., 2021). We thus hope to contribute to a more systematic assessment
of age differences in the neural basis of decision-making under uncertainty.
Method
The current analyses are based on data collected as part of a larger multi-session
research study to examine age effects on multiple indicators of risk preference,
impulsivity, and low self-control (preprint available via the Open Science Framework,
current analyses, which are exploratory in nature and extend the pre-registered ones by
focusing on the neural representation of uncertainty across several brain regions and
task contrasts and use a multiverse analytic approach to exhaustively examine
associations between these different operationalizations of uncertainty and age. To
address the current research questions, we conducted original analyses of the functional
neuroimaging data collected from two behavioral tasks featuring different
implementations of uncertainty. The original study was reviewed and approved by the
Ethikkommission Nordwest- und Zentralschweiz EKNZ (EKNZ BASEC 2015-00094).
We complied with all regulations and ethical guidelines during the research. Prior to
participating in the study, all participants received written as well as verbal study
materials and were required to give written informed consent to their participation in
the research. All participants were paid for their participation in the study (15 Swiss
Francs per hour of participation, approximately 98 Swiss Francs [∼98 USD] for
participation in all sessions of the larger study) and were further paid in cash any
additional earnings from the incentive-compatible behavioral measures completed (e.g.,
as part of the tasks completed during the neuroimaging session).
Participants
For the current analyses, we started with 189 participants who were recruited for
the neuroimaging session (52% female, mean age = 45 years, SD = 19) as part of the
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 11
larger original study. Ten of the 189 participants had to be excluded from all further
analyses because they had no or incomplete fMRI data (manly because only one
paradigm was completed due to time constraints in the MRI facility). Data from a
further two participants had to be excluded after (partial) data collection was complete
because of faulty equipment and another two participants were excluded because they
exhibited too much head motion (see section on neuroimaging data preprocessing for
further details). After exclusions, we included an effective sample of 175 individuals [93
(53.14%) females, mean age = 44.88 years, SD = 19.02, age range = 16.15 to 81.38
years] in all our analyses. A detailed characterization of the study sample with regards
information including power analyses, participant recruitment and screening, see
Appendix A.
Materials
To capture task-related neural activation differences, participants completed two
commonly used behavioral tasks involving different aspects of uncertainty inside the
MRI scanner, namely the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) and the Delay
BART
The BART has a long tradition in behavioral and neuroimaging research aiming
to elucidate (the neural basis of) individual differences in risk taking (Helfinstein et al.,
2014; Lejuez et al., 2002; Rao et al., 2008; Schonberg et al., 2012; Tisdall et al., 2020).
Age effects have also been studied with the BART, at the level of both behavior
(Mamerow et al., 2016; Mata et al., 2011; Rolison et al., 2012) and the brain (Tannou
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2016). The standard implementation of the
BART involves the virtual inflation of balloons via sequential administration of pumps
(i.e., button presses), yet participants are not informed about explosion points or
inflation capacity. Instead, participants are required to build up a mental representation
of an average explosion point through repeated choice and the experience of choice
outcomes. Importantly, successful pumps (inflations which do not lead to an explosion)
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 12
contribute to the accumulation of a financial reward as each successful pump is worth a
certain amount of money. In contrast, if an inflation causes the balloon to explode, the
earnings accumulated on the current trial are lost. Participants are free to decide
whether to continue to inflate the balloon (unless it explodes beforehand) and when to
stop pumping and cash out (save) their accumulated earnings on any given trial. That
is, a reward balloon trial ends when the balloon explodes or the participant decides to
cash out. Participants are typically asked to earn as much money as possible
completing the BART.
In a standard implementation, the BART starts off as a paradigm of ambiguity
(because participants often have no representation of risk at the start of the trial), and
only via repeated pumping, cash-out and explosion experiences can participants start to
build up a mental representation of the "riskiness" of balloons with regards to
approximate balloon inflation capacities. To manipulate riskiness, the standard
implementation involves two types of reward balloon, with one featuring a higher
maximum capacity (and thus higher average explosion point) than the other. Moreover,
the standard implementation also yields the same reward (per pump) regardless of the
level of risk (that is, regardless of how many pumps have already been administered).
In the current study, we ran an adapted fMRI version of the BART, which manipulated
some of the main characteristics of the standard implementation.
Specifically, we adopted a version featuring three balloon types: two different
types of reward balloon (red or blue color, assignment of balloon type to color was
counterbalanced across participants) and control balloons to account for motor-related
activity (gray color; these did not add to participants’ earnings). For both reward and
control balloons, explosion points were drawn from a uniform distribution with a
minimum of one and maximum of 16 pumps (that is, the maximum capacity for reward
and control balloons was 16 pumps). In contrast to standard implementations, the two
types of reward balloon differed with regards to the underlying reward function. For
one reward balloon type, accumulation of rewards for successful sequential pumps was
driven by the standard linear payoff function, where each successful pump earns the
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 13
same amount (e.g., 0.05 Swiss Francs). The second reward balloon type, in contrast,
was characterized by an exponential reward function; initial reward is low and
accumulates slowly, but as the balloon grows larger (i.e., the stakes rise), payment per
pump increases exponentially. Simulated payment structures for both balloons are
Our motivation for the two types of reward balloon was twofold. First, we
wanted to capture the idea that taking risks "in the wild" may pay off in the long run,
but that also means repeated exposure to and acceptance of losses. Exponential
balloons simulate such a context: over time, pumping will lead to increasing rewards
and higher accumulated total earnings, but in the short run require participants to
explore and accept many more explosions compared with the linear balloon. A second
motivation was that the way in which we programmed the reward function (see
Appendix A for formalization of linear and exponential reward functions), exponential
balloons would initially increase uncertainty because participants would experience even
more ambiguity due to the initial lower reward per successful pump of exponential
compared with linear balloons. We thus hoped to present participants with an
experimental manipulation that would affect behavior and thereby lead to insights
about behavioral and neural markers for the different reward conditions, and in
particular their convergence.
Feedback was presented at the end of each trial (that is, at the point when the
balloon exploded or participants cashed out) in the form of earnings for the current
trial, as well as total earnings accumulated across all completed trials. We used a
fixation cross to visually separate consecutive trials, and programmed
inter-trial-intervals between trial offset and trial onset (range=1000-11000 ms,
mean=4340 ms) as well as predetermined but randomly drawn inter-stimulus-intervals
between stimulus offset and stimulus onset within a trial (range=1000-2000 ms,
mean=1500 ms). Performance inside the scanner was self-paced and incentivized, and
earnings were paid out in cash at the end of the fMRI session.
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 14
Delay Discounting
Delay discounting (aka temporal discounting) paradigms are commonly adopted
to capture individual differences in impulsive choice (Ruggeri, 2022; Seaman et al.,
2022). In a standard implementation, smaller-sooner rewards are repeatedly pitched
against larger-later rewards, with trials varying with respect to the intervals of delay,
reward magnitudes, and percentage differences between smaller and larger rewards.
Thus, although the BART introduces uncertainty concerning balloon capacity and
explosion points—the magnitude and probability of incurring rewards and losses—the
delay discounting task eliminates such uncertainties. Instead, it introduces uncertainty
about the future itself, including one’s own future self. Will I be around in one or two
or five years’ time to receive the payment? Maybe I will have moved or have died? Will
the researchers be around to pay me the money? Maybe inflation will drastically change
the value of the reward? These and other future-oriented questions could drive
individuals’ decisions between smaller-sooner and larger-later options, making the delay
discounting task a candidate measure for decision-making under a form of prospective,
existential uncertainty.
In neuroimaging studies, the delay discounting task has been used to isolate and
characterize the neural basis of impulsive choice (McClure et al., 2004) and also to
probe age-related differences therein (Eppinger et al., 2012; Samanez-Larkin &
Knutson, 2015; Samanez-Larkin et al., 2011; van den Bos et al., 2014). In this study we
followed previous analyses which examined the role of the presence of immediately
available rewards on both behavioral and neural indices (McClure et al., 2004) but with
an additional focus on age effects (Eppinger et al., 2012).
To facilitate the desired analyses, participants completed 80 trials of the delay
discounting task inside the MRI scanner. The 80 choice sets (i.e., trade-offs) were based
on five unique delay-pairings, namely (a) today versus in two weeks, (b) today versus in
four weeks, (c) in two weeks versus four weeks, (d) in two weeks versus six weeks, and
(e) in four weeks versus six weeks. The difference between smaller and larger amounts
in each choice set mapped onto eight different percentage differences (1%, 3%, 5%, 10%,
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 15
15%, 25%, 35%, 50%). We thus created 16 trials based on eight possible percentage
differences for each of the five temporal pairings, amounting to 80 trials in total. The
rewards in the choice set were generated by drawing 80 random numbers from a normal
distribution between five and 40, and each of these 80 random values presented the
smaller reward. Based on these initial values, we constructed the 80 unique choice sets
by adding the required percentage differences (two trials for each of the eight possible
percentage differences, for each of the five delays) to the randomly drawn numbers,
which yielded the larger-later option. All participants completed the same 80 trials, but
in randomized order. We programmed intertrial intervals between one and 11 seconds
(mean = 4.32 s).
Performance was incentive compatible, and participants were informed at the
start of the paradigm that one of their choices was to be drawn and payed out. If the
selected trial included a smaller-sooner choice that was today, participants received the
money at the end of the scanner session. If the drawn trial included a choice to be
realized at any other time, we matched the waiting time and participants received the
money in cash via registered post.
Covariate measures
Behavioral measures of risk preference have been shown to suffer from low
convergence, at the level of both behavior (Frey et al., 2017; Frey et al., 2021; Mamerow
et al., 2016) and the brain (Congdon et al., 2013; Tisdall et al., 2020). Cognitive theory
[e.g., confound hypothesis (Mata et al., 2011; Olschewski et al., 2018)] points towards
the important role of the cognitive resources required for the completion of behavioral
measures, in particular when these rely on integrative processing, learning, working
memory, or attention, to name but a few. As many of these cognitive processes are
subject to age-related differences, the heterogeneous life span trajectories observed for
risk preference measures may in part be due to these confounds rather than to changes
in risk preference per se (Best & Charness, 2015; Mamerow et al., 2016; Mata et al.,
2011). To account for the influence of factors that have been posited to exert a
confounding influence on individual differences in decision-making under uncertainty
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 16
(Frey et al., 2021), we used data collected as part of the laboratory session of the larger
income) and cognitive variables (numeracy, working memory). Participants
self-reported their gender, educational attainment and monthly personal income, and
both numeracy (Weller et al., 2013) and working memory (Unsworth et al., 2005) were
captured via computerized tasks.
Neuroimaging Data Acquisition
The neuroimaging data were collected on a Siemens 3T MAGNETOM Prisma
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) system with a 20-channel head coil at the
University Hospital Basel. For every participant, we first acquired a structural
T1-weighted scan using a magnetization-prepared rapid gradient echo sequence
(repetition time=2500 ms, echo time=4.25 ms, inversion time=1100 ms, flip angle=7 ,
field of view=256 mm × 256 mm, 192 slices, voxel dimensions=1.0 mm isotropic). This
was followed by the acquisition of the task-related functional runs via T2 -weighted
blood–oxygen-level-dependent echo-planar imaging sequences (repetition time=2010 ms,
echo time=30 ms, flip angle=78 , field of view=192 mm × 192 mm, voxel size=3 mm ×
3 mm × 3 mm, 33 transversal slices per volume, 15% distance factor).
Procedure
At the time of the neuroimaging session, all participants were once again
screened for any contraindications for MRI-safety, and provided with MRI-safe clothing.
MRI-safe glasses were available to correct for impaired vision. Both paradigms were
programmed and presented using Eprime 2.0 software, which we linked up to the
scanner trigger signal to provide input for the temporal alignment of the onset of
volume collection. The paradigms were presented via a projection system onto a screen
behind the scanner, which participants inside the bore could see via a mirror located on
the head coil. We recorded individuals’ choices using a Celeritas response system
attached to their right hand. Prior to completing the two paradigms inside the scanner,
participants completed short sets of practice trials to familiarize themselves with the
visual and response components of both tasks.
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 17
For the BART, individuals were not told the exact reward functions underlying
exponential reward balloons. Instead, participants were instructed that successful
pumping on one balloon (color) would always yield the same amount, whereas the other
balloon themselves for optimal performance and achieving high earnings. Because
exponential balloons introduce more uncertainty, they thus also afford more
exploration. For the delay discounting task, participants were explicitly informed about
the random selection of a trial and the realization of their choice on that particular
trial, including any potential delays in receiving the reward.
To ensure (especially older) individuals were as comfortable as possible inside the
scanner and for the duration of the scan session (approximately 60 minutes), we allowed
for extra time at the start of the session to add cushioning and padding to individuals’
Main Analyses
We conducted a series of key analyses to test for age effects on behavioral and
neural indices of decision-making under uncertainty. We describe each of these steps in
detail below. Unless stated otherwise, all main analyses were conducted using R Studio
(R Core Team, 2021).
Behavioral analyses
BART. For the BART, we concatenated the two functional runs of the
paradigm and analyzed individuals’ performance across the two runs. As the BART was
designed to capture individual differences in risk preference (Lejuez et al., 2002), typical
performance indices of risk taking comprise total number of pumps, average number of
pumps, average number of pumps on trials that did not lead to an explosion (i.e.,
adjusted average number of pumps), and number of explosions, but also include task
performance indices as captured via total earnings or reaction times (Schmitz et al.,
2016). Some of the existing scoring alternatives for the BART are (highly) correlated
(Mamerow et al., 2016; Tisdall et al., 2020), even though they may tap into slightly
different behavioral (and potentially cognitive) components. For our main analyses of
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 18
age effects, we computed the average adjusted number of pumps as this was the main
BART performance indicator of interest and used it in all subsequent analyses. For
descriptive purposes, we computed additional indicators (total number of pumps,
number of trials, number of explosions, total earnings, reaction time), and tested the
associations between different BART indices using correlation analyses. To examine if
the experimental manipulation of reward function influenced behavior on the BART, we
first computed one index per reward balloon type, and examined mean differences
between indices for the two reward balloon types via two-sided paired-samples t-tests.
Delay discounting. Given our focus on decision-making under uncertainty, we
primarily followed previous work contrasting behavioral patterns for immediate and
delayed options (Eppinger et al., 2012). We computed participants’ proportion of
smaller-sooner choices for trials with (a) immediate versus delayed options, (b) varying
delays, and (c) varying reward differences, as well as (d) the respective reaction times.
Informed by previous work finding the standard index of proportion of smaller-sooner
choices to be highly positively correlated with computational indices of temporal
discounting [e.g., discounting parameter k (Seaman et al., 2018)], we concentrated our
behavioral analyses on model-free indices of delay discounting. Mirroring our BART
behavioral analyses, we computed correlations between the different delay discounting
metrics to ascertain their similarity.
Covariates. We computed one index for each of the two measures of fluid
cognitive capacity. For numeracy, we computed the total number of correctly solved
math problems, yielding a score between zero (no problem solved correctly) and eight
(all problems solved correctly) for each participant (Weller et al., 2013). To capture
individual differences in working memory from the automated operation span, we
computed the total number of correctly recalled letters (recalled correctly and in the
correct order) (Unsworth et al., 2005), which resulted in a score between zero (no letters
recalled in the correct order) and 75 (all letters recalled in the correct order) for every
participant.
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 19
Neuroimaging data analyses
Prior to running any analyses, we excluded neuroimaging data from 12
participants (of the recruited 189 MRI participants) due to incomplete imaging data
(n=ten) or faulty equipment (n=two). Below we describe analyses of the neuroimaging
data from the remaining 177 participants. We describe the standard statistical routines
preprocessing routines of the raw functional neuroimaging (fMRI) data in the Appendix
(A). After preprocessing, we excluded a further two individuals from the statistical
analyses due to excessive head motion, resulting in an effective sample of 175
participants included in all subsequent analyses.
Individual-level contrast analyses for the BART. The BART is predicated
on the assumption of being a more naturalistic paradigm then, for example, described
lotteries (Lejuez et al., 2002; Mata et al., 2011; Rao et al., 2008; Schonberg et al., 2011),
thus should capture the neural processes associated with pertinent risk-taking related
features, including anticipated (uncertain) rewards, losses, and their integration. The
structure of the BART paradigm, however, can lead to confounded processes, making it
difficult to clearly isolate these different mechanisms (Schonberg et al., 2012; Schonberg
et al., 2011); as pumping continues, rewards accumulate, but so does the risk of
explosion and thus loss of the current reward. To deal with the paradigm’s complex
(and partly confounded) structure, we sought to utilize different contrast analyses to
tap into different aspects of uncertainty. Specifically, to estimate voxel-wise neural
activation differences in the BART, we focused our analyses on three contrast analyses
because each of these tapped into different aspects of uncertainty during decision
making. For details about the underlying general linear model, see Appendix A.
Reward bal loons versus control bal loons. A standard contrast of neural
activation differences in the BART is that of reward balloons versus control balloons
(Rao et al., 2008; Schonberg et al., 2012; Tisdall et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022; Yu
et al., 2016). This contrast is thought to capture essential processes associated with
decisions being made under uncertainty, in particular because only the balloon display
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 20
phase is modeled, but not outcome or feedback phases. For the current analysis, we
contrasted average activation differences (relative to baseline) of reward balloons with
the average activation differences associated with control balloon trials (accounting for
head motion). This contrast has been shown to yield activation differences in
subcortical brain circuitry associated with the processing of anticipated (uncertain)
rewards and losses, as well as with cortical integration regions, among others
(Schonberg et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2022). However, although standard, this contrast
misses the rising tension associated with additional pumping, because it treats every
balloon equally, regardless of where in the sequence of pumps this balloon occurred.
Parametric modulation of reward bal loon versus parametric
modulation of control bal loons. To capture the rising tension of additional
pumping, we analyzed activation differences for the parametric modulation of the
(demeaned) number of (pumps on) reward balloons and contrasted these with the
parametric modulation of the (demeaned) number of (pumps on) control balloons. For
this contrast, a value of zero would code for the participant’s own average number of
pumps (across trials), positive values for a pump number above average, and negative
values for a pump number below average. As the value of this regressor becomes more
positive, the participant is exceeding their own mean pumping behavior, and is also
approaching the explosion point. By better capturing the rising tension associated with
each additional pump, this contrast is thought to better capture the affective
component of decision-making under uncertainty. As such, the main effect for this
contrast might yield parametrically increased insula activation for parametric pumps on
reward relative to control balloons; as pumping goes up, so does insula activation (but
given the confounded nature of the paradigm (Schonberg et al., 2011), reward-related
nucleus accumbens activation might also track increasing pumps.
Linear versus exponential reward bal loons. To assess whether our
experimental manipulation of reward functions affected the neural correlates of
decision-making under uncertainty in the BART, we contrasted average activation
differences in linear reward balloons with average activation differences in exponential
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 21
reward balloons. Based on our motivation for introducing this comparison, we expected
higher average activation in nucleus accumbens and insula for exponential compared
with linear balloons, and potentially also higher activation in brain regions supporting
learning and integrative processing.
Individual-level contrast analyses for the delay discounting task. To
capture different facets of the temporal uncertainty experienced in the delay discounting
paradigm, we focused our neuroimaging analyses of on two contrasts, one capturing
immediacy, and another capturing delay (Eppinger et al., 2012; McClure et al., 2004).
To avoid biasing the neural contrast analysis with an imbalanced number of trials, we
removed all trials that offered a trade-off between a smaller amount in four weeks versus
a larger amount in six weeks from the neural analyses (cf. Samanez-Larkin et al., 2011).
We consequently (a) worked with 32 trials involving an immediate payment and 32
trials involving delayed payments only, and (b) controlled the starting point of the
delayed trials by including only trials that offered the smaller option in two weeks. Our
contrast analyses thus focused primarily on the temporal characteristics (Eppinger
et al., 2012; McClure et al., 2004; Samanez-Larkin et al., 2011) rather than on localizing
an integrated (subjective) value signal (e.g., Seaman et al., 2018).
Immediacy. Following previous work (e.g., Eppinger et al., 2012; McClure
et al., 2004; Samanez-Larkin et al., 2011), we conceptualized uncertainty in the delay
discounting task as the differential processing of options with and without an immediate
payoff. Specifically, we sought to contrast activation differences on trials with the
sooner option being paid out today with activation differences on trials for which the
sooner option started in two or in four weeks. Previous work suggested neural
differences in the processing of immediate versus delayed rewards, including dissociation
in ventral striatal and medial prefrontal cortex (McClure et al., 2004), furthermore
pointing towards age-related differences in striatal reward sensitivity as driving
age-related decreases in delay discounting (Eppinger et al., 2012).
Delay. Although uncertainty may pertain to the presence or absence of
immediate options, it can also be conceptualized as the length of the delay between the
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 22
sooner and the later option. To investigate the neural markers of delay and probe
potential age-related differences therein, we specified a second contrast between all
trials that included a two-week delay (regardless of the sooner time point) and trials
that involved a longer, four-week delay. If the temporal distance between payments
plays a role, we would expect activation differences for these two trial types, potentially
involving higher activation in reward-related striatal regions for shorter delays. To the
extent that time horizons change as a function of age (Carstensen, 2021), we may also
expect that longer delays lead to age-related differences in their neural representations.
Volumes of Interest. Although AIM is relevant for all aspects of the
decision-making process, we were particularly interested in the first two stages; the
affective evaluation of anticipated gains and losses, as well as integrative mechanisms
acting on these different signals in the process of valuation. Thus, for our
Volume-of-Interest (VOI) analyses, we focused on brain circuitry proposed to be
particularly important for these initial processes, namely nucleus accumbens (processing
of anticipated rewards), anterior insula (processing of anticipated losses), medial
prefrontal cortex (integration of signals into subjective value) and thalamus (involved in
reward learning). The VOI masks used for the current analyses are presented in
Group-level contrast analyses. Given our focus on age-related effects on
neural activation differences in a set of a priori theoretically derived brain regions, we
only performed supplemental analyses to estimate and visualize group-level (average)
contrast activation differences. Details concerning the group-level analyses and results
based on 175 participants are provided in Appendices A and B, respectively.
Individual differences analyses
Bivariate associations. Our initial analyses focused on understanding
bivariate associations between age, behavioral and neural markers of decision-making
under uncertainty, as well as (socio)demographic and cognitive covariates. For this
purpose, we first computed a matrix of Pearson correlation coefficients between all
variables in our analyses. Seven individuals did not disclose their personal monthly. In
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 23
our analyzes we used pairwise complete observations to compute bivariate associations,
and consequently all analyzes that included income were based on 168 participants,
whereas analyzes that did not include income were based on 175 participants. Second,
we translated the correlation matrix into a network plot, visually grouping variables in
order to more easily identify the extent to which different variables converge (i.e., form
clusters) or diverge based on their associations to the other variables in the network.
We used the R package qgraph (Epskamp et al., 2012) to generate the network plot,
specifying a Fruchterman Reingold algorithm and a repulsion parameter of 0.7 to
determine the relative spacing of variables in the network based on the strength of their
associations. To focus on the most pertinent associations, we only included correlations
with an absolute correlation coefficient of r ≥ 0.15 in the network plot.
Pearson
Specification Curve Analysis. Specification Curve Analysis, SCA
(Simonsohn et al., 2020) provides a method to systematically assess and visualize,
through exhaustive combination, the (variance in) effect sizes for a given set of
predictor, outcome, and confounding variable(s). In this study, we performed one SCA
to examine the effect of age on behavioral and neural indices of decision-making under
uncertainty while controlling for covariates. Our SCA thus included one predictor (age),
24 outcome variables, and five covariates (sex, education, income, numeracy, working
memory). The outcome variables comprised four indices of performance (three from
BART, one from delay discounting), 12 neural indices from BART (three contrast
analyses with extraction from four VOIs each), and eight neural indices from delay
discounting (two contrast analyses with four VOIs each). The total number of
specifications given the selected predictors, outcomes, and covariates was derived
through additive combinations of age, outcomes, and covariates, with the restriction
that a specification (i.e., a model) always contained age, one outcome, and one unique
combination of covariates. This approach resulted in 24 × 2 = 768 unique
specifications. Every specification was estimated via ordinary least squares regression
models using the R package specr (Masur & Scharkow, 2020). We report the median
age effect across all specifications, and also report the number of null, positive, and
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 24
negative age effects. For a more detailed discussion of the rationale behind SCA, see
Appendix A. Due to missing income information for seven participants, specifications
that included income were based on 168 participants, and specifications that did not
include income were based on 175 participants.
Permutation testing. To ascertain the robustness of the overall set of
effects, we followed a permutation-based approach (Rohrer et al., 2017) to calculate the
global significance of the observed SCA. We estimated whether the empirically observed
set of effects deviated systematically from the to-be-expected false-positive effects if
there was, in fact, no systematic relationship between age and the outcomes of interest.
For this purpose, we first generated 500 shuffled data sets by randomly sampling the
age variable (with replacement), and in a second step computed a SCA for each of the
500 new shuffled data sets. We then counted how many of the shuffled new data sets
yielded a larger number of age effects than observed in the original (unshuffled) data
set, and divided this number by the number of shuffled data sets (i.e., 500).
Results
Behavioral results for BART
In a first step, we computed summary indices of risk taking and performance in
differences between linear and exponential reward balloons with regards to indices of
behavior as expected. On average, participants earned 6.45 CHF in the BART, but we
did find a difference with regards to earnings in the two reward balloon types, such that
participants earned significantly less money on exponential compared to linear balloons
(mean difference = 1.10 CHF, p < 0.001). The (direction of the) difference in earnings
may be due to insufficient exploration on the exponential balloon. Specifically, pumping
participants also need to experience relatively more explosions (i.e., losses). Thus,
exponential balloons expose participants to increased uncertainty (at least initially,
given the task instructions and lack of information pertaining to the exact reward
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 25
structure of exponential balloons) and require more exploration. Across participants,
the (adjusted) average number of pumps was much lower than what would have been
is possible that participants did not fully realize the potential of exponential balloons.
We visually explored age-related differences in the summary indices of risk taking and
suggest that age did not have a marked effect on BART behavioral indices.
Furthermore, earnings across balloon types were similar for younger (6.40 CHF),
middle-aged (6.45 CHF), and older participants (6.50 CHF).
Based on these results, we aggregated across reward balloons and performed all
subsequent analyses on indices of risk taking on reward balloons. As expected, the
adjusted average number of pumps was positively correlated with number of pumps
(r = 0.84), earnings (r = 0.69) and number of explosions (r = 0.44),
Pearson Pearson Pearson
highly negatively correlated with number of trials (r = −0.73), but not correlated
Pearson
Pearson
results, we computed an index for the adjusted average number of pumps across the two
balloon types for our main analyses. However, due to the novelty of this BART
implementation, in particular the idea that the exponential balloon may introduce even
more uncertainty which may interact with age, in addition we also entered adjusted
average number of pumps for the linear and the exponential balloon as separate
outcome variables into our main analyses.
Behavioral results for delay discounting
To understand general patterns of behavior for the delay discounting task in our
Specifically, across the sample, we looked at the average proportion of smaller-sooner
choices across all trials as well as for trials with particular properties, including
immediacy (i.e., trials for which the smaller option was delivered today), delay (i.e., for
the five different delays), and reward difference (i.e., the eight magnitude differences
between the smaller and the larger option). For each of these trial types, we also
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 26
analyzed mean reaction times. The overall pattern for choice proportion and reaction
a higher mean proportion of sooner choices for trade-offs with immediate options than
option was also more frequent for smaller differences between the sooner and the later
options, dropping below 50% (i.e., higher proportion of delayed choices) for options with
c). We did not see marked reaction time differences as a function of immediacy, delay,
suggest that age did not have a marked effect on delay discounting indices.
As multiple indices of choice can be used, we examined the correlation between
the number and proportion of smaller-sooner choices, proportion of smaller-sooner
choices when an immediate option is present, and overall reaction time. As expected,
the number and proportion of smaller-sooner choices was highly correlated, yet we
For our main analyses (and to match up with our neuroimaging contrast analyses for
delay discounting), we used the proportion of immediate choices (out of all trials with a
today option) in all our subsequent analyses probing age effects.
Bivariate associations between study variables
Based on the correlation matrix for associations between study variables
emerged. First, behavioral indices between paradigms diverged (that is, were not or
negatively correlated and thus were located further away from each other in the network
plot) whereas behavioral indices within paradigm (for the BART) converged (that is,
were positively correlated and thus formed clusters inhabiting similar space in the
network plot). Second, although behavioral markers of pumping behavior in the BART
were sporadically associated with BART neural markers, the proportion of immediate
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 27
choices in delay discounting was mainly uncorrelated with neural markers of delay
discounting contrasts. Third, BART neural indices extracted from the average contrast
of reward versus control balloons and from the parametric modulation contrast showed
strong positive associations, suggesting that these two contrasts capture similar neural
processes. Interestingly, this did not apply to BART indicators extracted from the
contrast of linear versus exponential reward balloons, which formed a separate cluster on
the opposite side of the plot. Fourth, neural markers from delay discounting correlated
strongly within contrast, but were not associated across contrast. This pattern suggests
that neural markers associated with immediacy and delay capture different processes.
Focusing on the main variable of interest, we observed heterogeneous
associations between age and behavioral as well as neural markers of decision-making
under uncertainty. For example, age was associated with neural indices extracted from
the BART (primarily with indices from the average reward versus control balloons
contrast and the parametric risk modulation contrast). In contrast, age was not
associated (at r ≥ 0.15 or r ≤ −0.15) with behavioral indices from either
Pearson Pearson
paradigm, and was also not associated with neural markers extracted from delay
discounting contrast analyses. As expected, age was negatively associated with indices
of cognitive capacity and positively associated with income.
To ascertain the robustness of the observed associations for age, in particular
when controlling for covariates, we adopted a Specification Curve Analysis (Simonsohn
et al., 2020), a multiverse analytic approach to test associations between age and
markers of decision-making under uncertainty for various combinations of covariates.
Specification Curve Analysis
A summary of the number of empirically observed age effects is provided in
mainly null effects of age on varying operationalizations of uncertainty, both for
behavioral and neural markers (n null effects = 624). This conclusion is also reflected in
the median age effect across all 768 unique specifications being 0.008 (i.e., close to zero).
Looking at particular sets of specifications, we found no significant associations (at
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 28
p ≤ 0.05) between age and delay discounting; older adults did not take the immediate
option less often than younger participants, nor did we find evidence for neural
activation differences in the four regions of interest for the immediacy contrast. We did
see an effect of age on MPFC activation differences for the delay contrast (median
adjusted R = 0.03 for 32 significant specifications), suggesting that the difference in
MPFC activation for delays of two weeks versus four weeks becomes smaller with
increasing age. Interestingly, we found no effect of age on nucleus accumbens activation
differences, suggestive of preserved reward sensitivity during delay discounting
(Eppinger et al., 2012). The latter results may also explain the absence of any
behavioral effects of age observed in this study and in previous meta-analytic work
(Seaman et al., 2022).
The results for age effects on BART indices were more heterogeneous for both
behavioral and neural markers. First, although we observed positive age effects for four
(12.5%) unique specifications that included the adjusted number of pumps for
between age and behavioral BART indices at the level of bivariate associations
association remains to be clarified. Second, we observed some convergence of age effects
on neural indices extracted from the BART. Specifically, age was negatively associated
with insula activation extracted from the contrast of reward and control balloons
(median adjusted R = 0.02 for eight significant specifications) and the contrast
between parametric modulation of risk in reward versus control balloons (median
adjusted R = 0.07 for 24 significant specifications). Furthermore, age correlated
positively with MPFC activation extracted from the contrast of reward and control
balloons (median adjusted R = 0.05 for 22 significant specifications) and MPFC
activation extracted from the contrast of parametric modulation of risk in reward versus
control balloons (median adjusted R = 0.12 for 32 significant specifications). Age was
also found to be negatively associated with nucleus accumbens activation differences
extracted from the reward versus control balloons contrast (median adjusted R = 0.01
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 29
for six significant specifications), and positively associated with MPFC activation
extracted from the contrast of linear versus exponential balloons (median adjusted R
= 0.01 for 16 significant specifications). Regardless of contrast, we found no
associations between age and thalamus activation differences.
Overall, the SCA approach allowed us to systematically and exhaustively analyze
age effects on varying operationalizations of decision-making under uncertainty, not
only confirming the bivariate analyses, but also yielding a clearer, visually more
accessible idea of the convergence and divergence of age effects given different outcome
variables and (combinations of) covariates. In summary, operationalization—that is,
how we assess individual differences in uncertainty-based decisions—seems to play a
potentially larger role than the inclusion or exclusion of different covariates.
Permutation testing
To assess the global significance of the SCA, we adopted a permutation-based
approach to generate a distribution of false-positive results under the null hypothesis
sampled the age variable with replacement), seven yielded a higher number of
significant effects than observed in the unshuffled data (number of significant effects in
the unshuffled data = 144). In other words, if there were in fact no systematic
association between age and the outcome variables, the probability of observing the
Discussion
In this study we aimed to systematically examine age effects on different
behavioral and neural indices of decision-making under uncertainty in a large sample of
participants between 16 and 81 years of age (N = 175) while controlling for theoretically
relevant covariates, including gender, education, income, and cognitive ability. We used
two common decision-making tasks, the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART) and a
delay discounting task, as these are thought to capture decisions under uncertainty in
the context of risk and trading off temporal options, respectively. In addition to
adopting different tasks, we also computed different neuroimaging contrasts as these
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 30
allowed us to examine whether age differentially affects the contrast-specific neural
processes (e.g., immediacy versus delay of temporal options). In what follows, we
summarize our results in the context of previous findings, discuss pertinent implications
of our findings, and highlight some limitations while providing an outlook on how to
advance our understanding of the effects of age on dealing with uncertainty.
Summary of Results and Implications
Overall, we found no evidence for wide-ranging age effects on decision-making
under uncertainty. First, with respect to behavior, we found no robust age effects on
risk-taking behavior in the BART, nor did we find evidence for age impacting trade-offs
between present and future rewards. Thus, although some have suggested behavioral
differences between younger and older adults (Eppinger et al., 2012; Henninger et al.,
2010; Wilson et al., 2021), our results are in line with studies reporting no effect of age
on either the BART or the delay discounting task (Seaman et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2016).
Second, with respect to neural correlates, our results were more heterogeneous, mainly
as a function of the two different paradigms.
For the BART, we observed negative effects of age on insula activation for both
the average and parametric activation contrast, and both of these contrasts also yielded
positive effects of age on activation differences in medial prefrontal cortex. Concerning
the former, the observed age-related reductions in anterior insula activation are in line
with previous findings (Samanez-Larkin & Knutson, 2015), suggesting that the
dampened neural coding of anticipated (that is, uncertain) losses presents a key
mechanism for explaining why older adults may display more risk-taking behavior than
younger adults (e.g., Cavanagh et al., 2012). However, as we found no effect of age on
behavior, and behavior was overall not related to neural markers, the observed age
effects on anterior insula activation appear to be inconsequential for behavior in the
BART. Interestingly, the observed positive effect of age on medial prefrontal cortex
activation corroborates our previous finding of decreased deactivation in older relative
to younger adults in the BART (Yu et al., 2016). Overall, the observed age effects on
medial prefrontal cortex activation in the BART are in line with previous results,
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 31
suggestive of age differences in the integration of core components such as anticipated
rewards and losses into a subjective value signal (Samanez-Larkin & Knutson, 2015;
Samanez-Larkin et al., 2011). In contrast, recent work using simple decision scenarios
(e.g., delay discounting) found no effect of age on neural subjective value (Seaman
et al., 2018), yet the presence of more complex, to-be-integrated decision components in
paradigms like the BART may account for the different results (Mata et al., 2011;
Olschewski et al., 2018; Seaman et al., 2018).
Concerning contrast selection, we only found negative effects of age on nucleus
accumbens activation for the average but not the parametric contrast analysis of reward
versus control balloons. Mechanistically, this pattern of age effects on nucleus
accumbens activation has been suggested to be indicative of older adults experiencing
more difficulty with the representation of a clear reward prediction error signal due to
suboptimal reward learning (Samanez-Larkin & Knutson, 2015). This explanation may,
in fact, account for the divergence of age effects on nucleus accumbens activation as a
function of contrast, because the parametric contrast aims to identify regions which
track progress over time, in particular the escalating risk associated with additional
pumps, yet this should in principle be uncorrelated to reward prediction error.
However, as this is the first time that age effects have been systematically studied on
different BART contrast analyses, the robustness of this finding needs to be examined.
Furthermore, we found that age was negatively associated with medial prefrontal cortex
activation for a novel contrast of linear versus exponential reward balloons, a pattern
which yet again points towards age-related differences in the computation of an
integrated value signal (Samanez-Larkin & Knutson, 2015). We should note that we did
not find robust behavioral differences between the two reward balloons, thus it is
currently unclear to what extent the observed age effect in medial prefrontal cortex for
this particular contrast can illuminate age differences in decision-making under
uncertainty.
For the delay discounting paradigm, we only observed an effect of age on medial
prefrontal cortex activation for shorter relative to longer delays, but did not find the
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 32
previously reported age effects on ventral striatal activation differences observed for
immediate versus delayed options (Eppinger et al., 2012; Samanez-Larkin et al., 2011).
Thus, our results are suggestive of preserved reward sensitivity when trading off
smaller-sooner versus larger-later options. Similar results were reported by Seaman and
colleagues (Seaman et al., 2018), who directly targeted age differences in the neural
representation of subjective value in varying discounting paradigms, also finding no age
differences. More generally, the lack of age differences in the delay discounting
paradigm poses questions for the mechanistic role that changing time horizons have
been proposed to play across the adult life span (Carstensen, 2021); we return to this
point in discussing the limitations of our work.
In the aggregate, our results suggest some age differences in the processing of
anticipated gains and losses in the context of the BART but these effects do not
generalize to the delay discounting task, thus limiting support for the idea of general
age-related differences in the processing of uncertainty.
Our results also have some important methodological implications. First, our
results suggest that the choice of task matters for identifying age differences in the
neural basis of decision-making under uncertainty. We considered only two tasks but a
research agenda that aims to broadly cover the links between aging and uncertainty
would require examining many more different measures that have so far coexisted in the
literature but only rarely been compared directly in within-subject designs. We hope to
see future work covering multiple tasks and task variations that can provide a better
understanding of the task characteristics, if any, that elicit age differences when dealing
with uncertainty. Second, our results suggest that there is some, but limited,
contribution of the choice of neural contrasts (e.g., average vs. parametric) in identifying
age differences in the neural basis of decisions under uncertainty. This is important
because it suggests that heterogeneous results found in the past or future literature may
not principally derive exclusively from the choice of contrast. That said, it would be
interesting to assess to what extent this conclusion is specific to the tasks we considered
or whether this is a more general characteristic of the decision paradigms currently used
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 33
in the literature. Third, we found that the inclusion of covariates in our analyses, such
as measures of cognitive ability, did not play a major role in determining individual and
age differences observed, which is against the idea that cognitive ability is a major
determinant of age differences in tasks, such as the BART, that rely on updating beliefs
over time (Mata et al., 2011). Future work needs to determine if this hypothesis needs
to be rejected completely, or, alternatively, what the boundary conditions are for
cognitive task demands to exact an influence on age effects on decision-making under
uncertainty. Furthermore, although our paradigms were incentive-compatible and paid
out real financial rewards, both previous research (Horn & Freund, 2022) and our
results for specifications that included income (cf. Frey et al., 2021) suggest that certain
methodological choices—like the incentive structure or controlling for individuals’
ability to "buffer" financial losses—may not be as potent a determinant of
decision-making under uncertainty as previously assumed (Camerer & Hogarth, 1999).
Limitations and Future Directions
There are five main limitations to our work that we should point out. First, we
should note limitations concerning our choice of tasks for investigating age differences in
dealing with uncertainty. Our work focused on two very different tasks that were not
specifically designed to isolate specific mechanisms of uncertainty in a comparable
fashion across the two. Further, although some have praised measures, like the BART,
that simulate the thrill and engagement of real-world risk taking, others have criticized
the difficulties in isolating specific cognitive and neural processes in such paradigms (cf.
Schonberg et al., 2011) and non-representative task design (Steiner & Frey, 2021). More
broadly, recent work has pointed out some limitations of behavioral paradigms
concerning, for example, their test-retest reliability (Frey et al., 2017) that pose a
challenge for individual and age differences research. Concerning the delay discounting
task, we focused on a small set of magnitudes and time intervals, which can also limit
the conclusions for age differences that perhaps are expressed more clearly at longer
time intervals (cf. Leverett et al., 2022; Seaman et al., 2022). Moreover, while we
focused our analyses on age effects observed via temporal contrasts—as opposed to, for
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 34
example, on tracking subjective value across the brain (Seaman et al.,
2018)—examining the neural conjunction of temporal contrasts and subjective value can
shed more light on the common and unique computations captured by the different
analytical methods. Future work could benefit from expanding the battery of measures
as well as from conducting more thorough measure development for the purpose of
neuroimaging research in order to adopt measures that can isolate particular processes
and that have the desired psychometric properties.
Second, we introduced a novel experimental manipulation concerning the use of
exponential and linear reward functions in the BART. The rationale for investigating
different reward functions was that this could allow better discrimination of the role of
exploration and varying values of uncertainty. Although we did not collect feedback
from participants about whether they detected a difference between balloon types, we
did not observe noticeable behavioral or neural differences between the two balloon
types, suggesting that participants may not have perceived them as sufficiently different
or did not have enough opportunity to learn about these differences in our study. We
believe that future studies should nevertheless consider more extensive testing of
different formulations of such principles, for example, in representative task designs that
more strongly vary learning opportunities or measure participants’ beliefs over time
(Steiner & Frey, 2021) to help uncover individual and age differences in dealing with
uncertainty.
Third, recent work has called for increased attention to issues of sample size and
power in neuroimaging studies (e.g., Marek et al., 2022). We have aimed to address
some of these concerns by targeting neural regions of interest derived from the aging
literature and adopting a multiverse approach to provide protection concerning spurious
findings. In the future, however, similar work may profit from using larger samples
stemming from extant panels (e.g., Dunedin Study, Lifebrain) or establishing research
consortia that can more easily target larger samples for discovery purposes of neural
markers of age differences in decision-making under uncertainty.
Fourth, we focused on a limited set of functional activations from a small set of
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 35
brain regions and thus our results cannot provide a full account of the computational
role of these regions or their role in a larger network of regions. Past work suggests that
functional and structural connectivity between key neural regions can account for some
individual (age) differences in decision making (Kohno et al., 2017; Leong et al., 2016;
Samanez-Larkin et al., 2011; van den Bos et al., 2014) and future efforts could use some
of the data reported here or adopt similar approaches to assess the role of brain
connectivity in accounting for age differences in decisions under uncertainty. However,
our decision to focus a priori on a small set of well-described regions with empirically
demonstrated relevance for age effects on decision making (Samanez-Larkin & Knutson,
2015) was motivated by the desire to follow a principled approach to the selection of
outcome variables; less principled approaches (e.g., Marek et al., 2022) have often
resulted in the (unsurprising) convergence of effect sizes around zero, thereby masking
and, potentially, undermining the contribution of neuroimaging approaches to our
understanding of the role of biological markers to complex phenotypes.
Fifth, and finally, we focused our efforts on understanding the relatively
well-controlled domain of the laboratory but cannot provide insight into the
consequences of age differences in the neural basis of decision-making under uncertainty
for real-world, everyday decisions. Future efforts could consider adopting a more
ambitious strategy that integrates laboratory testing with a battery of measures
covering more consequential decisions and real-world outcomes, such as financial status
or health choices (e.g., Li et al., 2015); only then will we be able to make a contribution
to determining the role of neural aging on how people treat uncertain gains and losses
"in the wild".
Conclusion
We have examined adult age differences in decisions under risk using two
behavioral tasks. Our results provide little evidence for behavioral differences but point
out a few age-related differences in the processing of anticipated gains and losses that
may be associated with uncertainty but are evident in only one of the tasks. As a
consequence, our work suggests the need for a larger research agenda that considers how
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 36
different forms of uncertainty and associated task characteristics determine age
differences in decision making.
Author contributions
LT contributed to Conceptualization, Methodology, Software programming
(EPrime, Unipark), Investigation, Resources, Data Curation, Visualization, Project
administration, and Writing - Original Draft. RM contributed to Conceptualization,
Methodology, Resources, Writing - Original Draft, Supervision, and Funding acquisition.
Funding
This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant to
Research Fund for Junior Researchers.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Open practices statement
Data and code supporting the main individual differences analyses, as well as
data pertaining to additional covariates, are available online via the Open Science
Additional information
This work is accompanied by supplemental materials, Appendices A and B.
Acknowledgment
We thank Markus Steiner, Jennifer Kurath, Anna-Chiara Schaub, Linda Goosen,
Lisa-Marie Wadle for their help with data collection. We also thank Laura Wiles for
proofing the manuscript.
AGE DIFFERENCES IN DECISION-MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY 37