This is the peer reviewed version of the following article (see reference for the published article in its final form):
Schürmann, O., Frey, R., & Pleskac, T. J. (2019). Mapping risk perceptions in dynamic risk-taking environments. Journal
This article may be used for non-commercial purposes in accordance with Wiley Terms and Conditions for Use of Self-
Archived Versions. This article may not be enhanced, enriched or otherwise transformed into a derivative work, without
express permission from Wiley or by statutory rights under applicable legislation. Copyright notices must not be removed,
obscured or modified. The article must be linked to Wiley’s version of record on Wiley Online Library and any embedding,
framing or otherwise making available the article or pages thereof by third parties from platforms, services and websites
other than Wiley Online Library must be prohibited.
Mapping risk perceptions in dynamic risk-taking environments
Oliver Schürmann
University of Basel
Renato Frey
University of Basel and Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin
Timothy J. Pleskac
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin
Author Note
This research was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation with a grant to the first
author (P0BSP1_148884). We would like to thank Jann Wäscher and Chantal Wysocki for assistance
with data collection. We also thank Laura Wiles for editing the manuscript. Finally, we thank Andreas
Pedroni and Ralph Hertwig for comments in the development of this project. Author contributions
were as follows: Conceptualization & Methodology: O.S., R.F., & T.J.P.; Software: O.S.; Data
collection & curation: O.S. & T.J.P.; Formal analysis (psychometric & cognitive modeling): O.S. &
T.J.P.; Writing - Original Draft: O.S.; Writing - Reviewing & Editing: O.S., R.F., & T.J.P;
Supervision: T.J.P. The full data set as well as the scripts for the statistical analysis can be
to Oliver Schürmann, University of Basel, Missionsstrasse 62A, 4055 Basel, Switzerland. E-mail:
oliver.schuermann@istituto.ch.
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 2
Abstract
Risk-taking behavior is rarely a single action made in isolation but is often repeated
and dynamic. Yet, the role risk perceptions play in risk taking have often been studied
using descriptions of isolated single-shot activities. To better understand the link
between risk perceptions and risk-taking behavior, we investigated risk perception in a
dynamic choice environment, the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART). In the BART,
participants repeatedly inflate a virtual balloon earning points if the balloon does not
explode. Across two studies, we measured risk perceptions by asking people to estimate
the probability that the balloon would explode at different levels of inflation. Our
results show that the probability ratings deviate both from the actual probabilities of an
explosion and from those predicted by the most successful cognitive model of the BART.
Yet, the probability estimates correlated with the actual choice behavior. Moreover, we
found that the very first experience in the BART was a critical factor in determining the
perceptions of the risks in the task, and in turn subsequent risk-taking behavior. Taken
together, the results help reveal the critical role risk perceptions play in risky behavior
and potentially can be used to improve our ability to identify real world risk takers.
Keywords: risk taking, risk perception, experience, cognitive psychometrics
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 3
Mapping risk perceptions in dynamic risk-taking environments
Decision making in everyday life, from smoking one or more cigarettes to riding a
bike without a helmet, forces people to evaluate choice options with different amounts
of risk. People’s perceptions of the probabilities of different outcomes in such
situations—that is, their risk perceptions—can be a key factor underlying risk-taking
behavior. Indeed, the way people perceive risks has been found to be associated with
risk-taking propensity across many different domains, people, and cultures (e.g.,
Gigerenzer, 2006; Klos, Weber, & Weber, 2005; Siegrist, Keller, & Kiers, 2005; Viscusi,
1990; Weber, Blais, & Betz, 2002; Weber & Hsee, 1998; Weber & Milliman, 1997).
Typically, though, this process and the role of risk perceptions in risk-taking
propensity has been examined using descriptions of single-shot scenarios (e.g., “Betting
a day’s income at a high stake poker game.” or “Consuming five or more servings of
alcohol in a single evening.”; Slovic, 2000; Weber et al., 2002). Although these studies
have helped identify the important role risk perceptions play in people’s self reports of
engaging in risk taking activities, there remain several open issues: One aspect that is
not well captured in these simplified vignettes is that actual risk-taking behaviors, like
navigating traffic or smoking cigarettes, is often repeated and dynamic. Moreover,
decisions in these situations usually come with at least partial feedback about the
outcomes of the decision allowing people to learn and update their beliefs for future
decisions of the same kind. It is thus essential to understand how these dynamic factors
impact risk perceptions. For example, to what extent do early experiences of risk
influence subsequent risk-taking behavior? And more generally, how closely do people’s
risk perceptions track the objective probabilities in dynamic choice environments?
To address these questions, we turned to laboratory-based gambling tasks (e.g.,
Bechara, Damasio, Damasio, & Anderson, 1994; Figner, Mackinlay, Wilkening, &
Weber, 2009; Frey, Rieskamp, & Hertwig, 2015; Lejuez et al., 2002; Pleskac, 2008;
Pleskac, Wallsten, Wang, & Lejuez, 2008; Rogers et al., 1999; Slovic, 1966). A key
factor in these tasks is that they prompt respondents to make repeated risky decisions,
often with feedback. Moreover, in some of these tasks the probabilities of a gain or a
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 4
loss change dynamically, as a function of how much risk has already been taken (see
also Figner et al., 2009; Frey et al., 2015; Pleskac, 2008; Slovic, 1966). Thus, these tasks
provide a means to study risk perceptions in dynamic but controlled choice
environments. In the current study, we focused on the Balloon Analogue Risk Task
(BART; Lauriola, Panno, Levin, & Lejuez, 2013; Lejuez et al., 2002; Pleskac et al.,
2008). We were particularly interested in how people’s risk perceptions track objective
risks in this dynamic choice environment, how these risk perceptions influence actual
risk-taking behavior, and what role early experiences play in perceptions of risk.
During the BART, people are asked to pump up a balloon on a computer screen.
With each successful pump they earn a fixed payoff (e.g., 5 cents). Each balloon has an
(initially unknown) maximum capacity, and pumping beyond this capacity results in an
explosion of the balloon. Consequently, the accrued payoff of the current trial is lost.
People, thus, have to decide when to stop pumping and collect their earnings before the
balloon explodes. If they choose to stop and collect their earnings, the trial ends and
the earnings are transferred to a permanent bank. Typically, people complete a series of
30 trials and the average number of pumps on non-exploding balloons across all trials is
used as a general risk-taking score known as the adjusted BART score.
The adjusted BART score has been found to correlate with real-world risky
behaviors, including substance use and abuse, delinquency, risky traffic behavior and
sexual behaviors (e.g., Aklin, Lejuez, Zvolensky, Kahler, & Gwadz, 2005; Hopko et al.,
2006; Lejuez et al., 2007, 2003; Skeel, Pilarski, Pytlak, & Neudecker, 2008). One
suggestion as to why performance in the BART correlates with these risky behaviors is
that its underlying structure appears to mimic many real-world risks and thus entice
people to take similar levels of risk in the laboratory tasks (Lejuez et al., 2002;
Schonberg, Fox, & Poldrack, 2011). Specifically, during the BART the probability of a
loss is initially small but grows with each pump, much like other risky actions like
smoking or substance abuse. Formally, the probability of a balloon exploding on pump
opportunity i, given that it did not explode on the preceding pump opportunities is
p = , (1)
n − i + 1
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 5
the 128 pump opportunities in one trail of the BART, given that the balloon has not
yet exploded (conditional probability). The dotted line is the median estimate of the
explosion probabilities that individuals have at the end of the BART, according to the
best-fitting cognitive model of the BART (i.e., the Bayesian Sequential Risk-Taking
Model, BSR; median over all participants).
where n is the number of maximum pumps that can be made (in most cases 128).
That is, with a maximum of 128 pump opportunities the probability that the balloon
will explode on the first pump opportunity is . Given that it did not explode on the
first pump opportunity, the probability of an explosion on the second pump opportunity
1 1
is , on the third pump opportunity, and so forth up to pump opportunity 128,
127 126
probability of a balloon exploding given its current size (i.e., the conditional
probability) for every possible pump opportunity i. Thus, with the probability of an
explosion increasing with each pump, the BART creates, as Schonberg et al. (2011)
stated, “a sense of escalating tension and exhilaration” (p. 16).
Crucially, at the outset of the BART people are unfamiliar with the stochastic
To achieve this structure, the explosion points (across trials) are predefined by a random draw of
numbers without replacement between 1 and a maximum number of pumps possible n (usually 128).
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 6
properties of the task. People only learn that the balloon will explode somewhere
between the first pump and when the balloon fills the screen (Lejuez et al., 2002). This
lack of knowledge on the part of people playing the task, raises the question just what
are people’s perceptions of the risk during the BART? And, relatedly, how well do their
perceptions track the underlying objective probabilities?
Potential answers to both of these questions stems from computational models of
decision making in the BART (Pleskac, 2008; Pleskac & Wershbale, 2014; Wallsten,
Pleskac, & Lejuez, 2005). According to the best performing model, people begin the
BART with a prior belief about the probability of an explosion. After each trial, they
learn from experience and update their beliefs. This model, somewhat curiously,
assumes that people inaccurately treat the probability of an explosion as constant across
pump opportunities. In other words, this computational model suggests that subjective
plots the median estimated probability of the balloon exploding that people have at the
end of the task, estimated from the data in the study of Wallsten et al. (2005). We
should emphasize that these probability estimates were not based on explicit ratings of
the probability of an explosion, but inferred from choice behavior alone.
By measuring people’s subjective risk perceptions we can test the prediction that
people believe the probability of an explosion remains constant during the BART.
Alternatively, their perceptions may conform closer to the stochastic structure of the
task, which would suggest that a reformulation of the current cognitive models is
needed. Either way, a better understanding of people’s risk perceptions in a dynamic
choice environment promises to improve our understanding of risk-taking behavior.
Studying people’s risk perceptions in the BART may also shed light on particular
puzzles that have arisen in such dynamic choice environments. For example, why do
people’s initial experiences appear to have such a strong impact on behavior? One
study showed that the first three explosions in the BART have a substantial influence
on people’s behavior throughout the task (Koscielniak, Rydzewska, & Sedek, 2016), and
another study demonstrated that the first few explosions shape people’s certainty about
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 7
their decisions (Walasek, Wright, & Rakow, 2014). In a related paradigm, even altering
only people’s very first experience had a lasting impact on their behavior throughout
the task (Shteingart, Neiman, & Loewenstein, 2013). Our hypothesis is that these
initial experiences impact people’s risk perceptions, which in turn impacts people’s
risk-taking behavior throughout the task.
Overview of Studies
In two studies we investigated i) how peoples’ self-reported risk perceptions track
objective probabilities in a dynamic choice environment, ii) whether these risk
perceptions influenced their actual risk-taking behavior, and iii) how initial experiences
in the task shape subsequent risk perceptions. To this end, in Study 1 we asked
participants to complete the standard BART and subsequently rate the probability of
an explosion for different sizes of the balloon. A complementary goal of this study was
to try to replicate the results found by Lejuez et al. (2003), namely, that smokers were
more risk seeking in the BART than non-smokers. To foreshadow our results, although
we did not find a difference in pumping behavior between smokers and non-smokers, we
did find some intriguing results in terms of participants’ risk perceptions. In Study 2 we
followed up on these results investigating how initial experiences shaped participants’
risk perceptions, and how these perceptions changed over the course of the task.
Study 1: Properties of People’s Risk Perceptions in the BART
In our first study, we focused on addressing two questions. First, what are the
properties of people’s estimates of the probability of an explosion in the BART? Second,
how are these estimates associated with risk-taking behavior in the BART? To
investigate these questions we repeated one of the original BART studies, which found
Consistent with this hypothesis Wichary, Pachur, Koscielniak, Rydzewska, and Sedek (2017) showed,
by fitting Wallsten et al.’s (2005) computational model, that the experience of the first three explosions
in the BART appeared to impact initial beliefs about the explosion probability of the balloon. However,
the causal direction of these results seem at odds given the prior beliefs in the model should precede
participants’ experience with the first three explosions.
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 8
smokers and non-smokers to differ in terms of the adjusted BART score (Lejuez et al.,
2003). We thus invited a group of smokers and a group of non-smokers to undertake the
classic version of the task. After the task, we asked participants to sequentially rate the
probabilities of an explosion after a certain amount of pumps for several balloon sizes.
Methods
Participants. We invited 100 participants (M = 25 years, SD = 4 years,
age age
59% female) from the participant pool of the Center for Adaptive Rationality at the
Max Planck Institute for Human Development. We required half of them (n = 50) to
have been daily smokers (smoking at least one cigarette per day over the past six
months) and the other half to be non-smokers (no history of daily smoking). The sample
size was determined using a power analysis based on the mean correlation between the
adjusted BART score and smoking status (mean r = .33), and a desired power of .9.
These parameters result in a goal of 86 participants. We rounded this number to 100.
We actively balanced the groups in gender (smokers: F = 56%, M = 44%;
non-smokers: F = 62%, M = 38%). All of the participants were native German
speakers. Each participant signed a consent form prior to the beginning of the study.
Participants were paid 10 per hour for their participation in the study plus a bonus
e e
contingent on their performance in the BART, which was between 1.25 and 11.55
with an average of 5.93. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board
of the Max Planck Institute for Human Development.
Materials. All tasks were conducted on personal computers with 19-inch LCD
screens. The first part of the study (behavioral tasks) was presented using the
Presentation software from Neurobehavioral Systems (Albany, California). The second
part of the study was presented in Unipark, an online questionnaire tool.
Bal loon Analogue Risk Task (BART). During this computer-controlled
task, participants were presented with a series of 30 balloons on the computer screen
(i.e., trials). For each trial, participants could sequentially click a button on the screen
to pump up the balloon. For each successful pump, 0.05 was added to a temporary
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 9
account. At any point, the participant could choose to stop pumping (i.e., to “cash
out”) whereupon a slot machine payoff sound was played and the money in the
temporary account was transferred to a safe account. However, if the balloon exceeded
a certain number of pumps, it exploded, with the computer playing a pop sound, and
the money in the temporary account for this trial was lost. In the original BART, the
balloon could fill up the entire screen (Lejuez et al., 2002). Due to the different
experimental software, we placed the balloon within a square on the screen and the
balloon could only get as large as the square.
A new balloon appeared after each trial until a total of 30 balloons was
completed. During each trial, the screen showed five items: the balloon, the amount
won in the last trial, the total amount won (i.e., the safe account) and two buttons
“pump” and “cash”. The sound files and amount of information on the screen were the
same as used in the original study of Lejuez et al. (2003). The instructions were
translated to German from the original task.
material) and were identical for all participants (on average, the balloons exploded after
64 pumps). For half the participants, we used the same series of explosion points as
used in the original study of Lejuez et al. (2003). For the other half of the participants,
we inverted this order by subtracting every explosion point of the original series from
the maximum capacity (i.e., from 128). Consistent with conventional BART procedures
(Lejuez et al., 2002), participants received no detailed information about the probability
of an explosion. They were only told that the balloon could explode somewhere between
the first pump and when the balloon reached the size of the box surrounding the
balloon. At the end of the task, three trials were randomly selected and participants
were paid according to their earnings on these trials, a bonus payment method
commonly used in incentivised experimental procedures.
Probability Ratings. To measure participants’ risk perceptions, we asked
them to rate explosion probabilities in a separate task. Here participants saw a series of
11 balloons at different pump stages (i.e., different balloon sizes). The series of sizes
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 10
ranged from 1 pump to 128 pumps in 11 equal-sized steps:
0, 13, 26, 39, 52, 65, 78, 91, 104, 117, and 128. The balloon sizes were presented in order.
At each step, participants were prompted with the question (in German), “What do you
think is the probability that the balloon will explode with one additional pump, given it
is already inflated at this size?” Participants rated the probability from 1 to 100% using
a slider, which was displayed below the balloon.
Questionnaires and Additional Measures. In addition to gender and age,
we assessed participants’ smoking status (using the Fagerström Test for Nicotine
Dependence; Heatherton, Kozlowski, Frecker, & Fagerström, 1991) and their alcohol
consumption (using the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test; Saunders, Aasland,
Babor, de la Fuente, & Grant, 1993). We also included two personality measures to
capture sensation seeking: the Zuckermann Sensation Seeking Scale V (Zuckerman,
2007) and the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (Barratt, 1965). These two personality
characteristics have repeatedly been shown to be correlated with real-life risk-taking
behavior in various domains such as drug use, financial decisions, and health decisions
including smoking (see Frey, Pedroni, Mata, Rieskamp, & Hertwig, 2017; Lauriola et al.,
2013, for a review). Both measures were also included in the original study of Lejuez et
al. (2003).
In addition to the tasks described above, we also asked participants to complete
two other tasks. The benefits task was designed to measure individual differences in
participants’ benefits from pumping a balloon at different pump stages—inspired by
observations that not only perceived risks but also expected benefits determine actual
risk taking (Weber et al., 2002). The other measure, the BART lottery task, was a
descriptive lottery-based gambling task that mimicked some of the stochastic properties
of the BART, and thus promised to further explore to what extent experiential
risk-taking measures converge with (equivalent) description-based measures (Mamerow,
Frey, & Mata, 2016). However, both measures resulted in unreliable estimates that were
not associated with behavior in the BART. We thus do not report them further. Details
about the methods, results, and interpretations of the BART benefit and lottery tasks
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 11
are reported in the supplemental material.
Procedures. After providing informed consent, participants completed the two
parts of the study. In the first part, participants completed the behavioral tasks on the
computer, including the BART, probability-rating task, benefit task, and lottery task
(in that order). As the study took part in a laboratory where participants were not in
an enclosed cubicle, we asked them to wear over-ear headphones during the first part of
the study to help reduce any possible influence from other participants (e.g., hearing
other participants clicking the mouse to inflate the balloon). On the headphones
participants only heard the sounds produced by the BART (i.e. explosion and
cash-sound) and no music or other sounds. In the second part of the study, participants
completed three questionnaires including the personality scales sensation-seeking and
impulsivity and a questionnaire about the participant’s demographic information.
Some procedural and methodological differences between the original study of
Lejuez et al. (2003) and our study should be mentioned. In our study, the BART was
administered only once while in the original study the BART was administered three
times. Because Lejuez et al. (2003) did not find any significant differences between the
three administrations, there was only one run of the BART in our study. The original
study did not include the BART perception, benefit and lottery task, but did include
the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT; Bechara et al., 1994). Because the IGT was not the
focus in our study, we did not include this task. Furthermore, Lejuez et al. (2003) only
used 34 non-smokers and 26 smokers. The sample in the original study included
English-speaking undergraduate students who were younger than in our sample (mean
age: 20.1 years), whereas our participants were German speaking and drawn from a
participant pool made up primarily of undergraduate students from a local university
(average age of 25.1 years). Finally, in our study, participants were incentivised by
receiving the winnings of three random balloon draws in the BART. In the original
study, participants were told they would win money depending on how well they
performed compared to other participants (a total score in the bottom third earned $5,
a total score in the middle third earned $10, and a total score in the top third earned
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 12
rating function (Equation 2). As can be seen leftmost panel, this functional form is able
$15).
Analyses. With regard to the probability ratings, we adapted a psychometric
function (henceforth rating function) to characterize the individual ratings of each
participant. The function is given by:
p (x) = γ + (1 − γ ) · , (2)
i i
i x−µ
− i
1 + e
with p(x) denoting the subjective probability of the balloon exploding on pump
opportunity x for participant i. The parameters γ, µ, θ are free parameters estimated
individually from the data for each participant.
We should emphasize that we are using this function solely to empirically describe
the probability ratings. Although this function has been used in other areas such as
item response theory (e.g., three-parameter item response model), the interpretations
and theoretical meaning of the parameters from that context do not necessarily extend
to this domain. To illustrate how the parameters measure different properties of the
probability ratings, we have plotted this function with different parameter values in
probability of an explosion was rated .5. Thus, the higher µ was, the lower the
probability rating over all 11 balloon sizes that the participants rated. The θ parameter
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 13
(sensitivity parameter) controls the slope of the function. Pragmatically, it indicates
how quickly the probability ratings switch from a low to a high rating with lower values
indicating a quicker shift and thus higher sensitivity. Finally, the γ parameter (elevation
parameter) measures the starting point of the probability ratings. We fitted a separate
curve to each participant’s probability ratings by minimizing the squared deviations
between the observed ratings and those predicted by the curve. We did so using the
optimize algorithm in R, with the following boundaries for the parameter estimation:
µ : [−128, 128], θ : [−1, 200], γ : [0, 1].
Results
BART Results. On average, participants had an adjusted BART score (mean
number of pumps in all trials where the balloon did not explode) of 37.5 (SD = 12.8).
This is consistent with the average score of 37.6 (SD = 11.6) reported in Lejuez et al.
(2003). However, unlike in the original study, in terms of the adjusted BART score
smokers (M = 36.83; SD = 13.86) did not significantly differ from non-smokers
(M = 38.2; SD = 11.93) (F (1, 98) = 0.28, d = 0.10, 95%CI [−.29, .50], p = .60). We
thus did not replicate the findings of Lejuez et al. (2003) concerning the differentiation
of smokers and non-smokers with the BART. Means and standard deviations for all
measures as well as correlations between all measures and risk-variables are provided in
the supplemental material.
of each participant (light gray dots), the fitted functions (light gray curves), the mean
ratings for each of the 11 rated balloon sizes (black dots), and the fitted function to the
average ratings (black curve). The rating function provided a good fit to the subjective
probability ratings (mean R = .96). On average, the estimates of the probability of an
explosion did increase with each pump. The ratings for each pump stage, however, were
all substantially higher than the objective probabilities (dashed curve).
tion of the ratings and the fit of the function at the individual level showed the function provided a good
description of the ratings even when the ratings deviated from a sigmoidal function. Follow up analyses
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 14
ratings for each balloon size in the perception task and the fitted rating function curves
(light gray). The individual probability ratings generally increased with balloon size
and the mean of the ratings for each size (solid curve). The estimates are strikingly
different from the objective probabilities of the task (dashed curve). Error bars on the
mean ratings are ±1 standard error. Right Panel: The relationship between the
individual µ parameter values (thereshhold parameter) and the adjusted BART score.
To assess the degree of association between perceptions and risky behavior, we
correlated the parameters of the rating function with the adjusted BART score. The
threshold parameter µ, which indicates the horizontal shift of the curve and the point
where the rating function hits a probability of .5, correlated with the adjusted BART
shows the scatter plot of individual µ parameter values and the average number of
pumps in the task. Thus, higher pumping was correlated with the pump on which
participants rated the explosion probability to be .5. In other words, participants with
lower explosion probability ratings also pumped more in the task indicating a link
between individual differences in risk perceptions in the BART were associated with
(see supplemental material) showed that removing participants who showed more deviant rating profiles
did not change our conclusions and if anything the effects were stronger excluding these participants.
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 15
higher risk taking in the BART.
The other two parameters, the sensitivity parameter θ and elevation parameter γ,
were not correlated with the adjusted BART score (see the supplementary materials for
detailed results).
Discussion
With the first study we aimed to answer two questions: What are the properties
of people’s people’s risk perceptions in a dynamic choice environment; and how are risk
perceptions associated with risk-taking behavior? Regarding the first question, Study 1
showed that people’s perceptions of the risks in the BART (as obtained from
self-reports) differ substantially from previous assumptions (as obtained from
computational modeling analyses). The functional form was quite different than that
assumed by the cognitive models of the BART (Pleskac, 2008; Wallsten et al., 2005).
The ratings were also a lot higher than the objective probabilities, and showed a
different functional form than the actual hyperbolic function.
Regarding the second question and the relationship between perceptions of risks
and actual behavior: We observed that the ratings were related to risk-taking behavior,
with participants who gave lower probability estimates (low µ) taking more risks (i.e.,
pumping more). However, this relationship is perhaps not all that surprising given that
the ratings were collected after participants had completed the BART. Thus, to
examine the link between risk perception and actual risk taking in our study more
thoroughly, we conducted a second study to investigate (a) what the properties of initial
risk perceptions were in the BART, (b) how predictive these perceptions were of
subsequent risk-taking behavior, and (c) how early experiences in the task influenced
perceptions and in turn risk-taking behavior.
Smokers and non-smokers did not differ in µ of the probability-rating function (µ: F (1, 98) = 0.35,
p = .555, η = .004).
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 16
Study 2: The Impact of Early Experiences on Risk Perceptions and
Risk-Taking Behavior
In Study 2, we sought to assess the extent to which risk perceptions predict
risk-taking behavior, and how early experiences of risk shape risk perceptions in the
BART. To this end, we collected risk perceptions at two time points: after the first and
after the last balloon. Doing so also provided us a means to test the hypothesis that
initial experiences in the BART play a large role in shaping participants’ risk
perceptions, which in turn might impact risk-taking behavior throughout the task.
That is, building on the finding from Koscielniak et al. (2016) that the experience on
first three balloons in the BART has a high impact on subsequent risk-taking behavior
(see also Shteingart et al., 2013; Walasek et al., 2014), we hypothesized that risk
perceptions play a mediating role between participants’ early experiences and
risk-taking behavior in the BART. To test this hypothesis, we manipulated the
explosion point of the first balloon, holding everything else constant. We examined how
this explosion point impacted initial risk perceptions, risk-taking behavior, and to what
extent these initial risk perceptions mediated the relationship between early experiences
and risk-taking behavior.
Methods
Participants. We invited 90 participants (M = 24.5years, SD = 4.5years,
age age
61% female) from the Center for Adaptive Rationality’s participant pool. The
participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions (see below). Unlike in
Study 1, we did not specifically invite smokers or non-smokers. All of the participants
were native German speakers. Each participant signed a consent form prior to the
beginning of the study. Participants were paid 10 per hour for their participation in
the study plus a bonus contingent on their performance, which ranged from 2.2 to
e e
11.9, with an average of 5.43.
Materials. We used a similar set of tasks as in Study 1, and thus only report
the differences here.
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 17
Bal loon Analogue Risk Task (BART). We used the same implementation
of the BART as in Study 1 and implemented the same explosion points as in the
original version of Lejuez et al. (see the supplemental material for the entire list of
explosion points). However, we manipulated the first explosion point in the following
way: In the control condition the first explosion point remained the same, set at 65. In
the low condition the explosion point was set to 13 and in the high condition the
explosion point was set to 98.
Probability Ratings. We used the same probability-rating task as in Study 1,
but participants completed the task twice once after the first balloon and once after
completing all 30 balloons.
Questionnaires and Additional Measures. As in Study 1 we also asked
participants to rate the expected benefits that would come from pumping the balloon
(benefits task). The benefits task was the same as in Study 1. Even though responses in
this task were not very reliable in Study 1, we still collected it to investigate if the
unreliability remained (which turned out to be the case). Please see the supplemental
material for further details.
As in Study 1, we also asked participants to complete a lottery task where
participants were asked to make a series of choices between a monetary lottery and a
fixed payoff that was meant to mimic the decisions participants face at each pump
opportunity. The goal with this task was to examine a possible description-experience
gap with a task like the BART (Hertwig & Erev, 2009; Mamerow et al., 2016). Further
details can be found in the supplemental material.
Finally, following similar procedures as in past studies with the BART, we also
asked participants to complete the sensation seeking scale, the impulsivity scale, and a
demographic questionnaire.
Procedures. We used a similar procedure as in Study 1. The only major
deviation was that in Study 2 participants completed the probability-rating task twice,
once after the first trial (“T1-rating”) and once after completing all 30 balloons
(“T30-rating”).
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 18
Analyses. We used a similar set of analyses for Study 2. By collecting risk
perceptions also at the beginning of the BART, we were able to examine to what degree
the relationship between early experience in the BART and overall risk-taking behavior
is mediated by their risk perceptions. To do so, we conducted a mediation analysis
using the adjusted BART score as dependent variable, the explosion point of the
respective condition as predictor variable, and probability ratings of the first rating
point (using the individually fitted µ parameters for each person, because this was the
best predictor of behavior in the BART in Study 1) as a mediator. We used the
mediation analysis procedure specified by Preacher and Kelley (2011). In this mediation
analysis, a direct effect is the effect of the first explosion point on average pumping in
the BART. An indirect effect would be the effect of the explosion point on perception,
which, in turn, influences the pumping behavior. Thus, a significant indirect effect
would indicate that the explosion point indirectly influenced the pumping through the
perception of the risk. We used the MBESS package in R, which is suggested by
Preacher and Kelley (2011) and is especially useful to calculate bias-corrected and
accelerated (BCa) bootstrap confidence limits.
Results
for each of the three experimental conditions. Participants in the control condition on
average pumped slightly more (M = 42.47, SD = 11.42) than participants in Study 1,
and considerably more than participants in the low condition, in which the balloon
exploded very early (M = 28.01, SD = 13.25). Participants in the high condition
showed the highest average pumping behavior (M = 45.67, SD = 12.47). An ANOVA
revealed a significant main effect of the experimental condition on the average adjusted
BART score (F (2, 87) = 16.71, p < .001, η = .278) with the contrast between
participants in the low condition and in the control condition being significant
(t = 4.442, p < .001). The difference between participants in the control condition and
in the high condition was not significant (t = 0.98, p < .33). One possible explanation
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 19
1) of the BART in Study 2. The differences between the conditions low and control as
well as between low and high were significant.
for the lack of a difference between the high and control condition is that only seven
participants (23%) in the high condition pumped the balloon until it exploded. In
comparison, 11 participants (37%) in the control condition and 25 participants (83%) in
the low condition experienced an explosion in the first trial. Further details about the
descriptive results can be found in the supplemental material.
rating functions for both the ratings after first trial, T1 (left) and the ratings after the
last trial, T30, (right). The rating functions fitted the data well at both rating points
2 2
(T1-rating: mean R = 0.97, T30-rating: mean R = 0.97). The colors of the curves
represent the three conditions (i.e., control: blue, low : green, high: red). The
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 20
dashed curve (triangles): “low” condition; solid blue curve (squares): control condition;
dotted red curve (exes): “high” condition). The thick dashed curve shows the objective
probabilities in the task. Left Panel: Function curves (light colored) and the mean
values for each of the 11 rating sizes separated by explosion condition in the
pre-perception task. Right Panel: Fitted rating function curves (light gray) and the
mean values for each of the 11 rating sizes separated by explosion condition in the
post-perception task. Error bars represent standard errors.
T1-ratings differed substantially depending on the explosion condition. The graph
suggests that participants in the low condition rated the probability that a balloon
would explode generally higher than in the control condition (blue) or the high
condition (red). However, this difference appears to dissipate in the post-task ratings.
As in Study 1, the probability ratings generally increased with increasing size of the
balloon, but were substantially higher than the objective probabilities in the BART.
The µ and θ parameters of the rating function give a little more insight into the
effect of the different explosion points on risk perceptions (there were no systematic
The elevation parameter γ correlated with the threshold parameter µ, which might indicate that the
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 21
and rating point (T1-rating: immediately after the first trial, T30-rating: after the last
trial). Left Panel: mean µ-parameter (shift of the rating function on the horizontal
axis) values per condition and rating point. Right Panel: mean θ-parameter values
(slope of the rating function) per condition and rating point
was an effect of the explosion point of the first balloon on the threshold parameter µ
(F (2, 87) = 10.27, p < .001, η = .191). This effect depended on the time point of the
rating (F (2, 87) = 8.51, p < .001, η = .15). After the first balloon (T1-rating) the
mean threshold parameter µ values showed a large difference in perceived probabilities
in line with the initial explosion point. There, participants in the high condition
estimated the balloon to explode with probability .5 at µ = 65.3 pumps on average,
whereas the low condition estimated probability .5 at µ = 28.4 pumps on average, and
the control condition at µ = 45.67. The significant interaction indicates that these
differences collapsed on each other with experience. The ratings in the high condition
decreased, whereas they increased in the low and the control condition. However, only
threshold parameter picked up some variance of the elevation parameter. The supplemental material
shows the descriptive results of the correlations
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 22
the change in the low condition was significant (t(87) = 4.8, p < .001). For the
T30-ratings, the differences between the experimental conditions were smaller.
Although none of the differences remained significant (high vs. control: t(87) = 1.41.
p = .15; low vs. control: t(87) = 0.47. p = .63; low vs. high: t(87) = 1.89. p = .06).
The sensitivity parameter θ also showed systematic effects from the manipulation
condition resulted in a much lower level of sensitivity while the low condition had a
high level of sensitivity, but with subsequent experience the sensitivity converged with
all three groups (F (2, 87) = 6.21, p < .01, η = .125). This interaction was driven by
the significant decrease in the high condition (t(87) = −2.241, p = 0.028) and significant
increase in the low condition (t(87) = −2.623, p = 0.010).
One possible explanation for the effect of the explosion point on trial 1 could be
that more participants in the low condition experienced the balloon explode and would
therefore be more certain about the explosion point. The sensitivity parameter could
thus capture the participants’ degree of certainty when the balloon explodes. Since for
θ, lower values represent higher certainty, participants who experienced an explosion
should have lower θ. A post-hoc analysis revealed the tendency of participants that saw
an explosion in the first trial having lower θ values, but this effect was not significant
(F (1, 84) = 2.06, p = .15, η = .02). See supplemental material for detailed results.
Taken together, the results from Study 2 showed that initial experience with the
first balloon had a critical impact on subsequent risk-taking behavior in the BART.
Moreover, the properties of the risk perceptions were similar to that of Study 1 with the
probability of an explosion increasing with each pump. This was true for both the T1-
and T30-ratings. As in Study 1, the perceptions substantially deviated both from the
true probability and from the prediction from the computational model of a small
constant probability of an explosion. In addition, we also found that initial experiences
in the first balloon impacted risk perceptions. This raises the question of whether and
to what degree risk perceptions mediate the relationship between the experience in the
first balloon and risk-taking behavior in the BART. We turn to this question next.
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 23
Mediation Analysis. We conducted a mediation analysis to investigate
whether the difference in pumping behavior between experimental conditions was due
to differences in subjective probabilities, following the three-step procedure proposed by
Baron and Kenny (1986). A three-step linear regression analysis confirmed that
explosion condition was a significant predictor of the µ-parameter, (b = 9.79, SE = 3.41,
p = 0.004), and the perception of probabilities (µ) was a significant predictor of the
adjusted BART score, b = .0.18, SE = .055, p = .001. Finally, when both variables are
considered, the explosion point was no longer a significant predictor of the adjusted
BART score (b = −.17, SE = .1.85, p = .92). This confirms the hypothesis that the
explosion point indirectly influenced pumping behavior through the perception of
probabilities (an indirect effect). To calculate the effect size P , we used bootstrap
procedures suggested by (Preacher & Kelley, 2011), resulting in a effect size P = 0.81
for the indirect effect, which was significant with bootstrapped CIs = [0.04, 2.45].
General Discussion
In two studies, we investigated how risk perceptions influence behavior in a
dynamic choice environment. To this end, using the BART we probed risk perceptions
by asking participants to rate the probability of a negative outcome (i.e., the explosion
of a balloon in the BART). Our results showed that these probability ratings did not
correspond to the objective probabilities in the BART, nor did they correspond to the
assumptions of the most successful cognitive models developed to date. However, these
risk perceptions shaped risk-taking behavior in the BART, which is in line with studies
investigating risk perception on a static, descriptive level (e.g., Slovic, 1964, 2000;
Weber et al., 2002).
In addition, our design revealed the important role of repeated and dynamic
decisions in shaping risk perceptions (and in turn, risk taking). In particular, risk
perceptions are shaped by early experiences, which in turn impact risk-taking behavior
lastingly. These results corroborate previous findings that report the importance of
early experience in the BART (Koscielniak et al., 2016; Walasek et al., 2014) and even a
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 24
wider range of tasks (Shteingart et al., 2013). Our results go beyond these findings in
that they isolate these effects to participants’ risk perceptions. There are two key
implications of our results, which we discuss next.
The Link Between Risk Perception and Risk Taking
Our results support the conclusion that risk perceptions play a causal role in risk
taking. The approach of using self-reports (of risk perception) is a different approach to
that of using cognitive models to investigate the cognitive underpinnings of behavior in
the BART (Pleskac, 2008; Pleskac & Wershbale, 2014; Rolison, Hanoch, & Wood, 2012;
Wallsten et al., 2005). In fact, our results do not support the assumptions implied by
the most successful cognitive model of the BART, which suggests (based on choice
data) that the probability of an explosion is treated as small and constant across pump
opportunities.
How do our findings inform cognitive models of the BART? Even though our
studies were not designed for this goal and despite risk perception ratings being only
collected once (Study 1) or twice (Study 2), we also ran a thorough modeling analysis
(see supplemental material for details of methods). In total we tested five cognitive
models: Four of the models are different variants of the models from Wallsten et al.
(2005) and Pleskac (2008), which are a factorial combination of how the probability of
an explosion is represented and whether the models assumes there is learning or not.
Specifically, two of the models assumed a stationary representation of probabilities in
the BART and the other two assumed participants had a correct representation of the
BART (the probability of an explosion increased hyperbolically with pump number).
Half the models included a Bayesian learning process, according to which participants
learned about the explosion probability (stationary) or the number of possible pumps
(increasing). In general, models with learning performed better than those without, and
the stationary representation models performed better than non-stationary
representation models. These findings are in line with previous applications of these
models to the BART (Wallsten et al., 2005).
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 25
The fifth and novel model that we developed integrated the probability ratings of
the perception task into the modeling structure from Wallsten et al. (2005) and Pleskac
(2008). This model did not include a learning process because using our design, a clear
learning process was impossible to assume with only one (Study 1) or two (Study 2)
probability rating point(s). This turned out to be a substantial restriction in the
model’s ability to account for the data, and the models with a Bayesian learning process
outperformed the newly implemented perception model in our data. However, our new
“perception model” did perform better than the Wallsten et al. (2005) models that did
not incorporate a learning process. This result suggests that participants’ subjective
probabilities account for more behavioral differences than the representations inferred
from the traditional models. However, learning alters the probability representation in
ways that we cannot clearly investigate with our current design. Further studies should
address this issue and design studies that allow investigating probability estimates of
participants throughout the task. Additionally, a successful new model should include
the influence of the initial experience of the explosion point to accurately account for
this effect. A similar model including a so-called reset structure has been suggested by
Shteingart et al. (2013) for sequential sampling tasks; this could potentially be adapted
for a new BART model, too.
This joint effect of learning and risk perceptions on risk taking raises the question
of how important it is to conceal the stochastic structure of the BART as a means to
measure risk taking. In fact, several results suggest that when the stochastic structure
is more transparent, risk taking becomes much more stable in the task and less reliant
on early risk perceptions. For instance, Frey et al. (2015) made the stochastic structure
in a similar sequential task more apparent by manipulating the feedback participants
received. With “partial feedback” (as provided in the BART), participants did not
manage to overcome their early impressions of risk across trials, which systematically
shaped risk taking (i.e., relative strong risk aversion as in the BART). Only when
participants were given feedback about the entire stochastic process (in terms of the
BART: when the balloon would have exploded), risk taking became less reliant on early
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 26
risk perceptions and performance more optimal. Similarly, Pleskac (2008) showed that
when participants were fully informed about the stochastic structure of the task from
the outset (i.e., the probability of a failure at each pump opportunity and how it
increased), the predictive performance of the task increased compared to when the
stochastic structure was hidden. Thus, although obscuring the stochastic structure of
the task like the BART makes it possible to understand the cognitive processes involved
in risk taking such as the link between say risk-perceptions and risk taking, it also has
negative implications in terms of measuring someone’s overall risk proclivity. We take
up the topic of identifying risk takers next.
Identifying Risk-Takers
Our results are also informative in terms of one of the initial goals of the BART,
which which was to identify risk takers (Lejuez et al., 2003, 2002; Pleskac et al., 2008).
Whereas the BART is often found to correlate with risk taking outside the lab (e.g.,
Aklin et al., 2005; Hopko et al., 2006; Lejuez et al., 2007, 2003; Skeel et al., 2008), there
are also reports that the BART can have limited convergent validity with other
behavioral measures or risk taking (Frey et al., 2017; Pedroni et al., 2017), as well as
with self-reported measures of real-life behaviors (e.g., Ba, Zhang, Peng, Salvendy, &
Crundall, 2016; Coffey, Schumacher, Baschnagel, Hawk, & Holloman, 2011; Frey et al.,
2017; Le Bas, Hughes, & Stout, 2015; van Ravenzwaaij, Dutilh, & Wagenmakers, 2011).
Our results suggest that to a certain degree, these somewhat inconsistent results could
be due to particular task designs.
One critical aspect of task design pertains to the substantial influence of early
experiences on risk perception and risk taking throughout the task. This suggests that
particular attention needs to be given to the first few trials that participants will
experience. For example, when not specifically controlling the order of balloons (i.e.,
when administering a randomized order of balloons), this could strongly and
differentially influence participants’ behavior in the task, and thus lead to attenuated
correlations with other measures (e.g., smoking status). The data of Frey et al. (2017)
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 27
in trial 1 (i.e., the first experienced explosion point; data from the Basel-Berlin Risk
Study, Frey et al., 2017; Pedroni et al., 2017). This analysis only includes participants
who actually experienced an explosion in the first trial (i.e., 765 of all 1,507
participants). For these participants, the correlation between the first experienced
explosion point and adjusted BART score was significant (r = .40, 95% CI [.33, .45],
p < .001). Points depict the mean adjusted BART scores, and error bars show 95%
confidence intervals. Values above 100 are truncated since few people pumped as far to
experience an explosion.
support this idea: There, the explosion points were randomized between participants,
participants’ experience in the first trial (i.e., larger adjusted BART scores when
participants’ experienced an explosion at a high pumping stage in the first trial; this
analysis excludes participants who did not experience an explosion in the first trial).
Is controlling the explosion points between participants enough to remedy the
solution? The answer to this question appears to be no. Though the explosion points
were fixed in Lejuez et al. (2003), they were also fixed in our Study 1 where we did not
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 28
observe association between the BART and smoking status. It is, however, possible that
these diverging findings could be due to minor differences between our study and the
one of Lejuez et al. (2003) (i.e. cultural differences, age and profession differences or
different perception of smoking 13 years ago).
Another possibility, extrapolating from the substantial impact of the very first
balloon explosion on risk perceptions, is that other factors possibly present in past
studies could have differentially influenced the perception of risks in the BART and in
turn resulted in a relationship between performance in the BART and smoking status.
For example, it is well known that the expectations of the experimenter can influence
participants behavior (Rosenthal, 1966; Rosnow & Rosenthal, 1997). In the case of
identifying risk takers, it seems possible that even subtle differences in how participants
are initially treated, especially if the criterion of interest is easy to identify (e.g.,
whether one smokes), could impact their risk perceptions about the task and ultimately
their behavior.
Taken together, our results imply that subtle differences in the structure of the
task can impact behavior. Going forward, if the goal is to identify risk takers, then
great care should be taken to control for these differences or at least potentially
measure risk perceptions from the outset. More generally, our results also illustrate the
important role early experiences of risky situations can have on risk perceptions. This
suggests that successful interventions to reduce risk taking might focus on these early
experiences and helping individuals better understand and interpret them.
Conclusion
Our results show that while risk perceptions in the BART do not cohere very well
to the actual structure of the task, they do play an important role in the risks people
take. Moreover, they support the important function ascribed to risk perceptions in
determining actual risk taking in a variety of everyday behaviors, which appears to
extend from static to dynamic situations. At the same time, our results also
demonstrate the critical role early experiences have on shaping risk perceptions, which
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 29
in turn impact people’s overall dynamic risk-taking behavior. Taken together our
results identify the importance of controlling differences in risk perceptions when using
behavioral tasks like the BART to measure risk taking, and more broadly, the important
role early impressions can have on risk perceptions, and thus the risks people take.
RISK PERCEPTION IN DYNAMIC RISK-TAKING BEHAVIOR 30