Digital campaigning: How digital
media change the work of parties and
campaign organizations and impact
elections*
ANDREAS JUNGHERR
INSTITUTE FOR POLITICAL SCIENCE
UNIVERSITY OF BAMBERG, BAMBERG, GERMANY
Abstract: Digital media have become important elements of political
parties and campaign organizations all over the world. Examples from
U.S. presidential campaigns dominate the public imagination of digital
campaigning. At the same time, it is important to recognize that the
uses of digital media in politics vary considerably depending on cam-
paign contexts and resources. This makes necessary the analysis of the
use of digital media by parties and campaign organizations in varying
temporal and international contexts instead of expecting the examples
from the U.S. to apply globally. The chapter will proceed by a discus-
sion of some of the dominant theoretical and empirical approaches to
the study of digital campaigning. Following this, the chapter will use a
framework focused on campaign functions for the discussion of digital
campaigning: The impact of digital media on organizational structures
and work routines, resource collection and allocation, achieving pres-
ence in communication spaces and reach to audiences of interest, and
the use of digital media as a symbol for professionalism and innova-
tion of parties and their candidates.
Keywords: digital campaigning, political parties, political campaigns, campaigning,
data-driven campaigning, digital parties, platforms, public arena
*This is a draft of the chapter. The final version will be available in Research Handbook Digital
Sociology edited by Jan Skopek, forthcoming 2023, Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd. The material
cannot be used for any other purpose without further permission of the publisher and is for
private use only. Please cite as: Jungherr, A. (2023). Digital campaigning: How digital media
change the work of parties and campaign organizations and impact elections. In J. Skopek
(Ed.), Research handbook digital sociology. Edward Elgar
1 Digital campaigning in the work of parties and
campaign organizations
Digital media have come to play an important role in the work of political parties and
campaign organizations all over the world. Examples for the use of digital media in the
U.S. like Barack Obama’s presidential campaigns of 2008 and 2012 and Donald Trump’s
campaign of 2016 dominate the public imagination. At the same time, it is important
to recognize that the uses of digital media in politics vary considerably depending on
campaign contexts or resources. This demands for the analysis of the use of digital media
by parties and campaign organizations in varying temporal and international contexts
instead of expecting the examples from the U.S. to apply globally.
The focus of this chapter lies on the discussion of how digital media have impacted the
work of political parties, especially the way they run political campaigns. Political par-
ties are at the heart of democracies and although they face persistent challenges regarding
membership and public trust, they are crucial institutions connecting the people with po-
litical elites and the government (Dalton et al., 2011). This renders the impact of digital
media on parties’ ability to connect with voters one of the crucial channels through which
digital media impact democracy (Jungherr et al., 2020, pp. 158–178).
Digital media have a strong impact on politics beyond parties. They have changed the
work of non-governmental organizations (Bimber et al., 2012; Karpf, 2012), extended the
toolkits and repertoires available to activists and protestors (Bennett & Segerberg, 2013;
Earl & Kimport, 2011; Jackson et al., 2020), and provided new forms of political par-
ticipation (Theocharis & van Deth, 2018). These are important changes. But the specific
institutional, organizational, and participatory characteristics of political parties deviate
strongly from these other political organizations and forms of political participation. This
makes the analysis and discussion about the role and impact of digital media in the work
of political parties an important topic in its own right. Of course, this does not mean that
the patterns identified in the broader discussion on the impact of digital media on political
organization, participation, and activism do not also inform the study of political parties.
By now, digital tools available to parties, elites, and people in their pursuit of politics
and political information have reached a staggering variety. In the past, it was possible
to discuss the role of “the internet” in politics, “social media,” or specific services like
Facebook or Twitter. Today, the variety of available services and their differentiated uses
and functions challenge these unified approaches. Instead, I will use the term “digital
media” in order to capture the breadth of this phenomenon in the work of political parties.
Here, I follow the definition by Jungherr et al. (2020, pp. 7–8):
“[digital media are] institutions and infrastructures that produce and dis-
tribute information encoded in binary code.”
The chapter will proceed by a discussion of some of the dominant theoretical and empir-
ical approaches to the study of digital campaigning. Following this, the chapter will use a
framework focused on campaign functions for the discussion of digital campaigning: The
impact of digital media on organizational structures and work routines, resource collec-
tion and allocation, achieving presence in communication spaces and reach to audiences
of interest, and the use of digital media as a symbol for professionalism and innovation of
parties and their candidates. Finally, the chapter will sketch persistent challenges to the
academic investigation of the uses of digital media for political parties and their effects on
campaigns and present promising perspectives for future research.
2 How do we know?
Before we proceed, it is important to ask how scientists know about the role of digital
media in political parties and effects on campaigning. This will show that we as a field
know very little about these questions and what we appear to know does not necessarily
stand on the firmest ground.
In recent years, we have seen many studies examining the use of digital media through
parties. Yet, while the study-count might be high and steadily increasing, these studies
tell us little about the strategic use of digital media, their organizational embedding, or
their actual effects in the pursuit of campaigning goals. The literature faces systematic
challenges both regarding theory and the establishment of empirical evidence.
One reason for this surprising state is that studies often approach the use of digital me-
dia by parties and campaigns from distinctly unpolitical perspectives. For example, early
studies approached the use of campaign websites by counting features, such as the pres-
ence of hyperlinks or contact options (Foot & Schneider, 2006). These signals served as
operationalizations of concepts supposedly characteristic of digital communication, such
as “interactivity.” The analysis of political uses of digital media thus starts out as the
search for characteristics associated with digital communication. The question thus is not
how political actors use digital media to further their political goals but instead how dig-
ital communication starts to shape and change political communication. This early logic
still permeates many contemporary studies approaching the use of digital media by polit-
ical actors through their use of features of digital tools supposedly signaling authenticity,
bottom-up mobilization, deliberation, or interactivity.
Another strand in the literature examines whether the use of digital media by political
actors corresponds with a “normalization” of digital politics or a “revolution” of politics
through digital media. Normalization is here understood as established political power
dynamics and communication styles starting to dominate digital communication environ-
ments as well. In contrast, revolution speaks of new political powers and communication
styles to emerge in digital communication environments and over time to transform poli-
tics as such. While still a popular framing device for studies, the normalization-revolution
debate tells us little about actual uses of digital media and their impact on practices and
work routines in political organizations and their effects on campaigns (Jungherr et al.,
2020, pp. 240–244). For one, the bar of what degree of change constitutes a revolution
is contested, thereby leading different researchers to take the same evidence as support
for normalization or revolution depending on their priors (Wright, 2012). Second, the
time frame of changes is disputed with most studies taking a predominantly presentist
perspective. This can lead scholars to treat the emergence of new political actors, such
as the #Occupy protests or the various European Pirate Parties, as evidence for a digital
revolution of politics, while in hindsight of a few years the actual impact of these new
actors turned out to be limited and they themselves were somewhat short-lived (Jungherr
et al., 2020, pp. 240–244).
What passes in these approaches as theory usually does not go beyond labelling the
emergence of a specific practice or the use of specific tools or features as evidence of a
supposed trend. Theories stating causal relationships or mechanisms are rare in this liter-
ature. Accordingly, these studies are best understood as descriptive rather than explana-
tory accounts of the uses of digital media for parties and in campaigning. They tell us a
lot and in detail about the uses of specific practices, tools, and features at specifics point
in time but little about causes, effects, or processes.
Beyond a lack of theory, the field faces empirical challenges too. For one, many stud-
ies rely predominantly, if not exclusively, on the analysis of digital artifacts of campaign
activity – such as websites, tweets, Facebook posts, or YouTube videos. What is gener-
ally missing is a meaningful follow up involving campaign professionals or party officials
allowing for the identification of their motives for or assessments of the uses of digital
media. Also lacking are studies with explicit evaluative designs allowing for the identifi-
cation of actual effects of digital media. Thereby, the respective studies end up telling us
more about the expectation of researchers regarding the uses of digital media, than the
expectations of political professionals or their effects on campaigns. At the same time, as
we have seen above, researchers’ expectations often do not account for specific goals of
political actors or functions of digital media in their pursuit but are based on much more
general expectations regarding the nature or effects of digital media as such.
Some of the richest narratives on the use of digital media by campaign organizations or
parties stem from accounts of either participants and consultants (Bond & Exley, 2016;
Pearlman, 2012; Therriault, 2016; Trippi, 2004) or journalists (Edelman, 2020; Issenberg,
2012; Madrigal, 2012). While these accounts offer rich information, their authors invari-
ably are trying to sell their audience exciting narratives about the decisive uses of digital
media in politics. Accordingly, they need to be interrogated critically by academics. Fail-
ure to do so can lead to the emergence of folk-theories about the power of digital media
in politics that prove surprisingly resilient even when faced with mounting contradicting
evidence. Examples for this are the ill-founded claims about the decisive impact of Cam-
bridge Analytica on the U.S. presidential campaign of Donald Trump in 2016 (Jungherr
et al., 2020, pp. 124–130). This highlights the risks of relying uncritically on the accounts
of insiders or journalists when it comes to understanding the role of digital media for
political actors and their effects.
Recently, there has been emerging a literature informed by the sociology of organi-
zations and ethnographic research practices, that provides rich insights on the practices
and consequences of the use of digital media by campaign organizations and parties. Un-
til now, however, this literature has focused predominantly on U.S. campaigns, specifi-
cally the campaigns of the Democratic party between 2004-2016 (Baldwin-Philippi, 2015;
Hersh, 2015; Kreiss, 2012b, 2016a; Nielsen, 2012). Analyses in other countries or sys-
tematic comparisons are still very rare. As a result, there are severe holes in our knowledge
of digital campaigning outside of the United States or even within the United States (like
campaigns of the Republican Party or non-presidential campaigns).
Previous research suffers also from gaps in terms of methodology. The most insightful
works in recent years have been very successful in mobilizing observational approaches –
such as embedded participatory observation (Baldwin-Philippi, 2015; Nielsen, 2012) or
interview-based organizational ethnography (Dommett, Kefford, & Power, 2021; Dom-
mett, Temple, & Seyd, 2021; Jungherr, 2016b; Kreiss, 2012b, 2016a; McKenna &
Han, 2014) – or meta-accounts based on academic, journalistic, and participant accounts
(Stromer-Galley, 2019). Very few studies try to identify the actual reach and effects of
digital media in party campaigns quantitatively (Bimber & Copeland, 2013; Copeland &
Bimber, 2015; Hersh, 2015). Specifically, we lack research designs that employ random-
ized controlled trials for testing for the causal impact of specific digital media in the use
by campaigns. For example, with respect to persuasion or mobilization we would like to
know about the effectiveness of digital approaches – as for example, data intensive tar-
geting – compared to other approaches. Randomized controlled trials have been proven
to be highly effective in campaign research (D. P. Green & Gerber, 2019) but also chal-
lenging to implement within actual campaigns of political parties (Foos & John, 2018;
Wuttke et al., 2019).
The available evidence thus leaves us with deep narratives of some political campaigns
– predominantly campaigns run by the Democratic Party in pursuit of the U.S.-Presidency
– and some idea of what participants, consultants, and journalists like to talk about re-
garding digital media and politics. However, our understanding is seriously limited when
it comes to the actual uses of digital media in campaigns beyond these narrow cases, the
actual effects of digital media in campaigning or specific goals within it (such as mobiliza-
tion or persuasion), or the differential benefits of the use of digital tools (for example in
targeting efforts) compared to other established approaches. Far from ideal, this offers
a starting point for a larger and more systematic international research effort regarding
these questions.
3 Four functions of digital campaigning
To understand digital campaigning we need to consider, first, the functions digital media
serve for political parties and campaign organizations (Jungherr et al., 2020, pp. 1–29).
Political parties and campaign organizations use digital media in order to pursue a set of
very specific goals: To increase the efficiency of their organizational structures and prac-
tices, for resource collection and allocation, to ensure presence in the public arena and
reach to specific audiences, and as a symbol to represent professionalism and innovative-
ness of parties and their candidates (Jungherr, 2016b).
3.1 Organizational structures and work routines
Digital media have impacted parties and campaign organizations in their organizational
structure and their work routines. Here, we find two areas of interest: the impact of digital
media on existing parties and campaign organizations of established political groups and
the emergence of new parties enabled through opportunities provided by digital media.
In existing party organizations, we find varying degrees of adaptation to the require-
ments and opportunities of digital media. For example, in Germany – a country in which
political parties still can rely on central organizations providing strategical planning and
organizational support – large parties have adapted to digital media by the establishment
of new specialist organizational departments while smaller parties have integrated digital
media within the workflow of existing departments (Jungherr, 2016b). In the USA cam-
paigns are run through dedicated organizations formed around candidates who first com-
pete within the party for the nomination before entering the competition with candidates
of other parties. Therefore, campaign organizations are highly flexible in optimizing their
structure to new campaign trends or candidate types. It is no surprise to find that here, dig-
ital media have had a stronger impact on campaign structures and personnel. Specialists
in the use of digital tools have become ever more central in the organizational structures
of campaigns and have started to become part of the campaign elite. At the same time,
they have become crucial contributors to decisions on how to allocate resources, evalu-
ate activities, and produce campaign content (Kreiss, 2012b, 2016a). Yet, it is unclear
whether this development mainly holds for highly resource-intensive campaigns, such as
presidential races, or will over time also come to matter for more resource-starved races.
For example, in the UK a study finds highly varying practices in the adoption of digital
tools at the party grassroots (Dommett, Temple, & Seyd, 2021). In general, digital media
have become crucial for the daily working practices of non-elite campaign workers all
over the world. This is especially true for “mundane” tools – such as e-mail (Epstein &
Broxmeyer, 2020; Nielsen, 2011). These shifts are easy to forget but maybe matter more
than the adaption of the hottest app of the moment.
The differences between countries indicate that the impact and uses of digital media
seem to depend on contextual factors of party and campaign organizations. The strong
party organizations in European countries face different organizational challenges and
opportunities in their adoption of digital media from the weak party organizations in the
USA. While strong organizational structures allow learning within organizations with rel-
atively high continuity of personnel and structures over time, weak organizations need
to rely more heavily on broad networks for allowing learning over time and maintaining
institutional memory. The question of organizational learning in parties and campaign or-
ganizations is highly interesting and relevant but one the field is only beginning to address
(Kreiss, 2016a; Kreiss & Jasinski, 2016; Kreiss & Saffer, 2017).
At the same time, digital media have also emerged as an important enabling factor
in the emergence of new parties – so called cyber-, digital-, or platform-parties. Digi-
tal media provide people and movements with tools allowing them to coordinate, elicit
feedback, mobilize, organize, and create public visibility allowing new organizations to
emerge (Margetts, 2001, 2006). Some have seen a connection between the supposed par-
ticipatory and democratic characteristics of digital media and utopian political goals of
the political left (Gerbaudo, 2019). This initial assessment seemed plausible for as long as
new digitally enabled parties predominantly were on the left political spectrum, such as the
European Pirate Parties (Almqvist, 2016; Deseriis, 2020), the Spanish “Unidas Podemos”
(Casero-Ripollés et al., 2016), or the Italian “Movimento 5 Stelle” (Deseriis, 2020; Natale
& Ballatore, 2014). More recently, a growing count of new parties and movements on
the political right rely on digital media, such as Germany’s “Alternative für Deutschland”
(AfD). Instead of enabling consistently the political left, digital media seem to enable po-
litical challengers by providing the organizational resources to mount a challenge to the
political status quo be it from the left or the right (Jungherr et al., 2019). What these cases
undoubtably show, though, is the potential of digital media for the internal organization
and coordination of parties and campaigns (Dommett, 2020).
3.2 Resource collection and allocation
For parties running political campaigns digital media have also come to play a very im-
portant role as channels for resource collection and as sources of information about how
to best allocate resources. As of now, this has been maybe most pronounced in Barack
Obama’s presidential campaigns 2008 and 2012 where information collected and ana-
lyzed through digital tools was so central to the decision making in the campaigns, that
researcher Daniel Kreiss coined the term “computational management” (Kreiss, 2012b).
One reason for the centrality of digital media for political organizations in the U.S.
lies in their ability to generate and channel political donations (Hindman, 2005; Kreiss,
2012b, 2016a). As donations are less important in other political systems (Anstead, 2008;
Jungherr, 2016b), the influence of digital media and the specialists implementing them has
remained significantly lower in other countries.
Besides in the generation of donations, digital media are also a very important element
in the mobilization and coordination of volunteers. Various U.S. primary and presidential
campaigns from Howard Dean (Kreiss, 2012b; Trippi, 2004), through Barack Obama
(Cogburn & Espinoza-Vasquez, 2011; Kreiss, 2012b, 2016a; McKenna & Han, 2014;
Nielsen, 2012), to Bernie Sanders (Bond & Exley, 2016; Kreiss, 2019) have used digital
media actively to generate and channel enthusiasm among supporters within the party
organization and translate it into volunteer work, such as telephone or door-to-door can-
vassing. At the same time, channelling the enthusiasm of activists into a more structured
campaign organization can prove to be challenging. Activists and volunteers often pur-
sue politically more pure or extreme goals than official campaigns feel comfortable with
in wanting to appeal to the general electorate (Enos & Hersh, 2015; Jungherr, 2012a;
Trippi, 2004).
Digital media allow campaign organizations and parties to identify promising support-
ers. By using dedicated organizing platforms, they can turn supporters into volunteers
while at the same time being able to steer and monitor their efforts (Pearlman, 2012).
Digital media therefore serve an important coordination and control function for political
organizations. This has somewhat been lost in public debate, where there is a strong focus
on romanticizing so-called digitally enabled bottom-up or grassroots volunteerism. But
as more precise accounts of volunteer driven campaign organization have shown, there is
much more coordination, training, and monitoring from central organizational structures
going into these organizations than meets the eye (Han, 2014; McKenna & Han, 2014).
These practices have travelled internationally, with either U.S. firms branching out their
services and platforms originally developed for campaigns in the USA to other countries
(McKelvey & Piebiak, 2018) or parties or local firms developing dedicated platforms op-
timized for local campaign contexts which often vary regarding what type of data can be
collected or fed into these platforms (Jungherr, 2016a).
Even more at the fore of public debate is the role of data-driven campaigning (Jungherr
et al., 2020, pp. 179–211). The term collects campaign practices that use large data sets
and statistical models to guide campaign activity and resource allocation, for example
in identifying and contacting likely voters. For some, these practices have even come to
define contemporary campaigns. Yet, looking closely at the extend of these efforts and
what little is known about their effects should generate some pause for anyone claiming
the future of campaigning to lie in data-driven practices. Especially U.S. campaigns have
been known to use data to decide which potential voters and donors to contact given their
expected propensity to be mobilized to vote, persuaded by a message, or likely to donate
(Nickerson & Rogers, 2014). These efforts have been discussed most extensively in the
context of the two presidential campaigns of Barack Obama in 2008 and 2012 (Kreiss,
2012b, 2016a) and through popular journalistic accounts over time have come to reach
mythical heights of electoral effectiveness (Issenberg, 2012; Madrigal, 2012). Yet, a closer
look at the mechanics and practices of data-driven targeting shows its limits as well as its
potential.
For one, some data – such as basic identity or contact information – are crucial for cam-
paigns to reach voters, for example through mailings or telephone calls. Any support in
collecting these data and keeping them current, for example through dedicated software
solutions, are of great help to any campaign in organizing their voter outreach. Beyond
this, further data points are available to campaigns depending on the specific privacy laws
governing the use of data in politics. In the U.S., for example, campaigns can buy or collect
many data points on individuals; in Germany, in contrast, campaigns can buy or collect
comparatively few. But the sheer number of data points alone is not decisive. Instead,
it matters if and how strongly data documenting individual traits and behaviour relates
to electorally relevant behaviour, such as turnout or partisan support. This distinction
gets lost in the myth of data-driven campaigning, which expects data-driven practices
to transform all aspects of campaigning irrespective of context (Baldwin-Philippi, 2017).
We encounter this myth in the accounts of many consultants and journalists, emphasizing
the perceived power of large data sets to inform on people’s political behaviour (Simon,
2019). Recently, this has been famously discussed in the context of the supposed targeting
of Facebook ads by the consultancy firm Cambridge Analytica during the 2016 U.S. pres-
idential bid of Donald Trump (Jungherr et al., 2020, pp. 124–130). But if we are looking
closely at the mechanics of the underlying models it is highly unlikely that even in compar-
atively data-rich campaign environments – such as the USA – data allow robust inferences
about people’s electoral behaviour. For one, many studies have shown that in the USA
not the large data files provided by commercial data vendors or social media companies
contribute to the precision of voter outreach but instead data provided and maintained by
the state, the official voter files. In the USA the information provided by voter files to cam-
paign organization varies in granularity, but often contains information on people’s party
affiliation and participation in local, state, or federal elections (Ansolabehere & Hersh,
2014; Igielnik et al., 2018). It has been shown that traits and behaviours that are of in-
terest to campaigns but not provided in voter files can only be inferred very imprecisely
from other data sources (Hersh, 2015). This is especially true regarding psychological
traits and their connection with political attitudes or voting intention supposedly identi-
fied through “psychometric targeting” based on social media data (Confessore & Hakim,
2017; Hersh, 2018; Karpf, 2017). The perceived precision of data-driven targeting is
therefore doubtful. Similarly, the actual degree to which even U.S.-based campaigns are
using data-driven practices has been challenged by studies looking closely at actual cam-
paign practices rather than press-releases, accounts by campaigners and consultants, or
breathless media coverage (Baldwin-Philippi, 2017; Karpf, 2016b; Kroll, 2018; Sides &
Vavreck, 2014). This goes double for international campaigns that find themselves in legal
environments much less permissive in terms of data privacy than the USA (Anstead, 2017;
Dommett, 2019; Jungherr, 2016a, 2016b; Kruschinski & Haller, 2017). Campaigns and
parties might talk about their use of data-driven practices but their actual uses and the
effectiveness render these approaches a much less crucial element in campaigns than pop-
ular belief has it. Inspecting closely the role of data in campaigns, thus, shows that the
management of voter outreach through digital campaign platforms plays a much more
important role in campaigning than the elusive hopes pinned on perceived precision of
data-driven targeting of voters (Jungherr, 2016a).
Finally, campaigns and politicians employ digital media to gain insights into public
opinion or message testing. Publicly voiced reactions to politics on social networking sites
such as Facebook or Twitter are used as informal cues to assess public opinion (Anstead &
O’Loughlin, 2015; Chadwick, 2017; Hamby, 2013; Karpf, 2016a; Kreiss & McGregor,
2019; McGregor, 2020). The quality of the respective insights needs to be taken with
more than the proverbial grain of salt. Public social media contributions have repeatedly
been shown as not being representative of public opinion and not corresponding with
levels of political support. Instead, they point to attention toward politics by a politically
highly invested public (Jungherr et al., 2016, 2017). While there certainly is some insight
to be gained from data like this, it is probably far from the “cheap” survey-substitute that
some journalists, politicians, or consultants may hope to have found.
This also illustrates the value of taking a function- and context-driven approach to
the analysis of digital media and campaigning. A classic modernization or profession-
alization account would look at the repertoire of tools and services in use by parties or
campaigns and chalk up any deviation from repertoires or usage patterns deviating from
U.S. campaigns as being deficient or a case of belated development on the temporal trajec-
tory toward the U.S. campaign blueprint. In contrast, in the function- and context-driven
approach context conditions dictate what functions digital media can serve for specific
parties. Taking Germany for example, the comparatively small role of grass-root funding
in the campaigns of large parties leads them to invest less in the development of digital
tools supporting and optimizing donation acquisition. Accordingly, digital specialists do
not rise as fast to leading functions in campaigns and parties, which slows down other
uses of digital media. Similarly, restrictive data privacy laws limit the abilities of parties
to collect, buy, or reuse data on voters which in turn limits the role of and investment in
data-driven practices severely. Both these outcomes are not driven by limited appreciation
or understanding of the role of technology in campaigning but instead is determined by
a cost-benefit analysis of the functions digital tools can serve for parties and campaigns
given their specific contextual environment and goals.
3.3 Achieving presence in the information space and reach
One of the most important challenges of political parties and campaigns is to ensure their
presence in contemporary information environments. In the past, they could rely on tradi-
tional mass media to carry their message to the public but at a time of fracturing audiences,
a myriad of different news outlets, and plenty of opportunity for people disinterested in
politics to avoid the news, this is not enough. Parties and campaigns need to adapt to
the digital transformation of the public arena (Jungherr & Schroeder, 2022) in order to
achieve presence in information spaces (Jungherr et al., 2020, pp. 30–68) and to reach the
public (Jungherr et al., 2020, pp. 69–102).
As parties and campaigns cannot rely anymore exclusively on traditional media to en-
sure their presence in information spaces, they must become information providers them-
selves and achieve distribution through new and alternative media providers and channels.
Consequently, we find the gatekeeping power of traditional mass media further weakened
(Bimber, 2003; Wilhelm, 2000). This can lead to a healthy and more pluralistic extension
of the types of information and opinions represented in the public area but also to the
challenge of the status quo through extremist or exclusionary actors, which previously
would have found themselves excluded from the public arena by mass media exercising
their gatekeeping power (Jungherr et al., 2019).
Parties and campaigns have answered the challenges of transformed communication
environments by becoming information providers themselves. For this purpose, they use
dedicated web presences, such as websites or social media profiles (Vaccari, 2013), as well
as targeted approaches, such as email or online ads (Epstein & Broxmeyer, 2020; Fowler
et al., 2020; Ridout et al., 2021a, 2021b). As a result, parties and campaigns may establish
dedicated news desks that produce dedicated multi-media content optimized for distribu-
tion through varying digital media channels. In the extreme, parties and campaigns may
establish or spawn nominally independent but clearly allied research or media units that
produce content designed to influence the coverage of traditional news organizations. The
“Government Accountability Institute” (GAI) is one example from the U.S. presidential
campaign 2016: A research unit with no official connection to the Republican party but
financed by important Republican donors and thereby clearly part of the larger Repub-
lican network. The group produced a dossier collecting unfavourable information and
rumours about the finances of then Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton and her hus-
band and former U.S. President Bill Clinton. The resulting dossier, Clinton Cash became a
New York Times bestseller and influenced the media coverage of the candidate for the run
of the campaign (J. Green, 2017, pp. 177–189). While this is an extreme example, parties
and campaigns routinely try and influence the coverage of traditional and alternative me-
dia through specifically designed content, events, or outreach. This can also take the form
of interacting with bloggers, influencers, or social media users to prompt them to cover
specific aspects of the campaign in the hope that this will attract coverage by traditional
media. In other words, they use digital tools to indirectly influence the communication en-
vironment during a campaign (Karpf, 2010; Kreiss, 2016b). This process is facilitated by
traditional media’s willingness to incorporate information found on blogs, YouTube, or
on Twitter in their coverage (Anstead & O’Loughlin, 2015; Chadwick, 2017; McGregor,
2019).
In distributing information, parties and campaigns also rely on digital platforms, for
example in the form of ads targeted to specific audience segments (Cotter et al., 2021;
Fowler et al., 2020; Ridout et al., 2021a, 2021b). We have encountered this use of digital
media already in the previous section on data-driven campaigning. As discussed, the per-
ceived precision and manipulative potential of data-driven targeting might be exaggerated
in public discourse and perception. Still, by allowing campaigns to reach specific audience
segments – such as groupings based on age, location, or general interests – digital ad-based
targeting equips political actors with a tool to reach parts of the public otherwise invisible
to them at comparatively low costs. This ensures the visibility of parties and campaigns
in an increasingly fragmented information environment. The growing importance of this
form of informational reach in the U.S. has led the Trump campaign 2016 to collaborate
closely with platform companies relying on their advice on how best to pursue their cam-
paign goals. This has given rise to questions as to the role and responsibility of platform
companies in politics and the growing dependence of parties and campaign organizations
on them (Kreiss & McGregor, 2018).
Taken together, the transformation of the public arena, the weakening influence of tra-
ditional gatekeepers over political discourse, and the way parties and campaigns have
started to adapt has given rise to fears about the integrity of political communication en-
vironments and their vulnerability toward misinformation and manipulation (Bennett &
Livingston, 2021). But a close look at the available literature reveals that such concerns
are not yet grounded on solid evidence of large-scale societal effects or threats. Instead,
they might be best understood as a reaction to widespread societal uncertainty driven by
unfamiliarity with the emerging phenomena, patterns, and actors (Jungherr & Schroeder,
2021).
3.4 Digital media use as symbols
Political parties and campaign organizations may use digital media also as symbols sig-
nifying their professionalism, innovativeness, cultural relevance, and candidate’s skill
(Jungherr, 2016b). The public use of digital media by parties and campaigns has come to
matter in the performance of politics in a variety of ways. This includes the use of specific
digital media and practices primarily to have them included in the public narrative of the
campaign, the use of data in campaigns, the explicit use of cyber-rhetoric to talk about
a politician or a campaign, choosing a dialogue-oriented style in digital communication,
the attempt to provide audiences with the impression of authenticity, and the conscious
adoption of communication practices found in online culture.
Digital media feature strongly in the work of political parties and campaigns going back
at least to the 1990s. While digital media clearly contribute to important campaigning
tasks, they also serve a rhetorical function. Examining U.S. campaigns closely shows that
they adopt new digital services and technology even if it remains uncertain if and how they
contribute effectively to campaign activities. Yet, each campaign puts their use of digital
media front and centre in their public relations activity and link them to the public nar-
rative of what they are trying to achieve (Stromer-Galley, 2019). At the same time, these
accounts remain suspiciously opaque in providing robust evidence for the actual uses of
digital technology and their impact on campaign functions, such as voter outreach or do-
nation acquisition. The public narratives of U.S. campaigning practices and their supposed
use of digital media have become highly influential models for international campaigns to
imitate. While realizing the deeper potential of digital media and technology depends on
an organization’s resources and organizational structures, simply adopting the use of se-
lected tools and technologies and publicly talking about their supposed importance in a
campaign is comparatively easy. The use of digital media and technology, thereby, has
become an important rhetorical element in international campaigns selling the public im-
age of a candidate, party or campaign. In this, the use of digital tools is independent
from their actual contributions to important campaign functions, such as voter outreach
or donation drives. Accordingly, researchers and journalists should treat statements by
campaign officials or consultants on the transformative impact of digital tools not blindly
as true accounts. Instead, they should interrogate them critically on their merits beyond
rhetorically advancing the public image of campaigns or consultants.
Currently, one of the most important elements in the public narrative of campaigns
are data-driven practices. Beginning with the presidential campaigns of Barack Obama
in 2008 and 2012, data-driven practices became a central feature in the self-presentation
of U.S. campaigns (Kreiss, 2012b, 2016a; Nickerson & Rogers, 2014) even if the degree
of their use and their actual contribution to campaign success remains unclear (Baldwin-
Philippi, 2017). After Obama’s success in 2012, the use of data-driven practices became
a common element in the self-presentations of international campaigns. To take but two
examples: During the 2016 EU referendum in the United Kingdom, the (Vote Leave) cam-
paign emphasized the importance of data and computational modelling in their work
(Cummings, 2017), while remaining characteristically vague in presenting evidence of
data-driven practices’ actual contribution to the efficiency of voter targeting and reach.
Even in Germany, a country with famously strict data privacy laws and a population
highly sensible to issues of data protection (Kruschinski & Haller, 2017), parties publicly
emphasise the role of data-driven practices. For example, during the federal election 2017,
the German conservative party (CDU) pushed its use of data in order to drive their door-
to-door campaign in public presentations of the campaign (Jungherr, 2016a). While data
undoubtably played a role in these campaigns, given differences in institutional, legal, and
resource contexts the uses and effects of data-driven approaches varied strongly between
these campaigns and the blueprint provided by the Obama campaign (Jungherr, 2016b).
Still, irrespective of these differences and the actual impact of data-driven approaches to
campaigning success, political operatives shared the conviction that talking about data-
driven campaigning in public would positively contribute to their public image. In this,
employing and talking about data-driven approaches served a rhetorical function for in-
ternational campaigns from 2012 onwards.
More generally, parties and campaigns very consciously try to position themselves and
their candidates rhetorically in relation with prominent normative narratives and promi-
nent figureheads associated with digital technology. This can be called cyber-rhetoric. Ex-
amples for this are associations with open-source software culture (Kreiss, 2011, 2012a)
or hacker culture (Madrigal, 2012) by using related rhetoric or trying to attract endorse-
ments from public intellectuals and entrepreneurs prominent in the development of digital
tools. Related to this is the use of specific communication styles deemed typical of digi-
tal media, such as the use of dialogue-oriented features (Stromer-Galley, 2000; Stromer-
Galley & Baker, 2006), the public performance of mediated authenticity (Enli, 2015), or
the adaption of communication practices – such as ironic memes – prevalent in specific
digital communication environments (@Jungherr:2012lo; Kreiss, 2016b). A closer look
at actual usage practices and the organizational structures shows that while campaigns
and parties rhetorically might embrace specific usage practices indicative of openness and
digital media, often this corresponds more with a public performance of digital culture
than an actual adherence to it.
Finally, in its most primitive form digital media also serve as symbols for campaign
dynamics by the surfacing of publicly available online metrics of campaign activity, such as
a candidate’s Twitter mentions or number of Facebook fans. These metrics are becoming
objects of media coverage to illustrate a campaign’s momentum (Jungherr, 2012b). This
has become the digital equivalent of traditional “horse-race” media coverage. At the same
time, journalists and politicians now use digitally mediated public reactions to campaign
media events such as televised debates in discussions of which candidate or campaign
“won” (Anstead & O’Loughlin, 2015; Hamby, 2013). Through this coverage of the
“digital horse race,” publicly available metrics on campaign activities are becoming de
facto symbolic representations of a campaign’s momentum.
To sum up, the use of digital media by campaigns and parties is not always directly
related to core functions such as organization, resources, or voter mobilization and per-
suasion. Instead, the public use of digital media often has a performative function aimed at
symbolizing the professionalism and innovativeness of parties, campaigns, or candidates.
4 Digital campaigning: Where to go from here?
Digital media have changed the practice of campaigning all over the word. However, the
immediate impact of digital media on organisational structures of parties or campaigns
seems to be contingent on the respective electoral contexts and the relative position of
those parties and campaigns in electoral competition. Changes brought to campaign-
ing by digital media have neither transformed political power and competition, nor have
things stayed the same as before (Jungherr et al., 2020, pp. 236–240). It is important to
be clear here: while the practices of political actors and campaigners in pursuit of their
goals have changed, these goals and the functions of campaigning to achieve them have
not. These changes in practices have impacted political competition at the margins and
sometimes have even resulted in surprising successes by unconventional actors or chal-
lengers of the political status quo (Jungherr et al., 2019). It is safe to say that the 2018
success of Italy’s “Movimento 5 Stelle” and subsequent participation in a governing coali-
tion between 2018 and 2021 would not have happened without the use of digital media by
the party and their supporters to coordinate, internal decision making and campaigning
(Deseriis, 2020; Gerbaudo, 2019; Natale & Ballatore, 2014). Still, unlike some commen-
tators had prophesised from the movement’s digital-driven approach, their success has by
no means led to a revolution of Italian politics as their subsequent fate at the polls during
the elections for European Parliament in 2019 and the formation of a technocratic govern-
ment under Mario Draghi after the collapse of their second governing coalition in 2021
has demonstrated. When trying to understand the consequences of digital campaigning
we therefore need to be aware of the actual and very real changes digital media brought to
politics as well as the persistent contexts, functions, and power structures these changes
are contingent on and embedded in.
This limits an outcome-oriented perspective in the analysis of digital campaigning as
political success depends not only on technology but also context and structures. Like-
wise, a “repertoire” perspective in the analysis of digital campaigning expecting that all
campaigns sooner or later will resemble contemporary U.S. presidential campaigns also
falls short. Such perspective misrepresents the contingency of the role of digital media in
campaigns based on their necessary embeddedness in specific electoral, cultural, organi-
zational, and legal contexts. For example, as discussed above, the large investments by
U.S. parties, campaign organizations, or their extended networks in the development of
specialized digital tools, infrastructures, and associated practices depended on the per-
ceived contribution of digital tools to campaign funding through donation requisition.
This important contribution to a primary campaign function allowed digital specialists to
achieve important positions in political organizations. At the same time, the funds avail-
able for the development and acquisition of digital tools allowed political organizations to
experiment with uses of these tools going beyond those narrowly associated with driving
donations. Over time, the uses and personnel associated with digital media grew in im-
portance and influence well beyond their initial contribution. In political contexts where
digital media are not seen as crucial in providing funds for campaigns, digital specialists
will struggle to successfully achieve central organizational positions. The same goes for
advocates for the development of dedicated digital solutions and their pleas for funds with
the party or campaign treasurer. This does not mean these people do not understand the
use of digital media or their organizations somehow lack behind in the march of history
toward the universal (speak U.S. presidential) digital campaign. Instead, it means that the
functions digital media serve are contingent on varying contexts and so do their actual
uses by campaigns.
This chapter has also highlighted that the use of digital media by campaigns can be of
merely symbolic value apart from contributing to core functions of a campaign. Conse-
quently, academics should not take at face value campaigners’ and consultants’ reports
regarding the importance of digital media in their campaigns. Instead, scholarship needs
to question those reports critically and ideally triangulate them with other approaches.
What are actual uses of digital media and what are their actual effects? Are they known?
Are they quantifiable? If not, we should be critical of the often self-serving claims of the
centrality of digital media in contemporary campaigning.
Overall, the study of digital campaigning has shown to profit much through interdis-
ciplinary approaches and a broader understanding of parties and campaigns as organiza-
tions. Accordingly, there is much research potential in systematically linking the study of
parties and campaigns to the sociology of organizations, transformation within organi-
zations, competition of established and new organizations, learning and adaption within
organizations over time, and comparisons between countries. Emerging promising re-
search topics address the respective embeddedness of parties and campaign organizations
in larger networks of organizations and actors or societal fields (Dommett, Kefford, &
Power, 2021; Kreiss, 2019; Kreiss & Saffer, 2017). Another topic of great interest are
processes of learning, innovation, and development within parties or campaign organiza-
tions (Epstein, 2018; Kreiss, 2016a).
Digital campaigning is a dynamic research object with many facets. As political practi-
tioners and consultants learn and experiment with the new opportunities and challenges
of digital technology, so must academic researchers adapt their theoretical frameworks
and empirical approaches. This makes digital campaigning an exciting and stimulating
field of research with great potential for interdisciplinary perspectives. At the same time,
it is a field of great political importance as academics critically accompany the process
of political and societal actors in realizing the potential of digital media in campaigning.
Thus, academia can contribute to the broader understanding of the role of digital media
in politics and support society in governing their use and dealing with their effects.