Developing Effective Measurement Strategy for Mental Health Research
Sonny Mattek, PhD1,2
1Inner State, Inc., 2Interdisciplinary Research Institute at Shasta
sonny@enteris.me
Abstract
Self-report mental health assessments are the primary tool for measuring mental health in
research contexts. These assessments have many limitations, in large part because there is still
much we have not adequately formalized about the basic nature of mental health and mental
illness, and how to improve the former and prevent and treat the latter. This paper outlines a
new approach for developing measurement tools in mental health research. We describe
principles that are essential for the process of authentically trying to understand the nature of
mental health problems suffered by humans. In this novel framework, psychological
measurement is considered a meta-psychology problem: how can we use our understanding of
the mind to facilitate access (i.e. measure) the inner world of human beings? We propose three
principles that are fundamental: (1) reverence for the data, (2) openness to discovery, and (3)
compassionate listening (ROC). These principles are necessary components for creating a safe
psychological context, which is analogous to having a “clean petri dish”, for psychological data
to be captured. Without these principles in play, the research context will contain psychological
contaminants that inhibit authentic sharing of information in assessment tools. These
psychological contaminants, including shame, avoidance/denial of painful information, fear of
honesty, and mistrust of research, are sources of noise that directly corrupt the integrity of
psychological assessment data. The proposed three principles are a way of creating safe
containers that can receive information that wants to be known. Implementing these principles in
research contexts has the potential to generate cleaner psychological data in mental health
research, which can globally increase observed effect sizes across the field of psychology and
generate scientific insights that alleviate psychological suffering.
Introduction.
Measuring mental health status is a complex issue. The most commonly used tool in
mental health research is the self-report assessment, in which research participants respond to
a series of questions that are usually multiple choice answers. The main advantage of these
scales is that they reduce complex phenomena to a number. The main disadvantage is that
much, if not most, of the detailed information about the participant’s situation or condition is not
captured, and thus the meaning of the data is at best ambiguous out of this context. These
scales are widely criticized by researchers and clinicians alike, but new approaches are lacking.
Surprisingly, the field of psychometrics has almost entirely ignored considering the actual
experience of a participant while they are undergoing psychological assessment, and how the
participant’s experience directly affects the integrity of the data. This consideration is especially
important in the domain of mental health, where measurement tools are intentionally designed
to probe for personal, stigmatized, and potentially triggering information. Any discomfort or
distrust felt on the part of the participant will directly add noise to the data, and any
demographics that feel unsafe to participate at all create systemic bias from missing data.
Ultimately, psychological measurement is a meta-psychology question, in the sense that
principles of psychology can be applied to facilitate access to internal information, which is the
crux of what mental health research is trying to measure. This is a scientific question as well as
an ethical question, as the ethics of the researcher directly influence the psychological
experience of the participant. In this sense, we find that ethics are not just a moral necessity, but
a scientific one. In psychology, high ethical standards are required for generating clean
subjective data, there is no way around this fact. Cultivating these ethical standards is not
merely a matter of paying best practices lip service, but of truly integrating ethical principles into
experimental design.
This paper outlines a set of principles that can be practiced by scientists in order to build
an effective experimental mechanism that creates a safe context for psychological
measurement. These principles are built on the notion that cultivating authentic trust between
researcher and participant is necessary for obtaining accurate data from psychological
measurement. We propose three principles for building this trust are: (1) reverence for the data,
(2) openness to discovery, and (3) compassionate listening. Without these principles,
psychological “contaminants” will add significant noise to the data, as well as biases to the
analyses. The field of psychology has so far essentially ignored this critical link between ethics
and data quality. This in part can explain the observation of low effect sizes across the entire
field of psychology research that employs subjective assessments. In this paper, we explain the
importance of these principles and highlight the urgency of implementing these principles.
Background: Measuring Mental Health.
This section will outline some current problems facing the measurement of mental health
disorders and symptoms in research. We highlight the open problems in the field that have
stagnated the development of more effective measurement strategies in this domain.
The principles underlying how psychological scales are built and validated has been so
far defined by the field of psychometrics. Psychometrics is a highly technical and complex field,
filled with debates on the nuances of statistical calculations that can presumably tell us whether
an anxiety scale is actually measuring anxiety, or whether an IQ test is actually measuring
intelligence. While there are many formalizations for validating an assessment scale, there is no
established standard for what makes an assessment scale technically valid and for whom. If
one were to review the hundreds of published assessments out there (citation), one would find
that the statistical methods are somewhat (or sometimes drastically) different in every paper. In
addition to the lack of standards, the process of validating a scale is laborious and expensive.
Therefore, many experiments use outdated scales that have not been updated in decades.
Another source of noise in mental health assessments is about whether the participants
can even answer the questions validly. That is, the questions probed by the scale may not be
easily accessed by the participant, either due to memory or emotion (or both). For example, a
depression scale commonly asks about symptoms over the past two weeks. How easy or
accurate are our memories of how we have felt over the past two weeks? The inability to
remember is one limitation of this kind of measurement. Additionally, there is a strong natural
mechanism for avoiding painful feelings. Therefore, many individuals will refuse to access
internal information that is tagged with painful emotion, whether they are aware of it or not. That
is, someone may believe that they are being completely honest and thorough in their response,
but be unconsciously refusing to access or acknowledge certain information. There is no
statistical test that can determine whether this is happening. This is why user experience is
critical for psychometrics. How can we design a method that helps participants access the
information? Our proposed method tries to answer this question.
Another reason mental health assessments are limited is because the complexity of
mental health constructs, such as anxiety, do not easily lend themselves to quantities. That is,
the answers to psychometric questions often evoke complex answers that cannot be easily
reduced to a number. This seems fairly obvious, yet the numbers are often taken at face value,
with no attempt to estimate the noise from either the participant’s inability to access the
information requested by the scale, or other complex caveats that qualify their actual response.
Finally, participants might not be willing to share accurate information with the
researchers. Mental health information is highly sensitive data, often reflecting the most core
and personal pain and trauma that people experience and may be stigmatized. Unwillingness to
share can come from mistrust of the researcher, or more general mistrust of science or
academic institutions, and this lack of trust is completely valid. As an institution, science has a
historical pattern of excluding people from discourse, exploiting people for data, and withholding
valuable information behind overly complex jargon or paywalls.
No wonder we have failed as a field to find biological markers of psychological disorders,
given that our measurements of psychological phenomena have such low standards for quality
control. We do not know how much noise is in the measurements, nor is there any methodology
for testing the signal-to-noise ratio of psychological measurement tools. There are no clear
standards for statistical thresholds of reliability and validity in psychometrics, as every scale
published takes a slightly different approach and has a range of results that can get past peer
review. Despite this, data produced by subjective psychological assessments is statistically
treated as a ground truth, despite the fact that the data produced by any psychological scale
can have many meanings, and the interpretations are never qualified with consideration for the
originally reported psychometric statistics. New approaches to measurement and classification
of psychological phenomena are urgently needed.
Barriers to progress. The issues outlined in the previous section are difficult problems,
and the solution is not easy to happen upon. It seems that no one wants to solve this problem
because of the depth of its difficulty, so we continue to use ineffective measurement strategies
developed decades ago. However, continuing to use ineffective measurement tools is a waste of
time and resources, as any results based on ambiguous measurements are impossible to
interpret. Furthermore, because the issues are common to all research in the field, no one takes
the time to talk about them in their limitations sections, except maybe some papers explicitly
focused on psychometrics. That is, you will never find a peer-reviewed research study on
anxiety that states explicitly, “by the way, our measurement approach is flawed” due to the
reasons stated above. Because the research “must go on”, researchers simply select what is
standardly used in the field. That is, researchers conveniently use the methods that everyone
else is using, because this is easily defensible in peer-review since there are simply no other
options.
When talking explicitly about the problem of measurement in psychology, it seems odd
that there is so much research about anxiety and other mental health constructs, all the while
we do not really know how to measure these things. It seems the field would benefit from
collectively focusing on the measurement problem until it is solved, since any claims made from
unclear measurements are ambiguous at best and destructively misleading at worst. This issue
has certainly contributed to the “replication crisis” in the field of psychology (e.g., Barch &
Yarkoni, 2013), and is likely the root of the problem. However, psychometrics remains a niche
and nearly impenetrable branch of psychology, caught in arguments about statistical nuances.
However, statistics cannot produce good theories or good measurements. Furthermore, no
statistical test can validate whether or not my response on an anxiety scale actually reflects how
anxious I am, because statistics cannot access my internal experience! Facilitating access to
internal experience is the goal of psychological measurement, and this is not a statistical
problem, but a meta-psychological problem. In this sense, the rest of this paper is focused on
how ethics influences psychological measurement, which uses general principles of the mind to
improve psychological measurement. This provides a completely novel framework for improving
the accuracy of psychological measurement.
Principles for Designing Measurement Tools in Psychology: Reverence, Openness, and
Compassion.
In this section, we argue that the following three factors must be present in order to
generate clean, accurate data in psychological measurement: (1) reverence for the data, (2)
openness to discovery, and (3) compassionate listening. These factors are like psychological
sanitizers that keep the petri dish clean: without them, psychological factors arise that
contaminate the data. These contaminants include shame, avoidance of painful memories, fear
of honesty, and mistrust of researchers. These psychological contaminants prevent people from
sharing their internal experience with researchers openly and honestly, and can even prevent
people from participating in research altogether. As long as these contaminants are present in
our current paradigm, psychological research across the board will be biased and noisy, effect
sizes will remain low, and we will be unable to identify reliable biological correlates of mental
health problems.
Reverence for the Data. Asking people about their internal experience and/or
psychological issues is personal. Our deepest truths are only shared with those we trust. If we
want to understand the inner workings of people’s minds, we have to know what is really going
on for them. Psychological research asks participants about their core experience, which is
deep information about the self. This self knowledge is sacred information, each individual
experience is entirely unknown to all other beings except the one who has the experience, and
the power to share that experience or keep it private belongs to the experiencer alone.
Researchers must cultivate an attitude of deep respect for the information they are gathering,
and respect the boundaries of their participants. Not just at the time of data collection, but in the
entire attitude of the research. The push to collect more and more data, to publish more and
more findings, is a kind of gluttony that indicates systemic disrespect for data. Rather than
deeply knowing, contemplating, and processing the data in front of us, there is this belief that
more data will give us the answers that we seek. However, as the famous polymath Henri
Poincare once said, “Plenty of people before Newton had seen apples fall, but none of them
knew how to make anything of it. Data are sterile without minds capable of discerning what is
hiding beneath.” Until mental health research understands the sacredness of the data they are
collecting, there is no possibility of scientific breakthrough in this field. The people carrying the
deepest psychological pain are the treasure chests containing the secrets mental health
research wants to discover.
Openness to Discovery. Right now, there is an emphasis on “replication” and
“confirmatory analysis”, which expects psychological researchers to know beforehand what
results they will find. There is an attitude among the field that, unless you can predict a priori
what the data will look like, then the data are not as meaningful. The belief is that predicting the
results beforehand is what a useful scientific theory is for. For example, we can predict where
Venus will be in a thousand years with great precision. However, for psychology, it is actually our
a priori predictions that limit our ability to fully interpret our data with an open mind. Making
predictions will not teach us anything beyond the frameworks within which we are confined. As
the late Zen master Thich Nhat Hanh once said, “The first obstacle to enlightenment is
knowledge.” In order to make truly novel and creative discoveries, we must be willing to let go of
our hypotheses. We must be willing to let go of what we think we know. Exploratory research is
the only way forward for psychology. We must acknowledge that we do not know enough to
make solid a priori hypotheses and respect the exploratory process. Psychologists must
approach their research as a physicist approaching dark matter. In a sense, deep psychological
content is dark matter. We don’t know how to measure it, but it is the principle substance that
makes our entire consciousness possible, and there is no doubt of its reality. When we start to
navigate the territory of the soul, we find that we are infinite and inherently unmeasurable. How
can we have a science of something unmeasurable? The only way is to be continuously open
and curious, so that we are able to recognize what reveals itself.
Compassionate Listening. In order to understand the nature of psychological
phenomena we must know how to listen with compassion and non-judgment. If we want to
understand anxiety, depression, despair, anguish, anger, hatred, fear, and other elements of
mental illness, we must first know how to listen to this information without judgment and without
pathologizing. Our current paradigm in mental health widely and explicitly pathologizes,
stigmatizes, and judges mental health problems and negative emotions, despite their
prevalence in the average person. Yet the ones who feel these things the strongest are, in fact,
our greatest source of wisdom. If we want to understand these issues as a scientific field, we
must listen from the depths of our hearts to those who are suffering the most, rather than
leaving them in psychiatric hospitals, prisons, forgotten, homeless, or simply ignored. We must
open our hearts to this information, without thinking that people are “crazy”, “sick”, “useless”,
“criminals”, etc. We have to change our way of thinking about those who are suffering from deep
psychological wounds. Once we are truly listening without judgment to those who suffer the
most, the answers that the field of psychological science seeks will be readily available. The
information wants to be known, but can only arise in the context of compassion. Compassion is
like the battery in an electrical circuit, without it the information simply will not flow. This is a
scientific principle, not merely an ethical one.
Cultivating psychological safety. These three principles can be practiced in order to
generate a research context that is psychologically safe. The norms of best practices in
handling research data, such as data privacy and confidentiality, anonymity, and informed
consent, are all aligned with these principles. However, in addition to current best practices,
these principles, when fully cultivated, have the ability to neutralize the standard power dynamic
between researcher and participant. When the researcher can truly honor the deep value of the
participant and the information they contain within themselves, and the participant can truly see
the deep relief of releasing that information into the compassionate container that the
researcher has created, then the power dynamic is neutralized, and both parties are equally
benefited by the exchange. When both parties are benefitted, there will be no distortion or
resistance in the exchange of information. This is why creating safety is the key to generating
clean data. Research contexts must have these principles in play to meet this standard of
quality, both in terms of the quality of the participant’s experience of benefit, as well as the
quality of the data itself.
The Urgency of Effective Psychological Measurement.
The internal psychological problems we have, which exist as the collective and individual
experiences of depression, delusion, loneliness, anxiety, anger, despair, etc., are the primary
practical problems of psychological science and mental health research. Scientists in the field of
psychology have an opportunity, and even a responsibility, to create effective mechanisms that
allow the information pertaining to these problems to be contained and understood. This sacred
information, which is the key to our scientific understanding and insight, lies within the hearts
and minds of those suffering the brunt of these psychological problems. Mining this information
from the depths of the psyche is not a task to be taken lightly, nor a task that can be done by
brute force or manipulation. It is also not a task that can be achieved by current psychological
assessment scales. Furthermore, neglecting to find ways to collect and contain this information
appropriately perpetuates the deep psychological suffering that we all see in our families,
friends, and society.
Currently, our society is lacking effective containers for this kind of psychological
information. The containers that do exist, such as one-on-one therapy, psychiatric hospitals,
recovery and retreat centers, therapeutic programs such as 12-step programs or group therapy,
psychedelic containers such as Ayahuasca ceremonies or psychedelic assisted therapy, etc.,
currently lack the infrastructure to record the valuable data and insights that are gleaned from
the deep work that people are doing. This loss of data is an ongoing tragedy, as millions of
people would benefit from the collective wisdom that could be disseminated if effective data
collection mechanisms were in place. An effective data collection mechanism includes authentic
trust between researchers and participants, in which researchers honor the value being
contributed by the participant and participants honor the service being provided by the
researcher.
Summary.
The three principles mapped out here are not a way of manipulating people into being
honest for the purposes of scientific advancement. Moreover, these principles cannot simply be
coded into an experimental design overnight. Cultivating these principles requires (a) a daily
practice, (b) a community of committed practitioners, and (c) a willingness to receive guidance
from those who have already established this kind of practice. These principles are inspired by
the 14 Mindfulness Trainings published by late Zen master Thich Nhaht Hanh (2007), and the
14 Mindfulness Trainings are an evolution of the basic 5 ethical precepts of Buddhist monks and
practitioners, which are also the universal vows of the first limb of the 8 limbs of Yoga. Scientists
have historically perpetuated an attitude that dismisses spirituality as unscientific. However,
these ancient principles are essential for establishing a rigorous scientific framework for clean
and effective measurement in psychology.
These principles are not merely theoretical. Reverence, compassion, and openness
must be practiced, and in this sense they are literally practical. Implementing these practices
requires a commitment to apply these principles in all affairs, including our scientific work.
Hopefully this paper elucidates how these practices are not just an ethical sidenote, but lie at
the foundation of unpacking the deep unknown that the field of psychology hopes to illuminate,
including new discoveries and frameworks for mental health research and treatment.
References.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
Barch, D. M., & Yarkoni, T. (2013). Introduction to the special issue on reliability and replication
in cognitive and affective neuroscience research. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral
Neuroscience, 13(4), 687-689.
Hanh, T. N. (2007). Chanting from the Heart. Parallax Press; Berkeley, CA.
Spielberger, C. D. (1983). Manual for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI Form Y). In