Uniqbu Journal of Social Sciences (UJSS)
E-ISSN: 2723-3669
Volume 3 Nomor 2, Agustus 2022 Halaman 70—73
Copyright © 2022 LPPM Universitas Iqra Buru (UNIQBU). All Right Reserved
THE INTERPLAY OF COMPENSATION STRATEGIES AND STUDENTS’
READING COMPREHENSION OF LANGUAGE LEARNERS
Ibrahim Manda, Andi Sadapotto, Muhammad Hanafi, Buhari, Lababa, Usman M,
Elfany Dwi Purwika
Lecturer and Student of English Department, Teacher Training and Education Faculty
of Universitas Muhammadiyah Sidenreng Rappang, Indonesia.
Corresponding Email: ibrahimmanda@gmail.com
(Received 19 July; Revised 08 August; Accepted 22 August 2022)
Abstract
Language learning strategies are offered and employed as boosting and facilitating factors. Having its
benefits, language learning strategies appear to be effective terms of different language skills. Reading
comprehension is one of the important skills and language learning strategies have some facilities in this skill
too. There are some strategies that appropriate for reading comprehension and most of them have purpose to
make the reading process more effective and time-efficient. One of the strategy is compensation strategy that
help reader comprehend their reading faster by guessing intelligently using linguistic and non-linguistic clues.
So, this study is conduct to measure the degree of the correlation between compensation strategies and students’
reading comprehension. The research design applied in this research is quantitative and the approach of this
research is correlation quantitative research. The sample of this research is the third year students of Nusantara
PGRI University Kediri that consisting 24 students. To get the data, the researcher used two instruments. They
are questionnaire and reading test. Based on the result of this research, the mean score of students’
questionnaire is 40,125. The score is in the average of often using compensation strategy. It means that the
students in Nusantara PGRI University Kediri often used compensation strategies. Besides, the result also shows
that the students’ reading comprehension in Nusantara PGRI University is good enough. It was proved by the
mean score of the reading test is 77. Then, the data is computed by using Pearson Product Moment Formula.
any significant correlation between students’ compensation strategy and students’ reading comprehension.
According to the result of this research, it can be concluded that the better compensation strategies applied by
the students so the better reading comprehension achieve. From that statement, the researcher suggests the
students to apply the compensation strategies to increase their English skill, especially reading. The writer also
suggests the teacher to help the students in applying compensation strategies by giving them a game to teach
them about how to guess the meaning of a new word from prefixes, suffixes and the other clues of compensation
strategies.
Keywords: Correlation, Compensation Strategies and Reading Comprehension
Abstrak
Strategi pembelajaran bahasa ditawarkan dan digunakan sebagai faktor pendorong dan fasilitasi. Karena
manfaatnya, strategi pembelajaran bahasa tampaknya merupakan istilah yang efektif untuk keterampilan
bahasa yang berbeda. Pemahaman membaca adalah salah satu keterampilan penting dan strategi pembelajaran
bahasa memiliki beberapa fasilitas dalam keterampilan ini juga. Ada beberapa strategi yang tepat untuk
pemahaman bacaan dan sebagian besar bertujuan untuk membuat proses membaca lebih efektif dan efisien
waktu. Salah satu strateginya adalah strategi kompensasi yang membantu pembaca memahami bacaannya lebih
cepat dengan menebak secara cerdas menggunakan petunjuk linguistik dan non-linguistik. Jadi, penelitian ini
dilakukan untuk mengukur tingkat korelasi antara strategi kompensasi dan pemahaman membaca siswa. Desain
penelitian yang digunakan dalam penelitian ini adalah kuantitatif dan pendekatan penelitian ini adalah
THE INTERPLAY OF COMPENSATION STRATEGIES AND STUDENTS’ READING COMPREHENSION
OF LANGUAGE LEARNERS
(Ibrahim Manda, Andi Sadapotto, Muhammad Hanafi, Buhari, Lababa, Usman M, Elfany Dwi Purwika)
penelitian kuantitatif korelasional. Sampel penelitian ini adalah mahasiswa tahun ketiga Universitas PGRI
Nusantara Kediri yang berjumlah 24 mahasiswa. Untuk mendapatkan data, peneliti menggunakan dua
instrumen. Yaitu angket dan tes membaca. Berdasarkan hasil penelitian, rata-rata skor angket siswa adalah
40,125. Skor tersebut rata-rata sering menggunakan strategi kompensasi. Artinya mahasiswa Universitas PGRI
Nusantara Kediri sering menggunakan strategi kompensasi. Selain itu, hasil tersebut juga menunjukkan bahwa
pemahaman membaca mahasiswa di Universitas PGRI Nusantara sudah cukup baik. Hal ini dibuktikan dengan
nilai rata-rata tes membaca adalah 77. Kemudian data tersebut dihitung dengan menggunakan Rumus Pearson
Product Moment. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa nilai rxy lebih tinggi dari rxy-tabel pada signifikansi 1%
dan 5%. Dengan kata lain, ada hubungan yang signifikan antara strategi kompensasi siswa dan pemahaman
membaca siswa. Berdasarkan hasil penelitian ini, dapat disimpulkan bahwa semakin baik strategi kompensasi
yang diterapkan oleh siswa maka semakin baik pula pencapaian pemahaman bacaan. Dari pernyataan tersebut,
peneliti menyarankan siswa untuk menerapkan strategi kompensasi untuk meningkatkan kemampuan bahasa
Inggris mereka, terutama membaca. Penulis juga menyarankan guru untuk membantu siswa dalam menerapkan
strategi kompensasi dengan memberi mereka permainan untuk mengajari mereka tentang bagaimana menebak
arti kata baru dari awalan, akhiran dan petunjuk lain dari strategi kompensasi.
Kata Kunci: Korelasi, Strategi Kompensasi dan Pemahaman Membaca
INTRODUCTION and social under the indirect class).
Compensation strategy, seems appropriate to
Reading is as one of the most important
apply in reading because it is important for the
skills that have to be mastered by second
language learners, especially English learners. students to increase their skill in guessing about
the theme of an article and comprehending the
There are so many purposes why people read a
reading activity better. It is concluded that using
passage, a text, a book, and etc. For example,
language learning strategies could be of a
students read a history book and the children
read a fairytale. They are reading, but their contributing effect for enhancing reading
comprehension skill. In fact, most of the students
purpose is not the same. The students read
in universities do not realize about the
history book to get information or knowledge
importance and the role of compensation
(education purposes) and the children read
comics for getting pleasure. In short, both of strategy, especially in reading. It is supported by
Ismail Yaman (2013) who states that ―It is an
them are reading but they have different
undeniable fact that it is not so Artikel Skripsi
purposes. Reading has a big correlation with
Universitas Nusantara PGRI Kediri Elfany Dwi
text. In line with that statement, Fuenzalida
(2011: 4) argues that reading implies interaction Purwika | 11.1.01.08.0063 FKIP – Pendidikan
Bahasa Inggris simki.unpkediri.ac.id || 6|| simple
between readers and texts, a degree of
and smooth to ensure the integration of language
knowledge of the world and determined topics,
learning strategies in English classes where
some knowledge of the target language and also
the interpretation of the writer’s message which traditional understandings are rather hard to
break. Some of the preceding problems posing
can vary from reader to reader. All statements
difficulty in this regard are the unwillingness of
above make reading, especially reading a text in
the students accustomed to the dominance of
foreign language, is undoubtedly a difficult
subject for second language learners. Learners teacher-talk, hardness to break the classical
habits of both teachers and learners, limited time
must have learning strategies to comprehend
and so on.‖ From the statements above, the
what they read. It can be said that learning
writer conducts a study to prove the correlation
strategies are important for the students to make
between compensation strategy and reading
their learning easier, faster, more enjoyable, and
more effective. Learning strategies are the step comprehension of students, entitled ―The
Correlation Between Compensation Strategies
taken by students to enhance their own learning.
and Students’ Reading Comprehension of the
Furthermore, Oxford (1990 : 14) also divides
Third Year University Students of Nusantara
learning strategies such as: Strategies are divided
into two major classes: direct and indirect. These PGRI Kediri Academic Year 2014/2015‖ II.
METHOD In this research, the writer used the
two classes are subdivided into a total of six
quantitative research. The technique that used
groups (memory, cognitive, and compensation
correlation descriptive quantitative research. In
under the direct class; metacognitive, affective,
(UJSS), Vol. 3, No. 2, Agustus 2022: 70—73
this study, the writer conducted the research at comprehension. It was experiment quantitave
Nusantara PGRI University that is located on research in the Ondokus Mayis University. This
K.H. Achmad Dahlan street no. 76 Mojoroto, study is aimed to find out whether teaching
Kediri. The population was the third year cognitive and compensation strategies for
students of English Department in Nusantara reading comprehension skill makes a statically
University. The population was 158 students, the significant.
sample was 24 students. The instrument which
was used in this research is a reading RESULT & DISCUSSION
comprehension test and questionnaire about The data analysis showed the score of the
compensation strategies to measure the students’ reading comprehension. The mean of
correlation between compensation strategies and the students’ reading comprehension was 77. As
the students’ reading comprehension. To know a result, the reading comprehension of the third
the correlation between two variables, students’ grade students at University of Nusantara PGRI
compensation strategies and students’ reading Kediri was good enough. Also from the data
comprehension, the researcher used Pearson analysis it can be co ncluded that there is any
Product Moment Formula. significant correlation between students’
compensation strategy and students’ reading
comprehension. It can be seen from the result of
METHOD
the data where the score is higher.
In this research, the writer used the
rx
Difference in the students’ reading
quantitative research. The technique that used
performance. The result indicates a statically
correlation descriptive quantitative research. In
significant progress between pre-test and post-
this study, the writer conducted the research at
test. It shows that using language learning
Nusantara PGRI University that is located on
strategies could be of contributing effect for
K.H. Achmad Dahlan street no. 76 Mojoroto,
enhancing reading comprehension skill.
Kediri.
According to the discussion above, it can be
The population was the third year students
concluded that the using of compensation
strategy help the students’ reading
x x
comprehension.
r r r H H
x - x
a o
CONCLUSION
x Tabel -
Reading is as one of the most important
significa
Ta
skills that have to be mastered by second
nt 1%
language learners, especially English learners.
bel
There are so many purposes why people read a
signific
passage, a text, a book, and etc. For example,
students read a history book and the children
ant
read a fairytale.
5%
The data analysis showed the score of the
0 0,404 0,5 A R
students’ reading comprehension. The mean of
,52 15 ccept eject
the students’ reading comprehension was 77. As
2 ed ed
a result, the reading comprehension of the third
grade students at University of Nusantara PGRI
Kediri was good enough. Also from the data
analysis it can be co ncluded that there is any
significant correlation between students’
compensation strategy and students’ reading
It can be concluded that the strategies,
comprehension. It can be seen from the result of
compensation strategies can help reader
the data where the score is higher.
rx
comprehend text efficiently. The result above is
. To know the correlation between two
also supported by Ismail Yaman who conducted
variables, students’ compensation strategies and
a research about teaching cognitive and
compensation strategies for reading
THE INTERPLAY OF COMPENSATION STRATEGIES AND STUDENTS’ READING COMPREHENSION
OF LANGUAGE LEARNERS
(Ibrahim Manda, Andi Sadapotto, Muhammad Hanafi, Buhari, Lababa, Usman M, Elfany Dwi Purwika)
students’ reading comprehension, the researcher Pembelajaran Embedded Multilingual. Uniqbu
Journal of Social Sciences, 1(1), 53-60.,
used Pearson Product Moment Formula.
Bin-Tahir, S. Z., Suriaman, A., Hanapi, H., Iye, R., &
Umanailo, M. C. B. (2020). Development of