The Impact of Russia’s Invasion on European
Attitudes
Margaryta Klymak Tim Vlandas
University of Oxford University of Oxford∗
December 30, 2022
Abstract
The Russian invasion of Ukraine has led to numerous casualties, the destruction of
civilian infrastructure, forced deportation and a significant fall in output. European
countries have played an important role in providing humanitarian, economic and mil-
itary support to Ukraine. However, we do not know about the consequences of this war
for public opinion in Europe. Using the tenth wave of the European Social Survey, this
article explores how the Russian invasion has affected the political and social attitudes
of people across eight European countries. The overlap between the survey fieldwork
in these eight countries and the Russian invasion allows us to recover causal estimates
by adopting the ‘Unexpected Event during Survey Design’. We find that the invasion
increased support for democracy and the welfare state, reinforced positive views of the
European Union and immigration, while it reduced authoritarian attitudes.
Russia’s invasion, public opinion, Ukraine, Europe, views about democ-
Keywords:
racy, immigration attitudes, redistribution preferences.
∗Klymak (corresponding author): margaryta.klymak@economics.ox.ac.uk, Somerville College, University
of Oxford. Tim Vlandas, tim.vlandas@spi.ox.ac.uk, Department of Social Policy and Intervention, University
of Oxford. All errors are our own.
1 Introduction
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 has led to substantial loss of life, destruction
of civilian infrastructure, and a large negative economic shock to the region and beyond.
As a result of the invasion, over 18 million people already require humanitarian assistance
(United Nations, 2022 ), nearly 17,000 casualties have been documented (United Nations,
2022 ) and over 7.5 million people were forced to flee Ukraine (UNCHR, 2022). In addi-
tion, there have been over 700 attacks on health centres (WHO, 2022) and over 300 cultural
sites were damaged (NYT, 2022). Finally, the Russian military has targeted critical civilian
infrastructure which has left many – including 7 million children - without access to wa-
ter, heating or electricity (UNICEF, 2022) while food security has been compromised (FAO,
2022).
The Russian invasion also exacerbated the challenges of already struggling European
economies with many in the grip of an inflationary shock coupled with a slowdown of eco-
nomic activity post-pandemic (OECD, 2022). European Union member states have so far
been supportive: in addition to providing military and humanitarian support to Ukraine,
nearly 5 million Ukrainian refugees are also registered for Temporary Protection in the Eu-
ropean Union (UNCHR, 2022) and the European Council has adopted its ninth sanctions
package against Russia in December 2022 (EU Council , 2022 ). The invasion has also accel-
erated Ukraine’s rapprochement with the EU: Ukraine applied to the EU four days after the
start of the invasion and was granted candidate status in June 2022 (EU Council , 2022 ).
While there has been overwhelming support for Ukraine among European governments,
it is not clear whether and how European public opinion has changed since the invasion.
More generally, existing literature suggests that conflicts affect the politics and economics
of participating countries (Abadie and Gardeazabal, 2003; Smith, 2014; Balcells and Stan-
ton, 2021; Rohner and Thoenig, 2021), but we do not know whether and how wars abroad
influence public opinion at home for countries that are not directly involved. This is impor-
tant because there is good evidence that governments are constrained and influenced by
public opinion when choosing policies (Manza and Cook, 2002; Brooks and Manza, 2006;
Soroka and Wlezien, 2010; Dassonneville et al., 2021). We investigate the impact of the
Russian invasion of Ukraine on a wide range of individual attitudes and preferences. We
focus on five dimensions: support for democracy, immigration, the European Union, redis-
tribution, and authoritarian attitudes. We use data from the tenth wave of the European
Social Survey (ESS) of respondents in eight countries that were surveyed just before and
right after the Russian invasion: Greece, Italy, Portugal, Norway, Montenegro, Macedonia,
the Netherlands, and Switzerland. Therefore, our sample includes both EU member states
and non-member states, with different economic and political systems in both Eastern and
Western Europe. Our research design employs the ‘Unexpected Event During Survey De-
sign’ (UEDSD) method to estimate the causal effects of the invasion on European public
opinion. Since the day and person interviewed are fixed in advance and not affected by
the war, our design resembles a natural experiment: the invasion is a random shock to re-
spondents who were interviewed just after the start of the war, which we then compare to
respondents that were interviewed before the invasion began.
We find that the conflict in Ukraine had significant effects on public opinion in Europe.
The invasion reduced authoritarian attitudes whereas it increased support for democracy,
Europe, the welfare state, and positive views of immigration. The respondents were less
likely to find it acceptable for a country to have a strong leader above the law and more likely
to say that they did not follow traditions and customs, while the war increased the declared
importance of living in a democratically governed country and of being free. Greater sup-
port for the welfare state following the invasion is noticeable in terms of more favourable
redistribution preferences. Respondents also became more emotionally attached to the Eu-
ropean Union and more supportive of European unification. Finally, they adopted more
positive views of immigration, although these effects for some variables fade in the medium
term.
Our findings contribute to previous research showing that during times of crisis, such
as economic, security, and health crises, people may shift their political attitudes and pref-
erences (Hetherington and Nelson, 2003; Baker and Oneal, 2001; Bechtel and Hainmueller,
2011; Ruiz-Rufino and Alonso, 2017; Kuijpers, 2019; Bol et al., 2021; De Vries et al., 2021;
Hale, 2022). We show that foreign invasions affect a wide range of preferences and views of
people in countries that are not directly involved in the conflict. These results also add to the
emerging body of literature on the effects of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on attitudes and
perceptions abroad. Previous research has found that the 2014 invasion of Ukraine had a
positive effect on EU identity among Eastern European member states (Gehring, 2022) and
the 2022 invasion strengthened support for European integration among students (Steiner
et al., 2022). This article shows that the Russian invasion also had important effects across
many other different dimensions of public opinion besides European integration, including
support for democracy, freedom, immigration, and the welfare state.
2 Data and Method
We use the tenth wave of the European Social Survey released in December 2022 for our
analysis. The survey covers a representative sample from over 20 European countries.
Crucially for our purpose, the interview dates for surveyed respondents are clearly pre-
assigned. Respondents in eight countries were surveyed both just before and straight after
the invasion: Switzerland, Greece, Italy, Montenegro, Macedonia, the Netherlands, Nor-
both inside and outside the EU, although over 50% of the respondents are in Southern Eu-
and after the start of the war on 24th February 2022, even if this varies depending on the
Ukraine took place during the ESS fieldwork period, it represents an exogenous shock to
the subset of respondents that were randomly interviewed after the start of the war.
We estimate the effect of the invasion on a series of dependent variables by estimating
the following equation:
(1)
Invasion
y = α + β + γX + γ + ϵ
ic ic ic c ic
Our outcome variable, , represents the attitudes of respondent in a country . We
y i c
ic
focus on five types of attitudes which we describe briefly in the next paragraphs (see Tables
tnecreP
1202von62 1202ced30 1202ced01 1202ced71 1202ced42 2202naj10 2202naj80 2202naj51 2202naj22 2202naj92 2202bef50 2202bef21 2202bef91 2202bef62 2202ram50 2202ram21 2202ram91 2202ram62 2202rpa20 2202rpa90 2202rpa61 2202rpa32 2202rpa03 2202yam70
Date of interview
Note: The histogram shows the distribution of respondents by day of their interview for
all countries covered by the ESS which overlapped before and after the war (see appendix
for details). The vertical line indicates the start of the Russian invasion of Ukraine on 24
February 2022.
A2 and A3 in the appendix for details and summary statistics). First, to capture authoritar-
ian attitudes, we use three questions that ask respondents whether they find it acceptable
for a country to have a strong leader above the law, whether following rules and traditions is
very much like them or not at all like them, and whether they agree that their country needs
the most loyalty towards its leaders. Second, two questions allow us to measure democratic
attitudes. Specifically, respondents are asked to rate the importance of living in a demo-
cratically governed country and being free, respectively. Third, to assess attitudes towards
the European Union, we rely on five variables. The first two ask respondents whether they
are emotionally attached to their country and Europe, respectively. Next, we also have a
question about whether European unification has gone too far (or should go further). We
then include a question to respondents who live in countries that are not member states
about whether they would like their country to join the EU and to respondents who live in
EU member states about whether they would like their country to leave or remain in the
EU. Fourth, for immigration attitudes, respondents are asked whether immigration is bad
or good for the country’s economy, culture, and “as a place to live”. They can also express a
view about whether the government should allow more immigration for two hypothetical
groups: “different race/ethnic group from majority” and “immigrants from poorer coun-
tries outside Europe”. Fifth, respondents are asked whether their government should re-
duce differences in income levels and another question about whether their government
protects all citizens against poverty.
We control for several relevant individual characteristics : the age, gender of respon-
ic
dents, residence in urban areas, years of education, subjective income insecurity, and source
of income (wages, unemployment, social assistance, pensions, or investments). Summary
statistics for all controls are shown in the appendix. Country-specific fixed effects are also
included to capture unobservable cross-national heterogeneity, while our baseline models
report robust standard errors , although we also check robustness for different clusters.
ic
All coefficients are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares, but using ordinary logistic re-
gressions does not change our results.
The effect of the invasion is captured by . The exact date of the invasion is as good as
random in terms of whether respondents got interviewed just before or just after the war
began. These dates are decided at the sampling stage and, according to ESS sampling proce-
dures, are never changed. In the next paragraphs, we discuss the key conditions for causal
identification in ‘Unexpected Event during Survey Design’ and its challenges, following
Hainmueller (2012) and Muñoz, Falcó-Gimeno and Hernández (2020): full compliance,
ignorability and exclusion.
First, full compliance requires individuals in the treatment group to have actually been
treated. In cases where the treatment is administered by a researcher (e.g. RCT or survey
experiments), it is straightforward to assume that all individuals in treated groups have
received the treatment. In our case, the treatment is the receipt of information about the
start of the war for all respondents to the survey that were interviewed after the invasion
has started. It is in general very difficult to formally test this assumption since there is
no a priori way to be sure that all respondents were aware that the invasion had started
before the time of their interview. That being said, non-compliance is highly unlikely in
our case because the Russian invasion of Ukraine was a major event in 2022 that received
widespread attention both in print media and online. According to Google’s 2022 report,
Ukraine was the third most searched term on their search engine overall and number one in
the news category. Compliance was also likely immediate as the invasion occurred before
the first interview on February 24th and was widely reported in the morning news across
European countries.
Second, the ESS ensures in its sampling and weighing protocols that samples are rep-
resentative and balanced in terms of the characteristics of respondents. Our treatment is
random and not related to the distribution of respondent characteristics, so that in princi-
ple there are no reasons for individuals of particular age, residence, gender, education or
income to be more or less likely to have been interviewed after the start of the war. Since re-
spondents cannot change the time of their interview, and since the ESS decided this time in
advance, there are no possibilities for certain types of respondents to be more or less likely
to pull out after the invasion began. This limits the potential for selective attrition in terms
of treated respondents with certain characteristics dropping from the sample. However, it
could be that through a purely random allocation process individuals with certain charac-
teristics end up being over- or under-represented before versus after the start of the war. A
balance test shows that there indeed exists a statistically significant difference between the
mean values of individuals interviewed after the start of the war, at least for some of the
covariates. To address this issue, we apply entropy rebalancing between the treatment and
control groups (Hainmueller, 2012). The resulting reweighting effectively ensures that the
distribution of each covariate is the same in the reweighted treated and control group.
Third, the exclusion assumption requires us to exclude the possibility that unrelated
cyclical dynamics, and/or other closely occurring events, confound the effect of our treat-
ment. To address this issue, we replicate our analyses for different bandwidths around
the start of the war. Reducing the bandwidth entails potential benefits and risks (Muñoz,
Falcó-Gimeno and Hernández, 2020). On the upside, reducing the bandwidth makes it
more likely that the exclusion restrictions are met. The closer the time of the interview to
the date of the treatment cut-off point, the more likely that the treatment is as random as
possible for a subset of individuals with relatively fewer unobservable differences in char-
acteristics. This has the additional advantage of limiting the likelihood that other unrelated
events drive the observed treatment effect. In terms of risks, a tighter bandwidth reduces
the number of individuals included in the sample, while not always ensuring that these in-
dividuals share more similar characteristics and will therefore not automatically decrease
bias, while the variance rises. At the same time, the smaller sample and shorter time frame
limits generalizability by providing more local treatment effects. If the true treatment effect
of the event occurs only over time, a narrower bandwidth might also wrongly suggest a null
effect. We therefore use eight different time frames in our analysis: 7, 14, 21, 28, 31, 40, 50
and 60 days after the start of the invasion.
3 Results
The results for OLS regressions of the effect of war on all our dependent variables with the
different bandwidths are shown in Figures 2 to 5, while more detailed results are reported
in tables B1 to B17 in the appendix. All regressions include the set of controls described
earlier as well as country fixed effects, and p-values are calculated using robust standard
errors. We report results for different bandwidths since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine began.
dents were less likely to find it acceptable for a country to have a strong leader above the law
and more likely to say that they did not follow traditions and customs as well as to disagree
that a country needs most loyalty towards its leaders, although in both cases statistical sig-
nificance disappears in the medium term. The results for democratic and redistribution at-
in a democratically governed country and of being free. Respondents became less likely to
disagree strongly that the government should reduce differences in income levels and more
likely to think that the current government protects all citizens against poverty. Next, the
become more emotionally attached to the EU (as well as their country) after roughly one
month following the invasion. There is no statistically significant effect on joining the EU,
a question that is asked only to respondents living outside the EU, but there is a negative
statistically significant effect on leaving the EU in the first 14 days for respondents who live
in current EU member states. For bandwidths in the first 31 days, results strongly suggest
a positive and statistically significant effect of invasion on respondents wanting European
and large, respondents are more likely to think immigration is good for the country’s econ-
omy, culture, and as a place to live, in the short to medium term. However, these effects fade
in the medium term (> 31 days). After one month, respondents become more favourable to
welcoming more immigrants into Europe. More specifically, they are less likely to express
views that the government should allow no immigrants for two groups: immigrants from
“different race or ethnic groups from the majority” and “immigrants from poorer countries
outside Europe”, but these effects are only statistically significant in the medium run (after
28 and 31 days).
We carry out a range of robustness checks to assess the stability of these results in tables
C1 to C17 in the appendix. First, we report the war coefficient for different sets of controls
with and without country fixed effects. Second, our baseline results report robust standard
errors. As robustness checks, we therefore opt for alternative clusters, at the day, country-
week, and country-day levels, respectively. Third, we rerun our analyses when restricting
our sample only to the five countries with the largest number of observations (i.e. Greece,
Italy, Montenegro, Macedonia and the Netherlands). Fourth, we rerun all our analyses with
ordinal logistic models.
2.-
4.-
6.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(a) Strong leader
3.
2.
1.
1.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(b) Follow traditions
2.
51.
1.
50.
50.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(c) Loyalty toward leader
first dependent variable is based on a question about whether respondents find it acceptable for a country
to have a strong leader above the law, coded from 0 “not at all” to 10 “completely”. Second, they are asked
whether following traditions and customs is 1 “very much like me” to 6 “not like me at all”. Third, respondents
are asked whether they agree strongly (coded 1) to disagree strongly (coded 6) with a country needing most
loyalty towards its leaders. Circles are OLS coefficient estimates from distinct regressions of each dependent
variable on a dummy variable taking value one if respondents were interviewed after the start of the invasion,
and zero otherwise, for different time bandwidths. All regressions include controls, country fixed effects
and entropy weights (see appendix for description and summary statistics). Horizontal bars are 90 per cent
confidence intervals calculated with robust standard errors.
3.
2.
1.
1.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(a) Importance of democracy
2.
51.
1.
50.
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(b) Importance of being free
50.-
1.-
51.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(c) Government should reduce income differ-
ences
4.
3.
2.
1.
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(d) Government protects people from poverty
respondents are asked to rate the importance of living in a democratically governed country on a 10-point
scale from 0 “not at all important for democracy” to 10 “extremely important for democracy”. Second, they
also answer a question about whether it is 1 “very much like them” to 6 “not like me at all like them” that to say
that it is important for them to make their own decisions and be free. Third, respondents are asked whether
they 1 “agree strongly”, 2 “agree”, 3 “neither agree nor disagree”, 4 “disagree” or 5 “disagree strongly” with
the statement that the government should reduce differences in income levels. Third, they choose whether
the statement in their country the government protects all citizens against poverty 0 “does not apply at all”
or 10 “applies completely”. Circles are OLS coefficient estimates from distinct regressions of each dependent
variable on a dummy variable taking value one if respondents were interviewed after the start of the invasion,
and zero otherwise, for different time bandwidths. All regressions include controls, country fixed effects
and entropy weights (see appendix for description and summary statistics). Horizontal bars are 90 per cent
confidence intervals calculated with robust standard errors.
3.
2.
1.
1.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(a) Emotionally attached to country
3.
2.
1.
1.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(b) Emotionally attached to the EU
50.
50.-
1.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(c) Leave EU
1.
50.
50.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(d) Join EU
4.
3.
2.
1.
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(e) More EU unification
first two asks respondents about whether they are not at 0 “not at all” to 10 “very emotionally attached” to
their country and Europe, respectively. We then include the variable taking the value of one if the respondent
answered that they would vote to leave the EU and zero if they would prefer to remain in the EU. Next, we
include a question about whether they would like their country to 1 “join the European Union” or 0 “not join
the European Union”. Finally, respondents are asked if European unification has 0 “gone too far” to 10 “it
should go further”. Circles are OLS coefficient estimates from distinct regressions of each dependent variable
on a dummy variable taking value one if respondents were interviewed after the start of the invasion, and zero
otherwise, for different time bandwidths. All regressions include controls, country fixed effects and entropy
weights (see appendix for description and summary statistics). Horizontal bars are 90 per cent confidence
intervals calculated with robust standard errors.
4.
2.
2.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(a) Immigration good for economy
1.
50.
50.-
1.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(b) More immigration from non-majority group
51.
1.
50.
50.-
1.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(c) More immigration from poorer & non-EU
6.
4.
2.
2.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(d) Immigration good for culture
3.
2.
1.
1.-
7 days 14 days 21 days 28 days 31 days 40 days 50 days 60 days
(e) Immigration makes place better
spondents are asked whether immigration is bad (coded zero) or good (coded ten) for the country’s economy
(panel a), culture (panel d), and as a place to live (panel e). They can also express a view about whether the
government should 1 “allow many to come and live here”, 2 “allow some, 3 “allow a few” or 4 “allow none”
for two hypothetical groups: “different race/ethnic group from majority” (panel b) and “immigrants from
poorer countries outside Europe” (panel c). Circles are OLS coefficient estimates from distinct regressions of
each dependent variable on a dummy variable taking value one if respondents were interviewed after the start
of the invasion, and zero otherwise, for different time bandwidths. All regressions include controls, country
fixed effects and entropy weights (see appendix for description and summary statistics). Horizontal bars are
90 per cent confidence intervals calculated with robust standard errors.
4 Conclusion
In February 2022, Russia launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, which immediately led
to widespread international condemnation from numerous governments as well as interna-
tional organisations. This invasion had profound effects on international relations and the
economies of many countries besides Russia and Ukraine. Using data from the European
Social Survey, we estimate the causal impact of this invasion on attitudes and preferences in
European countries that were not directly involved in the conflict. Our findings show that
the invasion increased support for democracy and freedom, the welfare state and Europe,
while it reduced authoritarian attitudes. In addition, respondents initially adopt more pos-
itive views of immigration, but these effects for some variables fade in the medium run.
These findings represent the first empirical attempt to shed new light on the indirect effects
of war on European views and attitudes. Future research could consider other attitudes, for
instance about foreign policy and support for refugees, which we could not measure with
our survey, and also explore whether the shifts we document in this article hold up in the
very long run.