Validation of BIS/BAS, SIS/SES-SF and SOI-R Questionnaires in Two Czech
Samples
1 1 2 1
*Jakub Binter , Tomáš Hladký , Kamila Machová , Daniel Říha & Silvia
1,2
Boschetti
Faculty of Humanities, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
Department of Philosophy and History of Science, Faculty of Science, Charles University,
Prague, Czech Republic
Corresponding author
Email address: jakub.binter@fhs.cuni.cz
Faculty of Humanities,
Charles University,
Pátkova 5,
Prague,
182 00
* This article is now submitted for review in Czechoslovakian Psychology
Abstract
Objectives: Research of sexuality often times includes individuals who choose to be
researched and are willing to undergo the procedures. Samples of population (students and
self-selected enthusiasts) may not resemble the nation’s population structure nor general idea
of random human even though the psychological mechanisms researched are thought to be
universal. The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between proximal
measures of domain specific and non-specific excitation and inhibition in two (probabilistic
and non-probabilistic) samples.
Sample and settings: We collected approximately 400 individuals from Central European
country – Czech Republic – via specialized agency to match the probabilistic sample and a
second similarly sized sample via snowball sampling and online advertisements at the same
time. The participants were asked to fill in two questionnaires widely used by sex researchers
(Sexual Inhibition and Excitation Scale and Sociosexual Orientation Inventory), and one scale
designed to map broader motivations to avoid aversive outcomes and motivation to approach
goal-oriented outcomes (Behavioral Inhibition and Activation Scale).
Hypotheses: We expected partial or complete confirmation of previously found results
(general and sexuality specific activation and inhibition and sociosexuality). We also expected
that the replication will be affected by the sample choice.
Statistical analyses: To follow methodologies of previous studies used to create hypotheses
we decided to use partial correlation controlling for age of the participant.
Results: Generally, the non-probabilistic sample findings resembled the published results
whereas the probabilistic sample differed, especially in men. Furthermore, findings from
women were the more consistent of the two sexes when comparing the probabilistic and non-
probabilistic sample outcomes. Our results, relying on correlational analyses as majority of
studies does, provide a valuable insight to impact of sampling on results.
Limitations: The sample size, thus larger than usual studies, could be higher. We have been
unable to research latent variables due to methodological constrains of the method -
correlation.
Keywords: Dual Control Model; Behavioral Inhibition and Activation System;
Sociosexuality; Sampling; Self-selection
Introduction
Human behavior can be broadly reduced to a dichotomous motivational system of
approach and avoidance. According to Reward Sensitivity Theory (Gray, 1973, McNaughton
& Corr, 2008), whilst the former regulates behavior towards something appetitive, the latter
regulates behavior away from something aversive. These two systems – excitatory and
inhibitory – are thought to be independent; for example, a high level of excitation is not
necessarily related to low inhibition (Corr, 2002). The Behavioral Inhibition System and
Behavioral Activation System (BIS/BAS) questionnaire was developed to measure an aspect
of personality derived from variation in patterns of excitatory and inhibitory responses across
non-specific contexts.
Derived from the core system proposed in the BIS/BAS, the Sexual Inhibition System and
Sexual Excitation System questionnaire (SIS/SES) was developed to measure the
motivational system underlying sexual behavior exclusively. Based on the Dual Control
Model (originally developed by Bancroft and Janssen, 2000), a dichotomous division of
appetitive and aversive motivations are postulated to influence sexual behavior. The SIS/SES
aimed to predict individual differences in behavior arising from the relative patterns of
excitatory and inhibitory sexual responses (Graham et al., 2006; Bancroft & Janssen, 2000;
Hodgson et al., 2016). While theoretically proximal, SIS/SES shown modest overlap with the
BIS/BAS (Janssen et al., 2002). Given the domain specificity, SIS/SES should share a
stronger relationship with measures of sexual behavior. For example, there is a relationship
between SIS/SES items and scores on the sociosexual inventory (Nolet et al., 2021; Bártová et
al., 2021; Janssen et al., 2002). However, the notion of domain specificity is somewhat
equivocal given evidence that both scales contribute to the prediction of sexual and non-
sexual behavior (van Lankveld et al., 2015).
Previous studies have shown the SIS/SES to satisfy criteria for establishing psychometric
properties (Velten et al., 2018; Nowosielski et al., 2021; Graham et al., 2006; Bloemendaal &
Laan, 2015). Application of the SIS/SES scale has also proven useful; evidence of high SES
and SIS scores have been linked to sexual dysfunction and pathology Bancroft et al., 2009;
Velten et al., 2018). However, research in the development and assessment of the
psychometric properties predominantly utilized non-probabilistic sampling of university
students, for example, raising questions about the extent to which results from the
questionnaire can be accurately attributed to a broader population. This issue has been raised
in social psychology more broadly, where it is estimated that samples ranging from 20-70 %
of studies comprise undergraduate students (Rad et al., 2018).
The use of non-probabilistic convenience samples can lead to bias in the research findings: (a)
students (regardless of their age) are in close contact with their peer group, which is likely to
influence social behavior and strategy (Binter et al., 2012). Furthermore, psychological
problems and lower quality of life are more prevalent amongst students (Henning et al.,
2012). Another issue pertains to the self-selected sample (Bethlehem, 2010): (b) individuals
that participate in a study focused on sensitive topics such as sexuality tend to be more open-
minded and experienced; individuals that choose not to participate in such a study tend to be
more insecure or conservative (Copas et al., 2020; Wiederman 1999). As such, the narrow
focus of participants could lead to less reliable predictions when applied to sexual behavior in
the broader population. It is not to say that the sample that is collected as probabilistic is at all
not affected by the self-selection. Also part of population that does not use internet is hardly
researched in quantitative studies in last decade. Furthermore, those who take part in such
studies may have other motivations such as financial reward for participation. Thus, the
chances of discovering generalizable phenomena are higher in population that are motivated
by different notions than interest in the topic or signing in a subject thought at university.
In addition to acknowledging factors related to sampling, it has long been recognized that the
development of psychometrics is subject to cultural bias; estimates indicate that 96 % of
research in the social sciences is conducted in western, educated, industrialized, rich, and
democratic (WEIRD; Rad, Martingano, & Ginges, 2018regions. Furthermore, more than half
of the studies are carried out in the United States (Rad, Martingano, & Ginges, 2018). The
universal nature of psychological mechanisms is often belied by socio-cultural, political, and
linguistic manifestations. The SIS/SES has been translated and applied in several countries
including Germany, Italy, Portugal and Poland (Velten et al., 2018; Panzeri et al., 2008;
Gomes et al., 2018; Nowosielski et al., 2021). While the results are generally supportive, there
are some differences in the comprehension of individual items and variation in the optimum
factor structure.
Several studies have indicated gender differences in SIS/SES scores: in comparison to men,
women tend towards higher sexual inhibition and lower sexual excitation (Carpenter et al.,
2008; Cantarella et al., 2008). Validation of the SIS/SES with women confirmed a similar
factor structure although the model fit was less convincing (Carpenter et al., 2008). There
were some gender differences in the relevance of items with respect to sexual arousal
(Carpenter et al., 2008). Interestingly, it was noted that women’s scores correlated more
strongly to measures of sexual behavior while men’s scores were more closely related to the
BIS/BAS (Carpenter et al., 2008). A short version of the scale was developed that
incorporated items deemed to have invariant psychometric properties across genders
(Carpenter et al., 2011). However, the short form was also developed based on the responses
of higher education students.
Previous studies have explored the relationship between BIS/BAS-SIS/SES (Carpenter 2008,
2011; van Lankveld et al., 2015; Janssen et al., 2002) and SIS/SES-SOI (SOI: Sociosexual
Orientation Inventory; Carpenter 2008, 2011; Bártová et al., 2021; Janssen et al., 2002). We
used these studies to generate hypotheses and extend our study to investigate the relationship
between the BIS/BAS and SIS/SES questionnaires together with the SOI using two methods
of sampling – non-probabilistic and probabilistic. Both samples were collected in the Czech
Republic, a central European country, that arguably does not conform to a typical WEIRD
population. The aim of this study was to determine whether predicted relationships between
questionnaires were evident when applied to a broader population.
Method
Participants
The probabilistic (representative) sample was collected by a data collection agency (Czech
National Panel; narodnipanel.cz). The sample was randomly sampled based on strata
including sex, age groups, level of education, and size of inhabited area. The non-probablistic
(non-representative) sample was collected using combination of online advertising on science
and life style oriented webpages and snowball sampling (websites pokusnikralici.cz;
bezpasaka.cz). Data were collected using Qualtrics online platform, which could be
completed on both computer and mobile devices. Both samples were collected simultaneously
in the Czech Republic 2021.
The data was part of a larger research project focused on affective state perception (pre-
and 50 years, and (b) at least minimal reported experience with pornographic materials (due to
fact that pseudo-sexual images – facial expressions and vocalizations of individuals
experiencing sexual pleasure, but no explicit visual materials – were presented to participants
during the study). The exact formulation was as follows: “I declare that I have at least
minimal experience with pornographic materials.”
In the probabilistic sample, a total of 417 respondents (aged 18-50, Mage = 33.69, SD = 9.72)
completed the questionnaires. We aimed for N= 400 but extra 17 individuals filled in the
questionnaire). In total 213 women (aged 18-50, Mage = 31,98, SD = 9,02) and 204 men
(aged 18-50, Mage = 31,98, SD = 9,02) took part in the study. In the non-probablistic sample,
485 participants filled in the questionnaire, 313 women (M age=30.17, SD=7.77) and 172
men (M age=31.43, SD=8.01). Further demographic information for both samples are
Measures
Following an onscreen introduction to the study, participants provided informed consent
before completing the demographic information set of questions. The BIS/BAS, SIS/SES, and
SOI questionnaires were translated to Czech and back-translated by experienced researchers
and trained psychologists.
The sexual inhibition and inhibition scales (SIS/SES-SF)
The questionnaire is composed of 3 separate types of questions targeting hypothetical
situations related to sexual performances, risks related to sexual interaction, and arousal
reactivity involving situations. The rating is on 4-point scale (Very false to me – Very true to
me). SIS1, Inhibition Due to Threat of Performance Failure, consists of 4 questions (i.e., “I
cannot get aroused unless I focus exclusively on sexual stimulation”). SIS2, Inhibition Due to
Threat of Performance Consequences, consists also of 4 questions (i.e., “If I realized there is a
risk of catching a sexually transmitted disease, I am unlikely to stay sexually aroused”). SES,
Sexual Excitation, consists of 6 questions (i.e., “When a sexually attractive stranger
accidentally touches me, I easily become aroused”).
The questionnaire used is a shorter form (Carpenter et al., 2011) of the original Sexual
Inhibition and Sexual Excitation Scales (Janssen et al., 2002). The reason for choosing the
short version, apart from time-consumption in an online experiment, is that the version is
valid for both sexes. The Czech version (Appendix 1) allows for administration for both sexes
with no modification. There are number of studies demonstrating consistency of the short
version with the original one (Bancroft et al., 2009, Carpenter et al., 2008, Rettenberger &
Briken, 2013, Turner, Briken, Klein, & Rettenberger, 2013).
Behavioral Inhibition System/Behavioral Activation System Scales (BIS/BAS-Scales)
The BIS/BAS-scales consist of 4 separate types of questions targeting motivation to avoid
aversive outcomes and motivation to approach goal-oriented outcomes. The rating is realized
on a 4-point scale (Very false to me – Very true to me). The Behavioral Inhibition (BIS) scale
consists of seven questions (i.e., “I worry about making mistakes“, “Criticism or scolding
hurts me quite a bit“). Other 13 questions are dedicated to the Behavioral Activation Scales
(BAS). Thus, three separate subscales are Fun-Seeking (BAS-FS) which consists of 4
questions (i.e., “I will often do things for no other reason than that they might be fun”),
Reward Responsiveness (BAS-RR) consisting of 5 questions (i.e., “When I’m doing well at
something, I love to keep at it”), and Drive (BAS-D), also consisting of 4 questions (i.e., “I go
out of my way to get things I want”). The Czech version (Appendix 2) allows for
administration for both sexes with no modification. The questionnaire was used in other
languages and consistency of the results was successfully demonstrated (Carver & White,
1994; Jorm et al., 1998).
The socio-sexual orientation inventory (SOI-R)
The questionnaire maps individual willingness to engage in uncommitted sexual activity. The
questionnaire consists of 9 questions that can be divided to 3 subscales, each consisting of 3
questions: Behavior (i.e., “With how many different partners have you had sex within the past
12 months?”), Attitudes (i.e., “Sex without love is OK.”), and Desires (i.e., “How often do
you have fantasies about having sex with someone you are not in a committed romantic
relationship with?”). A total score (SOI-TOT) can be obtained by summing (or less
commonly averaging) scores from all questions. We used the version that uses 9-point scales
that all responses are mapped into. The originally developed scale by (Penke & Asendorf,
2008) is commonly used in Czech language (e.g., Bártová et al., 2020, Bártová et al., 2021)
and consistency with the original language has been demonstrated by above mentioned
authors.
Hypotheses
Hypotheses were based on previously published results.
H1: Sexual excitation (SES) will positively correlate with the behavioral activation (BAS)
dimensions of Drive, Fun-seeking and Reward Responsiveness in women (van Lankveld et
al., 2015; Carpenter at al., 2008) and men (van Lankveld et al., 2015; Carpenter at al., 2008,
2011; Janssen et al., 2002).
H2: Sexual inhibition due to treat of performance failure (SIS1) and sexual inhibition due to
treat of performance consequences (SIS2) will negatively correlate with the dimension Fun-
seeking of behavioral activation (BAS) in men (van Lankveld et al., 2015; Carpenter at al.,
2008, 2011; Janssen et al., 2002).
H3: SIS1 and SIS2 in men will positively correlate with behavioral inhibition (BIS; Carpenter
at al., 2008, 2011; Janssen et al., 2002; van Lankveld et al., 2015).
H4: Sexual excitation (SES) will positively correlate with the three sociosexual orientation
(SOI) subscales (Bártová et al., 2021) and SOI total score in both men and women (Janssen et
al., 2002; Carpenter at al., 2008, 2011; Bártová et al., 2021).
H5: Both measure of sexual inhibition (SIS1 and SIS2) will negatively correlate with the three
sociosexual orientation (SOI) subscales and SOI total score in men and women (Janssen et al.,
2002; Carpenter at al., 2008, 2011; Bártová et al., 2021).
Data analysis
The data analyses were performed using SPSS 26 software package. Data from the
probabilistic and non-probabilistic samples were analyzed separately. Cronbach´s alpha was
calculated to determine the level of internal consistency. The relationship between subscales
were analyzed using Pearson’s correlations controlled for age. The reason is maximal
comparability with existing studies, especially Bátorvá et al. (2021) conducted on Czech non-
probabilistic sample.
Results
Reliability
Analysis of the internal consistency was conducted on data from the probabilistic sample. For
the BIS/BAS questionnaire, internal consistency of 0.790 (for women 0.790 and 0.775 for
men respectively) was found for the total score. The Behavioral Inhibition (BIS) subscale
reached a consistency of 0.753 (for women 0.741 and 0.714 for men respectively); the BAS-
FS subscale reached a consistency of 0.673 (for women 0.680 and 0.664 for men
respectively); the BAS-RR subscale reached a consistency of 0.688 (for women 0.682 and
0.691 for men respectively); and the BAS-D subscale reached a consistency of 0.680 (for
women 0.713 and 0.640 for men respectively).
For the SIS/SES-SF questionnaire, an internal consistency of 0.662 (for women 0.697 and
0.639 for men respectively) was found for the total score. The Sexual Excitation subscale
reached a consistency of 0.790 (for women 0.793 and 0.768 for men respectively); the
Inhibition Due to Threat of Performance Failure (SIS1) subscale reached a consistency of
0.538 (for women 0.512 and 0.516 for men respectively); and the Inhibition Due to Threat of
Performance Consequences (SIS2) subscale reached a consistency of 0.648 (for women 0.656
and 0.618 for men respectively).
For the SOI-R questionnaire, an internal consistency of 0.829 (for women 0.788 and 0.849 for
men respectively) was found for the total score. The Behavior subscale reached a consistency
of 0.744 (for women 0.737 and 0.753 for men respectively); the Attitudes subscale reached a
consistency of 0.799 (for women 0.741 and 0.836 for men respectively); and the Desire
subscale reached a consistency of 0.818 (for women 0.780 and 0.816 for men respectively).
Correlations
The relationship between questionnaires was analyzed separately for men and women in each
of the probabilistic and non-probabilistic samples. Controlling for age limits the impact of age
differences in the samples and allowing for a direct comparison with the results of Bártova et
al. (2021).
significantly positively correlated. A significant positive correlation was found between SIS1
and SES. A significant positive correlation was found between SES and all three SOI
subscales (behavior, attitude and desire) as well as SOI total score. There was a significant
negative correlation between SIS1 and BAS reward, while SIS2 showed a significant negative
correlation with BIS. A significant negative correlation was found between SES and the three
BAS (drive, fun and reward) dimensions as well as between SES and BIS. Significant positive
correlations between the three BAS dimensions. There was a significant positive correlation
between both BAS Fun, BAS Reward and BIS. In addition, BAS fun was significantly
negatively correlated with SOI Behavior, SOI Desire and the SOI total result while for BAS
Reward we found negative correlation with SOI Attitude, SOI Desire and SOI total score.
replicated with two exceptions: a significant negative correlation between SIS1 and SES was
found in addition to a significant negative correlation between SIS2 and SES. There were
significant negative correlations between SIS1 and SOI Attitude, SOI Desire and the SOI total
score. SIS2 significantly negatively correlated with the three SOI subscales as well as SOI
total score.
between SIS1 and SIS2. SES significantly positively correlated with SOI, SOI Attitude and
SOI Desire. However, no further significant correlations were found between either SIS1 or
SIS2 and SOI. There was a significant negative correlation between SIS1 and BIS. A
significant negative correlation was also found between SIS1 and BAS Reward in addition to
a significant positive correlation between both SIS1, SIS2 and BAS Fun.
between SIS1 and SIS2 was replicated. SES was also found to significantly correlate with
SIS2. Significant negative correlations were found between SIS1 and SOI Attitude, SOI
Desire and SOI total score. Significant negative correlations were found between SIS 2 and
SOI Behavior, SOI Attitude, SOI Desire, and SOI total score. Significant positive correlations
were also found between SES and SOI Behavior, SOI Attitude, SOI Desire, and SOI total
score. The significant relationship between SIS1 and BAS Reward was not replicated in the
non-probabilistic sample. Furthermore, a significant positive correlation was found between
SIS1 and BAS Fun, with a significant negative correlation between SIS1 and both BAS
Reward and BIS. Significant negative correlations were found between SIS2 and both BAS
Drive and BAS Fun. There was a significant positive correlation between SIS2 and BIS. A
significant negative correlation was also found between SES and BAS Fun.
Discussion
We investigated the relationship between psychometric measures of excitation and inhibition
in two (probabilistic and non-probabilistic) samples. Data were collected simultaneously,
therefore any discrepancy in between our results and previous research can be reasonably
attributed to the sampling process and not differences in time. The correlation analyses also
controlled for age to limit the possibility of differences in sexual behavior between samples.
For example, it is understood that sexual motivation changes over the lifespan (Bártová et al.,
2021, Binter et al., 2012). As such, any difference between samples is likely to stem from
demographic aspects such as socioeconomic status or geographic location.
A positive correlation between sexual excitation and the three behavioral activation
dimensions was predicted (H1) in both men and women. This relationship was found in
women in both samples. In men, sexual excitation was only related to behavioral activation
dimensions (with the exception of the dimension Drive) in the non-probabilistic sample.
These results validate the sexual excitation construct as a specific domain of the general
behavioral activation system theorized by the Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory (Bancroft,
1999). However, the absence of a relationship in the probabilistic sample indicates that in
men, there could be demographic factors that moderate SES or BAS, creating divergence. For
example, it is notable that there is no relationship between sexual excitation and sociosexual
orientation’s behavior in the probabilistic sample that is calculated based on three items
including the number of sexual partners. Encompassing broader geographical regions where
access to multiple sexual partners is limited or stable monogamous relationships are more
prevalent could influence sexual excitation whilst not diminishing individual differences in
general activation.
A negative relationship between both SIS1 (sexual inhibition due to threat of performance
failure), SIS2 (sexual inhibition due to threat of performance consequences) and BAS Fun
was predicted (H2) in men. However, we only found a negative correlation between SIS1 and
BAS Fun in the non-probabilistic sample. There was also no negative relationship between
either SIS1 or SIS2 and BAS Fun in the women’s results. Both SIS1 and SIS2 concern sexual
inhibition; specifically, SIS1 concerns performance anxiety and SIS2 concerns fear of
performance consequences. As such, inhibition in this context was anticipated to be opposed
to proneness to seek novel sensations or excitement. Validation of the SIS/SES scale in Polish
also found no significant relationship between SIS and BAS (Nowosielski et al., 2021).
Firstly, their study incorporated a sample that had a broad age range, the majority of which
had attained secondary level of education and worked blue-collar jobs. Secondly, during
factor analysis two items in SIS1 were found to load better on SES. It was suggested that
socio-cultural factors might influence the context of sexual encounters (Nowosielski et al.,
2016), thus predicting arousal rather than threat of consequences for example.
In men, a positive relationship between both SIS1 and SIS2 and BIS (behavioral inhibition)
was predicted (H3). However, only a relationship between SIS1 and BIS was shown in the
non-probabilistic sample of men. This is congruent with some previous research that showed
a relationship between SIS1 and BIS (Carpenter et al. 2011; van Lankveld et al. 2015) while
others found a relationship between SIS2 and BIS (Carpenter at al., 2008, 2011; Janssen et al.,
2002). Both BIS and SIS measure inhibitory motivation and as such should at least show
some overlapping relationship. We also found no relationship between either SIS1 or SIS2
and BIS in both samples of women. Van Lankveld et al. (2015) suggested that whilst sexual
inhibition covaries with domain non-specific inhibition in men, the relationship may only be
weak in women.
We predicted (H4) positive correlations between SES and SOI (the three subscales and total
score of sociosexual orientation) in both men and women, which was confirmed in both
probabilistic and non-probabilistic samples; except the correlation between SES and SOI
behavior in the non-probabilistic sample discussed previously. These relationships in the
expected direction validate the SES construct. Individuals with a more casual attitude to
sexual relations exhibit greater sexual excitation. Conversely, a negative correlation was
predicted (H5) between sexual inhibition measures (SIS1 and SIS2) and SOI (the three
subscale and the total score) in men and women. In the non-probabilistic sample, the
relationships between SIS1 (Bártová et al., 2021), SIS2 (Janssen et al., 2002; Carpenter at al.,
2008, 2011; Bártová et al., 2021) and SOI subscales (with the exception of SOI Behavior) is
congruent with previous research. Individuals with a more casual attitude to sexual relations
are less likely to be inhibited by the threat of performance failure and consequences.
However, there was no relationship between measures of sexual inhibition in the probabilistic
samples of men or women. This pattern of results matches research conducted in Poland
(Nowosielski et al., 2021); while the relationship between sexual excitation and attitudes
appears robust, further research is required to determine the influence of sexual inhibition
within the broader population.
Findings from the non-probabilistic sample were generally similar to results of previous
studies (van Lankveld et al., 2015; Carpenter at al., 2008, 2011; Janssen et al., 2002, Bártová
et al., 2021). The data indicate that sexual excitation is predictive of casual sexual attitudes
across both men and women irrespective of the sample demographic. An overlap between
general domain of behavioral activation and specific domain of sexual excitation is consistent
in women. However, behavioral activation and sexual excitation tendencies are generally only
related in the narrow non-probabilistic sample of men. Czech Republic is considered as part
of Central Europe and does not arguably fit in the WEIRD categorization. Despite the
different historical and cultural background the findings from our self-selected sample are
highly similar to the previous studies conducted in western countries.
The relationship between sexual inhibition and attitudes to sexual behavior appear robust only
in the non-probabilistic samples of both men and women. These discrepancies were, however,
congruent with studies that utilized a broader sample (i. e., Nowosielski et al., 2021).
Furthermore, overlap between general domain of activation/inhibition and sexual inhibition
construct appears to be more complex. It is important to clarify that correlation analysis is not
the ideal statistical tool to explore the presence of associations between scales, thus used in
majority of the studies to evaluate the concurrent validity (van Lankveld et al., 2015).
Correlation can only capture the simplest type of association and the presence of subgroups
within a sample may create artefacts. Nevertheless, the self-selection of participants can bias
sex research; the most conservative or sexually insecure people are less likely to be included.
Furthermore, targeted broad population samples are more likely to influence results. Previous
cross-cultural research found gender equality, economic income, and life expectancy, for
example, to be related to socio-sexual orientation. While there is an abundance of support for
the sexual excitation and inhibition model, the validity of predictions may be less reliable
when applied to sections of the population.
Conclusion
The study was designed to evaluate the impact of sample choice on the correlational analyses
of concurrent validity. Concretely we have focused on SIS/SES-SF, which is based in Dual
Control Model of Sexual Response and BIS/BAS questionnaire which is broader measure of
tendency to motivation to avoid aversive outcomes (Behavioral Inhibition System) and
motivation to approach goal-oriented outcomes (Behavioral Activation System) based in
Reward Sensitivity Theory. As third questionnaire we have included the SOI-R that maps
socio-sexual orientation, a tendency and willingness to uncommitted sexual activity. The
questionnaire also includes behavioral component focused on amount of partners. As
expected, we have found different results in case of the probabilistic and non-probabilistic
sample. The results show more consistency in case of women compared to men showing
higher impact of sample choice on the result in case of men. We also found that our non-
probabilistic sample resembled the outcomes in other western countries whereas the
to be important for future research design adjustment, namely national surveys and
probabilistic sample collections, and interpretation of results involving human sexuality.
Ethics
All participants provided their agreement by clicking “yes” in the beginning of the online
questionnaire. The Helsinki Convention as well as GDPR regulation was adhered to at all times,
throughout the presenting of the questionnaire, collection of responses and abiding by the
wishes of those who did not agree with the terms and conditions; these were not allowed to
proceed with the study. All data were anonymized. The study is part of larger set of projects
and has been approved by Institutional Review Board of Faculty of Science, Charles University
(#2018/08).
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank to Jaroslav Flegr, and Robin Kopecký for allowing us to use of server
pokusnikralici.cz. We also thank to Iva Kopecká for the possibility to use server bezpasaka.cz
to obtain data by snowball sampling. Also, we thank to Ester Charvátová and
Viktorie Škorvagová from narodnipanel.cz for cooperation and running the collection of
probabilistic sample. The thanks also go to all our participants for taking part in the study.
The project is funded by the Czech Science Foundation (Grant No. 19-12885Y “Behavioral and
Psycho-Physiological Response on Ambivalent Visual and Auditory Stimuli Presentation”).